The present study investigated pressed high-purity alumina refractories containing either white fused or tabular (sintered) alumina aggregates under comparable conditions. Using factorial experiments especially the effects of the pressing pressure, the particle size distribution model and the particle morphology were evaluated. White fused alumina exhibited a higher refractoriness under load as well as a lower total compression and creep rate in creep in compression experiments. However, tabular alumina had a higher cold crushing strength and Young's modulus before and after thermal shock. Yet, no significant effect regarding the relative loss of the Young's modulus due to thermal shock was determined. Generally, a higher pressing pressure reduced the apparent porosity and increased the cold crushing strength, the Young's modulus and the refractoriness under load. The batches according to a recently suggested modified Andreasen particle size distribution model contained a considerably higher amount of the coarsest particle fraction, while the medium particle size fractions were reduced. Surprisingly, for both alumina raw materials the modified Andreasen model resulted in a virtually identical apparent density and a slightly lower apparent porosity compared to the conventional Andreasen model. Furthermore, the thermomechanical properties were essentially unaffected, while the cold crushing strength and the Young's modulus were somewhat lower. For both raw materials the addition of blocky coarse grain fractions yielded a lower apparent porosity and higher apparent density compared to angular grains due to improved particle packing. Remarkably, the creep in compression and the creep rate were reduced as well. Consequently, the modified Andreasen model together with a designed particle morphology might allow the fabrication of shaped alumina products with a much higher content of coarse grained particles resulting in at least similar or even improved physical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties irrespective of the used alumina raw material.Alumina is one of the most widely used raw materials for refractory applications due to its high refractoriness and due to its high erosion and corrosion resistance under many conditions In general three synthetic corundum raw materials are produced for refractory applications comprising tabular alumina (TA), white fused alumina (WFA) and brown fused alumina (BFA) The common primary material for tabular alumina and white fused alumina is calcined alumina of high purity from the Bayer process, while bauxite ores are used for the production of brown fused alumina Tabular alumina is produced during a sintering process of at least 1800 Tabular alumina consists of elongated, tablet-shaped crystallites with a size of 0.05–1 The main impurity in tabular alumina and white fused alumina is sodium from the alumina extraction in the Bayer process. The sodium impurities cause the formation of Nonetheless, the sodium impurities are in general more concentrated at grain boundaries. Due to the smaller crystallite size of tabular alumina, the relative amount of grain boundaries and thus the sodium impurities are evenly distributed in all grain size fractions. By contrast, because of the larger crystallite size in white fused alumina, it contains less grain boundaries. During crushing and milling to produce finer grain size fractions, white fused alumina is preferably comminuted along the grain boundaries rich in In general, tabular alumina grains have a lower apparent density than white fused alumina grains of comparable size, which can be attributed to the larger amount of closed pores in tabular alumina and is a general trend comparing sintered with fused refractory raw materials [ The high amount of closed pores in tabular alumina is generally believed to result in an improved thermal shock resistance compared to refractories of white fused alumina However, due to their specific processing, commercial tabular and white fused alumina raw materials normally have considerably different particle morphologies and particle size distributions Consequently, the aim of the present study is to study pressed high purity alumina refractories made of either tabular (sintered) or white fused alumina raw materials under comparable conditions. For that purpose the pressing pressure, the particle size distribution and the particle morphology are systematically varied using full factorial experimental designs to determine the influence of these factors on the resulting physical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties. The current study involved the investigation of the factors pressing pressure (A), particle size distribution model (B) and particle morphology (C) on high purity alumina refractories. In all experiments commercial white fused (WRG, Imerys Fused Minerals Villach GmbH, Austria) or tabular alumina (T60/T64, Almatis GmbH, Germany) raw materials were used for the coarse grain fractions, while the same reactive alumina types (NABALOX, Nabaltec GmbH, Germany) were used for the fine grain fractions. The sodium and For both alumina raw materials the investigated factors (A, B, C) were varied on two levels. Consequently, together with the factor of the used alumina raw material this resulted in three 2 To design the batches, the particle size distributions of the coarse alumina raw materials (0–0.2 For the particle analysis, the 0–0.1 In order to investigate the influence of the particle morphology (factor C), both alumina raw materials were then sorted regarding their particle shape using a tilted vibrating table with a rough surface. The varying shape of the particles resulted in a differing friction in contact with the surface of the vibrating table. Due to this varying friction, the particles consequently passed distinctive distances from top to bottom of the table, where the particles were collected and sorted in a row of plastic bottles. To evaluate the effects of the particle size distribution (see In the model according to Andreasen and Andersen All samples for further investigations were fabricated using ordered mixing followed by uniaxial pressing. Ordered mixing was applied to ensure that the fine particles are evenly distributed and that the coarse grains are wetted by the binders Immediately after mixing, cylinders with a height and diameter of 50 After pressing all samples were dried at 110 The diameter and height of the pressed samples were determined after drying and firing in order to calculate the green density and the firing shrinkage. Furthermore, the apparent density and apparent porosity of the fired samples were measured using the Archimedes method according to the standard DIN EN 993-1 with water as the immersion fluid. The pore size after firing was analyzed by mercury porosimetry (MP, AutoPore IV, Micromeritics Instrument Corporation, USA) according to the standard DIN 66133 using cut samples. The assumed wetting angle of mercury in contact with alumina was 130°. In addition to the physical properties, the cold crushing strength (CCS) on cylinder samples was determined using the same universal testing machine as for the sample preparation with an increasing force of The thermal shock resistance was determined similar to the standard DIN EN 993-11. In contrast to the standard, cylinders were used instead of bars. The cylinders were first put in an electrically heated furnace with a temperature of 950 In addition, the refractoriness under load (RUL) and the creep in compression (CIC) were determined on fired samples to evaluate the influence of the investigated factors on the long term stability at high temperatures. The RUL was examined according to the standard DIN EN ISO 1893 using a hood-type furnace (RUL/CIC 421, Netzsch-Gerätebau Gmbh, Germany). The CIC was measured using the same furnace with a temperature of 1680 Finally, the microstructure of the fired and thermally shocked samples was assessed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM; JSM-6610, JEOL Ltd., Japan). The following section first describes the results of the particle size and particle morphology measurements of the raw materials. Then the results regarding the effects of the three investigated factors (pressing pressure, particle size distribution and particle morphology) will be presented and discussed.  As can be seen from  Comparing the theoretical particle size distributions according to the Andreasen and the modified Andreasen model in The factor of the pressing pressure (factor A) was investigated using batches of tabular and white fused alumina, which were designed according to the Andreasen model (see As can be seen from Furthermore, at both pressing pressures the green density of tabular alumina was somewhat lower than the one of white fused alumina. The apparent density increased much more during firing for tabular alumina than for white fused alumina. Correspondingly, the linear shrinkage during firing was considerably lower for white fused alumina. The higher shrinkage of tabular alumina can be attributed to a higher amount of grain boundaries, which is associated with a higher sintering activity. Nevertheless, taking the variance of the linear shrinkage into account, a significant effect of the pressing pressure was not determined. The apparent densities measured with the Archimedes method were almost identical to the ones calculated from the dry weight and the geometric dimensions. Furthermore, as can be seen from Similarly the porosities determined by mercury porosimetry were in line with the data obtained by the Archimedes method. At both pressing pressures white fused alumina had a larger median pore size than tabular alumina. Secondly, the median pore size decreased slightly with a higher pressing pressure, while this effect was somewhat more pronounced for tabular alumina than for white fused alumina. However, determining the pore sizes of refractories by mercury porosimetry has several limitations such as a small sample volume and the assumption of a certain wetting angle as well as of cylindrical pores Similarly to the apparent density, the cold crushing strength (CCS) increased with a higher pressing pressure, which is a common feature for shaped refractories and pressed ceramics because the density increases with a higher pressing pressure. Furthermore, the cold crushing strength of tabular alumina was always higher than the ones of white fused alumina, which can be associated with a stronger bonding due to sintering  Inspection of the absolute values of the Young's modulus in Yet, as can be seen from The refractoriness under load (RUL) of the samples with differing pressing pressures and alumina raw materials is given in As a further important thermomechanical property, the compression in creep (CIC) is given in The higher creep rate of tabular alumina compared to white fused alumina can be most likely attributed to the smaller crystallite size of tabular alumina and the associated higher amount of grain boundaries causing a stronger grain boundary gliding In this subsection the effect of the raw material ( As already described in the previous subsection, the green and apparent densities were higher for white fused alumina samples than for tabular alumina, while the linear shrinkage was somewhat lower. Yet, as can be seen from Unfortunately, the mercury porosimetry data for the sample of tabular alumina using the modified Archimedes model was unavailable. Nevertheless, as can be seen from the median pore diameter of the white fused alumina samples, the pore size remained virtually unchanged. The apparent porosity using mercury porosimetry was slightly lower, while the apparent density was somewhat higher, respectively. By contrast to the physical properties, the mechanical characteristics (CCS and Young's modulus) were significantly lower for the batches with the modified Andreasen model (CCS: Similarly as for the physical properties, the thermomechanical properties were only marginally affected by the change of the particle size distribution model. The results of the refractoriness under load (RUL) measurements in This observation was in line with the compression in creep measurements, which are given in The almost negligible change of the physical and thermomechanical properties using a different particle size distribution model was somewhat surprising since the batches from the modified Andreasen model contained a substantially higher proportion of the coarsest grain size fraction (see also Consequently, for the first time it was shown that the model according to Fruhstorfer and Aneziris Finally, similar as for the pressing pressure and the particle size distribution models, the effect of the particle morphology will be evaluated regarding the resulting physical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties, which are given in The measured physical properties confirm the previous results that the white fused alumina samples had a higher green and apparent density, while the sintering shrinkage was lower. On the other hand, tabular alumina had a lower apparent porosity than white fused alumina. In general, the blocky samples had a higher apparent and green density, while the sintering shrinkage and the apparent porosity were lower compared to the ones containing the angular grains. In addition, these differences were apparently more pronounced for white fused alumina than for tabular alumina. The median pore size, however, changed only marginally as a function of the particle shape irrespective of the raw material. As is shown in As can be seen from The reason for the statistically significant interaction regarding the cold crushing strength was the much lower cold crushing strength for white fused alumina containing angular particles, while the tabular alumina with angular particles had only a negligible lower cold crushing strength. The lower Young's modulus of the samples containing angular particles is in line with those of Ishikawa  Similarly to other investigated factors, the Young's modulus dropped during the first two thermal shocks and remained relatively constant with further thermal shock cycles. As can be observed from But, as was already observed for the other investigated factors, neither the raw material nor the particle morphology had a significant effect on the relative Young's modulus after five thermal shock cycles (particle morphology:   Furthermore, comparing the refractoriness under load curves in The compression in creep curves in The lower creep for the samples containing blocky particles is somewhat surprising because a lower creep of the samples containing angular particles was expected due to a likely reinforcing effect. However, the samples containing blocky particles had a lower apparent porosity, which usually reduces creep The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of the processing, the particle size distribution and the particle morphology on physical, mechanical and thermomechanical properties of refractories made of either tabular or white fused alumina under comparable conditions. In all experiments, tabular alumina showed a higher linear shrinkage during firing as well as a lower apparent density together with a lower apparent porosity, indicating a higher closed porosity than white fused alumina. Furthermore, the median pore size of white fused alumina was always slightly higher. On the other hand, tabular alumina had a higher cold crushing strength and Young's modulus, which might be associated with a higher sintering activity compared to white fused alumina. For all batches, the Young's modulus dropped significantly after the first thermal shock, while it barely changed with further thermal shock cycles. Yet, evaluating the Young's modulus after thermal shock relative to the Young's modulus before thermal shock, no significant effect of the raw material or of any of the other investigated factors was determined. In addition, under comparable conditions white fused alumina always showed a higher refractoriness under load as well as a lower creep rate and total compression in creep in compression tests than tabular alumina. A possible reason could be the much lower amount of grain boundaries of white fused alumina compared to tabular alumina together with comparable sodium impurities, which can also impair the refractoriness. The samples produced using the modified Andreasen particle size distribution model according to Aneziris For both alumina raw materials the addition of blocky particles resulted in a higher apparent density and lower apparent porosity due to improved particle packing compared to the samples containing angular particles. Moreover, the samples containing blocky particles had a higher crushing strength and Young's modulus, which is partly associated with the higher apparent density. Furthermore, the creep in compression and the creep rate was significantly reduced by the addition of blocky grain size fractions. Thus, the modification of the particle size distribution and the addition of particle size fractions with a specific particle morphology are very promising to design alumina refractories irrespective of the used raw material. Thereby, especially the modified Andreasen model might offer the benefit to use a much coarser particle size distribution to produce refractories with at least similar or even improved physical, mechanical, and thermomechanical properties.