Single bubble velocity profile (velocity vs. distance) has been measured for a 1.45mm diameter bubble to try to explain reported differences in gas holdup in two systems: F150 vs. 1-pentanol, and MIBC vs. NaCl. It was found that in F150 the bubble slowed rapidly to reach the terminal velocity stage of the profile while in 1-pentanol the bubble remained in the deceleration stage and was consequently moving faster, at almost twice the speed. The lower rise velocity in F150 means longer bubble residence time and corresponding higher gas holdup than with 1-pentanol, as reported. In the second system, the bubble in MIBC reached terminal velocity more rapidly than in NaCl which agrees with the reported higher gas holdup in MIBC compared to NaCl. An implication for gas holdup evaluation is that the value may depend on the part of the velocity profile over which it is measured. Possible exploitation of this reagent effect on bubble rise velocity in flotation is considered.Frothers in flotation systems are used to reduce and maintain bubble size. Typically starting at a mean bubble size ca. 4 As an alternative to measuring bubble size, which requires a specialized setup, the use of gas holdup has been suggested ( The tacit assumption is that rise velocity is terminal and depends largely on bubble size. This proved not to be the case. In both the F150 vs. 1-pentanol and MIBC vs. NaCl cases a possible explanation is that bubble rise velocity is not just dependent on bubble size but there may be a role of system chemistry and the velocity is not terminal. To explain the gas holdup data this would imply that equal-sized bubbles in F150 rise more slowly than in 1-pentanol and in MIBC they rise more slowly than in NaCl. Measurements on bubble swarms did support this difference in velocity between F150 and 1-pentanol ( Measurement of single bubble rise velocity is typically done at or over a fixed distance from point of release. Such determinations have shown an apparent dependence of terminal velocity on frother type and concentration ( The profile may display three stages depending on the rise distance allowed: rapid acceleration to a maximum velocity followed by deceleration to a constant velocity ( The setup was based on that described by A digital video camera mounted on a track controlled by a variable speed motor was used to manually track a single bubble during its rise. Limit switches were placed at the bottom and at the top to arrest the movement. The camera was a high resolution CCD Canon GL2, coupled to a monitor (Sony PVM-1340) and a signal sender set (Radio Shack 15-2572). The camera recorded at 30 frames/s. When used to obtain bubble shape and size, a shutter speed of 1/1000 of a second was set. Size was measured from two directions at right angles close to the generation point. Prior to a test sufficient tap water was stored to reach room temperature (24–26 Some details on the four reagents are given in  For the only known comparable data,  The suspected difference in velocity between the tested pairs is revealed: the 1.45   The 1.45  The reason the bubble slows down in the presence of a surfactant is classically attributed to surface tension gradients as adsorbed molecules are re-distributed by the fluid flowing over the surface of the bubble as it rises ( Recent studies, however, have shown that shape is a key factor; that bubbles slow down the more they become spherical ( There are some practical implications for flotation that emerge from these observations. One is that for the same gas rate different reagents can create different gas holdups for the same bubble size, i.e., same bubble surface area flux. Of the two, gas holdup or bubble surface area flux, which drives flotation kinetics can then be tested. One problem we encountered following up this notion was that frothers may interact with solids differently; comparing F150 and 1-pentanol it was found that talc adsorbed the former but not the latter ( It is now understood why the initial idea of using gas holdup as a substitute for bubble size proved more difficult than expected. The evidence is that the reagent type can strongly influence bubble rise velocity, for example extending the deceleration stage making gas holdup difficult to correlate with bubble size. The evidence presented is for single reagents and may be further influenced by reagent combinations, e.g. salts and frothers. The reagent effect on rise velocity means that gas holdup depends on the distance from the bubble origin that the measurement is made. An example where this may be a factor is the result of This study of single bubble velocity profile has permitted observations in gas holdup to be interpreted. At concentrations giving equal bubble size reduction bubbles in 1-pentanol rise more slowly than in F150 because they are still in the deceleration stage of the profile and this corresponds to the lower gas holdup achieved in 1-pentanol; and likewise bubbles in NaCl rise more quickly than in MIBC and this corresponds to the lower gas holdup achieved in NaCl. There are practical implications for gas holdup measurement and possible applications in flotation that emerge from these findings.