The effluents from acid plants generated in copper pyrometallurgy contain high concentrations of sulphates and heavy metals that difficult further reuse of contained water. In this study, the neutralization of an effluent was studied by progressive addition of lime as a pH-modifying agent. Batch and continuous tests were conducted to evaluate the neutralization potential between pH 1 and 11 on an effluent containing As, Cu, Fe, Zn, Ni, Pb, Cd, Hg, Sb, Mn, Mo, Al and SO4
                     2−. In batch process neutralization, an efficiency of about 99.5% was attained except for Sb 98% and Pb 97%. Similar values were obtained for the continuous mode. The production of gypsum with commercial value was also evaluated based on the Chilean standard for hazardous solid waste measured by the TCLP (Toxicity characteristic leaching procedure) test. Best results were obtained between pH 1 and 2, after a minimum of four washes. The rheology of the residual solids was characterized using filtration tests and the sedimentation rate determined with different flocculants. The final liquid effluent was evaluated by the ASTM corrosion test and showed a non-corrosive nature, with a corrosion rate of 0.07 mm/year, well below the value allowed by established standard of 6.35 mm/year.In Chile, the control of industrial liquid waste (LW) has taken increased importance in large and medium-sized mining companies that process copper ores. These companies have to comply with environmental standards for adequate neutralization of their solid wastes ( The giant porphyry copper deposits are located in the driest regions in the world ( The pyrometallurgical processes that allow copper to be recovered from sulphides take place in a series of successive stages, most of which operate at high temperatures (typically 1250–1350 °C, depending on the type of reactor used). The smelting, conversion and refining stages generate gases rich in SO Pyrometallurgical smelting and converting processes have proven to be highly selective for Cu but not for heavy metals. Studies by During the neutralization step of the acid effluent the use of a number of reagents was evaluated, including: soluble silicate and kiln dust ( However, lime (CaO) represents the most economical and efficient alternative for the neutralization of cations dissolved in LW, either as hydroxides or complex anions ( The neutralization and co-precipitation process proposed begins with the hydrolysis of lime (1), followed by its partial dissolution resulting in a pH increment due to the formation of hydroxyl ions (2). Then, the hydroxyl ions follow a series of interactions with divalent and trivalent cations present, represented in a general form by reactions The objective of this work was to show the development and implementation of a neutralization circuit using lime for acidic effluents from gas treatment plants of smelting-converting processes of sulfide copper concentrates. This allows the neutralization of sulfuric acid and the simultaneous precipitation of metals such as As, Al, Cd, Cu, Fe, Hg, Mn, Mo, Ni, Pb, Sb and Zn, in compliance with the health regulations on hazardous waste management ( Although the method exposed here is, in general, known and commonly used for the treatment of liquid effluents, in this paper, not only the evaluation of this method in the removal of heavy metals and other contaminants from industrial liquid waste is presented, but also the possibility of producing a good quality gypsum as a byproduct with potential to be used as flux during the operation of the smelting and converting furnaces, is discussed. The LW used in the tests came from a single absorption acid plant in a copper smelting process. The original LW (as received and adjusted previously test to historic level) had a concentration called Level 1. In order to study the effect of a drastic increase in the concentration of cations that may occur in the plant, a synthetic LW called Level 2 was prepared with twice the concentration of the species of LW Level 1 which vary most in the plant such as As, Zn, Ni, Pb, Cd, Hg and Sb. The concentration of the other elements does not vary significantly in plant, so these were unchanged. Each of the solutions (Level 1 and Level 2) was analyzed by atomic absorption and gravimetric methods. Similarly, the residual solutions in each of the neutralization stages were analyzed. The lime used was analyzed by digestion followed by AAS (Atomic Absorption Spectrometry) and the results are shown in The mineralogical characterization of solid obtained in the neutralization and precipitation process was performed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Bruker D4 Endeavor® operated with Ni-filtered and Cu radiation. Neutralization tests were performed in a pilot plant with two 100 L tanks connected in series. These tanks have conical bottom and variable speed agitators, also a lime conditioning tank of 50 L and peristaltic pumps for propelling LW and lime suspension. Furthermore, the pilot plant has two vacuum filters 30 cm in diameter and two pH meters. Both tanks operate in series and continuous configuration to simulate two stages of neutralization at room pressure and temperature (101.4 kPa and 25 °C in Concepción, Chile). During the neutralization tests, submerged thermocouples were used to constantly monitor the liquid temperature in the tanks and provided the input to the temperature controller which regulated the flow of the heat exchanger fluid in the external cooling jackets of the three tanks. Tests were conducted to determine the sedimentation rate of the precipitates in a 0.5 L pulp sample at acidic and basic pH. Three doses of flocculants were evaluated in each case. The reagents used were: Superfloc A110, Preastol Magnafloc 6260 and 2620. Flocculants were prepared in solution by mixing 0.5 g of flocculant and 0.4 L of water with stirring at a low intensity for 2 h to ensure complete dissolution. Filtration tests were performed in a pressure filter using 4 L of neutralized pulp at pressure of 138 kPa for 30 min. To determine the corrosion rate of the neutralized solutions, the To evaluate the effect of pH on the neutralization of the LW solutions defined as Level 1 and Level 2, batch experiments at pH 1, 3, 5, 7, 9 and 11 were performed. When the pH modifying reagent selected is lime, this must be slaked by hydrolysis with 15% wt/v. This process was very fast and completed within 5 min, reaching an almost total transformation of CaO to Ca(OH) Once the lime suspension was prepared, it was added to LW for starting the neutralizing process. The process took about 1 h to reach pH 9 and an additional hour to reach pH 11. At each established pH, samples were extracted, filtered and chemically analyzed. The results are shown in   For the LW Level 2, Pb again presents a very low concentration due to precipitation of Pb sulphate. Sb, Ni and Hg present precipitation curves as a function of pH very similar to that for LW Level 1. In the case of Mo, a decrease was found in the concentration of the solution up to pH 5, as for the LW Level 1, however, at greater pH than 5 no increase was observed in concentration of Mo, as the case for the LW Level 1, leveling at 0.2 mg/L up to pH 11. This might be due to the fact that molybdenum precipitated with other metal cations such as Zn, which in the case of LW Level 2 had double concentrations as in LW Level 1. Also, Zn is one of the metals that remained in solution until higher pH and the Ksp for zinc molybdate (ZnMoO In For LW Level 2, precipitation curves similar to those obtained for LW Level 2 were obtained, they also show an increase in concentrations of Fe, Al and Mn from the original solution to that obtained at pH 1. In Lime consumption and temperature variation for LW Level 1 and Level 2 samples was monitored, as mentioned above. According to In parallel, a batch precipitation test which was progressively neutralized to pH 1, 3, 7, 9 and 11 was performed on LW Level 2. After each pH adjustment, the pulp was filtered and the solution was recirculated to the tank until the next pH level was reached. Each solid obtained in the above stages was analyzed by XRD (  At pH 7, the filtrate solution became transparent and the precipitate was blue which could be an indicative that all the Fe and the most of the Cu have been precipitated as shown in At pH 9, the precipitated gypsum was less as observed by comparing the relative intensities. At pH 11, only gypsum precipitation was observed, this time with a brown shade and no new crystalline phases could be identified. Other precipitated phases that were observed were Mg-Mn-Zn sulphates based on SEM and XRD analyses. A SEM image is shown in In order to develop an application that allows starting the process for obtaining clean gypsum and then neutralizing the LW, a procedure considering the neutralization of free acid was designed, preventing the precipitation of the elements present in the LW Level 2. To achieve this, tests were performed at pH 1.0, 1.5, 2.0 and 2.5. Once the required pH was reached, the pulp was filtered and the cake washed to remove the remaining solution. The washing water amount used corresponds to moisture content in the cake. This step was evaluated with various amounts of washing water to determine its effect on the quality of gypsum obtained. The solid wan then filtered and washed. The TCLP test is commonly applied to determine whether or not it meets the standard for non-hazardous solid waste. The analyses of the solutions obtained in this test are presented in In these tests, precipitation of impurities in the pH range subsequent to the precipitation step of clean gypsum was evaluated. The original LW was neutralized to pH 1.78, the formed gypsum separated by filtration and LW obtained was used as feed for continuous tests. The composition of this LW at pH 1.78 is shown in The test was run in a system operating continuously with two stirred tanks in series (see Operationally, it was observed that the pulp adjusted to pH 1.78 can easily increase the pH up to values close to pH 4 when allowed to stand. This can be explained due to excess of lime continuing to react when the pulp is quiescent. This can significantly alter the pH due to low consumption required in this pH range, resulting in further contamination of the gypsum. The results in Sedimentation tests were conducted to determine settling rates using flocculants Superfloc A110 (at pH 1.7), Magnafloc 6260 (at pH 1.7 and 11) and Preastol 2620 (at pH 11).  A sedimentation test was performed with the final pulp from Tank 2 for neutralization test to pH 11. For this purpose, a dose of 25 g/ton of Magnafloc 6260 was used.  Filtration test was developed for an acidic pulp (pH 1) prepared with the LW Level 1. For the test, a pressure filter was used. During the test, the recovery of filtrate was registered and is shown in The corrosion rate of the solution neutralized to pH 11 was studied. From the experimental results obtained for the proposed effluent neutralization by progressive addition of lime as a pH-modifying agent, the following was concluded: The efficiency of batch neutralization with lime was 97% for Pb, about 98% for Sb and SO The use of a series circuit proposed for the tentative production of clean gypsum evaluated by using TCLP test, showed that from pH 1 to 2 and with a minimum of four washings, it was possible to obtain a gypsum precipitate which complies with current regulations of hazardous solid waste and enables marketing. Continuous testing confirmed the results of the batch tests. It was noticed that the residual lime can raise the pH significantly. Testing of different flocculants, showed a substantial improvement in the rate of sedimentation with increases in the order of 300 to 1000% for pH 1.7 and 11, respectively. The need of using these reagents for an industrial scale process was established. The corrosion test indicated an average rate of 0.07 mm/year, much lower than the standard (6.35 mm/year) rate. This demonstrated the non-corrosive nature of liquid waste, making transportation easier through steel ducts. The mineralogical characterization of the residues was particularly complex due to the abundance of gypsum precipitate which masks the identification of the possible co-precipitating minor phases.