The process stability of water-in-oil (W/O) Pickering emulsions (10 or 20 wt% water), co-stabilized by 0.14 wt% of polyphenol crystals (curcumin or quercetin) dispersed in a soybean oil phase, plus 2.0 wt% whey protein isolate (WPI) or 0.1–2.0 wt% whey protein microgel (WPM) particles present in the inner aqueous phase, was assessed by measuring the apparent viscosity (η), water droplet size (via light scattering) and microstructural changes (via confocal laser scanning microscopy, CLSM). Stability was measured as a function of temperature (25–50 °C), using a shear rate cycle between 0.1 and 100 s−1 to highlight shear- and time-dependent hysteresis of η. All the emulsions showed shear thinning to some extent, but those without added WPI or WPM particles in the aqueous phase exhibited coalescence at increasing shear rate, that was more pronounced at higher temperatures. Emulsions containing WPI in the dispersed phase were stable, whilst those containing WPM particles showed a decrease in mean droplet size (D
                     4,3) on shearing due to the disruption of the aggregates of droplets, polyphenol crystals and/or WPM particles in the continuous oil phase, but with no droplet coalescence. The low shear rate (0.1 s−1) viscosity showed an increase with increasing WPM particle concentration. This increase, plus CLSM of the emulsions, suggested that the WPM particles increased W/O emulsion stability not only via their adsorption to the inner surface of the water droplets, but possibly also due to them promoting the formation of mixed weak flocs of polyphenol crystals + WPM particles + small water droplets in the oil phase attached to the surface of the main population of water droplets.Emulsions are metastable colloids where one liquid phase is dispersed into another immiscible liquid as droplets, which are created via external shear energy and the droplets stabilized by surface-active molecules or particles ( Food emulsions are often complex systems containing many different surface active ingredients and stabilizers – lipids, proteins, polysaccharides, particles, etc. ( In our previous work, we demonstrated the ability of water-insoluble polyphenol crystals, such as curcumin and quercetin, to stabilize water droplets via the Pickering mechanism ( The double Pickering stabilization effect was shown previously () to be strongly dependent on the concentration of WPM particles. At low WPM particle concentration, both polyphenol crystals and WPM particles were present at the interface and synergistically improved the W/O emulsion stability. At higher WPM particle concentrations, mixed weak flocculation in the oil phase of polyphenol crystals, WPM particles and possibly very small water droplets (which are almost impossible to distinguish from the latter) occurred. In the presence of these aggregates, which were usually attached to the surface of the main population of water droplets, the resilience of the emulsions to coalescence increased even further (). Evidence was also presented that the principal origin of the complex formation (for both WPI and WPM particles) was electrostatic attraction, at pH 3.0, between the oppositely charged polyphenol particles and protein, although hydrogen bonding between the two components may have also contributed to the stability ( As well as rheological stability being used as a measure of colloidal stability ( Curcumin (orange-yellow powder) from turmeric rhizome (96% total curcuminoid content) was obtained from Alfa Aesar (UK). Quercetin (≥95%) in the form of a yellow crystalline solid was purchased from Cayman Chemicals (USA). Both polyphenol crystals were used without further purification. Soybean oil (KTC Edibles, UK) was purchased from a local store. Whey protein isolate (WPI) containing 96.5% protein was obtained from Fonterra (New Zealand). Water, purified by treatment with a Milli-Q apparatus (Millipore, Bedford, UK), with a resistivity not less than 18 MΩ cm Curcumin or quercetin dispersions were prepared by dispersing these polyphenol crystals (0.14 wt%) in the continuous phase (soybean oil) using an Ultra-Turrax T25 mixer (Janke & Kunkel, IKA-Labortechnik) with a 13 mm mixer head (S25N-10 G) operating at 9400 rpm for 5 min. The WPI (4 wt%) was dissolved in the aqueous phase for at least 2 h at room temperature to ensure complete hydration. The WPI solution was then diluted to the desired WPI concentration and 0.02 wt% sodium azide was added as a preservative. The pH of the aqueous phase was adjusted to 3.0, by adding few drops of 0.1 M HCl or NaOH. An aqueous dispersion of WPM particles was prepared based on a slight modification of the methods previously described by W/O emulsions were prepared at room temperature (21–26 °C) based on the procedure described in our previous work ( A modular compact rheometer, MCR-302 (Anton Paar, Austria) was used to measure the viscosity of soybean oil, curcumin and quercetin dispersions, WPI and WPM aqueous dispersions and emulsions at different temperatures (25, 35 and 50 °C). Cone-and-plate geometry (CP50-2, diameter: 50 mm cone angle: 2°) was used for all measurements. The rheometer was initialized with 0.2 mm gap between the cone and plate. The shear rate was set in the range of 10 The particle size distributions (PSD) of emulsions were measured using static light scattering via a Mastersizer Hydro SM small volume wet sample dispersion unit (Malvern Instruments, UK). The size was measured before and after shearing in the rheometer at different temperatures. Average droplet size was monitored via the Sauter mean diameter, For water droplet size measurements, refractive indices of 1.33 and 1.47 were used, for water and soybean oil, respectively. Absorption coefficients of 0.01, 0.1 and 0.01 for curcumin, quercetin and water, were used, respectively. All measurements were made at room temperature on at least three different samples. The microstructure of the W/O emulsions was observed using a confocal microscope (Zeiss LSM700 inverted, Germany). The emulsions were prepared as discussed above but were deliberately not passed through the Leeds Jet homogenizer in order to maximize their size because with larger droplets it was easier to discern the absorbed layers of polyphenol crystals and WPI/WPM particles at the interface. Approximately 80 μL of sample were placed into a laboratory-made welled slide and a cover slip (0.17 mm thickness) was placed on top, ensuring that there was no air gap (or bubbles) trapped between the sample and coverslip. The samples were scanned at room temperature (25 ± 1 °C) using a 20 Significant differences between samples were determined by one-way ANOVA and multiple comparison test with Tukey's adjustment performed using SPSS software (IBM, SPSS statistics) and the level of confidence was 95%. Before measuring the viscosity of the emulsions, it was necessary to check the effects of the particles on the viscosity of the dispersed and continuous phases alone. The viscosity ( The WPM particles (2 wt%) at all the 3 temperatures showed strong shear thinning behavior, typical of microgel dispersions. This is due to inter-particle entanglements and other interactions that occur at relatively low particle volume fraction but that are disrupted by shear ( Protein microgels are soft colloidal particles that exhibit complex surface ( The Finally, it should be emphasized that the much higher  Rheological hysteresis was observed in all the above emulsions, but was more pronounced in those containing WPM particles, again probably due to more flocculated nature of the latter systems. Interestingly,  Images of fresh emulsions including 2.0 wt% WPM particles plus curcumin or quercetin are shown in The PSDs of the systems were measured before and after the shear cycle at the different temperatures. From the above results, it can be concluded that the curcumin- and quercetin-stabilized emulsions containing WPI or WPM particles were more stable to shear and elevated temperatures than without these two forms of protein. Thus, interfacial complex formation, between the oppositely charged polyphenol crystals in the oil phase and biopolymer or biopolymer microgel particles in the aqueous phase, not only improves the storage stability under quiescent conditions (as discussed in our previous work () but also enhances stability to shear and temperature. The curcumin and quercetin systems containing WPM particles were chosen for further testing since these had the highest viscosity values at high shear rates and no coalescence was observed. Emulsions stabilized by 0.14 wt% curcumin or quercetin crystals + 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 and 2.0 wt% WPM in the aqueous phase were investigated.  The shear stability of emulsions containing a higher water:oil ratio (20 wt% water) was tested for systems stabilized by 0.14 wt% curcumin or quercetin crystals + 2.0 wt% WPM particles as Pickering stabilizers, since this WPM particle concentration appeared to impart enhanced stability for 10 wt% W/O emulsions, (  In this study, the viscosity ( The authors declare no competing financial interests.  Authors gratefully acknowledge the