Because the physics that underpin many minerals processing operations is often complex, many researchers find it convenient to give empirical descriptions of their experimental observations. However, such empirical correlations are often given in a dimensionally inconsistent form which means that their utility is limited. In this article, the steps that must be taken to develop a correlation that has the required number of degrees of freedom that are necessary and sufficient to adequately characterise a system and retain dimensional consistency are presented. This methodology is supported by four examples of the rigorous development of empirical correlations that may be of interest to minerals processing engineers.The characterisation, development and design of minerals processing unit operations are often confounded because the underlying physics behind such operations is intractable. The mechanics of multiphase processes can be so complicated that mechanistic models are difficult to formulate with confidence. For example, in the flotation process one must consider the behaviour of effectively four phases (liquid, gas, hydrophobic particles, and hydrophilic particles), and the interaction between these phases is far from trivial, given that consideration must be taken of complex fluid mechanics and surface chemistries. An accurate and fundamental mechanistic description of the flotation process is therefore beyond the reach of current researchers. Because of the difficulties in formulating mechanistic descriptions of many physical processes, engineers often turn to empirical descriptions of their observations. There is no doubt that such empirical descriptions can be of great value because they can provide accessible predictive relationships for parameters of practical industrial interest. Often, an empirical relationship that has been developed using high-quality experimental or plant data is of more value than an unverified mechanistic analysis. However, empirical correlations are often presented in the literature in such a way as to make them only valid for the particular system on which the experimental data was obtained. This tendency is rather unfortunate, since there is a large body of literature that could contribute to broader understanding of minerals processing but, because it is not presented effectively, has limited value to the minerals processing community. Literature thus presented, tends to be deficient because the presented correlations are dimensionally inconsistent, or not enough degrees of freedom are allowed for in the correlation. In this paper, the need for proper consideration of dimensions and degrees of freedom when formulating empirical descriptions is demonstrated and Buckingham’s Π-Theorem is described to show how this may assist in the development of rigorous correlations. Four examples, ranging from a simple explanation for the development of the Blasius correlation for the shear stress at a hydraulically smooth pipe wall due to turbulent flow, to correlations that are of direct relevance to the processes of particle classification and flotation that have been developed by the authors, are then presented. Possibly the most important factor when developing empirical expressions to describe observed data is dimensional consistency. This means that the dimensions on one side of an equation A dimensionally inconsistent expression is dependent upon the system of units chosen, whereas a dimensionally consistent expression has efficacy whichever system of units is selected, as long as the unit system is self-consistent. A dimensionally inconsistent expression, although it may provide an effective fit to experimental observation, cannot properly capture the underlying physics that underpins a system. Because of the dimensional inconsistency, the empirical expression is not scaleable. The implication is that the expression is only good for the system from which the data used to develop the correlation is obtained. The corollary is that the correlation has no general efficacy for systems other than those observed by the reporting researchers. Dimensional consistency can be readily maintained, whilst developing correlations if one works with dimensionless variables, as will be described below. For an empirical correlation to be effectively developed by regression with experimental data, the functional form of the expression must be formed such that it can adjust to correctly reflect the underlying physics. In other words, an expression must be allowed sufficient degrees of freedom. The number of degrees of freedom (or the number of dimensionless groups) that are necessary and sufficient to characterise a physical system can be calculated by application of  Now, there are four steps to the development of a successful dimensionless correlation. Firstly the relevant independent variables must be identified. Every variable that may be reasonably expected to influence the subject variable (i.e. Secondly, once the number of relevant independent variables and hence number of dimensional groups that are necessary and sufficient to characterise a system can be determined, the appropriate dimensional groups need to be written. It is this step that is often seen as the most confusing, since an infinite number of dimensional groups can be written for a list of independent variables. However, Buckingham’s Π-Theorem, by giving the number of degrees of freedom required in a system, also gives the maximum number of independent dimensionless groups that it is possible to write in a set of dimensionless groups for a given list of independent variables. Thus, it does not matter which groups are selected, so long as the groups are independent of each other and each independent variable is included in at least one of the groups selected. In fact some groups are found to have particular utility and are commonly used in dimensionless correlations such as the Reynolds number, Thirdly, an experimental programme must be designed so that a correlation may be determined to describe the system in terms of empirical results. One of the major strengths of dimensional analysis lies herein: Rather than investigating the dependency of the subject variable upon every other independent variable, one can fully determine the nature of the dependency by correlating the values of the dimensionless groups rather than of each individual variable. Therefore, the dependency of the subject variable upon three independent variables can be determined without manipulating those three variables. In this way, for instance, the dependency of liquid drainage rate from gas–liquid foam upon the acceleration due to gravity can be determined without having to go to the moon or take a parabolic flight. Technical issues regarding human habitation of the moon have previously been discussed in the pages of this journal by Lastly, after appropriate data have been collected a functional form for the dimensionless correlation must be proposed before the correlation can be tuned by regression analysis against the data. In the absence of any physical insight a power-law relationship is often trialed, although better correlations may be developed if the functional form is suggested by empirical observation (see, for example, Four examples of dimensional analyses to demonstrate the points made above are presented below. Three of these examples are of direct relevance to the description of unit operations in minerals processing. As a first, and simple, example of the application of Buckingham’s Π-Theorem, the development of the well-known We seek to correlate the shear stress at the pipe wall, There are five independent variables, and because there are three base quantities in the problem (i.e. mass, length and time), Buckingham’s Π-Theorem dictates that two dimensionless groups are necessary and sufficient to characterise the system (i.e. there are two degrees of freedom). Another implication of this is that there are only two independent groups that one can possibly write from the list given by Eq. So, we write: We do not know what this function should be, but we know that such a unique function Note that, in order to determine the relationship between Now, if the walls of the pipe exhibit roughness that is intermediate between the conditions of being hydraulically smooth and fully rough, the shear stress becomes dependent upon the characteristic height of roughness elements at the pipe wall, Again, although we know that such a function must exist, we do not know what it is. In fact, The next example demonstrates how correlations can be simplified by discounting certain dimensionless groups on physical grounds. The prediction of liquid drainage rate from a spatially invariant foam is fundamental to estimating the hydrodynamic condition of a flotation froth ( We see that there are seven independent variables (i.e. one on the left-hand side, six on the right), and, because there are, again, three base quantities (mass, length and time), Buckingham’s Π-Theorem dictates that four dimensionless groups are necessary and sufficient to characterise the system. The groups we choose are a Stokes-type number: Again, even though we know that such a unique function exists, we have no Even though the Π-Theorem dictates that four groups are required to characterise this problem, we can simplify Eq. Judicious dimensional analysis can often reveal the type of physics that underpin a process, as will be demonstrated in the following example. The entrainment of gangue into the concentrate stream of a flotation process is worthy of investigation, since the entrainment rate contributes to determining the selectivity of the process. As a preliminary to developing a model for gangue entrainment, Again, we do not know what the functional form is, but, again, we trial a power-law form. In fact, when a regression analysis is performed against Lee’s data, it is apparent that the appropriate index upon Now, on noticing that the The reflux classifier (RC) is a novel particle classification device that consists of a set of parallel inclined plates above a fluidised bed which uses the Boycott effect to enhance the sedimentation rate within the inclined section in order to achieve particle separation on the basis of size and density. In the final example, we will demonstrate how a dimensional analysis can be implemented ( For the RC it is convenient to define a segregation efficiency, Simple kinematics shows the throughput advantage is given by Eq. However, We see that five dimensionless groups are necessary and sufficient to characterise the system: Now, It has been demonstrated that, because many processes are physically complex, the method of dimensional analysis is a powerful technique for empirically describing experimental data. By employing Buckingham’s Π-Theorem, one can determine the number of groups that are necessary and sufficient to adequately characterise a system. In addition, if one works with dimensionless groups then one avoids the pitfalls of producing dimensionally inconsistent expressions; dimensionally inconsistent expressions cannot be scaled, and therefore, only have utility for the experimental system upon which they were produced. Four examples have been given, ranging in complexity from the development of the Blasius correlation for the friction factor in pipes carrying turbulent flow, to the development of an expression for the segregation efficiency of a reflux classifier unit. It has been shown that a rigorous and judicious application of empirical methods can not only provide an effective correlation, but can also inform about the physics that underpin a particular process.