Vickers and Knoop hardness measurements performed on various ceramics (hard metals) and light alloy materials (soft metals) are compared. The results show that the Knoop hardness number is, in general, lower than the Vickers hardness number for the highest values of hardness, and this behaviour is reversed when the hardness values are low. This change in values, which occur at 8GPa, has no real physical meaning and, therefore, it is difficult to interpret such behaviour in terms of the elasto-plastic deformation around the indent such as sinking-in, piling-up, and bulging of the indent faces, phenomena which take place during indentation or after the withdrawal of the indenter.
                  Prior to interpreting the hardness difference, it is very important to consider the same area in the hardness calculations. That is why we have compared the available hardness data obtained from the literature and recalculated them by considering the projected and true areas of the contact. If the objective is to compare the two hardness numbers, it seems more suitable to consider the true area of contact, procedure which will provide a Vickers hardness number higher than the Knoop hardness number all over the range of the hardness values.The hardness of a material is defined as the resistance to plastic deformation usually when the indentation test is carried out. The principle of indentation consists in applying a given load and, subsequently, measuring the dimensions of the residual impression left in the material once the indenter has been withdrawn. Hardness of the material is then defined as the ratio between the indentation load and a parameter representative of the area of the residual impression, depending on the shape of the indenter and the method employed for the hardness calculation. For the Vickers hardness test, the indenter is a square-based pyramid for which the angle, The Knoop hardness test used a lozenge-based pyramid with the angle In the majority of the hardness studies, different authors compare the Vickers and Knoop hardness measurements by using these two forms of calculations for the hardness numbers. We will show above that this approach leads to a wrong result, which is characterized by an inexplicable change of behaviour at a given value of the hardness. Prior to the discussion related to various hardness measurements performed on hard ceramics, previous comments should be made on the validity of the experimental data. With the aim to normalize the hardness measurements, some rules and procedures were set and listed in several international standards such as the European draft standard ENV 843-4, Therefore, in the present work, we used the data provided by Ullner et al., All the hardness values, HV1 and HK2, obtained from Ullner et al. The hardness values obtained by Gong et al. To take into consideration much lower hardness values, we are considering the hardness results reported by Shaw et al. From a mathematical point of view, it is possible to solve Eq. The difference between the Knoop and Vickers hardness numbers has been subject to some interesting discussion in the past, but it was mainly centered on the high values of the hardness (>HL). That is why, the use of the general explanations for lower values of hardness leads to erroneous interpretations. For example, Shaw et al., In addition, it has been reported by Lawn and Howes On the other hand, Marshall et al. On the base of the above-mentioned assumptions, Gong indicated that VHN/KHN In their work, Zhang and Sakai All the Vickers hardness values indicated in For which, it will exist always a limit hardness value, HL This result is not yet fully satisfactory since HL The two angles Using Eq. The main important result is that the coefficient in front of VHN term in Eq. It is now possible to simply write the relative variation of the hardness: In these conditions, Eq. In addition, the use of Eq. If we base our discussion on the comparison of the hardness values obtained, it seems that hardness must be calculated by considering the true area of contact. This is achieved without difficulties for any instrumented hardness test if the calculation is performed with the contact areas obtained under load for the two types of indenters. Nevertheless, in a recent study of the depth–load registration curve, Li et al. Independently of such result, the load–depth registrations offer a large possibility of hardness calculations according to the area or the indentation depth considered into the hardness calculation. Then, for the instrumented hardness tests, the problem remains entire on the choice of the indentation area. Here, we propose a simple way for the hardness calculations by considering the true area of contact, procedure which will allow a valid comparison between the hardness numbers obtained when using Vickers or Knoop indenters. However, additional work is necessary in order to be able to link the difference between Vickers and Knoop hardness numbers to phenomena such as sinking-in, piling-up and elastic recovery. The Knoop and Vickers hardness numbers have been expressed on the same basis by taking into account the true area of contact between the indenter and the material, which allows a better understanding of the difference between the two. In this condition, Knoop hardness number is always lower than the Vickers hardness number. This important result allows us to render appropriate the relationship proposed by Gong et al., This work has been conducted in the framework of a Post-graduation Cooperative Programme (PCP), between the University of Science and Technology in Lille and the Universidad Central de Venezuela, supported by both the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MAE) and Youth, National Education and Research (MJENR) and the Venezuelan National Fund for Science, Technology and Innovation (FONACIT).