A cogent update of orbital blowout history, anatomy, and management are included with a retrospective study of 59 pure orbital blowout fractures which occurred between 1994 and 1998. Our goal is to provide a better understanding of this frequently encountered entity and to help augment the confidence of nonophthalmologists who will often evaluate patients with suspected orbital blowout fractures. (Am J Emerg Med 2001;19:147-154. This is a US Government work. There are no restrictions on its use.)The management of orbital blowout fractures has been debated for many years. Current management has become more standardized over the past century, but treatment remains individualized. Surgical indications are predicated on criteria such as enophthalmos, restriction of extraocular muscles, and diplopia. There are few reasons to perform immediate/urgent corrections when an invasive approach is indicated. Surgery is usually performed within 10 days. Because the emergency physician and family practitioner are likely to evaluate these patients before the ophthalmologist, they should feel comfortable with the initial examination, know which studies (if any) would be useful, and know how to manage the patient before the ensuing ophthalmology consult. In a review of 100 orbital fractures occurring between 1994 and 1998, we collected data from 59 pure orbital blowout cases. Any case which had an orbital rim fracture was rejected because they were cases of roof fractures. We analyzed the symptomatology, signs, adjunct studies, and treatment of pure orbital floor and medial wall fractures to update management considerations and techniques. Our patients' ages ranged from 8 to 75 years (average age 33), there were 38 male and 21 female subjects. Thirty cases involved the right eye whereas 29 involved the left. The most common causes were falling (22/59), aggression (16/59), or sporting events (16/59). The most common signs found on physical examination were periorbital ecchymosis (52/59), diplopia (39/59), hypoesthesia in V2 distribution (32/59), and intraorbital emphysema (25/59). Plain radiographs were ordered in 26/59 patients yielding 13 false negatives, 5 true positives, 5 suspected blowouts, and 3 nondiagnostic studies. Thin-cut, true coronal and axial computed tomography (CT) of the orbits were performed on 51/59 patients and provided 51 true positives. The delay between trauma and presentation ranged from 0 to 28 days with an average of 1.7 days. The range of time elapsed from trauma until surgery was 0 to 6 years with an average delay of 7.5 days. The predominant surgical approach was transconjunctival (53/55). It was associated with 12 transient complications lasting less than 1 week and 2 definitive complications. One case of new onset hypoesthesia that was still present at last follow-up (9 months) and one case with worsening of diplopia that improved with each follow-up. This was presumed to be secondary to globe displacement from the orbital floor implant. The remaining 2 approaches were subciliary and one through the original wound. Implants were used in 35/55 cases. Early surgeries (before 1996) usually used lyophilized bovine dura mater (24/55) but after the publicity of “Mad Cow Disease” its use was discontinued to prevent any possible prion transfer. Synthetic materials such as polydioxanone suture (PDS) (5/55), Ethisorb (5/55; Ethicon, Inc, Somerville, NJ), and autogenous bone (2/55) were used thereafter. The majority of fractures were medial to the infraorbital groove and had a lateral edge that involved the groove (36/59). There were 10 fractures involving only the lamina papyracea whereas 4 involved both the floor and the lamina papyracea. There are 7 bones of the cranial and facial skeleton which join to create the orbits: the maxilla, zygoma, lacrimal, ethmoid, palatine, sphenoid, and frontal. The orbit can be imagined as a cone or pyramid with an elliptical base presenting anteriorly and the apex going deep with an axis approximately 22° lateral from the visual axis. The walls of the orbit consist of relatively thin bone whereas the rims are relatively thick. A transilluminated skull will show this nicely. The lateral wall is formed by the greater wing of the sphenoid and the zygoma (Figs 1 through 4). Orbital architecture is well designed. As a result of “blowing out” it protects us from the perils of sudden, intense, intraorbital pressure elevations induced from external forces, hereby assuaging serious ocular injury. Although some articles report ocular injury percentages as high as 14% to 40% Regardless of whether the mechanism of injury is a result of a buckling Over the years, physicians from more than 6 specialties have generated excellent reports arguing their technique and their management strategy along with presenting new data associated with orbital blowout fractures. Present recommendations consider the well-founded data and astute observations of contributors from each side of the argument. A solid paradigm of current management has been outlined by Grant, Iliff, and Manson Patients can present with a wide range of symptoms. Depending on the cause, a patient may be virtually asymptomatic or he may have significant symptoms of orbit and globe involvement. Therefore, with blunt orbital trauma, regardless of presentation, a blowout should be suspected and promptly ruled out. As shown in a case report by Walker et al An orbital blowout fracture is one of several possible diagnoses for a patient who presents with a history of blunt trauma and diplopia. Included in the differential are orbital hemorrhage or edema (without a blowout), bruised extraocular muscle, and cranial nerve palsy. A plethora of diagnostic imaging options are available to the physician when considering the diagnosis of orbital blowout fracture. Usable studies include: plain x-ray films, ultrasound, CT, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and transantral endoscopic orbital floor exploration. Orbital plain radiographs are widely used and are ostensibly inexpensive. Bhattacharya, Mosely, and Fells at Moorfield Eye Hospital in London assessed the clinical role of plain radiographs in the management of suspected orbital blowout fractures. An article published in Once the diagnosis has been made, 2 initial courses can be followed: surgical and nonsurgical. The physician's philosophy along with the physical examination and any radiologic findings will direct the management. Two physical examination components with significant impact on any physician's surgical or nonsurgical decision are the presence of diplopia and enophthalmos. Additionally, a floor with greater than 50% fractured is likely to create cosmetically unacceptable enophthalmos and would influence a surgeon's decision. Intraorbital emphysema, although a frequent finding which is often so alarming to the patient that it is the primary reason for presenting, is considered by many physicians as an incidental, benign finding that resolves with time. The transconjunctival approach to the orbit appears to be the preferred surgical approach for the majority of orbital floor fractures because of its low complication rate and excellent cosmesis. This approach has been known for over 75 years, but did not become widely used until 25 years ago. Two studies done in the early 1970s The decision to use an implant is predicted on the degree of comminution and the size of the fracture. Implant materials include autogenous bone and cartilage, alloplastic materials such as methylmethacrylate, Teflon (Dupont, Wilmington, DE), silicone Supramyd, Marlex, Silastic, gelatin film, PDS, porous polyethylene channel implants and lyophilized dura mater, among others. Jordan et al Initial management of suspected orbital fractures includes ice treatments to the affected area for the first 48 hours, elevation of the head of bed while sleeping, use of nasal decongestants, a broad spectrum antibiotic such as Augmentin, and oral steroids to prevent fibrosis, avoidance of aspirin, and no nose blowing. Again, current indications for early surgery (within 1 to 3 weeks) in the US include diplopia in primary gaze or diplopia in slight downgaze or upgaze, enophthalmos of 2 to 3 mm or more, or substantial soft tissue herniation into the maxillary sinuses (usually indicated by a greater than 50% floor fracture on CT). Causes such as falling, aggression, and sports continue to be the main cause of pure blowouts whereas MVAs are one of the major causes of both pure and impure orbital blowout fractures. However, we corroborate unlikely mechanisms of injury, such as being struck with a single digit, and being hit by a tossed hand-held calculator, among others. Therefore, suspicion for fracture should be aroused if a patient presents with periorbital ecchymosis. Suspicion should be peaked if a patient presents with diplopia, V2 distribution hypoesthesia, or intraorbital emphysema. Forces causing periorbital ecchymosis/hematoma may be adequate to induce an orbital blowout. For this reason, a thorough ocular evaluation is advised. We observed little impact from the initial plain radiographs and would recommend a moratorium on the standard reflex of ordering them because it would be more efficient to get a thin-cut true coronal CT scan of the orbits when warranted. Regardless of imminent surgery or not, initial treatment should include cold packs to the site for the first 48 hours, use of nasal decongestants, elevation of the head of the bed, avoidance of aspirin (unless required for other systemic reasons), and no nose blowing. Steroids should be considered as well as a broad-spectrum antibiotic covering sinus pathogens. In our study, when surgery was performed, the transconjunctival approach was used most often (53/55) and this approach proved to be safe and efficacious. It was associated with excellent cosmesis and only 2 definitive complications: new V2 distribution hypoesthesia, that was present at the 9 month follow-up, and worsening diplopia postoperatively that was assumed to be secondary to graft thickness. These outstanding results coupled with other recent reports in the literature allow us to advocate early intervention (within 7 to 10 days) when patients meet criteria. Finally, we would like to impress on those who take part in the evaluation of any orbital trauma, that an ophthalmic examination is indicated. This is not because every case is an emergency—quite the contrary. Because it is difficult to judge which person will develop a threatening eye condition related to the trauma, each patient must be thoroughly examined. We encourage further reading on this subject and recommend the many sources noted throughout this article to enhance the provider's knowledge and comfort in the work-up of suspected orbital blowout fractures.