Methane reforming with CO2 over Samaria-promoted Ni and Co/SBA-15 was comparatively investigated. The Co, Ni (10%wt) and Sm (0.5, 1 and 1.5%wt) ions were introduced by two-solvent impregnation method. The Ni and Co catalysts with/without promoter, were examined by N2 adsorption-desorption, x-ray diffraction (XRD), high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), temperature programmed reduction (TPR) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) methods, and then evaluated in CO2 reforming of methane. The XRD and TEM results indicated that Ni and Co/SBA-15 promoted by 1%wt of Samaria, had the smallest NiO and Co3O4 particles size and the highest dispersion; as a result, they would rather studying dry reforming of methane test. Catalytic results indicated that Samaria promoted Ni/SBA-15 had the highest conversion (CH4 conversion∼58% at 700 °C), while a remarkable decrease of catalytic activity was observed over Samaria-promoted Co/SBA-15 (CH4 conversion∼25% at 700 °C). The positive effect of Samaria on Ni/SBA-15 catalyst activity is probably due to smaller NiO particles, higher NiO dispersion and lower trend to carbon deposition. On the contrary, the negative effect of Samaria on Co/SBA-15 catalyst activity is maybe due to Co oxidation to inactive phase and sintering of Co particles in high temperatures.In order to lower the concentration of the greenhouse gases (CO Selectivity of dry reforming of methane (DRM) product is extensively depended on the active metal, its interaction with the support and catalyst preparation methods. Noble metals, such as Rhodium, Platinum, Palladium, Ruthenium, and Iridium, dispersed on a support are efficiently used for dry reforming of methane Although, effect of lanthanide group promoters on Ni-based supported catalysts during CO Even though the catalytic performance such as activity is neither preferable to nickel nor to the noble metal catalyst, study on the promoted cobalt catalysts also reported better catalytic performance Moreover, according to essays Therefore, in the present work, we applied two-solvent incorporation method for comparison the effect of Samaria promoter on the catalytic performance between Co/SBA-15 and Ni/SBA-15 catalysts for dry reforming of methane. Our purpose is to achieve an improved catalyst with high metal surface area for methane reforming with CO Nickel nitrate hexahydrate (Ni(NO The mesoporous silica support (SBA-15) was prepared by hydrothermal method as investigated by Zhao and co-workers, previously The textural properties were obtained from N2 adsorption-desorption measurement recorded on a BEL sorp mini-II gas adsorption at 77 K. Prior to analysis, the calcined catalysts were pre-treated under vacuum at 150 °C for 2 h. The specific surface area and pore size distribution were evaluated by BET (Brunauer-Emmett-Teller) equation and BJH (Barrett-Joyner-Halenda) method, respectively. X-ray diffraction (XRD) characterization of the fresh and spent catalysts were carried out by a Bruker D8 diffractometer with Cu Ka radiation (40 kV and 30 mA). Catalysts crystallite size was estimated by the Scherrer equation. The morphology of the fresh catalysts were registered on Tecnai 20–100 kV from FEI Company from USA and Zeiss-EM10C-100 kV from Germany. Prior to the test, the catalysts were suspended ultrasonically in alcohol bath and then a drop of suspension was put on holey carbon film grid and dried. The reduction test of the catalysts was recorded by the temperature-programmed reduction (TPR) method; a micrometrics chemisorb 2750. An Amount of the synthesized catalysts (50 mg) was loaded in a fixed-bed reactor and heated from 100 °C to 700 °C (10 °C/min) in a gas flow of 10H Reforming of methane with CO The X-ray diffraction patterns of all the supported Ni and Co catalysts with/without Samaria are presented in N2 adsorption-desorption isotherms and BJH adsorption curves of unpromopted Ni and Co/SBA-15 and Samaria-promoted catalysts are exhibited in From The well-ordered structure and metal dispersions of unused catalysts are observed by TEM micrographs. In It is obvious that catalyst nanoparticles in 1Sm The TPR profiles of Ni and Co/SBA-15 catalysts with Samaria promoter, are presented in According to Yousefpour and co-workers studies Catalytic activities of Ni and Co/SBA-15 samples with/without Samaria for CO It is found that CO On the contrast, adding Samaria to Co/SBA-15 has a negative effect on 1Sm Also, from the H Short time stability tests were examined at 700 °C for 5 h for Ni and Co/SBA-15 with/without Samaria catalysts. A short time stability results showed that for all of the catalysts, the activity reduces slightly during 5 h of reforming reaction ( Scanning electron microscopy images of the 10Ni/SBA-15, 10Co/SBA-15, 1Sm On the other hand, another reason for carbon deposition is probably imbalance reaction between methane decomposition and carbon oxidation reaction on the catalyst. In fact, the carbon deposition will happen when the rate of methane decomposition is faster than the generation of carbon species HRTEM images ( On the other hand, the metal oxidation during the CH In the present work, Samaria-promoted Ni and Co/SBA-15 catalysts have been successfully prepared by two-solvent impregnation method, and tested in the CO Based on activity tests, Samaria incorporation to Ni improved methane conversion, while decreased catalyst Co activity. It is found, the main reasons for Samaria-promoted Co/SBA-15 low activity are Co oxidation to SmCoO The authors thank Semnan University, Dr. Mohammad Reza Vaezi in Department of Materials and Energy in Materials and Energy Research Center, Catalyst and Advanced Materials Research Laboratory in Chemical Engineering Department of Kashan University, Nanonafez Company in Semnan University Science and Technology Park, and Semnan University Science and Technology Park for supporting of research.