Powder Metallurgy is used widely to produce Cu‐based shape memory alloys having maximum of desired properties. It is better to use P/M to produce near‐net shape alloy products and have better controllability on the composition and grain size. In this study, the high‐energy planetary ball milling was applied to convert the elemental powder mixtures of Cu, Al and Ni into pre‐alloyed powders. The effect of milling time on composition and particles size distribution was studied and the pre‐alloyed powders were compacted by pressing and then hot extruded to obtain the final alloy sample. Strain recovery of the bended samples was studied to evaluate the effect of milling on shape memory properties. The densities of samples were calculated in green, sintered and extruded conditions to investigate the changes in the density of the samples, and influence of porosity on shape memory effect. The results showed that milling time has a variable influence on the density of samples, which can takes effect on the shape memory recovery due to amount of porosity.Shape memory alloys (SMAs) belong to a group of functional, smart materials with the unique property of remembering the shape they had before pseudo-plastic deformation. SMAs exhibit reversible hysteretic thermo-mechanical behavior very different from conventional elastic/plastic materials In this study, high energy planetary ball milling was applied to produce pre-alloyed powders from the Cu–Al–Ni elemental powder mixture. Conventional P/M with cold compaction was used to produce bulk Cu–Al–Ni based SMA from the pre-alloyed powders by MA. The purpose of this study is to reveal the effect of MA on the microstructure and properties of Cu–AI–Ni SMA produced by general milling. A Cu–Al–Ni alloy powder was prepared by mechanical alloying of elemental powders in a planetary mill for several durations. In the MA process, a Fritsch-puluarisate planetary ball mill with stainless steel vial was used. The details of milling process are listed in The powder mixtures were mechanically alloyed for 5, 10, 15 and 20 The compaction process is consisted of a 2 The maximum deformation strain  The pattern of the 1  The characteristic diffraction peaks of β′ Evolution of the particle size distribution is shown in This increasing was also observed by Xiao et al. On the basis of XRD and SEM results, several steps in mechanical alloying process can be considered: In the beginning of the process, joining of particles by cold-welding, occurred simultaneous with fracture of particles caused by strain hardening. The amount of the fine and coarse particles increased at the same time. Meanwhile, particle joining takes the lead, and layer composites appear in the form of coarse particles on the surface of the balls. By increasing milling time, fracture of particles caused an increase in fine semi-axial composite particles, and diffusion of elements in the matrix increases by localized elevation in temperature. Also, low driving force channels for diffusion of atoms will be provided by strain hardening. Appearance of clear active surface by fracture makes the welding between particles easier. This process continues until the powder becomes homogenous. The changes of green density and porosity of the samples as a function of milling time are shown in As can be seen, after milling the mixture for 5 As a result of sintering and hot-extruding, the density of the green samples increases as expected. As shown in More homogenous structure appeared by alloying, caused by milling, makes the material to flow easier during hot extrusion process and therefore, the density increases and less porosity remains after extrusion in sample milled for 10 The correspondence between milling time and transformation temperatures was determined by means of DSC. Two peaks are observed in both curves, an endothermic peak relates to martensite to austenite transformation and an exothermic peak which relates to inversed eutectoid transformation (α+γ The results showed that the martensite to austenite transformation temperature was decreased from 77.8 to 72.4 The martensitic transformation peak cannot be seen in cooling curve in the DSC results which is due to insufficient heat transfer needed for martensitic transformation and martensite phase formation. Shape memory properties of the final samples were investigated by measuring the strain recovery parameter. The changes in the strain recovery by milling time is shown in As can be seen, as milling time increases up to 15 The decrease of strain recovery in the 20 The changes in the strain recovery caused by solution treatment was plotted and is illustrated in The diagram shows that the efficiency of the solution treatment in the first stages is more than the efficiency in high solution times. This is due to appearing phases other than β′ In this study, by means of hot extrusion of PM samples made by mechanical alloying, a Cu-based shape memory alloy was manufactured and evaluated. Considering the results achieved, it is concluded that: MA can be successfully applied to prepare Cu, Al, Ni and pre-alloyed powders. A single phase of FCC structure with lattice parameter close to that of Cu was produced after high energy MA for 15 MA caused a notable evolution in particle size and shape. With increasing milling time, joining and fracture of particles happen simultaneously, and made a wide distribution of particle size. The spherical and polygonal powders changed to layer-shaped. As milling time increases, the green density of compacted samples decreases and the final density of the sintered samples increases. The martensite to austenite transformation temperature was decreased by increasing milling time. Strain recovery of final sintered samples increased by milling time. Also, solution thermal treatment improved the shape memory effect of samples.