Combustible dusts present an industrial hazard due to their ability to react rapidly and generate dust explosions. Studies have shown that processes utilized to inject and disperse dust particles within combustible dust testing devices result in further comminution of tested materials. Dust explosions are quantified by characteristics Pmax, (dP/dt)max, and Kst-max. This paper investigates the change in physical dust parameters of pulverized Pittsburgh coal, a certification material for ASTM E1226, after dispersion into a Siwek 20-Liter apparatus. Experiments indicate that the change in dust particle size and distribution varies with concentration. Smaller quantities of dust undergo higher levels of comminution. In the case of pulverized Pittsburgh coal all concentrations dispersed had more fines and smaller D10, D50(median), and D90 particle sizes than the pre-dispersion feedstock. Some samples had over a 50% decrease in particle size for D10, D50(median), and D90 which can affect engineering and risk assessment calculationsDust explosions are a hazard that affects many industrial processes and facilities with an average incident rate of more than one major dust explosion per month within the United States over the last 40 years [ NFPA 652 specifically designates ASTM E1226: Standard Test Method for Explosibility of Dust Clouds (ASTM E1226) as a test procedure meeting the specifications to examine the explosive characteristic of airborne dust. ASTM E1226 lists pulverized Pittsburgh coal (PPC) dust as a certification material for the evaluation of dust explosibility [ Physical properties such as; dust particle size, dust concentration, turbulence, moisture, initiation pressure, and initiation energy are known to influence the dust explosion characteristics maximum pressure (P The standard PPC dust used by the United States Bureau of Mining (USBM) is described as being composed of particles where 80% were equal to or smaller than 75 μm, 13% were smaller than 20 μm and the median particle diameter was 48 μm [ The research within this paper examines the change in PPC dust particle size due comminution during ASTM E1226 testing utilizing a Siwek 20-l apparatus. The operation of a Siwek 20-l apparatus is reviewed and the range of dust mass is specified. The PPC dust is processed to analyze particle size and distribution with the resultant data tabulated and plotted for review and discussion. A Siwek 20-l apparatus, an ASTM E1226 recognized vessel ( The test procedure outlined within the Siwek 20-l apparatus manual [ To evaluate whether comminution of PPC dust happens during ASTM E1226 testing a series of experiments were carried out. The dust samples were not sifted, sorted, or processed to change particle size or shape. To minimize particle segregation that may have occurred during shipping, the PPC was blended using a 3-D double motion mixer technique. The mixing vessel is rotated about 2 offset, non-planar axis which generates a multidirectional motion that produces many cross-mixing opportunities for the materials within the vessel. The mixing technique does not use paddles, augers or screws which could induce mechanical comminution during blending. All test samples were pulled from the same lot of PPC to minimize particle size variation. Dust moisture levels were below 5% and kept consistent by storing all samples and material in sealed containers. For the purpose of this paper no igniters were utilized for the experiments conveyed within this paper. The ignitors would have initiated dust combustion and significantly change the dispersed dust's physical and chemical characteristics making analysis of dispersed PPC impossible. In All post dispersion samples were processed individually through a micro rotary riffler before particle size analysis, as seen in PPC was used within a Siwek 20-l test apparatus and post dispersion materials were collected and analyzed for particle size distribution. The measured particle distribution statistics of D10, D50 (median), D90, D(3,2), Span, skewness (Sk The loaded mass and equivalent dust concentrations can be seen on the left side of the  The dust concentration of 3000 g/m   The peak of each curve in It can be seen on the lower left side of The combination of the particle distribution shifting resulted in the Skewness of the dispersed PPC moving in a positive direction, closer to a value of zero. Typically, one would assume that an increase in fines could lead to a more energetic reaction and higher (dP/dt) values, as described by Eckhoff [ Dust explosions are a major safety concern for industry. The explosion and fires following dust explosions can result in significant property damage and loss of life. The testing of PPC, a standard certification material for ASTM E1226, within a Siwek 20-l apparatus resulted in the dust undergoing comminution meaning the actual dust characteristics evaluated are different than the feedstock loaded into the test vessel. This results in an unknown and unquantified bias or error. The bias could result in more energetic reactions and lead to the introduction of a safety factor into subsequent safety designs. Conversely, if the bias results in a less energetic reaction then an undue risk may be present. Either way the bias makes computer modeling of energetic dust reactions difficult because the secondary comminution is not accounted for in thermodynamic and chemical reaction simulations. Further studies are recommended to fully understand the correlation between the comminution versus dust explosion characteristics and determine a safety factor. The comminution occurs during the injection and dispersion of the samples into the Siwek 20-l apparatus. All dust concentrations tested had D10, D50, D90, and D(3,2) values lower than the feedstock used. Lower dust concentrations underwent a greater change than higher dust concentrations, likely due to the equivalent energy used to disperse the dust. Lower dust concentrations had D10, D50, D90, and D(3,2) values 75–50% smaller than the feedstock. All dispersed dust samples had more fines and smaller particles than the feedstock. There is indication that at very high dust concentrations, 3000 g/m The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.