The bench-scale and industrial flotation test results of Jiangxi Copper Corporation Yongping Copper Mine showed that the flotation separation of Cu/Fe sulfide minerals has been achieved at pH values above 13 for xanthates, about 11 for dialkyl thionocarbamates and around 8.5 for ethoxycarbonyl thionocarbamates (ECTC), respectively, and ECTC collectors were powerful for copper minerals and very selective against iron sulfide minerals at pH 8–9. The flotation results have been explained from the structure–reactivity relationship of collectors by generalized perturbation theory and density functional calculation at B3PW91/6-31G(D) level.Xanthates interact with the majority of sulfide minerals to form metal xanthate and dixanthogen, therefore the selectivity is low without the use of additional reagents. For example, the flotation separation of copper sulfide minerals from iron sulfide minerals is only achieved at high pH values. This not only consumes a large amount of lime and increases the plant operating cost but also depresses the flotation of some copper minerals ( The test material was ore from Yongping Copper Mine of Jiangxi Copper Corporation in China, and the main copper bearing minerals were chalcopyrite, chalcocite, covellite and bornite and the main iron bearing minerals were pyrite and marcasite and significant amounts of non-sulfide gangue minerals were quartz, kaolinite, garnet and calcite. Sodium butyl xanthate, Z-200 ( The industrial flotation was performed in the Mineral Processing Plant of Yongping Copper Mine. The experimental system processed 5000 t/d and the operating pH for copper rougher and cleaner was 8.5 and, for iron sulfide mineral rougher was 7.0. The collector compared was sodium butyl xanthate. The flotation flowsheet of bench-scale and industrial tests are described in All calculations were made using the Gaussian98 ( The bench-scale flotation results for different collectors at different cleaner pHs are shown in Because of the high specificity for copper minerals, IOECTC was selected as copper collector in the industrial tests performed in the Mineral Processing Plant of Yongping Copper Mine. The statistical results obtained in a month of industrial tests and the adopted reagent conditions are described in It is evident from the results of industrial tests that ECTC collectors were powerful for copper minerals and very selective against iron sulfide minerals at pH 8–9 and the recoveries and grades of copper, silver and gold in the copper concentrates were very effective. Generalized perturbation theory ( The copper having (t   The HOMO eigenvalue of butyl xanthate ion was −0.03129 a.u., higher than those of Z-200 and IOECTC. Butyl xanthate ion was easier to donate its frontier electron to metal cation on the mineral surfaces to form normal covalent bond. At the same time, the LUMO of butyl xanthate ion could overlap the d-orbits of metal cation on the mineral surface to form back donation covalent bond. Butyl xanthate ion would act as a bidentate ligand, bonding with metal cation through two sulfur atoms to form a four-membered ring structure. Therefore xanthates are commonly powerful collectors. But they suffer from poor selectivity and render the flotation separation of copper/iron sulfide minerals need high lime consumption and the operating pH values have to be above 13. The HOMO eigenvalue of Z-200 was very low and the electron-donating power of Z-200 was weaker than that of butyl xanthate ion. The LUMO of Z-200 was constituted by p IOECTC’s HOMO eigenvalue was lowest and its electron-donating power was also weakest in three collectors butyl xanthate ion, Z-200 and IOECTC, which meant IOECTC’s selectivity against iron sulfide minerals was the best. The LUMO of IOECTC was constituted by p The electron-donating power of xanthates is strong, therefore it can strongly react with metal cation on the surfaces of copper and iron sulfide minerals through forming normal covalent bonds. This explains the poor selectivity of xanthates and also the high pH values (above 13) required for the flotation separation of copper/iron sulfide minerals. Dialkyl thionocarbamates are more selective for copper sulfide flotation, particularly against gangue iron sulfides. Although less powerful than xanthates, dialkyl thionocarbamates can perform copper/iron flotation separation at lower operating pH (commonly at pH values below 11.5). Ethoxycarbonyl thionocarbamates use an ethoxycarbonyl replacing an alkyl