Mineral admixtures are blended with Portland cement to improve strength and durability, and/or to reduce the cost and environmental footprint of concrete mixes. Some mineral admixtures such as fly ash have also been reported to enhance workability of blended cements. This study shows that the key parameter controlling the yield stress of ternary Portland cement–blast furnace slag–fly ash pastes, in the absence of an added rheology-modifying admixture, is the width of the particle size distribution (PSD) at a given water/solid mass ratio. A small addition of fly ash has a significant effect on workability because of its broad PSD, and any other precursors with a similar PSD could possibly have a comparable effect. A model to predict the yield stress is therefore derived based on the Rosin–Rammler PSD width parameter, n, and the water/solid mass ratio, which provides a good description of the experimental yield stress data. It is believed that a broader PSD provides a higher packing density of particles which reduces the volume of water volume required to fill the voids. The excess water is then used to disperse particles and reduces inter-particle forces, hence yield stress. Therefore, at a given water/solid ratio, PSD width is able to be used as a sole parameter to correlate the yield stress of such concentrated suspensions. Also, a very low yield stress can be approached if the PSD is broad enough, in the absence of any rheology-modifying admixtures.A variety of mineral admixtures, in particular ground granulated blast furnace slag, coal fly ash, calcined clays, silica fume and finely ground limestone, are now commonly used as blending agents to enhance various properties of Portland cement based concretes, including strength, durability, cost, and CO Cement–fly ash blends generally show higher flowability than Portland cement paste. Some reasons that are assumed in the literature to be responsible for this effect were summarised by Lee et al. The design of concrete often involves a balance between early-age and later-age properties, and beside fly ash which provides higher fluidity in Portland cement blends, one mineral admixture which provides particularly appealing properties in the hardened state is blast furnace slag Rheology of a concrete at early age is an important parameter, especially when aiming for the production of self-compacting concretes which need very high fluidity Rheological changes of blended cement with slag, fly ash, silica fume The current study aims to generalise the description of rheological behaviour of cement blended with mineral admixtures and without rheology-modifying admixtures, for application to any mix proportion of Portland cement, blast furnace slag and fly ash. This study presents ternary yield stress diagrams for this system from direct measurement using vane geometry for 30 mixtures at each of three water/solid ratios. A model is developed which relates the paste yield stress to the width parameter of the Rosin–Rammler PSD and the water/solid mass ratio (w/s). It is suggested that this model could be generalised to most concentrated suspensions having a mono-modal PSD, such as blended cementitious binders. Ground granulated blast furnace slag (GGBFS) and FA, with chemical compositions as displayed in The rheological behaviour of each sample was measured using a Haake VT550 rheometer with a four-blade vane, 50.1 Water demand is defined here as the minimum amount of water added to solid powders which results in a homogenous paste. According to the Sedran method  Two particularly interesting points are evident from the ternary yield stress diagrams of the OPC–GGBFS–FA system: A mixture with considerably higher weight percentage of GGBFS compared to Portland cement (corresponding to CEM III/(B,C) types in EN 197-1:2011) shows higher yield stress than Portland cement paste. However, these cements can have their rheology dramatically improved by addition of a small amount of FA. Narrower gaps between contour lines at the top of the ternary diagrams show this, and it is highlighted in The FA-only paste shows very low yield stress, and mixtures with high mass fractions of FA show similar behaviour. It is also seen in It can thus be concluded from Previous studies have described the effect of PSD on yield stress in various particulate systems. In particular, Zhou et al. The PSDs of the main precursors are shown in For PSDs which do not precisely follow the Rosin–Rammler relationship, Eq. The  Based on the converging lines in Incorporating Eq For the ternary blended cement systems studied, the Rosin–Rammler PSD width parameter and the water/solid ratio of any mixture proportions of OPC–GGBFS–FA seem to be sufficient to give a good prediction of the paste yield stress. However, there are obviously other parameters such as particle shape, degree of agglomeration, reactions, surface charging, and roughness which will influence paste yield stress The inter-particle forces which determine the yield stress are composed of the Van der Waals, electrostatic and steric forces, which are all determined by the particle conformations, surface charges and medium chemistry Because of the differences between the particle densities of OPC, GGBFS and FA, maintaining the same water/solid mass ratio for the different mixtures results in different water/solid volume ratios. This means that some mixtures have a higher volume of water compared to solid volume, and this higher volume of water could possibly separate particles more efficiently and assist in yield stress reduction. To assess this hypothesis, the w/s volume ratios were calculated for all mixtures with a w/s mass ratio of 0.39 using particle densities, and plotted against yield stress ( Flatt et al. introduced a yield stress model called ‘YODEL’ (Eq. The ratio Increasing the packing of cementitious materials, in addition to providing better rheological behaviour, also decreases the porosity and is known to improve concrete performance and durability The width of the PSD at a given water to solids mass ratio is the most important parameter determining the yield stress of ternary blended OPC–slag–fly ash cements. A broader PSD, as measured by a lower value of the Rosin–Rammler exponent, This work has been funded through an