This work shows results of electrocoagulation of solutions containing arsenic. The continuous flow treatment consisted of an electrocoagulation reactor with two parallel iron plates and a sedimentation basin.
                  The results showed that the electrocoagulation process of a 100mg/L As(V) solution could decrease the arsenic concentration to less than 2mg/L in the effluent with a current density of 1.2A/dm2 and a residence time of around 9min. Liquid flow was 3L/h, and the DC current was reversed each 2min.
                  Increasing the current density from 0.8 to 1.2A/dm2, the Fe3+ and OH− dosages increase too, and thereby favouring the As removal. On the other hand, it seems that increasing the current density beyond a maximum value, the electrocoagulation process would not improve further. This could probably be explained by passivation of the anode.The pyrometallurgic copper processing generates large amounts of arsenic that vaporize as arsenic trioxide. This compound is absorbed from the gas flow, and finally fixed as calcium or ferric arsenate, after the wastewater stream has been processed with ferric chloride or sulphate. Since the arsenic concentration in the gas phase changes due to batch wise operation of smelters, it is difficult to predict and control the chemical dosage for the precipitation of the arsenic compounds. Electrocoagulation is by now a well known process and has treated different wastewaters ( The purpose with this work is to investigate if the electrocoagulation process could decrease the arsenic content in wastewater by the use of a modified flow sedimentation basin, where iron plates modify the flow in such a way that the solids go to the bottom area as the liquid moves inside the basin. The in situ generation of metallic cations during electrocoagulation takes place at the anode, whereas at the cathode, typically H Arsenate co-precipitates with Fe(OH) The As containing wastewater was prepared by dissolving NaAsO The total arsenic content in liquid samples was determined by atomic absorbance spectrophotometer.  Five electrocoagulation experiments were carried out. See  The first factor is due to that nearly no As(III) is removed at a current density of 0.8 Analysing the effect of air bubbling one can see that in the experiment where no air was introduced (experiment 2) no significant arsenic removal was observed. This is probably due to that Fe in experiment 2 is only oxidized to Fe Increasing the current density to 1.2 Furthermore, Electrocoagulation of As(V) solutions in a continuous flow reactor is a promising remediation tool. Experiments showed As removal efficiencies from a 100 The importance of the arsenic speciation is clear since less than 10% of As(III) was removed in the same operational conditions where around 80% of As(V) was removed. Increasing the current density from 0.8 to 1.2 Future work should include the influence of residence time, current reversal frequency, initial concentration of arsenic and the presence of other elements in the wastewater in order to design an industrial process. The authors acknowledge the UTFSM Project No. 24.04.28.