The enhanced leaching of sphalerite concentrates in H2SO4–HNO3 solutions and the extraction of sulfur with tetrachloroethylene were studied. Variables of the process were investigated including leaching temperature, reaction time, liquid/solid ratio, and tetrachloroethylene concentration. The number of cycles that tetrachloroethylene could be recycled did not have a significant effect on zinc extraction. The results indicated that 99.6% zinc extraction was obtained after three hours of leaching at 85 °C and 0.1 MPa O2, when 20 g of sphalerite concentrate were leached in a 200 ml solution containing 2.0 mol/L H2SO4 and 0.2 mol/L HNO3, in the presence of 10 ml C2Cl4. Leaching rates were significantly improved under these conditions.Zinc is an important metal required for various applications in metallurgical, chemical, and textile industries. It is mainly recovered from primary sulfide concentrates. As the policy on discharge of sulfur dioxide becomes more and more strict, the technology of direct leaching of sulfide ores becomes more attractive. The striking advantage of direct leaching is that sulfur in the ore is converted to elemental sulfur, which remains in the leach residues, thus thoroughly eliminating discharge of sulfur dioxide into the atmosphere. However, the elemental sulfur formed during leaching usually covers the ore particles, which presents a major obstacle for effective leaching of the metals in sulfide ores (     The use of nitric and mixed nitric–sulfuric acids as a hydrometallurgical process leach medium has been known for some time ( To enhance leaching, increasing the intensity of stirring, controlling the temperature of leaching, adding catalytic agents or using surface active reagents have been resorted to ( Forward and Veltman first successfully carried out oxidation pressure leaching of zinc sulfide concentrates in sulfuric acid solutions for Sherrit in 1959. Originally, the leach temperature was restricted to below the melting point of sulfur, because molten sulfur would encapsulate unreacted concentrate and severely limit extraction. Subsequently, research of Surfactants were used in commercial zinc sulfide pressure leaching to prevent occlusion of unleached particles by liquid sulfur ( According to the above established technology, the authors carried out oxidation pressure leaching of sphalerite concentrates with H In the present experiment, sphalerite concentrate having the chemical composition shown in The reactions involved in the leaching process may be described by the following stoichiometric relationships ( The elemental sulfur formed in reaction All the experiments were carried out in a 500 ml titanium lined autoclave, which was equipped with accessories temperature control, mechanical stirring and gas injection. The reactor was charged with 200 ml of leaching solution containing 2.0 mol/L H The organic phase containing sulfur was obtained by separating the hot organic and aqueous phase; in the leach liquor. High quality sulfur and the recycled C The relationship between the leaching temperature and zinc extraction is shown in The relationship between the liquid    Based on the experimental data in In order to further analyze the effect of C  The leaching rate of zinc was considerably enhanced while coupling the leaching of sphalerite concentrate in H The recommended conditions for leaching were: Concentration of H Concentration of HNO Ratio of leaching solution to sphalerite concentrate is 10 Temperature of leaching is 85 °C; Process pressure of oxygen is 0.1 MPa; Volumetric ratio of organic solvent to leach solution is 1 The authors thank Dr Michael Torno and Dr Xianqiao LIU for their reviews and improvements of the manuscript. They are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.20276074) for financial support.