Uranium is extracted from ore bodies by leaching with either sulfuric acid or sodium carbonate/bicarbonate (alkaline) solutions. Alkaline leaching is usually preferred for ores with gangue compositions that would otherwise result in excessive acid consumption. After leaching, ion exchange is then commonly used to recover uranium from the liquor. Strong-base anion-exchange resins are generally used for both liquor types.
                  In this work, a recently released high capacity strong-base anion-exchange resin resin (Lewatit TP 107) was examined for the extraction of uranium from alkaline leach liquor simulants. The effect of solution composition on uranium adsorption was studied, including pH, carbonate, sulfate, chloride and nitrate ion concentrations. The results were then used to develop a competitive ion exchange model. The elution of uranium by a variety of industrially relevant eluents was also examined, and the loading and elution data was benchmarked against a conventional resin.
                  The results showed that uranium loading for TP 107 was two to three times greater than for the conventional resin, particularly at lower uranium tenors. However, the elution process was more difficult, requiring about twice the amount of eluent for a given resin volume. This suggests that TP 107 could be used for uranium recovery from alkaline liquors, and would be particularly attractive for lower grade deposits.In uranium mining operations, leaching is usually conducted using either sulfuric acid or sodium carbonate/bicarbonate. Alkali leaching is more appropriate for ores containing significant carbonate content, which results in high acid consumption and attendant high reagent costs ( Strong-base anion-exchange (SBA) resins are applied commercially for the extraction of uranium from carbonate-containing liquors. The resins contain a quaternary ammonium functional group which exchanges carbonate/bicarbonate ions for UO After uranium extraction, the PLS is recycled back to the leach to reuse the contained carbonate. The uranium-loaded resin can be eluted using NaCl, NaHCO Recently, Lanxess released a SBA resin, Lewatit TP 107, which has a significantly higher capacity than conventional SBA resins (>2.4 eq/L compared with 1.5–1.6 eq./L). We have previously reported that a high-capacity SBA resin was capable of extracting uranium from sulfuric acid leach liquors, and was more effective than conventional resins in the presence of chloride ( This paper explores the application of Lewatit TP 107 for the extraction of uranium from alkaline leach liquors. The effect of solution composition, including carbonate concentration and pH, as well as the impact of other competing anions on the extraction of uranium is explored. The data obtained were used to develop a model for the extraction of uranium by the resin. In addition, the potential impact of this higher-capacity resin in the context of an industrial process is examined. The loading and elution of uranium are compared with a conventional SBA resin, Puromet MTA8000PPHCO3 (formerly known as Purolite PPA800HCO3), which has been used to recover uranium from carbonate leach liquor of a recently operating mine site ( Lewatit TP 107, a high-capacity quaternary ammonium macroporous polyacrylic anion-exchange resin, was kindly supplied by Lanxess. Puromet MTA8000PPHCO3, a Type 1 quaternary ammonium gel polystyrene resin was kindly supplied by Purolite. These resins are henceforth referred to as TP107 and MTA8000, respectively. Details of the resins, as provided by the respective suppliers, are shown in A uranium stock solution containing 60 g/L uranium was prepared by dissolving an in-house UO All resin volumes were measured on a ‘wet-settled resin (wsr)’ basis, as described by The resin and aqueous solutions were brought to equilibrium in bottle-roll experiments. The resin (3–5 mL Samples of loaded resin were eluted using a variety of solutions as described in The resin samples (15 mL Concentrations of U and S (i.e. sulfate) in solution were determined by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) using a Perkin-Elmer Optima 5300DV. Chloride concentrations were determined by titration with AgNO Equilibrium isotherms for the extraction of uranium from synthetic uranium solutions by TP 107 and MTA8000 are shown in The same trends are evident in the MTA8000 curves; although the uranium loading is around 2–3 times lower. The maximum measured loading was 53 g/L The elevated loading exhibited by TP 107 would be beneficial for a commercial plant, as it indicates that a lower resin inventory and smaller IX columns could be used for the same PLS throughput. The elevated loading compared with MTA8000 is most likely due to the greater specific capacity of TP 107 (>2.4 eq/L compared with >1.6 eq/L). Both HCO The effect of total carbonate (i.e. CO In order to probe which of carbonate or bicarbonate competes more effectively with uranium, the equilibrium pH was varied. In alkaline solutions, the pH is determined by the ratio of carbonate and bicarbonate ions in solution, with predominantly bicarbonate solutions at pH 8 and predominantly carbonate solutions closer to pH 12. The relationship between the measured pH and titrated carbonate and bicarbonate concentrations in this test work is shown in In The solutions used in The effect of Cl This is consistent with previous data for SBA resins ( The results from As discussed in It is proposed that the other anions (Cl Assuming that these are the only ions that can load onto the resin, the total molar resin capacity ( This equation is the basis of the competitive IX model, as it links all of the anion exchange reactions by fixing the total loading. The total resin capacity ( The pH is related to the ratio of CO For a known aqueous composition (i.e. pH and concentrations of uranium, total carbonate, chloride and sulfate), the equilibrium concentration of each ion on the resin can then be found by solving Eqs. The K Elution of uranium from an SBA resin is based upon displacement by a higher concentration of another anion. Therefore, the strongest eluent would be the one that competes most strongly with uranium for the available quaternary ammonium sites on the resin. The results from A sample of uranium-loaded TP 107 containing 91 g/L The results ( As a comparison, a sample of MTA8000 loaded to 42 g/L U From a process flowsheet perspective, HCO The results show that Lewatit TP 107 is a strong and high-capacity SBA resin for the extraction of uranium from alkaline leach liquors. The extraction mechanism is one of anion exchange of UO The uranium loading of TP 107 is two to three times greater than that of a conventional SBA resin used for uranium extraction (Puromet MTA8000), particularly at low uranium tenors and low carbonate concentrations. The improved loading performance must be balanced by a greater difficulty in eluting TP 107. The most suitable eluent examined for TP 107 was NaCl, however the number of bed volumes required was more than double that for MTA8000. From a process perspective, it is expected that the elution reagent consumption on a mass of uranium basis would be quite similar for both resins, as both the uranium loading and number of bed volumes of eluent required are approximately doubled for TP 107. The plant size and resin inventory would be expected to be considerably smaller for TP 107. The results therefore suggest that TP 107 is a promising resin to consider for the recovery of uranium from alkaline leach liquors. None. The authors wish to acknowledge Lanxess and Purolite for kindly supplying the resin samples used in this work, and the ANSTO Minerals Analytical Group for analysis of all samples.