This study reports the compound specific stable carbon isotope compositions (δ13C) of lignin tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH) chemolysates obtained with gas chromatography–combustion–isotope ratio mass spectrometry (GC–C–IRMS). The possible sources of the errors associated are considered. Off-line (TMAH) thermochemolysis was performed on wood samples and the δ13C values of the chemolysates were compared with the bulk δ13C of the native woods and their Klason lignins. For the four woods investigated, the δ13C values, corrected for derivative carbons added, were spread over a wide range of values, ranging from −40 to −25‰ and were, on average, depleted in 13C by ca. 9‰ relative to the native woods and by ca. 7‰ relative to the Klason lignins. This large variability can be partially attributed to overlapping chromatographic peaks and to the low intensity of some of the peaks. However, isotopic fractionation cannot be ruled out, especially in compounds resulting from CC bond cleavage in the propyl side chain. The uncertainties associated with the correction for carbons added by derivatisation were found to be high, especially for compounds having high contribution of derivative carbons.Lignin-derived products have the potential to be used as geochemical indicators because lignin is a specific component of vascular plants and is relatively refractory The combination of detailed molecular information with stable carbon isotope analysis in palaeoenvironmental studies allows the assessment of whether variations in δ Analytical pyrolysis and CuO oxidation, both widely used methods for lignin structural studies, have been combined with GC–C–IRMS to study past vegetation changes Another widely used method for structural study of lignin is thermochemolysis with tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMAH thermochemolysis). This technique has proved to be a selective and reliable thermal method for characterising lignin A sample of English oak wood ( Samples of Ash ( Klason lignin was selected as a model for the lignin fraction of wood because, from a quantitative point of view, it is the most representative of the wet chemical methods Thermochemolysis with TMAH was performed according to the method reported by Vane The TMAH thermochemolysis products were analysed using a Fisons 8000 series gas chromatograph coupled to a Fisons MD800 mass spectrometer (Fisons Instruments, Loughborough, UK). The GC was fitted with a DB-5MS fused silica capillary column (50 Stable carbon isotopic compositions of wood samples and their Klason lignin concentrates were determined by on-line combustion in a Carlo Erba NA 1500 (Carlo Erba Instruments, Milan, Italy) elemental analyser coupled via a Con–Flo II interface to a Thermo Finnigan Delta plus XP isotope ratio–mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan Corporation, Bremen, Germany). Samples were run in triplicate and the reported values are the mean Compound specific isotope analyses of TMAH thermochemolysis products were performed on a Trace GC (Thermo Finnigan, Milan, Italy) gas chromatograph coupled to a Thermo Finnigan Delta plus XP isotope ratio mass spectrometer (Thermo Finnigan) via a GC combustion III interface. The GC was fitted with a DB-5 fused silica capillary column (30 Gas chromatography–mass spectrometry analysis (GC/MS) was performed to identify the TMAH thermochemolysis products prior to GC–C–IRMS. The chemical structures of the TMAH products are illustrated in The chromatograms indicate that the TMAH thermochemolysis products consist of very complex mixtures of compounds, including dimethoxy- and trimethoxy-substituted products. These monomers are derived from guaiacyl (G) and syringyl (S) units with propyl side chains linked mainly via β-O-4 bonds The presence of components derived from both types of lignin units (G and S) is consistent with the fact that the analysed woods are angiosperm, with lignin composed of guaiacyl and syringyl units. The product distribution patterns for all the samples investigated are very similar. The The δ The mass balance was performed using Eq. The corrected δ As already mentioned, this large variability in the δ Another source of error can be related to the low intensity of some of the peaks. Errors in accuracy approaching −3‰ (Δ There is also the possibility of isotopic fractionation caused during TMAH thermochemolysis. It has been reported that TMAH thermochemolysis induces C In addition to the potential problem of isotopic fractionation, another source of error associated with the TMAH thermochemolysis relates to derivatisation. The mass balance used for calculating the δ As expected, the compounds with more than one derivative carbon added are those with higher uncertainties. For example, G14 has 10 carbons in the original compound and 4 added carbons, the uncertainties found for this compound are 1.18, 5.03, 2.13 and 3.96 for ash, beech, oak and silver birch, respectively. For the reasons discussed above, in order to obtain meaningful information from isotope data of TMAH products, only the chromatographic peaks that are relatively intense and well resolved should be considered. In addition, it would be preferable to consider only those compounds with a complete propyl side chain, like G10 and S10, in order to minimise the effect of possible isotopic fractionation caused during thermochemolysis, and finally, compounds with high relative contribution of derivative carbons, such as G14, S14 and S15, should be avoided to minimise imprecision in δ In the Regarding S14, the chromatographic resolution is better and isotopic fractionation induced by C In spite of TMAH thermochemolysis being a powerful method for identifying variations in lignin composition, it seems unreliable as a preparation method for lignin isotopic analysis, owing to the limitations encountered through GC–C–IRMS analysis of TMAH products, and the increased uncertainties for compounds with more than one derivative carbon atom added. In addition to these issues, potential isotopic fractionation caused by C Financial support and the Ph.D. scholarship from the Mexican Council for Science and Technology (CONACyT) for L.E. Beramendi-Orosco are gratefully acknowledged.