In the present study, the wear behavior of in situ formed Al2O3 reinforced hypereutectic Al–18Si matrix composite coatings have been investigated. These coatings were successfully fabricated with mechanically alloyed Al–12Si and SiO2 powder deposited on aluminum substrates by atmospheric plasma spraying (APS). The produced samples were characterized by means of microscopic examinations, hardness measurements and wear tests. The obtained results pointed out that the amount of in situ formed Al2O3 particles increased with increasing spray distance and decreasing in-flight particle velocity and temperature, which was accompanied by an improvement in hardness and wear resistance.Al–Si alloys have been utilized extensively in the recent past due to superior properties such as low coefficient of thermal expansion, good specific strength, high wear resistance and fluidity Since the ceramic material Al The objective of the present work is to investigate the effect of spray distance and in-flight particle characteristics on the sliding wear behavior of plasma sprayed composite coatings with in situ formed Al Mechanically alloyed Al–12Si/SiO The wear behavior of the coatings has been investigated with respect to the relative amount of the phases depending on spray distance, in-flight particle velocity and temperature values. Relative amounts (RA) of the phases were calculated through the relative intensity ( Wear performance of the coatings was examined on a reciprocating wear tester, which was designed according to the ASTM G133 standard. Wear tests were carried out by rubbing a 10 A typical cross-section of the coating is given in The hardness of coatings is strongly relative to the distribution and the amount of the phases. It has been reported that the spray distance, in-flight particle velocity and temperature have a strong influence on the amount of Al The evaluation of the wear tests was made by measuring the wear track area of the coatings ( Relative wear rate values of the coatings and relevant Al In  This study points out the effect of spray distance and in-flight particle characteristics on the sliding wear behavior of plasma sprayed composite coatings with in situ formed Al The authors express sincere appreciation to Prof. Dr. E. Sabri Kayali and Prof. Dr. Huseyin Cimenoglu from the Metallurgical and Material Engineering Department of Istanbul Technical University for the wear tests.