The adsorption properties of microporous activated carbon (CSDA) obtained by direct activation of cherry stones in relation to low-molecular weight poly(acrylic acid) − PAA were examined. The solution pH influence and molecular weight of the polymer were examined. The PAA adsorbed amounts were correlated with the solid surface charge density and zeta potential of the solid particle in the polymer presence. The obtained results indicated that the highest adsorption on the activated carbon surface is exhibited by PAA with lower molecular weight at pH 3 (it reaches the level of 25mg/g). Thus, under such conditions the CSDA is the most efficient adsorbent for poly(acrylic acid) removal from aqueous solution. The polymeric adsorption layer at pH 3 is composed of more coiled macromolecules (low degree of PAA carboxyl groups dissociation) which are electrostatically attracted to the positively charged solid surface. It was also proved that applied low-cost activated carbon can be used for removal of undesirable low-molecular polymers from wastewaters.Synthetic water-soluble polymers are used in a great variety of practical applications. Their presence in the aqueous medium leads to the modification of physicochemical properties of colloidal systems (i.e. emulsions, suspensions, foams, aerosols, fumes). Their action is manifested through changes in solution viscosity (gelation and thickening agents), as well as through impact on the dispersion system stability (processes of emulsification, stabilization, flocculation, flotation) Two main kinds of polymeric substances are used: non-ionic (its functional groups do not undergo dissociation in aqueous solutions, i.e. poly(ethylene glycol), poly(ethylene oxide), poly(vinyl alcohol), polyvinylpyrrolidone) and ionic (whose macromolecules contain ionized groups, i.e. poly(acrylic acid), poly(methacrylic acid), poly(ethylene imine), poly(vinyl amine), poly(vinyl pyridine)). The ionic polymers are often called polyelectrolytes and in this class of chemical compounds three types can be distinguished: polyacids (anionic polyelectrolytes), polybases (cationic polyelectrolytes) and polyampholytes. One of the most important polymers from the anionic class is poly(acrylic acid) − PAA. The industrial synthesis of this polymer proceeded by radical polymerization of acrylic acid. Its chains have one carboxyl group per each monomer unit. PAA is characterized by weak acidic properties − its carboxyl groups dissociate with the increasing solution pH Poly(acrylic acid) finds a widespread usage in different practical fields as a dispersing agent in food processing, cosmetics production (personal care products, detergents) Copolymers of PAA with other polymers (i.e. polyacrylamide, poly(vinyl alcohol), poly(ethylene oxide), carrageen, chitosan) show ability of hydrogels formation. Such superabsorbents are used in agriculture Due to the common use of poly(acrylic acid) its presence in wastewaters is observed. Rather poor biodegradability of this macromolecular compound makes that its fast removal from the aqueous phase is necessary Adsorbents are classified as porous and non-porous. The first group include activated carbons, silica gels, molecular sieves (zeolites), porous glasses, hydrated alumina and other metal oxides. The representatives of the non-porous adsorbents are for example barium sulfate and graphite soot. Activated carbons are widely used for removal of pesticides, detergents, aliphatic and aromatic hydrocarbons, phenols and their derivatives, heavy metals, bacteria, viruses, dyes and low‐molecular weight organic compounds in the processes of water and wastewater treatment Their another important application is the purification of industrial waste gases through the adsorption of SO In the present study the adsorption properties of activated carbon (CSDA) obtained from cherry stones in the process of direct activation, in relation to low‐molecular weight poly(acrylic acid) was determined. On the basis of adsorption and electrokinetic data, the mechanism of polymer chains binding with the solid surface was proposed. The pH conditions assuring the most effective polymer removal from water solution (corresponding with the greatest PAA adsorption) were specified. Moreover, the determined PAA adsorption amounts on the CSDA surface were compared with those obtained on the surfaces of different metal oxides (both single and mixed), silica and porous glass. The applied activated carbon is a low-cost adsorbent obtained from plant waste material. For this reason, it is competitive to other adsorbents which are much more expensive. Moreover, understanding of the mechanism of interactions between the macromolecules and carbon surface groups will enable selection of appropriate method for the preparation and modification of activated carbons for effective removal of polymeric substances. In the first step, the starting cherry stones (CS) were air-dried at 110 The adsorbent was milled and next washed with doubly distilled water to achieve the supernatant conductivity about 2 The solid BET surface area, pore volume and average pore diameter were determined by the use of nitrogen adsorption/desorption method (Accelerated Surface Area and Porosimetry ASAP 2405 Analyzer, The mean diameter of solid particles was measured using high resolution scanning electron microscope Quanta 3D FEG ( Thermal analysis of CSDA sample was carried out on a Simultaneous Thermal Analyzer STA 449 Jupiter F1 ( The acid-base surface properties were determined by back-titration method The pH of activated carbon was measured using the following procedure: a portion of 0.4 Poly(acrylic acid) − PAA ( To verify the ( This technique enables also determination of number average molecular weight ( Adsorption measurements were performed at 25 The amount of adsorbed PAA was obtained from the difference between the polymer concentration in the solution before and after the adsorption process. For this purpose, the reaction of poly(acrylic acid) with hyamine proposed by Crummet and Hummel The calibration curves obtained earlier were applied for the determination of PAA concentration in the solution. Potentiometric titration started with obtaining of supporting electrolyte curve (reference curve), showing the changes of pH versus the volume of the added base. For this purpose, 50 The solid surface charge density was determined at 25 The activated carbon suspensions (without and with PAA) for the zeta potential measurements were prepared by adding 0.01 The physicochemical characteristics of activated carbon is placed in   Above 400 The FTIR spectra in the range characteristic of CO  Taking the above into consideration, it should be stated that the most favourable conditions for poly(acrylic acid) adsorption on the CSDA surface occur at pH 3. The small number of dissociated carboxyl groups in the PAA macromolecules is the reason for the assumption of more coiled conformation by polymeric chains. Additionally, the electrostatic attraction between the slightly negatively charged PAA and the positively charged activated carbon surface promotes the adsorption process. The polymeric adsorption layer is composed of PAA coils. Such structure of macromolecules enables the adsorption of a larger number of PAA chains on the unit of CSDA surface. As a result, the highest polymer adsorption level is achieved under these conditions. The evidence of PAA adsorption is the SEM image ( Besides favourable electrostatic forces at pH 3, poly(acrylic acid) can interact with the CSDA surface groups through hydrogen bonds. These bonds can be formed between PAA functional groups (both undissociated and dissociated) and activated carbon surface groups. On the other hand, the hydrophobic interactions can be present in the systems under investigation at pH 3. They occur between the main carbon backbone of the minimally ionized polymer and benzene rings (connected with surface of disulfide bridges). At pH 6 and 9 the PAA adsorption on the activated carbon surface significantly decreases. Under such conditions practically all carboxyl groups of the polymer are dissociated. Thus, its macromolecules assume considerably extended conformation. Moreover, the electrostatic forces between the adsorbent and adsorbate becomes unfavourable at pH 9. As a result, the PAA adsorption on the CSDA surface reaches a minimal level. The polymer molecular weight also affects its adsorption mechanism. In the case of PAA 2 Completely different situation occurs at pH 3, at which PAA with a lower molecular weight exhibits slightly higher adsorption than PAA with a greater molecular weight. As was mentioned above, the poly(acrylic acid) macromolecules are coiled at pH 3. Nevertheless, the coils of PAA 2 The influence of PAA adsorption on the surface charge density (σ The polymer concentration increase causes considerable decrease of the activated carbon surface charge ( The zeta potential is also a very important parameter relating to the structure of double electrical layer formed around the solid particles. Its sign and value depend on the charges located in the area of slipping plane, which separates a movable part of edl from the immobile part closely connected with the solid surface. The results of zeta potential measurements are shown in As can be seen in M’Pandou and Siffert The slipping plane position in the polymer presence and the anionic character of poly(acrylic acid) seem to be the main processes affecting the decrease of CSDA zeta potential. The increase in the polymer molecular weight and its concentration leads to the growth in length and number of the loop and tail structures in the adsorbed PAA macromolecules. This causes the significant shift of slipping plane and in consequence, considerable reduction of zeta potential. The number of dissociated carboxylic groups located in the slipping plane area increases when the thickness of polymeric adsorption layer rises. Such a situation takes place when the PAA concentration and its molecular weight increase. The summary of adsorbed amounts of PAA 2 The adsorption properties of activated carbon obtained by direct activation of cherry stones (CSDA) were examined. It was demonstrated that this adsorbent has surface groups only of acidic character and some parts of these groups contain sulfur. Anionic poly(acrylic acid) − PAA with ionizable carboxyl groups was used as an adsorbate. It was shown that the greatest adsorption level of the polymer was achieved at pH 3 and for PAA with a lower molecular weight (i.e. 2 Adsorption of poly(acrylic acid) on the CSDA surface changes considerably the structure of the electrical double layer (edl). The PAA presence causes decrease in both surface charge density and zeta potential of the solid particles (in comparison to the system without polymer). The comparison of PAA adsorbed amount on the activated carbon surface with other metal oxide adsorbents indicates that polymer shows the medium adsorption level at the CSDA-solution interface. Thus the future research will be focused on increasing of PAA adsorption by preparation of mesoporous activated carbon from waste plant material, containing surface groups of basic character. The research was carried out with the equipment purchased thanks to the financial support of the