Bauxite residue is a hazardous solid waste generated during the Bayer process of extracting alumina from bauxite ore, the high alkalinity of which limits its large-scale industrial applications. In order to reduce the alkalinity of bauxite residue, rich lime additions from 0 to 30wt.% and high digestion temperatures from 250°C to 300°C were performed on a high-ferrite diasporic bauxite during the Bayer digestion. The alumina extraction efficiency from bauxite and the Na2O to SiO2 weight ratio of the bauxite residue were systemically investigated. The alkalinity in the bauxite residue decreases considerably with the increasing lime addition, digestion temperature and duration. The bauxite residues after digestion are mainly comprised of hematite, zeolite, grossular hydrogarnet, andradite–grossular hydrogarnet and perovskite, but their proportions vary greatly. A new method to accurately calculate the mineralogical compositions is proposed according to both the chemical compositions and XRD analyses of the bauxite residues. The mechanisms of alkalinity reduction in the bauxite residue and performance change in bauxite digestion are discussed.Bauxite residue, also known as Bayer red mud, a hazardous solid waste generated during the Bayer process of extracting alumina from bauxite ore, has been attracting more and more attention due to the environmental damage caused by it ( The pH in bauxite residue slurry (washer overflow) ranges 9.2–12.8 with an average value of 11.3 The mineralogy of DSPs formed during the conventional Bayer process is sodium aluminosilicate hydrate, which has several structures such as zeolite, sodalite and cancrinite ( The recovery of valuable metals from bauxite residue has been studied by many researchers ( However, the most difficult stage is to reduce the alkalinity of the bauxite residue in order to produce iron. The usual lime addition to the Bayer digestion process of diasporic bauxite is about 5–9 The high-ferrite diasporic bauxite was ground to particle size less than 0.28 The digestion experiments were carried out in a 150 The chemical compositions of the bauxite and bauxite residues were analyzed using an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, ZSX100e). In order to identify the phase compositions of the bauxite and bauxite residues after digestion experiments, X-ray diffraction measurements (XRD, PANalytical PW3040/60) were performed using Cu-Kα X-radiation (all samples were ground to less than 45 The chemical composition of high-ferrite diasporic bauxite is presented in According to In order to reduce the alkalinity in bauxite residue, different lime dosages from 0 to 30 The alumina extraction efficiency increases to 78% when the lime addition is 10 As the lime addition is increased to 15 The alumina extraction efficiency from bauxite decreases with further increases of lime addition when over 10  The results from different digestion temperatures and durations with 22.5 The XRD patterns of the bauxite residues at different digestion temperatures for 60 The reactions of bauxite ore during the Bayer digestion process include the dissolution of Al-containing and Si-containing minerals and the formation of DSPs. For diasporic bauxite the reactions become more complicated because of the high digestion temperature and the extra lime addition. Lime performs many useful functions in the digestion process of diasporic bauxite ( Hydration of lime in caustic liquor proceeds according to Eq. The possible dissolution reactions of minerals in diasporic bauxite during digestion are listed as Eqs. The desilication reactions resulting in the products indicated by XRD in this paper may occur per Eqs. Titanate perovskite is formed via Eq. Because of the various and complex minerals formed in the bauxite residues, it is very difficult to accurately calculate the mineralogical compositions of the bauxite residues by Rietveld analysis of XRD patterns. XRD cannot be used to distinguish grossular hydrogarnet or andradite–grossular hydrogarnet from the total hydrogarnets. According to the reactions from Eqs. The remaining concentrations of Al Al Hence the compositions of grossular hydrogarnet and andradite–grossular hydrogarnet can be calculated using Eqs. Fe The concentration of perovskite (w  The calculated results with different lime additions and digestion conditions are listed in As for gibbsitic bauxites, the alumina extraction efficiency decreases approximately by 0.7–0.9% as the lime addition increases by 1 As shown in By combining the calculated mineralogical results with the digestion results, we can conclude that the alkalinity of the bauxite residue mainly depends on the zeolite composition, and the alumina extraction efficiency from the diasporic bauxite mainly depends on the proportion of andradite–grossular hydrogarnet. Therefore, with greater zeolite, the greater the alkalinity of bauxite residue; the greater the andradite–grossular hydrogarnet, the greater the alumina extraction efficiency will be. The alumina extraction efficiency from a high-ferrite diasporic bauxite and the Na The bauxite residues with different lime additions and digestion conditions are all mainly comprised of hematite, zeolite, grossular hydrogarnet, andradite–grossular hydrogarnet and perovskite, but their mineralogical compositions calculated according to both the chemical compositions and the XRD results are different. The formation of grossular hydrogarnet and andradite–grossular hydrogarnet, instead of zeolite, contributes to the decrease of alkalinity, while the proportion of andradite–grossular hydrogarnet determines the alumina extraction efficiency during the Bayer digestion. We acknowledge the financial supports from the