Breakage behaviors and energy consumed characteristics of coal are directly influenced by properties, such as particle size, ash content or density. It is essential to model these effects and conduct quantitative evaluation. In this study, samples of 4 particle sizes × 4 ash contents were ground in a Hardgrove mill for 9 energy levels, respectively. Breakage rate of particles in the top size and t10 were determined and effects of coal properties on two parameters were also discussed. Though the relation between consumed energies and t10 of each sample can be described by classical breakage model, experimental data of all samples were scatter. In this case, particle size and ash content were modelled into breakage equation in exponential term, namely t10 = A × (1 − e−b∙x∙Ecs/eYa
                        
                     ). This modified model gave good fitting results to experimental data. Introduce of coal properties into energy-size reduction model helps to compare grinding energy efficiency of various coals. Confidence analyses of repeat experiments demonstrated the repeatability of test results and indicated the reliability of new breakage model.Particle breakage is an energy-intensive process. Improvement of grinding efficiency and reducing energy consumption should base on a good understanding of energy-size reduction process. Though coal power plants make great contributions to electrical energy, nearly 0.5–2% of electric power generation is consumed by pulverizing system [ Vertical roller mill (VRM) is widely used in coal power plants to prepare PF, and flow direction of coal in VRM is shown in Later, a multi-component breakage model was established, with the addition of particle size and density based on size-by-density grinding tests [ These breakage models related t For a certain grinding device, breakage behavior of samples is influenced by particle properties. Usually, samples in narrow size or density fraction are used to precisely study effects of particle properties on breakage behavior. In this paper, grinding tests are conducted for coals with various size fractions and ash contents in a Hardgrove mill. Based on size distribution analyses of ground progenies, breakage rates of particles in initial size and t Particles with narrow size fraction and ash content were selected for energy-size reduction tests. First, narrowly sized coals of 2.8–2 mm, 2–1.4 mm, 1.4–1 mm and 1–0.71 mm were prepared. Then, materials were divided into four different ash levels by float-sink tests with media densities of 1.4 g·cm Particles in various size fractions and ash contents show differences in specific breakage rate. Relations between percentage of unbroken initial particles vs. grinding time of 2.8–2 mm and 2–1.4 mm particles are shown in Normally, a lower slope means a smaller breakage rate. Curves in Product fineness is also compared. Here, t Energy-size data of four groups of samples are shown in Shi investigated the breakage probability model published by Vogel and Peukert [ Grinding energy efficiency has a positive correlation with particle size. However, particles with low ash content yield a higher t Fitted results of energy-size data by Eq. Quantitative analyses of energy-size data indicate that grinding energy efficiency could be improved if raw coal in low ash content is chosen. Except for energy saving, less associated minerals in low ash coal can reduce the abrasion of grinding roller, increase the breakage rate, and decrease the emission of harmful air in combustion process. In 2006, Siddhartha Bhatt made a survey on energy consumed characterization of VSMs equipped in 30–500 MW coal power plants [ Confidence analyses are conducted to ensure testing accuracy by repeat tests. Experiments of 2–1.4 mm 18.04% 60 s and 1.4–1 mm 65.68% 160 s are done for three times and results of t In order to evaluate effects of particle size and ash content on breakage behavior and energy consumption characteristics, coal samples of 4 sizes × 4 ash contents are ground at 9 energy input levels. Size distribution of progenies is analyzed and specific energies in energy-size reduction process are also determined. The classical JK breakage model is modified by modelling particle size and ash content in exponential form and quantitative comparison among coals in energy efficiency can be conducted. Following conclusions are obtained: Due to combined effects of decrease of instantaneous power and accumulated fines on grinding table with time, breakage rate of initial particles decreases gradually as time increases. For particles in the same narrow size, breakage rate decreases with the increase of ash content. But for samples in similar ash, larger particles show a faster breakage rate. T Effects of particle properties on consumed specific energy, t Authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by the