A novel ion exchange process was studied to remove high concentration of Cu impurity from AgNO3 electrolyte was studied. A suitable ion exchange resin was screened using laboratory scale experiments with a synthetic nitrate electrolyte solution of the following composition: 80.5–90.3 g/L Ag and 37.9–44.3 g/L Cu. Based on simulations with a developed mechanistic ion exchange model, a process scheme was constructed for the best resin, 2-(aminomethyl)pyridine functional chelating CuWRAM. The process was shown to be capable of producing 0.46 BV/h of a purified electrolyte solution containing >70 g/L Ag and <10 g/L Cu. Based on the simulations, roughly 10% of the Ag would be lost to eluate, but because the model overestimates Ag adsorption, the actual percentage is assumed to be lower as based on breakthrough experiments as the model overestimates the Ag adsorption.A typical industrial Ag electrorefining process produces Ag cathodes of ≥99.99% purity from impure Ag anodes. During this process, dissolved impurities, such as Cu, accumulate in the electrolyte solution, which lowers the purity of the produced Ag cathode. When the Cu concentration in the electrolyte solution exceeds a certain level, There are two main approaches to treat bleeds in industrial-scale Ag electrorefining processes: Cu precipitation using base metal salts ( The cementation method utilized in the Ag electrorefining process by Outotec, which has been installed in 11 locations worldwide ( In addition to the industrial processes, the AgNO The literature contains general references to the ion exchange removal of Cu from electrolytes, mainly Co, and chelating resins have primarily been used for this purpose ( However, there is a research gap in understanding how ion exchange can be applied in the removal of Cu from the AgNO In this study direct selective removal of Cu from the AgNO The following chemicals were used in the experiments: NaOH (VWR Chemicals, purity >98%), H Five different ion exchangers were used: Purolite C104 (The Purolite Company), Dowex 50x8 (The Dow Chemical Company), Lewatit TP207 (Lenntech), Dowex M4195 (The Dow Chemical Company), and CuWRAM (Purity Systems Inc., currently CuSelect by Johnson Matthey). These include chelating resins and conventional weak and strong cation exchangers ( For ion exchange resins, exothermic degradation reactions are possible under highly oxidizing conditions, and Cu can act as a catalyst in these reactions ( All experiments were done in glass columns (YMC Europe GMBH), in which the fixed bed was constructed from the resins. The volume of the resin bed for each experiment was 123.7 mL ( The loading stage in resin comparison experiments lasted for 2–3 BV, during which the samples were collected at a rate of one per minute (40–60 loading samples from each run). The flow rate was 3.0 BV/h. After the loading stage, the bed was rinsed with water to remove the feed solution from its void fraction. The adsorbed metals were then removed from the bed by eluting it with 6–10 BV of 1 M HNO The metal concentrations (Ag and Cu) of the samples were analyzed using ICP-MS (Agilent 7900). The samples had a 1:10       Because of the system’s complexity, as it includes several components and high concentrations, a simple stoichiometric ion exchange model based on mass action law could not explain the data with an accuracy sufficient for process simulations. Therefore, the sorption equilibrium was modeled using the non-ideal competitive adsorption isotherm equation (NICA,       H    Because only one adsorption site type was considered in this study, The mass balance equation for a differential volume element in the adsorption column was given as     In these simulations,    In Eqs. Overall, there were four equilibrium model parameters ( Breakthrough and elution curves were determined for five cation exchange resins to find the most efficient one for AgNO Although with the CuWRAM chelating resin the adsorbed amounts of metals were low (Cu 18.6 g/L Because the 2-(aminomethyl)pyridine functional CuWRAM resin is selective especially for Cu ( The weak cation exchanger Purolite C104 did not show the desired selectivity between Cu and Ag, and the strong cation exchanger Dowex 50 × 8 exhibited significantly higher sorption of Ag than Cu ( In general, cation exchangers prefer ions with higher charges and ions with smaller hydrated radii ( For the chelating resin Lewatit TP207, no selectivity between Ag and Cu was observed during the loading stage ( For the bispicolylamine functional chelating resin Dowex M4195, salts formed in the resin bed and clogged the flow through the column. Industrial scale operations using this resin were thus deemed unfeasible. The appearance of the precipitate suggested that it was AgNO To study the possible non-ideal behavior of the ion exchange system in terms of dispersion, further column experiments were conducted using the CuWRAM resin and three distinct flow rates (3.0 BV/h, 6.5 BV/h, and 9.0 BV/h). The parameters of the ion exchange model described in Increasing the flow rate from 3.0 BV/h to 6.5 BV/h significantly decreased the dynamic capacities of both Cu and Ag (34% and 69%, respectively) ( In theory, the flow rate should not affect the dynamic capacities when the column is working ideally and the system is run until equilibrium, as was the case with the experiments in this study. Thus, a non-ideal flow phenomenon, such as flow maldistribution ( After the loading step, the resin bed was washed with water to remove the feed electrolyte from its void fraction. However, the washing curves were not identical for Cu and Ag ( The parameters of the chosen ion exchange model described in Although the very high concentrations in the feed solution are challenging from a modeling perspective, the simulated loading and elution curves ( The shapes of the all loading and elution curves are similar with the experimental data. However, with 3.0 BV/h flow rate, it was not possible to describe the experimentally observed Ag peak in the loading curve at around 0.9 BV ( The simulated breakthrough curves are similar for the different flow rates, with only slight difference in the shapes of the curves ( Despite these issues, it was concluded that the simulation model was accurate enough to study the dynamic process for the purification of the AgNO Numerical simulations were used to test the feasibility of Ag electrolyte purification using an ion exchange process. The composition of the feed was 84 g/L Ag and 41 g/L Cu, and the process capacity was arbitrarily set to 1000 L of feed per 24 h. The product specifications were given as concentrations in the raffinate stream: The flowsheet of this process is shown in Water wash. After an ion exchange cycle, the HNO First loading step. The resin takes all the metals from the feed solution, and pure water is collected from the outlet. This is recycled to the water tank. Duration: 0.7 BV. Second loading step. The actual product, a pure AgNO Third loading step. To prevent the loss of yield during elution, the resin is fully loaded to displace as much Ag as possible. Duration: until a combined feed amount of 2 BV is achieved for the loading steps (2–4). Water wash. The feed solution containing Ag and Cu is washed from the resin bed. Excess water is evaporated from this solution so that recycling it back to the feed tank will not reduce the feed concentrations. Duration: 1.5 BV. Elution. Cu and traces of Ag are eluted from the resin with HNO The size of the bed needed to process 1000 L in under 24 h was 127 L. The simulations were completed for feed flow rates of 3.0, 6.5, and 9.0 BV/h. In each simulation, the flow rate was 30 BV/h during the washing stage and 10 BV/h during elution, and these values were chosen based on the previous experiments. The simulation was conducted using the cyclic process described above. After each cycle, new amounts and compositions for the feed tanks were calculated and then used for the next cycle. In the simulated process, successive cycles increased the Ag concentration and decreased the Cu concentration ( The amount of treated electrolyte solution per time unit depends on the feed flow rate ( More metals are removed per time unit when the flow rate is increased, but the difference is not very large, especially when increasing the rate from 6.5 to 9.0 BV/h ( During the first few cycles, the quality of the Ag electrolyte product deteriorated slightly. But, due to the changing composition of the feed ( An ion exchange process for removing Cu impurities from the AgNO Using a 3.0 BV/h feet flow rate, the purification of 1000 L of the electrolyte solution in a single column with a 127 L resin bed is completed in 24.3 h. However, with a 9.0 BV/h feed flow rate, the purification takes only 14.3 h. Over 78% of the Cu (initial concentration 41 g/L) is removed with the 9.0 BV/h flow rate, and over 92% is removed with the 3.0 BV/h flow rate. The estimated Ag losses were tolerable at over 10%, but this amount was heavily overestimated in the simulations compared to the breakthrough experiments. The concentrations in the product electrolyte were typically under 10 g/L for Cu and over 70 g/L for Ag (initial 84 g/L), which is a good result. Notably, this solution can be recycled directly back to the Ag electrorefining process. None.