In this study, the flotation of a copper–gold ore in the presence of 10% bentonite in tap water and sea water was investigated. It was found that bentonite had a deleterious effect on copper and gold flotation in tap water, but this deleterious effect was mitigated in sea water. Rheology measurements, settling tests and Cryo-SEM analyses were conducted to understand the underpinning mechanism. It appears that the high viscosity produced by bentonite due to its swelling capacity and cross-linked network structures negatively affected flotation hydrodynamics and therefore copper and gold flotation in tap water. It is interesting that sea water reduced the swelling capacity of bentonite and modified the association modes of bentonite platelets in flotation pulp, resulting in the breakup of links between the structures with relatively large pores, which contributed to the improvement of copper and gold flotation.Clay minerals are associated with a number of minerals and can present a variety of problems in mineral flotation such as slime coating, high gangue entrainment and high pulp viscosity resulting in low mineral flotation recovery and/or low concentrate grade. Due to anisotropic charges on edges and faces of clay minerals, clay slime coatings may occur on positively and negatively charged minerals, depressing mineral flotation ( On the other hand, with the depletion of fresh water, the use of water with a high concentration of inorganic electrolytes in mineral processing industry has been increased. A number of flotation plants in Australia, Canada, Chile and Indonesia are operated with sea water ( In clay science, it is well established that particle association between clay mineral platelets determines the rheological behaviour of concentrated clay suspensions. Due to their anisotropic structure and charge properties, clay platelets can form three different modes of association, edge-to-face (E–F), edge-to-edge (E–E) and face-to-face (F–F) ( In this study, bentonite was chosen as a representative of 2:1 structure clay minerals with swelling properties. Montmorillonite, the main component of bentonite, is a layered clay mineral that belongs to the smectite group. The thin sheets of montmorillonite are held together by the interlayer bridging cations (typically Na A copper–gold ore with a low clay content was crushed to a size of −2.36 Particle size distribution of the bentonite sample was measured by a Laser Diffraction Malvern Mastersizer (Malvern Instrument Ltd., U.K.). The detailed procedure was described elsewhere ( Sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) and Cytec Aero 3894A (a thionocarbamate) were used in this study as collectors. Huntsman polyfroth W22 was used as the frother. Brisbane tap water and artificial sea water were used in the study in parallel. The sea water used in this study was the same as used in the sponsor’s flotation plant. Its composition is shown in 1 In order to study the effect of bentonite on copper and gold flotation in different water, a series of artificial mixtures of the clean ore and bentonite were prepared. For each test, a calculated amount of clean ore slurry (0 or 10% of the total solid by weight) in each case was taken out from the agitating flotation cell and replaced by the same amount of a well-mixed bentonite suspension so that the concentration of bentonite in the mixture was 10% while the solid density for all tests was kept constant. The mixed slurry was then conditioned with SIPX collector (6 Rheology measurements were conducted with an Ares rheometer (TA Instruments Ltd., U.S.) which employs a computation program so that measurement parameters such as shear stress, viscosity, and torque are directly calculated. A couette geometry with a stationary inner cylinder and a rotating outer cylinder was utilized. All rheology measurements were performed at ambient temperature around 22 The rheometer was operated in a strain-controlled mode where the shear rate was fixed and the required torque was measured. Each measurement required a sample of 15 Settling tests were conducted with 3 The Cryo-SEM technique is widely used in many applications to avoid changes in structure induced by vacuum drying or freeze-drying since the water is vitrified without crystallisation as ice (  Whilst in tap water the presence of bentonite was detrimental to copper and gold flotation, sea water reduced the negative effect of bentonite on copper and gold flotation. As shown in To understand the reason for the improved flotation performance in the presence of bentonite in sea water, pulp rheology measurements and bentonite settling tests were conducted.  In addition to swelling, another potential contributing factor to the alteration of pulp rheology by sea water is through the aggregation of bentonite particles and the subsequent formation of network structures. To monitor the association of bentonite platelets in fresh and sea water under the flotation context, Cryo-SEM study on flotation pulp was carried out. The Cryo-SEM images of flotation pulp of the clean ore in the presence of 10% bentonite under different resolutions in tap water and sea water are shown in In sea water, the platelets of bentonite in the flotation pulp were present in long E–E connected strings and F–F contacts with very thin layers and aggregates, while the E–F contacts were very few. In contrast, the bentonite platelets in tap water were associated in the modes of E–E, F–F and E–F, with much denser and more compact aggregates as shown in The pore size of the bentonite network in tap water was estimated to be ∼5 The current study found that sea water mitigated the deleterious effect of bentonite on copper and gold flotation observed in fresh water with simultaneous reduction of pulp viscosity. While cross-linked network structures formed by bentonite platelets were captured in fresh water, sea water reduced the swelling capacity of bentonite and also modified the association modes of bentonite platelets in the pulp, in particular from edge(-)/face(-) to face(-)/face(-) association, resulting in the breakup of links between the structures with relatively large pore sizes. The decreased pulp viscosity together with the enlarged pore sizes in turn improved bubble and particle mobility with enhanced flotation performance. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this study from the