To investigate the possibility of predicting the crushability of rocks from impact strength index, twenty-four different rock types were tested in the laboratory. The crushability results were correlated with the results of impact strength test and regression analysis was performed. A strong inverse linear relation between the crushability index and the impact strength index was found. The effect of porosity and density on the correlation was also shown. In addition, multiple regression analysis including porosity and density was carried out. The significances of the derived models were statistically tested. It was concluded that the crushability of rocks can practically be estimated from the impact strength index using the simple regression model.Crushing is a process which is widely used in mineral processing plants, cement factories, aggregates plants and some other industrial plants. Especially, the demand of crushed stone aggregates has increased from day to day, because of increasing expansion of highway and other construction works and decreasing natural aggregate resources in the world. The crushability of rocks depends mainly on the crusher type and properties, and geological characteristics of rocks. Physico-mechanical properties, mineralogical and textural features, structural properties such as microcracks, cleavage planes and schistosity are the geological characteristics affecting the rock crushability. Some researchers have investigated the effect of geological and mechanical characteristics of the rocks on the crushability. Impact strength test was first developed by Protodyakonov, and then it was used by The main objective of this research is to investigate the possibility of estimating the crushability of rocks from the impact strength test. For this purpose, the results of the crushing test on twenty-four different rock types were compared with the corresponding results from the impact strength test. A total of 24 different rock types were sampled, eight of which were igneous, eight of which were metamorphic and eight of which were sedimentary. Quarries, marble factories, and natural outcrops in Nigde, Kayseri, Konya and Afyon areas of Turkey were visited and rock blocks were collected for the laboratory testing. The location and the name of the rocks are given in A laboratory jaw crusher used in the crushing experiments. Firstly, block samples were crushed using a hand hammer to small sizes which were suitable for the crusher and charged to the crusher with a wide outlet gap. A charging size range of 19.0−9.52 The device designed by In addition to crushing and impact strength tests, density and porosity tests were carried out according to ISRM standards. Average results of all tests are given in The To see how the correlation varies with the rock class, regression analysis was performed for igneous rocks, metamorphic rocks and sedimentary rocks, respectively. The derived equations of the lines are:For igneous rocks, Including porosity and density values, multiple linear regression analysis was performed in the expectation of obtaining stronger relations than that of the simple regression. Alternative multiple regression models are given following: As shown above, the correlation coefficient of Eq. It has known that increasing the A crushability classification of rocks was suggested according to the The crushability is good for The crushability is medium for The crushability is poor for A crushing circuit designer can determine the crushability properties of a new rock type using the above crushability classification. In other words, the performance of a crusher for the different rock types can be estimated from the above classification. The validity analyses of Eqs. To test the significance of regressions, analysis of variance for the regression was employed. As shown in Since there are no doubts about the significance of Eqs. The crushability of twenty-four different rock types were determined and correlated with the corresponding results from the impact strength test. It was found that there is a strong inverse linear relation between the crushability index and the impact strength index. It was shown that there is a strong influence of porosity and density on the correlation. Concluding remark is that the crushability of rocks can practically be estimated from the impact strength index using the simple regression model.