Magnetic and microstructural properties of WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys were investigated. To establish the effect of varying Ru and VC content, three alloy series were studied: 80WC-10VC-(10-x)Co-xRu (0 ≤ x ≤ 3) (wt%), (89.6-x)WC-10Co-0.4VC-xRu (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) (wt%) and (89.2-x)WC-10Co-0.8VC-xRu (0 ≤ x ≤ 2) (wt%). Coercivity and magnetic saturation, measured using a magnetic analyzer and a Koerzimeter, were reported. Scanning electron microscopy was used to determine the microstructural parameters: WC mean intercept length, binder mean free path and contiguity. Magnetic saturation decreased with Ru additions for all alloy series, but did not respond to changes in VC content. Coercivity decreased with Ru additions in all three alloy series. Higher VC contents corresponded to higher coercivities. The WC mean intercept length decreased with Ru additions for the (89.6-x)WC-10Co-0.4VC-xRu series and, to a much lesser extent, the (89.2-x)WC-10Co-0.8VC-xRu series. For the 80WC-10VC-(10-x)Co-xRu alloy series, no trend was observed in the WC mean intercept length as Ru was added. The WC mean intercept length was lower for alloy series with higher VC content. The binder mean free path decreased with Ru additions for the 80WC-10VC-(10-x)Co-xRu and (89.6-x)WC-10Co-0.4VC-xRu alloy series, but increased for the (89.2-x)WC-10Co-0.8VC-xRu alloy series. Lower binder mean free paths were associated with higher VC contents. Contiguity increased with Ru content for the 80WC-10VC-(10-x)Co-xRu alloy series, but decreased for the (89.6-x)WC-10Co-0.4VC-xRu and (89.2-x)WC-10Co-0.8VC-xRu alloys. The alloy series with higher VC content had lower contiguities.Cemented carbides are very hard, strong, tough and wear resistant sintered composites, and their most basic form is the WC-Co hardmetal [ To reduce the WC particle size, thus increasing wear resistance, secondary carbides are frequently added. Kim and Accary [ Other efforts to improve the properties of cemented carbides have focused on Co binder modification, for example, partial substitution of Co with Ru to improve hardness [ To date, WC-Co alloys with both Ru and VC (i.e. WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys) have not been studied. Since the effects of Ru and VC on WC-Co alloys were complementary [ Industrially, non-destructive magnetic property measurements are used to test for microstructural consistency [ Powders with different amounts of WC, VC, Co and Ru were mixed by ball milling to give the compositions shown in Magnetic saturation was measured using a Setaram Sigmameter magnetic analyzer. Coercivity was measured using a Forster-Koerzimeter 1.095 instrument. Three as-sintered alloys per composition were used for both magnetic saturation and coercivity tests, and the averages were calculated. Prior to the microstructural investigations, the sintered samples were mounted in conductive bakelite and polished to a 1 μm surface finish using diamond polishing. A Carl Zeiss Sigma® Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) was used to study the microstructures of the sintered alloys, and the compositions of the phases and overall alloys were obtained. Phases present in powders and alloys were identified using a Bruker D2 Phaser, X-ray Diffractometer with a Co anode. For quantitative microstructural characterisation, five enlarged micrographs from SEM were used per sample to determine the microstructural parameters of mean carbide grain size (d Mean grain size measurements were done using the Heyn's linear intercept method [ Eq. L The binder mean free path, λ, was determined using Eq. Contiguity measurements were done using lineal analysis to resolve the binder phases so that carbide/carbide (N For comparison with experimental results, theoretical contiguities were determined using Eqs. To determine the best fitting equation to the experimental results, the least mean relative error approach [ The magnetic saturation decreased with Ru additions in all alloy series ( For the 80WC-10VC-(10- The general decrease in coercivity for the 80WC-10VC-(1- The relationship between coercivity and magnetic saturation for the 80WC-10VC-(10- Coercivity, H Roebuck [ Using Eq. SEM-BSE images of two extreme compositions per alloy series are shown in  The absence of a definite relationship between d Since the grain size did not change significantly with further additions of Ru for the 80WC-10VC-(10-  The values for the mean free paths for each alloy are plotted in The general decrease of mean binder free path with Ru content for the 80WC-10VC-(10- Contiguity very slightly increased with Ru content for the 80WC-10VC-10(1- Contiguity usually depends only on the binder volume [ The relationship of contiguity and the thickness of Co regions was derived using the values for λ and d Roebuck et al. [ It is shown from The properties of the WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys studied were affected by both VC and Ru contents. The properties depended on whether binder modification with Ru involved Co replacement or WC replacement. At 0.8 wt% VC, the WC mean intercept length decreased significantly, so additions up to 10 wt% VC might not be necessary. Overall, the property interrelationships for WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys were more complicated than the conventional hardmetals, because of the effects of both VC and Ru. At low VC contents, the WC-VC-Co-Ru alloys had the same magnetic response as conventional WC-Co alloys, since there was a direct relationship between coercivity and magnetic saturation for only the (89.6- The WC mean grain decreased with Ru additions for the (89.2-