Numerical analysis is widely used method in geotechnical engineering when calculating and predicting soil and rock behaviour under different loading and excavation conditions. For instance, simulation of tunnelling using 2D or 3D finite element (FE) analyses can often calculate any deformations and stress redistributions due to tunnelling operations without constructing real trial tunnels. Modelling the excavation process in 2D plane strain analysis, however, requires an approach that can consider 3D tunnelling effect as a result of volume loss. In addition, modelling shotcrete or similar support measures, using either beam elements, solid continuum elements or other special elements are needed to be adopted. Therefore, convergence-confinement, stiffness reduction, disk calculation and hypothetical modulus of elasticity (HME) soft lining approaches have been employed in the numerical analysis. Moreover, compatibility of each method with beam and solid continuum element models in 2D FE analysis was investigated. Thus, eight plane strain, non-linear FE analyses of tunnel construction in London Clay were performed and the results are presented and discussed in this article.Tunnel excavation and the application of support measures certainly induce a three-dimensional (3D) phenomena. Numerical modelling can trace these phenomena in a mathematical way that could characterise observed behaviour as close as possible. During tunnel construction, a volume of soil squeezing into the opening creates deformations around and above the tunnel, which cannot be simulated directly in 2D finite element (FE) analysis. Hence, when tunnelling process is analysed in 2D plane strain FE analysis, one must adopt assumptions, which take into account volume loss, percentage of theoretical tunnel volume, and deformations prior to structural elements such as lining, shotcrete and/or concrete introduced. The available approaches include convergence-confinement method ( Applications of the above mentioned methods are available in the literature. For example, For the present research the Heathrow Express Trial tunnel scheme with its single sidewall excavation sequence and geometry was used. Measurements taken during construction were adopted to compare the FE analyses results using Critical State Soil Program (CRISP). Undrained analysis has been adopted for London Clay using Gunn–Jardine Small Strain Stiffness soil model. Thames gravel and made ground were modelled using drained material properties. A constitutive soil model Drucker–Parger plasticity has been adopted for Thames gravel and made ground. The stress redistribution and the deformations occurring during tunnel face advance can be more properly simulated only if 3D numerical models are applied. In many cases, 2D plane strain assumption suffices to calculate simple tunnel geometry using certain approximations that can account for the 3D face effect. These approximations in 2D FE analysis would reflect the deformations, which occur between the removal of certain parts of the ground in the tunnel area, and the application of the support measures until the support is fully strengthened. These assumptions are summarised and discussed in the following sections. The convergence-confinement method introduced by 2D tunnelling problem is illustrated in In Eq. The stiffness reduction method uses a support core with a reduced modulus of elasticity (    In this method akin to convergence-confinement method, volume loss is prescribed rather than proportion of unloading prior to lining construction ( Three layers of soil were included within FE model. Top layer of model, 1.5   London Clay small strain model parameters used in CRISP version 4 are given in Finite element analysis has been carried out with the mesh illustrated in Tunnel excavation and construction were carried out in 12 steps. Increments for each step were kept within 50 increments, which were found to be sufficient to reach equilibrium. Introducing support elements have been carried out in a single increment. It was seen that running analyses in a small number of increments led to divergence of forces within the soil body when modelling excavation using simplified assumptions. After introducing initial stress conditions, left heading was excavated and structural elements were activated. Detailed excavation sequences are given in Each method has been compared separately in terms of selected beam elements and solid continuum elements used as shotcrete. Same procedures were successfully applied to the other excavation cycles. According to results show in In another simulation, stiffness reduction method has been applied for modelling of excavation and results are given in Result of the disk calculation model is shown in The last method investigated is HME soft lining approach. In this method, instead of reducing the soil stiffness in the excavation area, stiffness of shotcrete was reduced with Overall comparison of all methods using beam elements and continuum elements is shown in According to the results from FE analyses, better trough pattern was achieved with convergence-confinement method using beam elements as shotcrete. However, even this model predicted the max settlement larger than the other methods. Including HME soft lining approach in beam element model produced decisive settlement trough, which is much wider than measured data. Stiffness reduction and disk calculation methods as well as HME soft lining method calculated same settlement troughs using continuum elements, which agree with the observed maximum settlement, It is also noticed that continuum elements found to be in much more stiff behaviour than beam elements. Response of each approximations to beam and solid continuum element models in 2D FE analysis are found be different. On the other hand, these approximations can be successfully applied to tunnel simulations bearing in mind that the reduction amount among the methods are variable. Further investigations can be focused on any combination of HME soft lining method with stiffness reduction, convergence-confinement and disk calculation method as these methods considers the 3D tunnelling effect only. However, when shotcrete is applied to tunnel boundary, it gains its full strength in time and this phenomena can be traced by including HME soft lining approach in corporation with the other simple methods or carrying out a real time simulation in which shotcrete strength described as dependent on time.