In the present work the recovery of sulfuric acid from acid mine drainage by means of 3-compartment electrodialysis (ED) is evaluated. An effective recovery of sulfuric acid free from Fe(III) species was obtained in the anodic compartment as a result of the co-ion exclusion mechanism in the membranes. The difference in the pH and pSO4
                     2− values between the membrane phase and the external electrolyte promotes the dissociation of complex species inside the membranes. This phenomenon impedes the transport of Fe(III) and sulfates in the form of complex ions toward the anodic and cathodic compartment, respectively. The current efficiency values of the anion-exchange membrane at different current densities were approximately constant with time. However, the increase in the recovery of acid decreases as the current increases. This result is explained by the shift in the equilibrium at the membrane/solution interface as more SO4
                     2− ions cross the anionic membrane and, by the enhancement of the dissociation of water when the limiting current density is exceeded. The main limitation of the process is related to an abrupt increase in the cell voltage due to the formation of precipitates at the surface of the cation-exchange membrane.Mining industries represent an important source of metals, as well as an essential economic activity for the regions where they are located. However, the generation of acid mine drainage (AMD) entails environmental problems due to the contamination of the surrounding watercourses. AMD is the result of the oxidation of sulfide minerals, mainly pyrite (FeS In particular, ED can be used to obtain a valuable product, such as sulfuric acid, from AMD. The sulfuric acid can be used as resource to offset the costs of treatment and make ED technologies more feasible than the typical treatment with limes Different electro-membrane processes (e.g. bipolar ED, electro-electrodialysis or distinct ED configurations) have been effectively used to recover sulfuric acid from various industrial wastewaters, such as nuclear decontamination effluents or rinsing waters used in metal electrorefining operations Therefore, the main objective of this study is to investigate the transport processes determining the mass transfer rates and energetic efficiency of ED processes used to treat AMD solutions. For this purpose, ion-exchange membranes featured as chemically and mechanically resistant are employed at different current densities. In order to evaluate the viability of the recovery of sulfuric acid from iron-containing solutions, we put special emphasis on the formation of different ionic species. This approach will allow us to interpret the different phenomena involved in the mass transport through the membranes. Finally, the main benefits and limitations of this technology are identified by evaluating the effect of the applied current density on the mass transfer rates and energy-related indicators. The ion-exchange membranes used in the present study are heterogeneous HDX membranes (provided by Hidrodex®). The AEM (HDX 200) contains quaternary amine groups attached to the membrane matrix. The cation-exchange membrane (CEM, HDX 100) is charged with sulfonic acid groups and has a similar morphology to that of HDX 200. Both membranes have remarkably high ion-exchange capacities, which are 1.8 and 2.0 The composition of AMD varies substantially depending on the source from which samples are collected. In a previous study, the composition of different AMD solutions obtained from a carboniferous area in Criciúma/SC (Brazil) was elucidated The principle of the process proposed in this work is shown in The concentration of sulfates in the different compartments was measured by conductometric titration using barium acetate as titrant. The concentration of total iron was also measured by atomic absorption spectrometry (Perkin Elmer, Model A Analyst100) with a lamp current of 5 The mixture used to conduct the ED galvanostatic experiments, composed of 0.02 The complexation of Fe Moreover, the formation of precipitates was also considered: In the case of Na Besides, SO The stability constants of the reactions presented above are defined as follows: In order to calculate the concentrations of each species, the system of equations formed by the mass balance of sulfates, Fe(III) species and Na(I) species (Eqs. According to the previously defined reactions and balances, the concentration of each ionic species is presented in Moreover, in ED systems the initial equilibrium conditions can vary due to changes originated by the membrane selectivity or due to variations in the pH values, especially in the diffusion boundary layers formed at the membrane/solution interface and in the interstitial membrane solution. In order to take into account these variations, the speciation diagram of SO Following an analogous procedure, the fraction of Fe(III) species was also calculated and the speciation diagram of Fe(III) species as a function of pH is shown in In order to evaluate the recovery of sulfuric acid in the anodic compartment of the ED cell, three galvanostatic experiments were carried out at the current densities of 5, 10 and 15 The experiments lasted for 10 According to the data shown in In order to elucidate the mechanism responsible for the rejection of Fe(III) species by the AEM, the role of the Donnan exclusion mechanism of co-ions in the membrane phase has to be considered. The presence of fixed charges in the membrane matrix excludes those ions with the same charge sign from entering inside the membrane internal solution. In the case of an AEM, the exclusion of H In the present case, the increased pH values in the membrane phase originate the displacement of the equilibrium conditions from those of the bulk electrolyte. This phenomenon can be illustrated by considering a shift in the pH of the speciation diagram of Similar to the process occurring with the Fe(SO Regarding the increase in the concentration of protons in the anodic compartment, the acidity was measured at the conclusion of the experiments by means of titration against 0.5 The water splitting process can be enhanced when surpassing the i The transport mechanism of SO The proton leakage through the membrane would also imply a transfer of H Further research would be necessary to discern which of those phenomena is the most relevant. However, the enhancement of the water splitting reaction when the current exceeds the i The increased flux of SO Finally, the effect of current density on the magnitude of the proton leakage through the membrane is not as clear as with the other two phenomena. This process is associated with the water content inside the internal pore solution of the AEM. With reference to this effect, Huang et al. observed a decrease in the current efficiency for the recovery of sulfuric acid with decreasing the applied current and attributed this result to the greater water transport occurring at low current densities Regarding the pH values, The concentration of total iron was measured in the central and cathodic compartments in order to analyze the transport of Fe(III) through the CEM and elucidate its influence on the overall performance of the ED cell. The changing trend observed in the evolution of iron with time can be explained as a result of the difference between the rate of transport of Fe(III) through the CEM and the rate of reduction of iron at the surface of the cathode (Eqs. It should be noted that the concentration of iron in the central compartment at the end of the experiments was the same for 10 and 15 Finally, the concentration of sulfates in the cathodic compartment was measured at the end of the experiments. The measurements revealed that the concentration of sulfates remained unchanged with time. Analogously as occurred with the AEM, the Donnan co-ion exclusion in the membrane phase seems to affect the ionic species transported through the CEM. However, in this case the co-ions excluded from the membrane phase should be the OH In order to evaluate the viability of the proposed configuration, the energy-related indicators of the ED cell have to be taken into account. For this purpose, the current efficiency (  The evolution of the current efficiency with time is presented in The results of current efficiency of The evolution of E On the contrary, under an imposed current of 15 The obtained results have proven that the recovery of sulfuric acid from AMD can be achieved by means of an ED cell. Significant increases in the sulfuric acid concentration were obtained with the proposed scheme consisting of a three-compartment ED cell with CEM and AEM. Moreover, the removal of Fe(III) ions from AMD can be performed simultaneously. The determination of the concentration of sulfates and iron in the different compartments, together with the consideration of the speciation diagrams of mixtures of ferric and sodium sulfates allowed us to identify the phenomenon that ensures the recovery of sulfuric acid free of Fe(III) impurities. This phenomenon consists in the dissociation of complex ionic species occurring inside the internal phase of the membranes. Specifically, the high pH values prevailing inside the gel phase of the AEM promote the dissociation of the Fe(SO The energy efficiency of the sulfate transport through the AEM has been evaluated by means of calculating the This work was supported by