The influence of particle size on wear rate in compressive crushing of rock was investigated experimentally. A test apparatus was developed to replicate the squeezing wear that is present in many rock crushers. Silica sand of different size classes between 0.725 and 2.03mm was used. The crushing load was varied. The results show a strong relationship between particle size and wear rate. The wear rate increases as particle size increases. Not only mean particle size, but also size distribution width also has an influence on wear rate. From some theoretical considerations, an alternative wear model was derived, that matches experimental data well. In the new model, the wear is proportional to particle size and to the square root of the pressure.In a series of papers by the author, a model to predict the worn geometry of a cone crusher has been presented ( In compressive crushing rock particles of various sizes are squeezed and crushed against a steel surface. The wear mechanism is pure squeezing wear without macroscopic relative motion between the rock particles and the steel surface. Many wear models described in the literature, see for example Successful efforts have been made to theoretically derive the statistical distribution of contact loads in particulate materials. See for example In rock crushing applications, however, where the particle shape and size varies considerably, and especially when particle breakage occurs, theoretical solutions for the contact load distribution are not available. Some experimental results have been achieved by   As a consequence of the complexity of wear, a large variety of devices for wear testing exist. See for example An abrasive wear tester was previously used by In order to study the compressive wear found in cone crushers, the wear tester was further modified. The fixed specimen was replaced with a roller, see The rock material was silica sand, well known for its strongly abrasive properties. The silica sand was thoroughly sieved into four different size classes: 0.6–0.85 The valve of the abrasive hopper was opened and the roller was released onto the rotating wheel of the abrasive tester. The wear on the roller was measured with a vernier calliper. Since the abrasive tester consumes large amounts of material, the wear tests were made as short as possible. Each test was made long enough so that a diameter change of at least 10 times the resolution of the vernier calliper (0.02 In the first few tests many measurements were made with short intervals. It was noted that the wear rate was very low or even negative when starting from a new specimen. The explanation for this is that when a measurement is made, it is the peaks of the rough surface that are measured. This means that the smooth surface of a new specimen needs to be used for a certain time before taking measurements of wear. For this reason the first 5 For each revolution of the specimen, each point on the roller will be subject to one crushing event. The wear expressed as wear per crushing event, for the different particle sizes is shown in The wear resistance coefficient described by Eq. The position where squeeze starts in a roll crusher is governed by the coefficient of friction The pressure distribution in Several studies (  The results show a clear relationship between particle size and wear rate, see Assume that a bed of roughly equally sized particles are squeezed against a steel surface of a certain area. Smaller particles, compared to larger ones, will cause a larger number of contact loads within that area, since the number of particles increase as the particle size decreases. Each contact load will be lower as the number of particles and contacts increase. With knowledge of the wear or damage caused by each contact load, a wear model can be derived. Consider a number If the indent size  The particle sizes that were investigated here are smaller than in a cone crusher, and the maximum particle size was here limited by the test equipment.  In a study by The alternative wear model of Eq. In compressive crushing of rock material, a difference in particle size in the range 0.75–2.03 In a cone crusher, the level where the cross sectional area is at a minimum is called the choke level. Below the choke level, the cross sectional area increases, and there is more and more space between particles as they move further down. In the flow model for cone crushers presented by We now have a cone crusher model that predicts the operating conditions with some accuracy ( Professor Emeritus Göran Gerbert, Chalmers University of Technology is gratefully acknowledged for valuable discussions regarding wear models.