Concerns about the future balance between the supply and demand of metals have inspired research to define and assess metal criticality. Here we apply a comprehensive criticality methodology to four metals with uses in nuclear energy: zirconium (Zr), hafnium (Hf), thorium (Th), and uranium (U). 2008 criticality assessments for these metals were made on the national level for the United States and on the global level. The results and uncertainty estimates in three-dimensional “criticality space” are comprised of supply risk (SR), vulnerability to supply restriction (VSR), and environmental implications (EI) axes. The SR score is the highest for zirconium over both the medium term (i.e., 5–10 years) and the long term (i.e., a few decades). The cradle-to-gate EI score is highest for uranium, followed by hafnium and then thorium, with impacts due to a combination of on-site emissions and upstream burdens from the use of energy and materials during mineral processing and refining. Uranium has the highest VSR score at the national level, and the second highest at the global level. Zirconium is the most vulnerable at the global level. In general, SR for the four metals are reasonably high for the United States and more moderate for the planet, while EI and VSR scores are low to moderate. Overall, the criticality of the metals analyzed appears not to be of high concern, either nationally or globally.Energy is now a crucial part of the infrastructure and maintenance of society in almost all countries. As more concerns have appeared in recent years concerning the reliability of supplies of traditional energy resources, and the climate change issues connected with fossil fuels, nuclear energy has remained an alternative. Although many countries postponed their nuclear development after Japan's Fukushima Disaster of 2011 and Germany decided for a stepwise phase-out of nuclear energy to be completed by 2022 ( In the United States, there are 104 commercial nuclear reactors in operation at 65 sites, generating approximately 20% of electricity ( In 2008 the United States National Research Council (NRC) published a structured assessment of the criticality of non-renewable resources, which evaluates both the risk of unreliable supply of metals and minerals and the impact of such a restriction on the organization being assessed ( Our research group created a detailed methodology to generate assessments of the criticality of metals based upon the NRC's conceptual foundation but employing enhanced levels of scope, rigor, and transparency. We display the results on a three-dimensional criticality plot, comprised of supply risk, environmental implications, and vulnerability to supply restriction ( In the present work, we assess the criticality of four metals that are central to modern nuclear energy technology: zirconium, hafnium, thorium, and uranium. We group the metals by their unique and crucial functions in the nuclear energy industry rather than by a reflection of their geological occurrence. Uranium and thorium are known for their applications as energy sources for nuclear power generators, with uranium being the major energy source used in this way. Thorium's main uses are in gas mantles for lighting applications, refractory applications, and with tungsten in welding electrodes, although it has the potential to be used in nuclear power generators ( It is important to point out in the context of this work that the word “criticality” is used here in a way different from that often encountered in the physical sciences, where the associated word “critical” can be employed to indicate a transition from one state of a system to another (as in “critical point” or “critical angle”, where “critical” is an adjective). In contrast, in this paper and elsewhere (e.g., Criticality is dependent upon a number of diverse factors that span, for example, the topics of geology, regulation, geopolitics, and material science. Some factors are quantitative, while others require a more qualitative evaluation. We evaluate metals in three-dimensional “criticality space” where one axis is supply risk (SR), another is environmental implications (EI), and the third is vulnerability to supply restriction (VSR). Each axis is composed of equally weighted components that, in turn, are composed of equally weighted indicators whose quantification is discussed in detail in previous publications (i.e., All indicators are transformed to a 0–100 scale (transformations are provided in the Supporting information). Indicators are weighted equally, and all data and results are for year 2008. We explicitly estimate a quantitative uncertainty by Monte Carlo analysis for each indicator included in the three dimensions. Each indicator was varied over its assigned uncertainty range for 10,000 iterations, resulting in an “uncertainty cloud” in criticality space (further details provided in the supporting information). Global and national (i.e., United States) analyses were considered, and figures displaying the methodology are in the supporting information. Additionally, a list of acronyms and abbreviations for the components and indicators is provided as an SR consists of three equally weighted components – geological, technological, and economic (GTE), social and regulatory (S&R), and geopolitical (GP)–that, in turn, are comprised of indicators, also equally weighted. Unequal weighting is an option for analysts to adjust if desired. The evaluation of each indicator is transformed to a 0 to 100 scale, which represents low to high SR. The indicators are fully described in GTE is comprised of depletion time (DT) and companion metal fraction (CF) indicators. DT is an estimate of the geological abundance and abundance of available end-of-life scrap of each metal relative to current production rate, while CF represents the percentage of the metal mined as a companion (i.e., recovered as a byproduct from the ore of a host metal, rather than mined for itself). Note that the geological supply refers to terrestrial supplies. In the case of uranium, there is a longstanding trend to cite large quantities of uranium in seawater as a potential supply source (e.g., S&R is composed of policy potential index (PPI) ( GP is composed of worldwide governance indicators – political stability and absence of violence/terrorism (WGI-PV) ( Several SR indicators – PPI, HDI, and WGI-PV – were weighted by each metal's production on a country basis. For all indicators that were weighted, each except for PPI was weighted using either the metal's mining or refining production, whichever yielded the higher risk score. In this way, the production step that has the higher risk as the “bottleneck” most likely to cause a supply constraint. This selection of the higher risk production weighting was not used for PPI, because PPI is inherently based on mining factors and thus should only be based on mining considerations. In cases in which a metal is a companion of another metal (a host metal), the host metal's mine production data may be utilized to weight the appropriate indicators. For example, hafnium is a companion metal of zirconium, so zirconium's mine production data were used for PPI. For each metal, the primary data sources for mine and refinery production were the United States Geological Survey (USGS) and World Mining Data (WMD). In cases in which data were available from both sources, those from the USGS were utilized. It was not uncommon for data to be listed for some countries in WMD statistics but not in USGS statistics (details in the supporting information). The production values that were originally reported in gross weight were converted to metal content using atomic weight ratios or estimates derived from industry experts. In the case of these nuclear energy metals, zirconium, hafnium, and thorium are mined as companion metals. Zirconium production occurs mainly as a byproduct of titanium mining. Smaller amounts of zirconium production in 2008 result from tin and gold mining, with less than 1% zircon production from tin and approximately 3% zircon production from gold ( Hafnium is produced as a result of processing zirconium ( Thorium is mined as a companion of host material monazite ( Uranium is mainly mined on its own, with 10% of the 2008 supply as a byproduct ( The EI score for each metal represents the environmental impacts of all direct and indirect emissions that occur from mining, processing, and refining for each of the four nuclear energy metals. Direct emissions could be particulate matter from heavy mining equipment, while indirect emissions could be greenhouse gas emissions from power plants that supply uranium centrifuges. Environmental impacts were modeled using unit process data from the ecoinvent 2.2 life cycle inventory database ( VSR consists of components that vary depending upon the organizational level (i.e., global or national in this present work) and that are, in turn, comprised of indicators. Indicators and components are described in detail in At the global level, the components are importance (I) and substitutability (S), while at the national level they are I, S, and susceptibility (SU). I is comprised solely of material assets (MA) at the global level, and of MA and national economic importance (NE) at the national level. At the global level, S is comprised of substitute performance (SP), substitute availability (SA), and environmental impact ratio (ER); at the national level, the net import reliance ratio (IRR) is also included for S. SU is comprised of the global innovation index (GII) ( Evaluation of substitutability, or S, began with determining the uses of each metal, and the percentage of total demand each use comprises. We considered either “first” or “principal” uses (e.g., hafnium in superalloys used in subsequent applications) or “end-uses” (e.g., hafnium in plasma cutting tools sold directly) based upon the ease of choosing a substitute; to avoid confusion, we term these uses “applications”. For each use of a metal we identified a best-performing (or primary) substitute for the metal of focus. SP is a qualitative evaluation that was typically determined through a combination of expert opinion and assimilation of available literature (details in   Zirconium's relatively high SR The SR Uranium has the lowest scores for both SR The EI scores are shown in VSR is assessed separately at the national (i.e., United States) and global levels. The national VSR scores range from 22 for hafnium to 49 for uranium. Zirconium and thorium have similar scores of 37 and 36, respectively. Uranium has relatively high scores across all national VSR components, with a notably high indicator being the fact that the United States has a high net import reliance on uranium. Hafnium has the lowest VSR score, and the scores across all components are relatively low. Global VSR scores range from 17 for thorium to 39 for zirconium. Zirconium's highest indicator score is for substitute performance, due to the fact that the performance for substitutes across its major end uses are either poor or adequate. Uranium has the second highest global VSR score of 36, due again to substitute performance scores that are only adequate. Hafnium's VSR score is 22, and, interestingly, its highest indicator is substitute availability.  As shown in We thank  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: