For the prediction of buckling response of grid stiffened composite panels having different stiffening arrangements, an efficient finite element modelling technique is presented. The laminated skin of the stiffened structure is modelled with a triangular degenerated curved shell element. An efficient curved beam element compatible with the shell element is developed for the modelling of stiffeners which may have different lamination schemes. The deformation of the degenerated beam element is completely defined in terms of the degrees of freedom of shell elements and it does not require any additional degrees of freedom. This modelling strategy has helped to reduce the number of unknowns significantly compared to the usual approach where solid or shell elements are used for modelling stiffeners. As the usual formulation of degenerated beam elements overestimates their torsional rigidity, a torsion correction factor is introduced for different lamination schemes. Numerical examples are solved by the proposed finite element technique to assess its performance and it shows that the accuracy of the proposed model is quite satisfactory. A parametric study is presented to show the effects of skin thickness, stiffener breadth and stiffener depth on the buckling capacity of grid stiffened composite plates.Due to high specific strength and stiffness as well as flexibility in tailoring the structural performance, fibre reinforced polymer (FRP) laminated composites have been widely used in many weight sensitive structural applications such as aerospace structures, satellite launch vehicles, automotive structures and marine vehicles as well as modern bridge decks and buildings. On the other hand, a stiffened panel always performs better in resisting loads compared to an unstiffened panel of same weight. Thus a combination of lightweight composite materials and stiffened structural forms can efficiently enhance the load resisting capability that can be buckling strength of a structure. The structural behaviour of a stiffened composite panel is quite complex due to complex structural form and anisotropic material properties of the skin and stiffeners. These types of thin-walled structures are vulnerable to lose global and local stability under compression loadings. Consequently, the bucking analysis of these structures is a critical component for in-deep understanding of their buckling performances and also a prerequisite for a reliable bucking-resistant design of these panels. There is vast literature on stiffened plates and shells specifically for these structures made of isotropic materials and simple stiffener orientations. The research carried out up to the middle of nineteen nineties was nicely reviewed by Sinha and Mukhopadhyay Bisagni and Vescovini Some researchers used commercially available finite element packages to conduct buckling analysis and optimisation of stiffened composite panels. Herencia et al. All these studies mentioned above have considered simple stiffener orientations and did not address the problem of advanced grid stiffened (AGS) panels with ortho-grid, x-grid, bi-grid or iso-grid stiffenening arrangements, as shown in It shows that a limited number of investigations have been conducted on AGS composite panels and all these studies are based a simplified idealisation of the structural system. Moreover, an analytical solution is used in most of the cases which is attractive in terms of computational involvement but it lacks in terms of generality because an analytical model can only be applicable to simple structural geometry, loading and boundary conditions. These limitations may be overcome by using a reliable commercially available finite element code but the computational involvement will be reasonably high if the skin and stiffeners are modelled with shell elements. This modelling strategy is applicable for blade stiffened panels only where stiffeners are made with thin laminates with their layers stacked perpendicular to the skin surface. If the stiffeners are thick and their layers are stacked parallel to the skin surface, the modelling should be done with 3D solid elements where the computational involvement will be extremely high. Thus these modelling strategies are not suitable in a situation where a repetitive analysis of the structure is required. This type of scenario is quite common in a problem of optimum design of a structure which is a part of this ongoing research. Therefore there is genuine need for a computationally efficient as well as reliable modelling technique that can be used for buckling analysis of different grid stiffened composite panels accommodating different stiffener configurations, as well as buckling modes under arbitrary loadings and boundary conditions. In the present study an efficient finite element modelling technique having sufficient generality is proposed for the buckling analysis of grid stiffened composite panels having different grid configurations. The detail of the finite element formulation is presented in the following Section The governing equation for the buckling analysis of a stiffened composite panel can be expressed as The concept of the three-dimensional (3D) degenerated shell element The element geometry ( The displacement components (along For different ply orientations, the stress–strain relationship in the desired local axis system ( The elastic stiffness matrix of an element can be derived with the help of the virtual work technique and it may be expressed as The integration in Eq. The stiffeners are modelled as curved beam elements having 3 nodes which are placed along the edges of shell elements with an eccentricity ( The stiffeners may have two types of lamination schemes as shown in The initial stress vector { The procedure adopted of the derivation of the geometric stiffness matrix of the shell element in Section A cross-ply (0/90/90/0) square laminated plated ( A square plate ( An angle ply [(45/−45) Grid stiffened composite plates having different grid or stiffening arrangements such as ortho-grid, x-grid, bi-grid and iso-grid as shown in The proposed finite element model is used to conduct a parametric study on buckling load prediction of grid stiffened composite plates ( The skin thickness is an indispensable design parameter for grid stiffened composite panels. As the laminae are of equal thickness, the thickness of the skin will change with the variation of its number of ply. In this study the number of ply is varied from 16 to 120 for the skin of the grid stiffened composite plates shown in The aspect ratio of the rectangular cross-section of stiffeners is one of the basic geometry parameters for grid stiffened composite panels. The effect of stiffener breadth which depends on the number of equally thick ply ( The effect of the depth of stiffeners on the buckling responses of grid stiffened composite plates is investigated by varying their depth in the form of a ratio ranging from 1 to 12. This is defined as the ratio of the stiffener depth to the skin thickness in the present study. The variation of buckling load capacity of the grid stiffened panels ( An efficient finite element modelling technique for buckling analysis of grid stiffened laminated composite plates is proposed which can be used for the design of these structures. In order to have a better representation of the structural deformation, the skin of the panels and the stiffeners are modelled discretely where a 6-noded triangular curve shell element based on three-dimensional degenerated shell theory is used to mode the skin, while a compatible 3-noded curved beam element based on a similar hypothesis is used for the modelling of the stiffeners. It is to be noted that stiffener elements share the same degrees of freedom of shell elements and do not require any addition unknowns/degrees of freedom to represent their deformations. This is achieved by placing the stiffener elements along the edges of shell elements and the full compatibility conditions between their deformations are used to formulate the stiffener elements with necessary modifications for their representation as a beam. For the laminated stiffeners, the stacking sequence of their layers may be parallel or perpendicular to the skin surface. In order to validate the proposed modelling technique and investigate its performance, a number of numerical examples are solved. The performance of the model is found to be very good in majority of these test problems which have covered grid stiffened plates with ortho-grid, x-grid, bi-grid and iso-grid stiffening arrangements. Based on this observation, the model can be recommended with confidence for the analysis of grid stiffened composite plates having any stiffening configurations with reasonable accuracy and reliability. From the parametric study for the buckling load capacity of ortho-grid, x-grid, bi-grid and iso-grid stiffened composite plate made with angle-ply laminates, it has been observed that skin thickness, stiffener breadth and stiffener depth have significant effects on the improvement of buckling resistance of these panels. The skin thickness and the stiffener depth are found to have more dominant influence than the stiffener breadth on the buckling capacity enhancement. It is also observed that the improvement of the buckling capacity of these grid stiffener stiffened plates is saturated after exceeding a certain stiffener depth. Though the present study is focussed on grid stiffened plates, the formulation is capable of being extended to model grid stiffened shell having any curvature. Moreover, this computationally efficient and accurate model can be utilised to optimise these grid stiffened composite panels subjected to buckling loads which is part of this ongoing research.