Using ab initio methods, we calculated some properties such as the energies and compositions of frontier molecular orbitals and the atomic charges which are related to the reactive behavior of thionocarbamates containing different N-substituent groupings. The results of the calculations indicate that the efficiencies of N-substituent thionocarbamates depend on the investigated parameters, and the N-substituent groupings have significant effect on flotation performance of thionocarbamates as selective collectors for copper sulfide minerals. The order of electron-donating ability is O-isobutyl-N-ethyl-thionocarbamate (IBETC)>
                     O-isobutyl-N-allyl-thionocarbamate (IBALTC)≫
                     O-isobutyl-N-acetyl-thionocarbamate (IBACTC)>
                     O-isobutyl-N-ethoxycarbonyl-thionocarbamate (IBECTC), and the order of feedback-electron-accepting ability is IBACTC≈IBECTC≫IBALTC>IBETC. This implies that IBECTC or IBACTC can react with copper atoms having (t2g)6(eg)3Cu(II) or t6e4Cu(I) configuration on the surfaces of copper sulfide minerals through normal covalent bond and back donation covalent bond, but the interaction of IBECTC or IBACTC with iron atoms having (t2g)6(eg)0Fe(II) or (t2g
                     а)3(eg
                     а)2Fe(III) configuration on the surface of iron sulfide minerals is very weak. IBECTC or IBACTC have excellent performance in these agents as flotation collectors with improved collecting power for copper sulfide minerals and selectivity against iron sulfide minerals. The theoretically obtained results are consistent with the experimental data reported in the literature.Collector study is a crucial part of flotation development, since ores usually consist of a mixture of minerals, and success of the separation process depends mainly on the selective adsorption of the collector. Since the choice of collectors type is crucial in the flotation performance of minerals, the search for new chemical reagents having strong affinity and better selectivity for certain metal ions has attracted much attention recently. A selective adsorption of the collector can be achieved through an understanding of the properties of the mineral surface and collectors, and corresponding surface reactions. Xanthates can strongly interact with the majority of sulfide minerals to form metal xanthate and dixanthogen, however the selectivity is low without the use of additional reagents. In flotation separation of copper sulfide minerals from iron sulfide minerals, for example, lime is used to maintain pH values over 10.5 and more usually above 11.0 and often as high as 12.0 or 12.5 ( Ab initio calculation methods, such as Hartree-Fock (HF) and density functional theory (DFT), offered an effective tool in the study of the properties and energies of the various collectors ( All calculations were made using the Gaussian 03 ( Interpretation and prediction of chemical reactions are often complicated by the entanglement of electronic, steric, and a variety of other effects. The Klopman’s perturbation energy of the approaching two reactants R and S may be approximated as Here, If second-order perturbation theory is adopted to describe the interactions between the filled molecular orbitals of one reactant and the empty molecular orbitals of the other, the interaction energy between R and S is then In general, the most important terms in Eq. This equation is the essential basis for the chemical reaction between flotation reagents and minerals. It is composed of electrostatic effect, solution effect, normal covalent bond, and back donation covalent bond orderly. The energy of electrostatic effect is proportional to the net charge at the reactive center of flotation reagent or mineral. The energy of normal covalent bond depends on the electron-donating power of reagent and electron-accepting power of mineral. The energy of back donation covalent bond is related to electron-back-donating power of mineral and electron-accepting power of reagent ( The chalcopyrite band gap was 0.6 The optimized collector geometries with the numbering schema at B3PW91/6-31g(d) level are shown in Compared with 1.672 The net charges of sulfur atom in TC molecules with different ab initio calculations at 6-31g(d) basis set are given in   The HOMO energies ( The LUMO energies ( The LUMOs of IBETC and IPETC were constituted by p The LUMOs of IBECTC and IBACTC were constituted by p Based on above discussion, the effect of In this work, the chemical parameters such as the energies and compositions of FMOs and the sulfur atom charges indicating the reactive behavior of TC containing different As a result, this study provides a straightforward use of the computational techniques for the description of the activities of the chemical systems. The authors would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50604016) and the National “863” Project of China (Grant No. 2007AA06Z122) for the financial support of this research.