Despite 40 years of efforts, researchers have failed to provide calcium phosphate bone graft substitutes performing well enough to replace bone grafting procedures: their osteogenesis potential is limited, and calcium phosphates are too brittle. However, there is hope to solve the two afore-mentioned problems. First, it is now clear why nacre and bone are very tough despite a high ceramic load. Also, recent studies suggest that calcium and phosphate ions can trigger osteoinduction. The present article aims: (i) to review our current knowledge in the field of synthetic bone graft substitutes, (ii) to explain why ceramics and in particular calcium phosphates are still the most promising materials for bone graft substitution, and (iii) finally to describe the strategy to obtain osteoinductive calcium phosphate bone graft substitutes as strong as cortical bone.Yearly, a few million patients need a bone graft or bone graft substitute. The most frequent causes are bone cysts and tumours, revisions of orthopaedic implants, spine fusion, and traumatic fractures. Bone graft substitutes may be human-derived (allogenic), animal-derived (xenogenic) or synthetic. Since the use of human-derived and animal-derived products is ethically questionable and may lead to complications such as disease transmission, Synthetic bone graft substitutes may consist of metals, polymers, and ceramics ( Many resorption mechanisms have been reported in the past, including dissolution, cell-mediated dissolution, hydrolysis, enzymatic decomposition, or corrosion ( Considering the importance of a cell-mediated resorption, it is important to find methods to determine by which mechanism a bone graft substitute is resorbed. In general, the cell-mediated resorption only occurs with inorganic materials. Identifying which ones are resorbed by cells can be done using in vitro tests. Since the solubility of an inorganic material is so important to determine its in vivo fate, many studies have been devoted to the synthesis of materials with new compositions. In the 1970s and 1980s, a strong focus was set on hydroxyapatite (HA; Ca Another approach in controlling calcium phosphate resorption consists in creating ion-substituted calcium phosphates, Apart from chemical approaches, physical approaches can also be used to control the resorption rate of inorganic materials used as bone graft substitutes. Beside a change of bone graft substitute architecture, other physical aspects are expected to modify their in vivo behaviour. For example, when a ceramic is dissolved in vitro ( Since synthetic bone graft substitutes have poor mechanical properties, it is recommended to use them in mechanically stable locations (e.g. fixed with an osteosynthesis plate and screws). However, local deformations may still occur and provoke surface wear or comminution of the calcium phosphate bone graft substitute. Beside the fact that local deformations can lead to pseudo-arthrosis, the presence of loose particles should be addressed carefully. Some authors have reported biocompatibility problems due to the release of calcium phosphate particles, To design the most adequate bone graft substitute, it would be essential to have an idea about the rate of bone graft resorption, its mechanism, and the link between graft resorption and bone formation. Unfortunately, very little is known in this field because most in vivo studies are only descriptive. Nevertheless, a model was proposed a few years ago to determine the effect of geometry on the cell-mediated resorption rate of a bone graft substitute. In summary, there are many studies devoted to the resorption of inorganic bone graft substitutes, but it is still unclear how fast bone graft substitute resorption should be. Whereas HA resorption appears too slow (in the order of years to dozen of years), possibly leading to mechanical instabilities and bone fractures, As mentioned in Section Interestingly, Mother Nature has developed approaches to produce strong and tough composite materials using mechanically weak materials such as collagen, chitosan, calcium carbonate, or calcium phosphates. The solution to this problem lies in a perfect structural and morphological design of the composite material. Two main strategies have been used so far: (i) produce a scaffold with the first phase and reinforce it with the second phase, or (ii) produce the composite using a layer-by-layer (LBL) strategy. Applying the first strategy, Hartgerink et al. The third important property of a bone graft substitute is its osteoinduction, i.e. its ability to stimulate bone formation. The standard approach to obtain an osteoinductive bone graft substitute is to combine it with a drug, typically a growth factor such as BMP-2 Presently, the mechanism(s) involved in this process is/are unknown The importance of calcium and phosphate ions for osteoinduction is suggested in many studies. Phosphate ions are known to regulate osteoblast apoptosis, In Section Considering the excellent biological properties of ceramics, such as calcium phosphates, it is most likely that the first resorbable, osteoinductive and strong synthetic bone graft substitute will contain a large ceramic fraction. As a result, it is extremely important to control ceramic synthesis and understand what factors may affect its physical, chemical and biological properties. Surprisingly, there are still many ceramic-related aspects that remain fragmental or unknown as demonstrated by three examples. First, despite thousands of studies on calcium phosphate and calcium carbonate synthesis, there is to our knowledge not a single study describing how the raw materials of nacre or nacre-like structure can be produced. For that purpose, non-agglomerated platelets with a controlled shape (e.g. hexagon), size (typically Bone graft substitute research started four decades ago. Thousands of studies have been devoted to the search of THE ideal bone graft substitute, but efforts have failed so far: there is no material that is mechanically and biologically as good as human bone. As a result, the clinical indications of bone graft substitutes are still limited. The ideal bone graft substitute should be (i) resorbable, (ii) osteoinductive, and (iii) mechanically as strong as cortical bone. The present review of the literature in these three research fields reveals that there is a good understanding of the needs and routes to reach these goals. In other words, despite the complexity of the problem, one may hope to see the first resorbable, osteoinductive, and strong bone graft substitute soon. Looking at the present state of knowledge, it is highly likely that such a material will contain a large ceramic fraction, most likely a calcium phosphate. But since there are many aspects related to calcium phosphate synthesis and properties that are unknown, there is a great need for further research. This may include the synthesis of calcium phosphate single crystals with controlled shape, size and aspect ratio, or an improvement of our understanding of the link between calcium phosphate synthesis, properties and in vivo behaviour. The author would like to thank