The proliferation and hypertrophy of chondrocytes play important roles in endochondral ossification, which is tightly regulated during skeleton development. However, the regulation mechanism remains largely unknown. Here we show that DDB1 (Damaged DNA Binding Protein 1) has a critical function in the development of growth plates. Using chondrocyte-specific DDB1 knockout mice, we found that DDB1 deletion in chondrocytes results in dwarfism due to the aberrant skeleton development. The structure of growth plate in tibia becomes disordered at P21, not in femur. But at P70, the changes are severer in femur than tibia. Chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation are attenuated and asynchronous in both tibia and femur at P7 and P21. Furthermore, DDB1 deficiency induces p27 upregulation and subsequent cell cycle arrest in primary chondrocytes. Therefore, our data reveal that DDB1 is essential for the skeleton development by controlling chondrocyte proliferation and differentiation.Endochondral ossification is an essential process for skeleton development in vertebrates. This process begins with mesenchymal condensation, where the central cells subsequently differentiate into chondrocytes. These chondrocytes, also called chondrocytic progenitors, give rise to the formation of growth plates which are responsible for the elongation of the long bones. The growth plates consist of four subpopulations of chondrocytes: the resting, proliferating, prehypertrophic and hypertrophic chondrocytes. These cells are orderly arranged in certain regions and express distinct markers. The terminal differentiated hypertrophic chondrocytes undergo apoptosis, vascular invasion and mineralized bone replacement ( Cell cycle is tightly regulated by different factors including cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors (CKIs). p27Kip1 (p27), firstly identified as an inhibitor of cyclin-dependent kinase 2 (CDK2)/cyclin E complex ( Damaged DNA binding protein 1 (DDB1), a key component of E3 ubiquitin ligase complex containing Cullin 4A (Cul4A), is involved in UV-damaged DNA lesions recognition and subsequent nucleotide excision repair pathway ( To investigate the function of DDB1 in bone formation, we first examined the expression pattern of DDB1 in mouse tibia and femur growth plates by immunofluorescence. At postnatal day (P) 7, DDB1 protein was detected in the resting zone, proliferation zone and hypertrophic zone, and the expression level gradually increased from the resting zone to the hypertrophic zone ( We then examined the proximal tibia and femur of Since the column number of the proliferation zone was decreased in the mutant tibia at P21 but not at P7, we examined chondrocyte proliferation in tibia and femur at P7. A significant decrease of proliferating chondrocytes was detected in the mutant growth plate, especially in the proliferation zone, as revealed by Ki67 immunofluorescence staining (71.27 ​± ​23.24% vs 25.96 ​± ​10.15%), and there were no positive signals in the hypertrophic zone ( To determine whether decreased proliferation of chondrocytes in the mutant growth plates was simultaneously coupled with abnormal differentiation, Safranine O staining was used to exhibit the distribution of hypertrophic cells. In the mutant tibia at P7, we observed Safranine O positive signals in some cell clusters in the hypertrophic zone, indicating that these clusters have not truly become hypertrophic ( To further confirm the disrupted differentiation process, we evaluated whether the properties of type 10 collagen (Col10), the specific marker for prehypertrophic and hypertrophic cells, were altered. Immunohistochemistry results revealed the staining of Col10 in the mutant tibia and femur at P7 was weaker than control growth plates ( Moreover, we examined the expressions of Ihh and PTHrP, the two major regulators of chondrocyte differentiation, in mutant tibia and femur at P7, P21 and P70 ( In order to elucidate the molecular mechanism underlying the aberrant bone development, the primary chondrocytes were isolated for mass spectrometry analysis to identify differentially expressed proteins between wild-type and In the present study, our data reveals an essential role of DDB1 in endochondral ossification. By analyzing the chondrocyte-specific DDB1 functions as a key component of the CUL4-RING E3 ubiquitin ligases ( DDB1 regulates cell cycle progression by degrading p21 and p27 ( Among the upregulated proteins in  MicroCT imaging was performed using Quantum GX (PerkinElmer) according to the manufacturer’s instruction with mice after isoflurane anesthesia. The images of whole body skeleton and hindlimbs were captured. The knee joints were isolated from mice of different ages ranging from P7 to P70. After removing the skin and soft tissues, the knee joints were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature overnight and then decalcified in 0.5 ​M EDTA in PBS for different days (2 days, 3 days and 6 days for P7, P21 and P70 mice respectively). Paraffin sections (6 ​μm) were cut (RM2235, Leica). For immunofluorescence, the sections were de-paraffinized in xylene and graded alcohols, followed by antigen retrieval in 95 ​°C water bath for 25 ​min, permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 at 4 ​°C for 15 ​min, and blocked with 5% BSA at room temperature for 1 ​h. For TUNEL assay, added the TUNEL reaction mixture (Roche) and incubated at 37 ​°C for 1 ​h. Then the sections were incubated with the primary antibody at 4 ​°C overnight. The following primary antibodies were used: rabbit anti-DDB1 (Abcam, ab109027, 1:100) and rabbit anti-Ki67 (Abcam, ab15580, 1:300). The fluorescein-labelled secondary antibodies (Life Technologies, 1:300) with DAPI were applied for 1 ​h ​at room temperature. Images were obtained with an Olympus FV3000 Laser Scanning Microscope. And the proportion of positive cells was quantified by ImageJ software. For immunohistochemistry, the sections were subjected to endogenous peroxidase quenched by H Hematoxylin and Eosin (H&E) staining were performed as described ( Primary chondrocytes were isolated from knee joints of P3 mice. Briefly, dissected tissues with cartilage were digested in 0.1% collagenase I (Gibco)/DMEM (low glucose, Gibco) for 30 ​min to remove soft tissues and perichondrium, and then in 0.2% collagenase II (Gibco)/DMEM (low glucose, Gibco) for 3 ​h to disperse into single chondrocytes. The chondrocytes were subjected to western blotting with the following primary antibodies: rabbit anti-DDB1 (Abcam, ab109027, 1:50000); rabbit anti-p27 (Proteintech, 25614-1-AP, 1:1000); mouse anti-GAPDH (Abcam, ab8245, 1:3000). A total of 50 ​μg proteins were targeted for label-free mass spectrometry (Q Exactive, Thermo). Proteins with absolute log Total RNA from chondrocytes was extracted using TRIzol (Invitrogen). cDNA was prepared using Revertra Ace (Toyobo). qRT–PCR was performed in triplicates on a LightCycler 480 (Roche) with GAPDH as the reference gene. Data were analyzed according to the ΔCT method. The following primers were used: The freshly isolated chondrocytes were plated on 24-well plates (5000 ​cells/well) using DMEM (GlutaMAX, Gibco) with 10% FBS (Hyclone). The cells were digested, and cell number was counted everyday under microscopy. The freshly isolated chondrocytes were washed twice with pre-cooling PBS and then fixed in pre-cooling 70% ethyl alcohol overnight at 4 ​°C. After washing with pre-cooling PBS twice, the cells were resuspended gently using propidium staining solution (Beyotime) and then incubated at 37 ​°C for 30 ​min. The contents of stained DNA were tested by flow cytometry (CytoFlex LX, Beckman Coulter) and analyzed by Kaluza Analysis software. All experiments were carried out with at least three biological replicates. Results were presented as mean ​± ​s.d. Statistical differences were determined by Student’s LZ and YGC designed the experiments; LZ, PK, HL, GY performed the experiments; XW performed bioinformatic analysis; XY provided the The authors declare no competing financial interests. We thank Dr. Yong Cang for The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at