Separation and determination of lanthanides, Th and U is of great relevance in different fields of science and technology. Reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC) using α-hydroxy isobutyric acid (α-HIBA) as an eluent on reversed-phase column modified to cation exchanger has been reported to achieve the separation. However, under those conditions, Th and U are eluted amongst lanthanides, making their quantification difficult due to overlapping with some of the lanthanides peaks. In this work, different chromatographic parameters (concentrations of eluent and ion interaction reagent, pH, etc.) were studied systematically to arrive at optimum chromatographic conditions. Using the dual (concentration and pH) gradient conditions, lanthanides, Th and U could be separated in 11min by RP-HPLC with sequential elution of Th and U after the elution of all the lanthanides. The separation methodology was tested using SY-3 rock sample for the separation and determination of lanthanides, Th and U. The method allows an accurate determination of these elements in a single run using a single column. Also, the method is fast and cost-effective compared to the reported methods.Determination of lanthanides, Th and U is important from the point of view of their technological applications especially in metallurgy, ceramic and nuclear industry Concerning the measurement of lanthanides, Th and U, several analytical methods ranging from classical methods to modern instrumental analytical techniques are well documented This paper presents the details of the work carried out for optimization of chromatographic conditions to separate 14 lanthanides, Th and U in a single run. Under the optimized dual gradient conditions, lanthanides, Th and U are separated sequentially in 11 The HPLC set-up consisted of a L-7100 (Merck Hitachi) low-pressure quaternary gradient pump, a Rheodyne sampling valve (Model 7725i) with 100 Freshly deionised water (18.2 The oxides of lanthanides were dissolved in nitric acid and evaporated to near dryness, and stock solutions were prepared in 2% HNO All the experiments were conducted at room temperature (∼25 SY-3 rock sample (∼100 In dynamically modified reversed-phase HPLC, IIR ( The separation of lanthanides, Th and U has been reported on the dynamically modified reversed-phase column In natural samples of lanthanides, Th and U may be present along with transition elements. The use of Arsenazo(III), which is more specific for lanthanides, could detect the separated lanthanides selectively in presence of transition metal ions It was therefore necessary to search for the chromatographic conditions which can elute Th and U either before or after the separated lanthanides. Different chromatographic parameters such as IIR concentration, eluent concentration, and pH of eluent used in RP-HPLC were studied systematically using lanthanides (La and Lu), Th and U as discussed below. In absence of IIR, the α-HIBA complexes of lanthanides showed no interaction with the hydrophobic reversed-phase column and eluted together as a group at the solvent front The influence of the concentration of α-HIBA on retention of lanthanides, Th and U dynamically modified reversed-phase columns is shown in The effect of pH of mobile phase on retention of lanthanides, Th and U was also studied on modified reversed-phase column ( From the above studies, the pH of mobile phase was found to be a key parameter in the sequential separation of lanthanides, Th and U. It has been seen from The peaks of Th and U were improved by employing simultaneous gradient of decreasing pH of mobile phase along with the increasing concentration of α-HIBA. The use of a lower pH in the latter part of chromatographic run led to higher fraction of unionized α-HIBA which allowed faster elution of Th and U and also improved the peak shapes. Methanol can also be used for faster elution of Th and U from reversed-phase stationary phase as their α-HIBA complexes The optimized RP-HPLC separation methodology for lanthanides, Th and U was demonstrated using SY-3 rock sample. The rock sample was treated as discussed in With the optimized chromatographic methodology, we could separate and quantify lanthanides, Th and U by RP-HPLC on a single column and with a simple experimental set up in a single chromatographic run using dual (concentration and pH) gradient conditions. The dual gradient elution can be achieved using a single quaternary low-pressure gradient pump. The pH gradient used during the separation improved the chromatographic peak shapes of Th and U eluting after lanthanides. The method was tested using SY-3 geological reference sample for lanthanides, Th and U. This resulted in interference-free determination of lanthanides, Th and U with precision and accuracy of 6%. The authors are thankful to Dr. V. Venugopal, Head, Fuel Chemistry Division & Associate Director, Radio Chemistry & Isotope Group and to Shri. H. S. Kamath, Director, Radio Chemistry & Isotope Group, BARC for their constant support and encouragement. One of us (N.M.R.) is thankful to Department of Atomic Energy for providing Ph.D. Fellowship and facilities for carrying out the research work.