Survival and growth of postlarvae (PL) of Macrobrachium rosenbergii (De Man 1879) were investigated under different alkalinity (25 to 500mg·L−1 and total hardness (25 to 1000mg·L−1). 45days old PL feed with a rich protein diet (38%) comprising mussels, green beans and commercial shrimp pellets, where individually held in deionised water flow through systems with chemicals added according to the HMSO (1969) formula to make up the required calcium and carbonate concentrations. Increasing alkalinity reduced the growth rate and survival of PL of M. rosenbergii. An alkalinity concentration of 250mg·L−1 or above was lethal for PL of the species as total harness increased. Total hardness as high as 1000mg·L−1 however, did not have a significant effect in the growth rate or survival as long as the alkalinity was 100mg·L−1 or lower. Thus suggesting that water with high hardness and low alkalinity in different countries could be used for the production of the species.
               
                  Statement of relevance
                  Water suitability for the production of freshwater prawn
                  Calcareous exoskeleton in crustaceans provides protection and support, but also imposes severe limitations, since growth is only possible by moulting. Total hardness and alkalinity of the water are important considerations in the culture of Macrobrachium rosenbergii, since they represent the concentrations of cations (calcium-magnesium) and anions (carbonates), necessary for the mineralization of the exoskeleton. M. rosenbergii has a wide range of tolerance to most of the critical parameters in aquaculture. However, the optimum levels of combinations of both alkalinity and total hardness factors for the species are yet to be fully identified. Therefore, the chemical composition of the different water bodies, and their variations, demonstrate that site selection is of paramount importance for the culture of crustaceans, depending on their requirements for alkalinity and total hardness, and the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of environmental alkalinity and total hardness in the development of PL of M. rosenbergii, as well as to identify the maximum tolerance limits and the optimum range of levels of both factors, individually and as a synergistic effect for the prawns. It was found that alkalinity levels of 250mgL−1 as CaCO3 were lethal for the species and that PL of the species could grow and survive at total hardness levels of 1000mgL−1 as CaCO3 as long as the alkalinity was lower than 100mgL−1 as CaCO3.The calcareous exoskeleton in a decapod crustacean provides protection and support, but also imposes severe limitations, since growth is only possible by complete shedding and regeneration (moulting) of the exoskeleton. Total hardness and alkalinity of the water are important considerations in the culture of A quick change of the total hardness or alkalinity in the water can induce a premature moult in postlarvae (PL) of As calcium is in the form of carbonate in the exoskeleton, the alkalinity concentration of the external media is directly related to the mineralization process.   The aim of this study was to investigate the effects of environmental alkalinity and total hardness in the development of PL of The Animal (Scientific Procedures) Act of the UK was applied to the experimental animals used here. Postlarvae of There were nine flow-through water systems. Each system had a header tank and three white polypropylene containers. The water flow of the nine systems was controlled at the same time by a peristaltic pump, changing 100% of the water in the holding containers within 24 A total of 81 PL 45 Ammonia, dissolved oxygen, temperature, pH alkalinity, and total hardness, were monitored. The photoperiod was 12:12 The first week of each experimental time was used as an acclimatisation period, and the PL were weighed again afterwards. Feeding of the PL was done daily with a rich protein diet (38%) comprising human grade frozen and precooked mussels and green beans as well as commercial shrimp pellets. However, all the mesh pots were siphoned daily prior to feeding and the containers were changed every week. Changing the mesh pot containing the PL was done in the minimum time possible (3 to 5 After the two experiments previously described, a third experimental trial (extreme alkalinity levels up to 500 A General Linear Model was used to test for differences among the results of the treatments in all the experiments at a significance level of 0.05 in a SPSS program ( Water parameters for all the experiments are shown in The concentrations of alkalinity and total hardness were different for each experimental trial. Therefore, the pH varied as a consequence of the changes in the concentration of NaHCO It is shown in No significant differences ( Each group of PL used showed a different growth rate even when the PL were held in similar conditions in the control treatments. Therefore, a transformation into percentage of the control group was done to compare the differences among the PL ( There were no significant differences in the survival of the PL of the first experiment, regarding the alkalinity levels, nor total hardness or their combined effect ( Meanwhile, when the alkalinity was 50 Tropical waters where The differences in the growth rates between treatments intended as controls for each experiment were problematic; this is however a common problem when analysing growth rates of An important aspect to mention from On the other hand, The differences in the growth rate of the experimental PL of this study were not caused by the effect of the diet used, since the diet was a good balance of nutrients and the level of protein (minimum of 38%) was much higher than the ones suggested by some authors. For instance, Two important factors that affected the growth rate of the PL are environmental total hardness and alkalinity, where the later carried an unavoidable increase in the pH as it was increased: Low levels of calcium were not affecting the growth of  While there was a good survival at alkalinity 250 Prawn mortality can be due to ionic imbalance, high carbonates and low calcium for instance, instead of the high ionic concentrations. Survival of PL in the experiments of In the results of   Growth rate of PL of Survival of the PL of Water alkalinity is a crucial factor for Conrado González Vera is grateful to CONACYT for the scholarship/loan 88160, and to the Institute of Aquaculture of the University of Stirling as well as to Charlotte Wellon for all her help.