This section of the book is focused on technologies and approaches to beneficiate ash to improve its quality. This is done typically to meet national ash quality standards. The United States, Europe, China, India, Australia, Japan and Russia all have published standards for ash used in cement and concrete products. Although there are differences in methodology and proscribe limits, all the standards address several important quality criteria including: loss on ignition (LOI), caused by residual carbon from combustion; ash “fineness” a function of particle size; some measure of strength development expressed as “strength Index”; and typically, some measure of ash uniformity based on the consistency of important criteria as measured over a series of samples. Other criteria may also include limits on sulfate, calcium or moisture.
               A simple approach to improving quality, is selective collection, that is only collecting ash at certain times or from certain furnaces at power plants when the quality is highest. Another relatively simple approach is chemical passivation, i.e. the addition of a small amount of a chemical to dampen the effect of the carbon in the ash on air entraining agents added to concrete to improve its freeze resistance. More capital intensive approaches include air classification, primarily to improve fineness but for some ashes also LOI. Electrostatic separation has a long track record in reducing loss on ignition. Thermal beneficiation, the most capital intensive approach, reduces LOI without producing a reject stream and is capable of beneficiation very high LOI ashes. Interest in the recovery of ponded or landfilled ash creates the potential to use wet methods such as froth flotation to reduce particle size and hydraulic classification to reduce particle size or screening technology to improve both.This section of the book revolves around a review of technologies for the beneficiation of coal ash. Beneficiation transforms coal ash from a byproduct to a product. Changes in burner configurations and other environmental controls have impacted quality, and beneficiation is needed for many sources of ash just to meet the minimum national standards. Chapters written by technical experts on air classification, electrostatic separation, thermal beneficiation, and chemical passivation are offered. A chapter on the recovery of ponded and landfilled ash also includes the review of wet technologies, such as hydraulic classifiers, hydrocyclones, and screening. The primary reason for beneficiating fly ash is to improve its quality to meet or exceed national standards for use in concrete and mortar. To complicate matters, there are multiple national standards that differ significantly. These standards greatly affect the choice of beneficiation technology, thus a review of them is relevant. Perhaps the oldest standard for fly ash in concrete is the American Society for Testing and Materials ASTM C-618 ( Under ASTM guidelines, if the SiO The Canadian standard uses classifications based on CaO and defines a Class F, (< Perhaps the most common problem with fly ash is the high concentrations of carbon char, typically measured as loss on ignition (LOI). Carbon interferes with air entrainment in the concrete, which is important for freeze-thaw resistance. At higher levels, carbon also contributes to darkening the concrete, which is undesirable in many applications. LOI is primarily a function of the type of coal burned and the design and operation of the boiler. The use of activated carbon for mercury control exacerbates this problem due to the high air adsorption affinity of the activated carbon. The ASTM C618 limits the LOI to no more than 6%, but it does allow for higher levels in Class F ash with appropriate testing. However, in practice this limit may be lower as other organizations, such as state highway departments or national transportation authorities, which may require limits such as 3% or 4% As in the case of fineness, most other national standards have various levels of LOI associated with ash grades. For example, EN 450 lists three categories of LOI (A, B, and C) with maximums of 5%, 7%, and 9%, respectively. The Chinese standard includes values of 5%, 8%, and 15%, for Grades I, II, and III. The Canadian limits LOI at 8% for Class F and 6% for Class CL and CH, respectively. Fineness affects the reactivity of the ash. Finer fly ash particles are more reactive due to their larger surface area, improved particle packing, and flowability of the mortar or concrete. The ASTM criteria for fineness specifies that no more than 34% of the fly ash may be retained on a 325 mesh (i.e., 45 The consistency of the fly ash is important, as it is relatable to the quality and reliability of the product in the market place. For example, inconsistent properties create problems at the ready-mix plants with the application of air entrainment admixture dosages. Uniformity criteria are commonly ascribed in national standards. These range from the simple ASTM C 618 standard, which requires no more than 5% variation on fineness or density in 10 consecutive samples; to the complex EN 450, which sets criteria for a host of parameters with minimum frequency of sampling, with prescribed complex statistical methods to follow, and targets that must be met. Strength activity indexing is a measure of the effectiveness of the fly ash in concrete, although the test is typically performed on mortars primarily for the sake of simplicity. Some specifications for strength activity or strength index are present in most national standards. Typically, it is measured and reported as a ratio of the strength of a mortar mix with a prescribed level of ash substituted for Portland cement to that with a mortar mix with Portland cement only. It is also measured in some prescribed time period, typically 28 days. Unfortunately, due to the variations in test methodology, these data are not comparable among the various national standards. To illustrate: ASTM requires that a strength index of 75% be achieved as measured at 7 or 28 days. EN 450 prescribes an activity index of 75% be achieved at 28 days or 85% at 90 days. These requirements seem similar or at least comparable; however, this is not the case. ASTM uses a flow table to set the water in the tests; that is, the samples are prepared at constant flow, and the water variation is measured as water demand. EN 450 sets the test samples at constant water, and for Category S measures the flow separately to determine water demand. Fly ash has both a physical and chemical impact on concrete. Setting the tests to constant flow typically results in the reduction of water with a resultant gain in strength. Thus this test is emphasizing the physical or rheological properties of the mortar, which shows up quickly, hence the allowable measurement at 7 days. The European test, at constant water, is more of a measurement of the chemical activity of the fly ash, which generally is slower, hence the measurements at 28 days and 90 days. There are other test differences as well. ASTM specifies a standard mortar sand (ASTM C778) that has a narrow size range, while EN 450 uses a mortar sand with a broader size range (EN 196-1) ( There are several additional parameters that appear in the national standards for fly ash. These include: sulfate, phosphate, alkali, chloride, magnesium, free lime and reactive lime contents, set time criteria, soundness testing (expansion), and moisture. These are all important, but they show significant variations among the standards. These variations lend credence to recent proposals that a common international standard should be developed for fly ash ( All the ash beneficiation technologies reviewed in this section of the book are solid and credible solutions to solving or improving ash quality. These are discussed by experts who have worked with them over extended periods of time, so they reflect certain opinions and views that are associated with a long-term familiarity. There is no technical panacea or best choice, however. Each approach has advantages and may or may not be appropriate for any given ash. Choices need to be made based upon a specific ash composition, weighed against a backdrop of national standards, market size and area, and economics. The discussion of the technologies proceeds from the simplest to the more complex and includes a discussion of the authors’ opinions on the strengths and disadvantages of each. The least expensive method for ash beneficiation is enhanced quality control at the power plant; this is accomplished by monitoring the various ash streams for LOI and/or fineness and segregating the ash. The LOI in the ash is sometimes found to vary as a function of the load; that is, the lowest LOI produced during a constant load and higher LOI during periods of an increasing or decreasing load. Large power plants typically consist of 2–6 individual furnaces that may vary in age and design, resulting in variation in ash quality. By selectively collecting and segregating ash from selected units or electrostatic precipitator fields, a higher quality ash can sometimes be recovered for sale. Selective collection has been successfully employed at power plants in the United States, but may not be a widespread practice. Modifying operations at the plant can yield a substantial return for even the smallest investment, particularly if the infrastructure for selective collection and storage is already in place. As selective collection recovers only a fraction of the ash produced, it may be best suited for plants in small ash markets. Costs for this approach can vary widely, from a tens of thousands of dollars for the routine monitoring of ash quality to millions of dollars if separate ash handling equipment, silos, and load-out equipment must be added. Depending on plant operations, a selective collection may still leave a large percentage of the ash requiring disposal. The capital costs for installing equipment for selectively recovering ash can be high if new silos and collection systems are needed and integrated with other operations at the plant. Instituting operational changes to improve ash for sale are sometimes met with resistance, due to concerns that they may negatively affect the plant performance. Chemical passivation uses chemicals to reduce the activity of the carbon in the ash. This reduces the need to add large or variable amounts of air entraining agents to the concrete mix. Several passivation methods have been developed, and a few are commercially available from large concrete marketers. One approach has been to add low dosages of a “sacrificial chemical” to the ash, which will react with the active sites on the carbon, thereby neutralizing them. Another approach uses chemicals to encapsulate the carbon. Chemical passivation systems have been installed at many power plants in the United States. They are a cost-effective solution for marginal ash. This equipment is typically installed at the load-out silo, and the installation is inexpensive and quick. Operating costs are in the range of a few dollars per ton of ash for chemicals. This approach can improve a problematic ash and make it more acceptable in the market place. Some systems also indicate that chemical passivation can be used on activated carbon ( Early systems suffered from inconsistent distribution of chemicals on ash, which appear to have been largely corrected over time. This approach has a limited LOI range, as it does not directly reduce the LOI in the ash but rather lowers its activity. Thus an ash may still be out of spec for LOI content even after treatment. It also does not improve the physical uniformity of the ash. Air classification systems are installed at many power plants to control the fineness of the fly ash by rejecting coarse ash particles. It uses centrifugal force to selectively separate the coarser fractions of the ash from the finer fractions. This is a well-established technology with many equipment manufacturers. Fly ash is a mixture of coarser, lighter particles (carbon) and smaller, denser particles (glassy silicates), which have different separation profiles; thus air classification is not always effective for reducing LOI. Air classification is a very successful technology with a long history of ash improvement. Air classification equipment has relatively low capital costs, but installation costs can vary widely, and integration into the collection system can still run into the millions of dollars, but maintenance costs should be low. By improving the fineness of fly ash, this simple and relatively inexpensive technology can make a marginal ash into a high-performing pozzolan with greatly improved uniformity, marketability, and economic value. Air classification is not consistent or predictable for LOI reduction. If the carbon in the ash is very coarse, which is sometimes the case, some LOI reduction will occur. However, if the carbon is fine, it may increase LOI in the product. Air classification produces a coarse reject stream, which can be high in carbon with the potential for being recycled, but often must be landfilled. The first successful commercial application of electrostatic separation to fly ash was developed by Separation Technologies, Inc. (STI), now ST Equipment and Technologies (STET) in the 1990s ( The technology works by feeding ash from the raw ash silo through a vibrating screen to distribute the ash uniformly into a thin gap between two parallel plane electrodes. The particles are then swept up by a moving open-mesh belt and conveyed in opposite directions, depending on their charge. The moving belt is the key to this technology, as it continuously wipes off the plates as it moves, refreshing the attraction of the plates. The STET process has a long-proven track record of producing large quantities of consistent pozzolan from high LOI fly ash. It has a modest capital cost relative to thermal beneficiation. The unit is relatively small with modest installation requirements, and it is well suited for smaller power plants. Early versions of the technology were reported to require frequent belt changes, but maintenance issues appear to have been largely addressed. Once it is installed the process appears to be reliable and simple to operate. This technology is not targeted for fineness but may improve this parameter as well as particle size uniformity as well if the reject stream is coarse. Ash sources with significant quantities of very fine carbon may diminish yield and limit applicability. It produces a reject stream of 25% or more, typically requiring disposal. The process does little to improve the fineness of the noncarbon portion of the ash. Also, as is the case of all electrostatic technologies, the efficiency can be affected by humidity and the feed to the process must be dry. Thermal beneficiation is the use of combustion to reduce the level of carbon in the ash. Thermal beneficiation also eliminates ammonia issues and can improve fineness and uniformity. Successful thermal beneficiation technologies have been commercially deployed since 1999 ( The ability of thermal beneficiation to improve ash quality is truly impressive. It is a proven, highly flexible technology that can operate on a variety of ash types with a very wide range of carbon concentrations and sizes. It produces an ash that is low or even free of carbon. It also eliminates ammonia from fly ashes impacted by nitrous oxide controls or opacity treatments. The process may improve fineness by eliminating coarse carbon and liberating ash trapped within. Thermal beneficiation is a combustion process and may require additional air emission permitting. If not integrated into the power plant, it will also require its own emission control system. It is by far the most expensive of all the technologies considered. A facility can cost tens of millions of dollars, which suggests that it would be more attractive for larger power plants with access to large and stable markets. The construction of a thermal beneficiation facility may require significant plant modifications and systems integration; however, it does not specifically target ash fineness and uniformity. The recovery of ash from ponds and landfills has a history of application mostly in road base or structural fill. The beneficiation of these materials for application in the concrete and other added value applications has not been a common practice. The recovery of ash from ponds or landfills is inevitable based on two contravening forces. The first is the large number of coal power plant closings. This reduces the number of point sources of ash and increases transportation costs overall, affecting the economics of the market. Secondly, there is an increasing need for supplementary cementitious materials to reduce the carbon footprint of Portland cement-based concrete; this need will only increase in the future. Ponded and landfilled ash represents a processing challenge that is more like a natural resource recovery operation. The ponds have often operated for several decades, and the materials are highly variable; some contain bottom ash, coal mill rejects, and/or scrubber by-products that are codisposed with fly ash. Sedimentation also affects particle size distribution, and a careful and thorough assessment of the ash deposit is needed to determine the amount of ash that can be recovered and the level of beneficiation required. Applicable technologies for the recovery and processing of wet ash can readily be found in the mineral processing industries. In many respects the processing of wet ash is like sand and gravel or coal cleaning operations. The recovery of ponded ash will include ashrecovery, requiring a truck and shovel or dredge operation. Ash separation to improve the particle size distribution of the product, could include coarse screening, followed by a hydraulic classification of some verity and, if needed, froth flotation to reduce LOI. A product dewatering step is needed that might including product thickening and/or filtration and/or stacking and dewatering. Finally, thermal drying will allow for the conventional handling of the product. There are many potential advantages for recovering stored ash. These include: the advantage of operating “on demand,” thereby minimizing storage requirements and reducing capital costs; production from large known reserves that are in or near high-priced and underserved markets; the potential to produce highly beneficiated ash with superior performance at competitive costs; and finally, the potential to produce multiple products, including aggregates from a single source. There are also substantial disadvantages. As discussed, these deposits are heterogenous and will require substantial planning and resource assessment. Recovery systems must be designed, tailored to the deposit, and implemented. Products must be evaluated and tested. Finally, although there are plans in progress, no large recovery operation is currently in place, representing a substantial unknown for investors.