Indian high-ash coal contains α-silica components of the mineral matter. When coal is transported in the form of a slurry, α-silica adds to the settling properties of coal and enhances erosion of pipelines. As such any technique that will contribute to changing the characteristics of mineral matter by selective demineralization is bound to supplement the knowledge of coal slurries in the science of rheology. One such method is the use of a novel microwave technology, which changes the α-silica to less harmful β-silica. Thus microwave-treated coal slurry facilitates enhanced flow characteristics and abates the erosion problem in pipeline transport as well as in coal-slurry injection furnaces. This paper reports on the rheological study of closely sized coal particles of medium-volatile, low-ash, low-moisture cleans and high-ash rejects with and without microwave treatment. Viscosity of suspensions of microwave-treated coal was found to be less than that of untreated coal, in the case of both cleans and rejects. Microwave pretreatment thus reduces the viscosity and the pumping cost and opens a new outlook for pipeline transport. An attempt has been made to quantify the improvement of rheological characteristics due to microwave pretreatment.Transportation of coal in the form of a slurry through a pipeline is gaining importance. The slurry is transported over long distances of a few hundred kilometers, which creates severe problems such as settling of solids, wear of the conduit by erosion, and huge power requirements for the whole transport process. The present mode of transportation of solids in bulk quantities over a long distance cannot cope up with the future requirements. Microwave pretreatment seems to be very promising in this direction due to the multiple beneficial advantages that could be derived from it economically. Hence in this new mode of transportation of coal–water slurries, power requirements for pumping the slurries are one of the important factors. Therefore any attempt made in the direction of reduction of energy consumption in handling solid–liquid suspensions is of great importance. Microwave pretreatment of coal has been found to selectively heat the mineral matter based on differences in dielectric properties, thereby causing the pyrite to decompose magnetically susceptible pyrrhotite. Also, it resulted in weakening of the coal–mineral matrix, thereby altering the angularity and surface properties of the ground particles. The rheological behavior of solid–liquid suspensions has a great bearing on the power requirements for pumping of solid–liquid suspensions. This rheological properties of suspensions are very much influenced by the nature of the suspending medium, particle size, shape, surface characteristics, and size distribution. It is therefore quite logical to observe the effect of microwave treatment on the rheological properties of coal–water suspensions as they influence the particle shape and surface characteristics. Ergun and Bean Beeson The rheological behavior of suspensions depends on a large number of parameters. Literature survey reveals that work has been carried out mostly for stable suspensions with respect to fluidity handling, atomizability, etc., and some rheological models have been expressed in terms of solid concentration, particle size distribution, and shape of the particle by Thomas Toda Jeffery and Acrio Botsaris A detailed study of coal–water slurry rheology has been carried out by them using 20 coals of different origins having ash content 2.6–37.8% by weight. They have generalized the flow behavior into three categories based on carbon content of coal. Skolnik Mishra and Seversan Thomas Literature review reveals that the viscosity of a suspension depends on the nature of the solid particles, shape, particle size distribution, nature of suspending medium, solid concentration, additives, pressure, and temperature. The rheology of coal slurries has been studied mostly with low-ash coals. Since Indian coals are high in ash content and moreover the nature of low-ash coal is completely different from at of those found elsewhere, it is very much essential to measure rheological characteristics. In addition, after microwave treatment, the rheological behavior of pretreated coal should show different behavior from that of untreated coal. As microwave treatment causes possible changes in the mineral matter, it might change the surface properties of both coal and mineral matter. In addition, it weakens the coal–mineral matrix due to differences in dielectric constants that might alter the angularity after comminution. The development of pores both in the mineral matter and in the coal will result in the change in specific gravity. The transformation of the The potential application of microwaves to coal desulfurization was suggested by Wang and Yang Measurement of dielectric properties of coal and some of its significant sulfur compounds such as pyrite (FeS Therefore an attempt has been made in the direction of reduction of energy consumption in handling solid–liquid suspensions. A microwave pretreatment of coal has been found to selectively heat the mineral matter based on the difference in dielectric properties, thereby causing the pyrite to decompose into magnetically susceptible pyrrhotites. Also, it resulted in weakening of the coal–mineral matrix, thereby altering the angularities and surface properties of the ground particles. This investigation has been undertaken for both untreated and microwave-pretreated Indian coals, namely clean coal (18% ash) and reject coal (50% ash) from the Jamadoba washery (TISCO) in four sizes, namely 253, 182, 138, and 60 μm, corresponding to (−52, +72), (−72, +100), (−100, +120), and (−200) mesh (IS) fractions in water from 30 to 50% in weight. Hence an attempt has been made in this paper to investigate the flow behavior of microwave-pretreated coal and untreated coal–water slurries of different ash content with and without microwave treatment to see the effect of microwave treatment on the rheology of coal–water slurries.  The particle size selection for investigation of rheological studies mainly depends upon the viscometer used for the best interpretation. For the present investigation a Haake rotoviscometer was used for rheological studies, which can be used for particles 360 μm on finer. The particle sizes selected were −52, +72; −72, +100; −100, +120, and −120, +200 mesh size. The microwave oven used for microwave pretreatment of coal was a Microwin MX. Model 1100. The oven consists of a door handle (incorporating an automatic door lath mechanism), oven cooker window (to visualize the sample during treatment, but microwave-radiation-proof), stirrer fan cover (plastic shield to cover the stirrer fan, which operates whenever the oven is used and provides uniform distribution of microwave energy throughout the cavity), revolving tray (rotates during operation and ensures uniform distribution of microwaves), control panel (consists of several soft-touch programmable panels, through which any desired values of power consumption duration of heating, and start and stop operation are chosen, and oven cavity light. Nitrogen gas at a controlled flow rate was maintained within the oven as an inert atmosphere. During cooking in the microwave oven, hot air, steam, and vapors are generated within the oven cavity; to expelling these vapors and other gases during operation, and air vent was provided. The microwave oven used for coal pretreatment is a The coal samples of The viscometer (Haake Rotovisco) gives a direct plot of shear stress vs shear rate with a programmable panel. The viscometer consists of three main parts, namely, a programmable package with a printer, a viscometer body, bob, and cylinder, and a constant-temperature controlling device, which is shown in Proximate analysis of microwave-pretreated and untreated coals (both cleans and rejects) for four sizes is presented in The volatile matter and fixed carbon of microwave-treated coals are found to be more than those of untreated coals for both clean and rejects, which is quite obvious, as discussed earlier, due to partial removal of mineral matter. In order to see the effect of particle size distribution on viscosity, particle size distribution analysis has been done by a Malvern particle size analyzer using isobutyl alcohol as the dispersion medium. A typical particle size distribution of microwave-treated reject coal is shown in A comparison of the particle size distribution for untreated and microwave-treated coal of the same size fraction of 253 μm particles is shown in Densities of different coal particles for both microwave-treated and untreated coals are presented in It has been observed that the coal temperature increases with the duration of microwave treatment. The rise in temperature of reject coal for the same treatment period is greater than that of clean coal shown in   It is interesting to note that the viscosity of microwave-treated coals was lower than that of the untreated coals. The decrease in viscosity of microwave-treated coals might be due to the decrease in irregularity of the particles after grinding, as reported by Meikap  The effect of weight ratio on viscosity is shown in A typical log–log plot of shear stress vs shear rate is shown in The constant Microwave pretreatment of Indian reject coal (high-ash coal) and clean coal (low-ash coal) was investigated and compared to that of untreated coal samples. Experimental investigation shows that there is a strong effect of microwave pretreatment on the rheological behavior of coal–water suspensions. The effect of microwave treatment resulted in a decrease in apparent viscosity of the suspensions, which reduces the pumping cost of slurry transportation. The effect is greater in the case of high-ash coal. Microwave treatment thus reduces the viscosity and naturally increases the solid concentration for slurry handling at identical energy consumption. The authors thankfully acknowledge the reviewers of this paper for important comments and suggestions. The author also thank the Regional Research Laboratory, CSIR, Bhubaneswar, India for extending laboratory facilities to carry out part of the research.  constant for Hakke Rotovisco shear rate (1/s) average particle diameter (μm) constant in power law, consistency index constant in Eq. constant in Eq. constant for Hakke Rotovisco viscosity index rate of shear parameter (Pa) rate of shear rate (1/s) volume fraction of solid in suspension weight percentage of coal in slurry  one form of silica in mineral matter of coal, dimensionless another form of silica in mineral matter of coal, dimensionless viscosity (Pa s) slurry viscosity at infinite shear rate (Pa s) apparent viscosity (Pa s) viscosity of suspending medium (Pa s) slurry viscosity (Pa s) viscosity of suspension (Pa s) specific viscosity density (kg/m shear stress (Pa) yield stress