A new model for prediction of rock fragmentation by blasting is presented based upon the basic concepts of rock engineering systems (RES). The newly proposed approach involves 16 effective parameters on fragmentation by blasting with keeping simplicity as well. The data for 30 blasts, carried out at Sungun copper mine, western Iran, were used to predict fragmentation by the RES based model as well as Kuz–Ram and multiple regression modeling. To validate the new model, the fragmentations of nine production blasts were measured and the results obtained were compared with the predictions carried out by the RES, Kuz–Ram and multiple regression models. Coefficient of determination (R
                     2) and root mean square error (RMSE) were calculated for the models to compare the results obtained. For the RES, linear, polynomial, power, logarithmic, exponential and Kuz–Ram models, R
                     2 and RSME are equal to (0.65 and 14.51), (0.58 and 29.73), (0.54 and 21.58), (0.60 and 32.64), (0.61 and 23.80), (0.50 and 184.60) and (0.46 and 22.22) respectively. These indicate that the RES based model predictor with higher R
                     2 and less RMSE performs better than the other models.Rock fragmentation has been the concern of many research works because it is considered as the most important aspect of production blasting, since it affects on the costs of drilling, blasting and the efficiency of all the subsystems such as loading, hauling and crushing in mining operations Prediction of the rock fragmentation size is the first step toward optimization of blast design parameters to produce required fragment size Hjelmberg Some research works were carried out using artificial intelligence methods to predict rock fragmentation. Saavedra et al. The empirical and neural network models that are based upon the data surveying from different blasting operations, in a certain range of rock types, cannot be generalized for various ground conditions. Furthermore, all of above models do not simultaneously consider all the pertinent parameters in the modeling. Under such limitations or constraints, the prediction of rock fragmentation due to blasting needs the new innovative methods such as the RES based model, capable of accounting unlimited parameters in the model. The RES approach has been applied to a number of rock engineering fields, for examples, evaluation of stability of underground excavations The present paper introduces a new RES based model that can be applied to evaluate fragmentation risk (poor fragmentation) and then, predict rock fragmentation in bench blasting, considering all pertinent parameters. To validate the performance of the model proposed, it is applied to Sungun copper mine, Iran. Furthermore, the results obtained are compared with the results of Kuz–Ram model and also statistical modeling, which carry out for the same mine. Sungun copper mine, an open-pit mine, with a mineable reserve of 410 The geology of area consists of Sungun intrusive complex hosting the Sungun porphyry copper stock intruded along the Sungun anticline into cretaceous limestone, marls and shales. The main lithological units exposed in the Sungun pit are Sungun porphyry (SP), Dykes, Pyroclastics (PC), Trachybasalt (TB) and Skarn (SK) Based upon the rock mass characteristics in the Sungun copper mine, seven sectors were recognized (RS01–RS07), as shown in Based upon 39 blasts carried out at Sungun copper mine, a database was prepared for models development. Out of 39 blasts, 30 blasts were used for modeling development and nine blasts for evaluation of models performance. In this database, burden ( The image analysis technique was used to find muck pile distribution and the relevant The basic descriptive statistics of 39 blasts carried out at Sungun copper mine are summarized in The Kuz–Ram model, proposed by Cunningham The Kuznetsov The uniformity coefficient is calculated from an equation developed by Cunningham In reviewing the literatures published, addressing the parameters affecting on the muck pile fragment size At the first stage of analysis, hole inclination (INCL) was removed from analysis as it is constant for all blasts with standard deviation of zero ( A multiple linear regression analysis was carried out between B, A multicollinearity analysis was carried out to check whether two or more independent variables are highly correlated. In the case of occurring multicollinearity, redundancy of the independent variables could be expected, which can lead to erroneous results. One of the most common tools for finding the degree of multicollinearity is the variance inflation factor (VIF). It has a range of 1 to infinity. Generally, if the calculated VIF is greater than 10, there may be a problem with multicollinearity To reduce the effect of multicollinearity, a new regression model was defined by removing an independent variable from the model that is correlated with another independent variable. Between variables The regression statistics, model summary and analysis of variance (ANOVA) for Eq. Polynomial, power, exponential and logarithmic models with the same independent variables and For power model the relation with Furthermore, for logarithmic regression modeling, Finally, the exponential relation for regression modeling with The concept of rock engineering systems (RES), introduced by Hudson In the interaction matrix, the principal parameters affecting the system (for example, a fragmentation system) are located along the leading diagonal of the matrix and the effects of each individual parameter on any other parameter (interactions) are placed on the off-diagonal cells. The assigning values to off-diagonal cells are called coding the matrix. A problem having only two parameters is the simplest of interaction matrix, as revealed in Different procedures such as, the 0–1 binary, expert semi-quantitative (ESQ) In the interaction matrix, the sum of a row is called the “cause” value ( The principles of RES were used in the vulnerability index (VI) methodology concept, first introduced by Benardos and Kaliampakos (2004) to identify the vulnerable areas that may pose threat to the tunnel boring machine (TBM) tunneling operation In defining the new model, three main steps must be taken into account. The first step is to identify the parameters that are responsible for the occurrence of risk in case of fragmentation (poor fragmentation), analyze their behavior and evaluate the significance (weight) that each one has in the overall risk conditions (poor fragmentation). In this step, the RES principles can be used to assess the weighting of the parameters involved (within the rock mass system as a whole). In the second step, the vulnerability index can be determined, Based upon the vulnerability index estimated [Eq. In the third step, a relation between muck pile fragment size and vulnerability index can be determined. The higher value of VI refers to poor fragmentation and vice versa. Based upon this new relation, the muck pile fragment size for every blast can be obtained having VI for the corresponding blast. Parameters in The 16 principal parameters affecting on the muck pile fragment size are located along the leading diagonal of the matrix and the effects of each individual parameter on any other parameter (interactions) are placed on the off-diagonal cells. The assigning values to off-diagonal cells, coding the matrix, were carried out, using the ESQ coding method as proposed by Hudson  The rating of the parameter's values was carried out based upon their effect on the muck pile fragment size. Totally six classes of rating, from 0 to 5 were considered, where 0 denotes the worst case (most unfavorable condition (poor fragmentation)) and 5 the best (most favorable condition (good fragmentation)) In the case of rock fragmentation, the rating of each parameter is presented in The data related to 30 production blasts (out of 39 blasts), carried out at Sungun copper mine, were applied to determine the associated VI for each blast, using Eq. Variation in To evaluate the performance of the newly proposed model (RES model), Kuz–Ram and statistical models, nine blasts (out of 39 blasts) carried out at Sungun copper mine were used and the results obtained are shown in Two indices, coefficient of determination ( Furthermore, the predicted The RES based model presented in this paper, is an expert based model, which can deal with the inherent uncertainties in the geological systems. Also, it has the privilege of considering unlimited input parameters, which may affect on the system. Moreover, it has the merit of considering descriptive input parameters; for instance, initiation sequence and blast pattern, which are not applicable in statistical modeling. It is concluded that the RES based model with performance indices, The authors wish to thank the Sungun copper mine management for their appreciable cooperation and support, during carrying out this research work.