The aim of this study was to investigate stomatognathic performance after mandibulectomy. Twenty-six subjects were classified into two groups: the mandibular continuity (MC) group were reconstructed and kept in MC, while the mandibular non-continuity (MNC) group lost MC. Stomatognathic performance was evaluated using the Oral Health Impact Profile in Japanese (OHIP-J), a colour-changing chewing gum, a gummy jelly, Sato's questionnaire, electromyography (EMG) of the masticatory muscles, and mandibular movement. The OHIP-J and modified Sato's questionnaire revealed that the physical and eating disability of the MNC group was significantly more severe than that of the MC group (P
                     <0.05). The mean EMG activity of the anterior temporalis muscle in the relaxed state was significantly higher in the MNC group than in the MC group (P
                     <0.05). The mean masticating/relaxing ratio of EMG activities for the masseter muscle was lower in the MNC group than in the MC group (P
                     <0.05). The maximum mouth opening range of the MNC group was greater than that of the MC group (P
                     <0.05). Accordingly, the MC group had good results for physical and eating ability. The MNC group suffered from muscle fatigue but had the advantage of a greater maximum mouth opening range.Surgical resection of the mandible often results in various stomatognathic dysfunctions. In particular, when a segmental or hemi-mandibulectomy is performed, jaw movements, chewing functions, and dental articulation are compromised because the remaining mandible loses bilateral fulcrums of the temporomandibular joint and tends to rotate or deviate from a normal jaw position. Masticatory performance is one of the essential stomatognathic functions, and has been defined as a measure of food comminution in the glossary of prosthodontic terms of the academy of prosthodontics. Comminuted food particles are finally diluted and broken down by saliva, formed into a bolus, and swallowed. Before bolus formation, food particles are mixed with saliva and kneaded by the teeth, as well as by the tongue and cheeks. The ability to mix and knead a food bolus has been evaluated using chewing gum or paraffin wax. As a traditional questionnaire to evaluate masticatory performance in Japan, Sato's questionnaire has been used widely. Stomatognathic dysfunction influences oral health-related quality of life (OHRQoL). The Oral Health Impact Profile (OHIP) was developed in Australia as a measure of OHRQoL. The OHIP comprises 49 items grouped into seven subscales, namely, ‘functional limitation’ (9 items), ‘physical pain’ (9 items), ‘psychological discomfort’ (5 items), ‘physical disability’ (9 items), ‘psychological disability’ (6 items), ‘social disability’ (5 items), and ‘handicap’ (6 items). The original OHIP was written in English, but several versions have been developed in other languages, including one in Japanese. It has been demonstrated that OHRQoL in patients with oral cancer can be measured successfully using the OHIP. It is generally accepted that a segmental mandibulectomy or hemi-mandibulectomy reduces stomatognathic performance significantly, however it is uncertain whether mandibular continuity after bony reconstruction contributes absolutely to an improvement in stomatognathic function. A total of 26 patients attending Kobe University Hospital, who signed the consent document for this study, were recruited. The subjects underwent a mandibulectomy in the study hospital between January 1982 and May 2010. This study was approved by the medical ethics committee of the university (No. 1094, 2011). Fifteen of the subjects were male and 11 were female; their median age was 63.5 years, with a range of 11–89 years at the time of surgery. All of the patients had attended the hospital for the removal of a mandibular disease (1 benign, 25 malignant). The clinical characteristics of the patients are summarized in The subjects were classified into two groups based on the method of reconstruction. The mandibular continuity group patients were reconstructed using both hard and soft tissue (MC group); the mandibular non-continuity group patients were reconstructed using only a musculocutaneous flap (MNC group). In the MC group, nine cases were reconstructed using an osteocutaneous fibula flap, three cases were reconstructed using a combination of a reconstruction plate and a musculocutaneous flap, and one case was reconstructed using an osteocutaneous scapula flap. In the MNC group, seven cases were reconstructed with only a rectus abdominis flap, four cases were reconstructed with a pectoralis major musculocutaneous flap, one case was reconstructed with a latissimus dorsi musculocutaneous flap, and one case was reconstructed using a forearm flap. These reconstructive operations were performed simultaneously with the mandibulectomy. Therefore, no patient undergoing reconstruction with a musculocutaneous flap at the same time as the mandibulectomy underwent rebuilding with a reconstruction plate as a secondary operation. After surgery, radiation therapy was performed in three patients in the MC group and in seven patients in the MNC group. The following occlusal supports by natural teeth were used (Eichner's classification): in the MC group, B1 was used in six cases, B2 in four cases, B3 in two cases, and C2 in one case; in the MNC group, B1 was used in nine cases, B2 in one case, B4 in one case, and C3 in two cases. Finally, seven cases in the MC group and five cases in the MNC group required a removable denture. All of the data described below ( For each of the 49 OHIP questions, the subjects were asked how frequently they experienced the target condition. A rating scale was used for the responses: 0, never; 1, hardly ever; 2, occasionally; 3, fairly often; 4, very often. OHIP-49 is divided into seven categories, and the score range is 0–36 for ‘functional limitation’ (9 items), 0–36 for ‘physical pain’ (9 items), 0–20 for ‘psychological discomfort’ (5 items), 0–36 for ‘physical disability’ (9 items), 0–24 for ‘psychological disability’ (6 items), 0–20 for ‘social disability’ (5 items), 0–24 for ‘handicap’ (6 items), and finally 0–196 for the ‘overall OHIP score’ (49 items). With this model, the higher the score, the poorer the state of health. Masticatory Performance Evaluating gum XYLITOL (70 Masticatory function was also tested using a gummy jelly. This was performed in accordance with the method of Shiga et al. The questionnaire used was based on Sato's questionnaire of 100 foods, which are classified into five categories in accordance with their chewing index. Category 1 comprises the softest foods and category 5 the hardest. Four favourite foods were selected for each category. One point was then given for the food that the patient could eat in their usual manner, 0.5 points for a food eaten in an abnormal manner, and 0 points were given for food that the patient could not eat ( The Win Jaw System (Zebris Medical Systems) was used to record a surface electromyogram (EMG) and mandibular movements ( A surface EMG was recorded on the superficial masseter muscle and temporalis anterior muscle. After cleaning the skin with alcohol, the electrodes were placed in the middle belly portion of the muscle, parallel to the muscle fibre direction, at a distance of approximately 2 Mandibular movements were also recorded with the Win Jaw System. The measuring sensor (lower jaw sensor) was attached firmly to the labial surface of the lower anterior teeth, and the face-bow was placed on the nasion and fixed at the back of the head above the ears. The subjects were instructed to move the mandible along the sagittal, left lateral and right lateral border in a Posselt's figure, three times, and the maximum mouth opening range and the maximum distance traced out by the articulare were recorded. After that, the maximum envelope area, composed of the mandibular border movements in the sagittal or frontal view, was calculated. The statistical analysis was performed using IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, version 19.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). The Mann–Whitney The mean OHIP-49 score of the MC group was 47.4 with a range of 8–76, and that in the MNC group was 57.3 with a range of 18–130. With regard to the subscales, the mean score for functional limitation was 15.7 (range 3–25) in the MC group and 14.3 (range 4–33) in the MNC group, that for physical pain was 9.2 (range 0–20) in the MC group and 9.7 (range 2–23) in the MNC group, that for psychological discomfort was 4.9 (range 0–11) in the MC group and 7.8 (range 0–20) in the MNC group, that for physical disability was 7.5 (range 0–15) in the MC group and 13.8 (range 6–24) in the MNC group, that for psychological disability was 3.2 (range 0–10) in the MC group and 4.3 (range 0–17) in the MNC group, that for social disability was 2.8 (range 0–8) in the MC group and 2.9 (range 0–11) in the MNC group, and that for handicap was 4.2 (range 0–13) in the MC group and 4.6 (range 0–13) in the MNC group. There was a significant difference between the MC group and MNC group in the subscale of physical disability ( The mean score for the colour-changing gum in the MC group was 4.4 with a range of 2.5–5, and that in the MNC group was 4.3 with a range of 2.6–5; there was no significant difference between the MC group and MNC group for this test ( The mean score for the gummy jelly in the MC group was 78.9 with a range of 34–131, and that in the MNC group was 81.0 with a range of 30–118; there was no significant difference between the MC group and MNC group for this test ( The mean category 1 score was 0.9 (range 0.5–1) in the MC group and 0.9 (range 0.6–1) in the MNC group, category 2 was 0.8 (range 0.5–1) in the MC group and 0.5 (range 0–1) in the MNC group, category 3 was 0.7 (range 0.3–1) in the MC group and 0.3 (range 0–1) in the MNC group, category 4 was 0.5 (range 0.1–1) in the MC group and 0.2 (range 0–0.8) in the MNC group, and category 5 was 0.2 (range 0–0.5) in the MC group and 0.2 (range 0–0.9) in the MNC group. There were significant differences between the MC group and MNC group for categories 2, 3, and 4 ( The mean electrical potential of the surface EMG recorded on the temporalis anterior muscle in the relaxed state was 6.8 (range 3.3–15.6) in the MC group and 10.3 (range 5–21.1) in the MNC group, and in masticating was 39.1 (range 14.5–96.2) in the MC group and 51.8 (range 18–160.6) in the MNC group. The mean masticating/relaxing ratio of the temporalis anterior muscle was 6.9 (range 1.7–16.2) in the MC group and 5.0 (range 2.4–13.6) in the MNC group. There was a significant difference between the electric potential of the MC group and the MNC group in the relaxed state ( The mean maximum mouth opening extent was 28.8 Stomatognathic function is controlled by a complex neuromuscular system that operates the mandible, temporomandibular joints, tongue, circumoral musculature, masticatory muscles, etc. Surgical mandibular resection damages the stomatognathic function including mastication, and when combined with glossectomy causes chewing dysfunction as well as speaking disability. In the present study, the OHIP revealed no significant differences between the MC group and MNC group for the subcategories of ‘functional limitation’, ‘physical pain’, ‘psychological discomfort’, ‘psychological disability’, ‘social disability’, or ‘handicap’, however the ‘physical disability’ of the MNC group was significantly more severe than that of the MC group. Questions about physical disability showing statistical significance were, “Have people misunderstood some of your words because of problems with your teeth, mouth or dentures?” ( Endo reported that a very slight spontaneous discharge of the elevator muscles of the mandible in the rest position was found in normal subjects and in mandibulectomy subjects with bony reconstruction, whereas there was abnormally large spontaneous discharge in mandibulectomy cases without any bony reconstruction. Radiation therapy frequently causes various side effects. Radiation that affects the temporomandibular joint, the pterygoid muscles, or the masseter muscle, is most likely to result in trismus. Although there were more irradiated cases in the MNC group than in the MC group, the maximum mouth opening range of the MNC group was greater than that of the MC group. Since there were no patients in whom the mandibular condyle or the lateral pterygoid muscle was resected, it is thought that protrusive movement was not restricted in the MC group. Indeed, there was no significant difference between the MC group and the MNC group in the sliding distance of the articulare on the sagittal plane. On the other hand, cicatrization around the osteocutaneous fibula flap or the reconstruction plate should restrain hinge movement in the MC group. Urken et al. reported that there was no significant difference between the maximum mouth opening ranges of the MC group and the MNC group. In conclusion, reconstruction to build mandibular continuity produced good results in physical and eating ability after mandibulectomy, therefore reconstruction with an osteocutaneous flap is the first-choice procedure for mandibulectomy patients. On the other hand, the missing continuity of the mandible reconstructed with soft tissue alone caused muscle fatigue and a limitation in lateral mandibular movement. If a sufficient major flap was used for the reconstruction in mandibulectomy cases, missing mandibular continuity had the advantage of a greater maximum mouth opening range. However, the sample size of this study was small. Further studies are needed before any definite conclusions can be drawn. No source of funding for this research. No competing interests. This study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of Kobe University (No. 1094, 2011). Written patient consent was obtained to publish the clinical photographs.