Four different structurally modified sulphoxides in ionic liquid were chosen for the development of efficient method for the extraction of thorium from aqueous acidic waste solutions. Novel piperidinium ionic liquid based solvent systems were found to be more efficient than the conventional imidazolium based systems. The extraction of thorium was predominated by ‘cation exchange’ mechanism via [Th(NO3)·3SO]3+ species. The trend in extraction efficiency followed APSO>BMSO>DHSO>DISO. The phenyl substituted sulphoxides showed higher affinity for thorium due to a combination of steric as well as electronic factors. All the extraction processes were thermodynamically spontaneous without participation of NTf2
                     − ion in the extracted thorium complex. 0.05M oxalic acid was found to be suitable for almost quantitative stripping of thorium from loaded organic phase. APSO in ionic liquid was found to be radiolytically stable among the other four sulphoxides in ionic liquid.Due to the favorable properties like low vapour pressure, high liquidus range, large electrical potential window, high thermal and radiation stability, high degree of solubility for organic, inorganic and polymeric substance, room temperature ionic liquid was considered as potential ‘green’ alternatives to volatile organic compounds in various fields like synthesis ( In a country like India, where there is a shortage of sufficient amount of high quality uranium, the three stage nuclear power programme entirely depends on the effective utilization of vast thorium resources in the third stage ( The analysis was carried out using Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) with Capacitatively Coupled Device (CCD) as detector system. Operating conditions and instrumental specifications are summarized in Standard solutions for all the elements were prepared from CertiPUR® ICP standard solution of individual elements (E-Merck, Darmstadt, Germany) by proper dilution. Supra- pure HNO All the solvent extraction experiments were carried out using equal volumes of aqueous and ionic liquid phase. After 2 The subscripts ‘ For stripping studies, in the first step the extraction experiments were carried out at optimized experimental conditions to have Th-sulphoxide loaded ionic liquid phase. Then the loaded organic phase was separated and allowed to contact with fresh strippant solution. For radiolytic stability study, the organic phase was exposed to a 60Co gamma chamber GB5000, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, India having dose rate 2.5 The D where ‘aq’ and ‘IL’ referred as aqueous and ionic liquid phase respectively, SO is the sulphoxide ligand, n and m are the number of ligand and nitrate ion attached to the thorium cation during extraction, Im and Pi are the cationic part of the ionic liquid i.e. imidazolium cation and piperidinium cation, respectively. At higher feed acidity, H Due to higher extraction efficiency of Th For optimization of the separation process and to understand the complexation it is essential to know how many sulphoxide ligands are directly attached to the thorium in the extracted species. The extraction constants of Eq. If the experiments were carried out at a fixed acidity then nitrate ion concentration in the aqueous phase is constant. At a particular temperature, the partitioning of piperidinium ion between both ionic liquid phase and aqueous phase is also constant. So, the above equation can be modified as where Therefore, at a particular temperature and feed acidity, a plot of log D If ΔG is the change in the Gibb's free energy during the extraction of thorium into ionic liquid phase using the sulphoxide, then it can be quantitatively evaluated by the following equation ( Therefore, the above plot is useful for the evaluation of not only the metal-ligand stoichiometry but also the conditional extraction constants and Gibb's free energy change during the extraction. To understand the speciation it is required to know whether any nitrate ion is associated with the thorium ion in the extracted complex or not. If yes then the numbers of nitrate anion. In view of this attempt was made by varying D The plots of log The participation of NTf The D The major problem faced by ionic liquid based metal ion separation is the stripping of metal ion from ionic liquid phase. Due to very high D It is very important for a solvent system to be radiolytically stable while processing the radio toxic waste solution. The high energy alpha, beta particles or photon emerging out of radiotoxic isotopes present in the waste solution, deposit significant amount of energy to the organic phase used for its processing. As a consequence, the weakest bond in the ligands or in the diluents would break and lead to degradation in the performance of the solvent system ( Four sulphoxides based ligands in pieridinium based ionic liquids were investigated to the efficient extraction of thorium from aqueous acidic waste. The piperidinium based ionic liquid based solvent systems were found to be more efficient than that of conventional imidazolium based ionic liquid based solvent systems. The phenyl substituted sulphoxides were found to have higher extraction efficiency for thorium probably due to the highly resonance stabilized canonical forms were having very high electron density on the ligating oxygen atom. The extraction processes were found to proceed via ‘cation exchange’ mechanism. Three sulphoxide molecules and one nitrate ion were found to attach with the thorium ion in the extracted species. There was not participation of NTf The authors wish to acknowledge Dr. P.K·Pujari, Head, Radiochemistry Division and Dr. R.M.Kadam, head Actinide Spectroscopy Section, Radiochemistry Division.