Introduction
                  The purpose of this study was to assess 1-year outcomes of patients with displaced proximal humerus fractures who underwent treatment with locked plate fixation with rotator cuff suture augmentation.
               
                  Methods
                  A total of 86 patients who had sustained 2, 3 and 4-part displaced proximal humerus fractures underwent locked plate fixation with multiple sutures placed in the cuff tendons. Clinical outcome variables included active forward elevation (AFE), active external rotation (AER), and Constant and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) scores. Post-operative variables included the following complications: varus re-collapse, loss of fixation, osteonecrosis of the humeral head (AVN), screw cut out, hardware failure and infection.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-one patients were available with minimum of 1-year follow-up. Mean AFE was 142±17.0° and AER was 41±13.0°. The overall complication rate was 14.6%, with osteonecrosis being the most common (12.2%). Of the 21 patients (51.2%) that initially had varus displacement, all but one maintained anatomic reduction and fixation. Mean ASES score was 78.2±20.0 and average Constant score was 72.7±17.6. Bivariate analyses demonstrated that pre-operative medial comminution (p=0.297) or varus collapse (p=0.95) were not associated with an increased likelihood of sustaining a complication.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Follow-up of patients in this series demonstrated a low overall complication rate and excellent functional outcomes. We believe suture augmentation of the rotator cuff can counteract varus forces on proximal humerus fractures fixed with locked plates, and should be performed routinely in displaced 2, 3 and 4 part fractures.Proximal humerus fractures account for up to 4–5% of all fractures Locked plate fixation of comminuted 3-part and 4-part fractures has emerged as an established treatment modality, with increasingly encouraging results secondary to improvement in hardware and techniques The placement of tension band sutures within the rotator cuff has been recommended to counter the traction forces on the tuberosities, and has been shown to augment tuberosity reduction and improve overall fracture fixation The purpose of the present study is to retrospectively assess the outcomes of patients who underwent locked plate fixation with rotator cuff suture augmentation for proximal humerus fractures, with particular attention to the technique’s influence on preventing varus re-collapse or fixation failure in the presence of medial comminution. We also expected to observe a correlation between the complication rate and the presence of either medial comminution or initial varus fracture angulation. After obtaining approval from our institution’s Institutional Review Board, eighty-six consecutive patients with 2, 3 and 4-part displaced proximal humerus fractures who underwent locked plate fixation between September 2006 and April 2013 were identified. Forty-five patients were lost to follow up because of death, relocation or refusal to be included in the study. 41 patients remained with at least 1-year follow-up, and a mean follow-up period of 25.1 Patients were excluded from the study if they were less than 18 years old, sustained polytrauma, had an open or pathologic fracture, underwent fracture management by means other than locked plating (i.e. percutaneous pinning or arthroplasty), or had follow-up of less than one year. All patients were treated by a by a single fellowship trained orthopaedic surgeon at our institution (B.O.P.) Preoperatively, standard four-view shoulder radiographs were obtained for all patients, with known critical variables having received particular attention ( The medical records of all patients were reviewed by one of two authors. Fracture characterization was determined independently by two authors to ensure accuracy. All operative reports were reviewed for confirmation of specific details, including the performance of a biceps tenodesis and suture augmentation of the rotator cuff in all patients. The operative surgeon never used a structural allograft, nor did he ever use any bone void filler. Clinical outcome variables were assessed at minimum regular follow-up intervals of 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and one year, with some patients having followed up later than one year (range: 6 weeks–5 years). These included active forward elevation (AFE), active external rotation (AER), and presence of radiographic healing. At the final follow up visit of each patient, which was one year or longer, the physical examination and recording of AFE and AER were always performed by an author other than the operative surgeon (B.O.P.). Constant and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) scores were collected in addition to routine clinical variables. At each follow-up visit, physical examination was performed and standard 4-view shoulder radiographs were obtained to determine whether routine healing was occurring, or whether any complications had occurred. The complications of interest included varus re-collapse (in those patients with an initial varus fracture pattern), loss of fixation or hardware failure, intra-articular screw penetration, osteonecrosis of the humeral head, post-traumatic arthritis and infection. Varus re-collapse was defined as a neck-shaft angle <120° as measured on an anteroposterior (AP) radiograph with 20° of external rotation. Analysis of pre-operative patient characteristics to assess for association with occurrence of a complication was completed using Fisher’s exact test for categorical variables or independent Open reduction and internal fixation was performed using proximal humeral locking plates in all patients. The implants included one Hand Innovations plate (Hand Innovations,/DePuy, Warsaw, IN), two Synthes plates (Synthes, West Chester, PA), eleven Stryker plates (Stryker, Kalamazoo, MI), and twenty-seven Arthrex plates (Arthrex, Naples, FL). The patient was placed in the beach chair position, and the injured extremity was secured into a Spider arm positioner (Smith & Nephew, Memphis, TN). A standard deltopectoral approach was used in all cases. The subdeltoid, subcoracoid and subacromial recesses were cleared of adhesive tissue, facilitating appropriate retractor placement. An arthrotomy was routinely performed at the rotator interval, which allowed palpation of the glenohumeral articulation, facilitating tendon and fragment mobilization, and would allow for direct palpation of the humeral head’s articular surface to ensure that no articular penetration had occurred after hardware placement. The biceps tendon was always tenodesed to the superior portion of the pectoralis major tendon. To facilitate fragment reduction, and ultimately to confer important additional stability to the fixation contstruct, a minimum of five #2 Fiberwire (Arthrex, Naples, FL) sutures were placed in even distribution within the tendinous insertions of the supraspinatus, infraspinatus and subscapularis ( The patient cohort had an average age of 64 Multiple subgroup analyses were performed as well. There were no differences in Constant scores, ASES scores, or range of motion between those patients less than 65 years of age versus those over 65 years. Additionally, there were no differences in complication rates between the two age sub-groups. Statistical analyses of those with valgus impacted fractures demonstrated no difference as compared to the varus fractures in any parameter except for forward elevation and at only one time point. At 6 weeks post-operatively, the patients with valgus impacted fractures had an average of 14° greater forward elevation (p Complications occurred in 6/41 patients ( One patient with a severely displaced initial 4-part fracture, in which the articular surface had dislocated into the axilla, experienced some settling of the humeral head, osteonecrosis, late hardware penetration, and subsequently underwent removal of the offending locking screws. The five remaining complications, though also related to humeral head osteonecrosis, did not necessitate any additional procedures. None of those five patients have elected to undergo an additional procedure, as of yet. The incidence of osteonecrosis was not statistically different amongst those patients <65 years of age versus those >65 years. None of the patients in this study suffered from symptomatic impingement necessitating an additional procedure, nerve injury, nonunion, hardware failure or infection. This study demonstrated that locked plate fixation of proximal humerus fractures combined with tension-band suture augmentation of the rotator cuff is an effective method of minimizing failure, particularly in cases of initial varus displacement or with medial comminution. Only one of the twenty-one patients with initial varus displacement and 3 of the 13 patients with medial comminution experienced complications. We did not find that the presence of initial varus displacement nor medial comminution was associated with an increased risk of complication occurrence. We believe that placement of sutures in the rotator cuff for tuberosity control and force counterbalancing was critical to the favorable outcomes and low complication rate that we observed. The tension-band effect enhanced early stability and allowed for early range of motion. As a result of this, post-operative arthrofibrosis was not observed as a significant complication within our cohort. The potential benefit of rotator cuff sutures has been discussed by several authors Another aspect of the operative technique that we believe was critical to success was placement of a supportive calcar screw. Though the importance of the inferomedial calcar support We also observed a relatively low overall complication rate compared to those that have been reported in the literature, which range from 14% to 66%, inclusive of humeral head osteonecrosis The reported rates of intra-articular screw penetration range from 5% to 23% Humeral head osteonecrosis occurred in 5/41 patients, and accounted for the majority (5/6) of total complications. This rate is comparable to those currently reported, which range from 2% to 35% Of the 41 patients in our cohort, 21 had an initial varus fracture pattern. Varus re-collapse occurred in only one of the 21 patients. Our fixation contstruct was able to prevent varus re-collapse in 20 of the 21 cases with initial varus angulation, without the use of an intramedullary support such as an allograft. We attribute this biomechanical stability to the sutures placed in the rotator cuff and secured to the plate. As demonstrated by Aguledo et al. These data meaningfully contribute to the expanding body of literature in support of internal fixation of certain proximal humerus fractures. Our low complication rate can be partially attributed to the awareness of their potential to occur, which was possible because of similar such existing literature on this topic. Furthermore, this study demonstrated that favorable outcomes can be achieved in elderly patients managed with fixation. The success of arthroplasty for proximal humerus fractures in the elderly has been established Additional research in this area is necessary, particularly as it relates to the biomechanics of plate and screw fixation strength as well as rotator cuff suture technique. Clinical study is underway at our institution to investigate additional factors that might be predictive of humeral head osteonecrosis, as it relates to fracture characteristics (i.e. direction and degree of displacement), and further refine work that has been published in this area. One limitation of the present study might be considered the average follow-up. However, our data suggest that the outcomes of proximal humerus fractures managed with locked plate fixation tend to stabilize over time, which is consistent with the literature In appropriately selected cases, locked plate fixation with tension-band suturing of the rotator cuff can result in favorable outcomes, and prevent fixation failure in those cases of initial fracture varus angulation or with medial comminution. Dr. Bradford O. Parsons (Arthrex and Zimmer) has a financial or proprietary interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript, including (but not limited to) employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, and paid expert testimony. None of the other authors have a financial or proprietary interest in the subject matter or materials discussed in the manuscript, including (but not limited to) employment, consultancies, stock ownership, honoraria, and paid expert testimony. This study was not supported by any outside funding or grants. This study was conducted at the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, study # 12–1039. No outside funding was used for this study.