Arsenic-contaminated sulfuric acid solutions are produced in large quantities as by-product during pyrometallurgical processing of sulfide minerals. Options for re-using such acid solutions are increased if the arsenic is removed and recovered as a product. The performances of tributyl phosphate and a mixture of 6 wt-% 1,2-octanediol in 2-ethylhexanol were studied in liquid-liquid extraction of arsenic from an industrial solution containing 10.4 M H2SO4. It was found that, due to the complex phase equilibria, a process design based on conventional batch equilibrium data did not describe the countercurrent processes accurately. A countercurrent flowsheet utilizing undiluted tributyl phosphate was investigated by pseudo-countercurrent extractions. 83.7% extraction of arsenic and 31.4% coextraction of H2SO4 was obtained in three-stage countercurrent extraction operated at a solvent-to-feed ratio of 0.79. Two-stage countercurrent scrubbing with pure water at O/A = 4.03 back-extracted 83.6% of H2SO4 and 24.9% of arsenic. 100% and 89.7% back-extraction was achieved in four-stage stripping at O/A = 2.01 for H2SO4 and arsenic, respectively. The effects of varying the flowsheet and operating parameters on separation efficiency are discussed.Utilization of sulfide minerals in the metals refining industry produces by-product H Partial replacement of the electrolyte with fresh sulfuric acid solution can alleviate the problems caused by impurities. The electrolyte bleed is then directed to separation processes where the impurities or by-products can be treated and recovered. Copper electrolyte bleeds contain significant amounts of nickel, which can be removed by evaporative crystallization to produce crude nickel sulfate. Evaporation concentrates both H Flue gases from copper smelters contain volatilized arsenic. During gas cleaning, the arsenic ends up in electrostatic precipitator (ESP) dust and also into the H Arsenic was recently listed in the ‘Final List of Critical Minerals 2018’ by the US Department of the Interior (DOI) The applicability of liquid-liquid extraction (LLE) for removal of arsenic from H In previous research, most authors have focused on extracting arsenic from non-concentrated copper electrolyte bleeds ( Precise mechanisms and stoichiometry of solvation in extraction of arsenic are not very well known. Travkin et al. ( It is generally agreed that increasing H To the best of our knowledge, results on extraction of arsenic from extremely concentrated ( In this work, the separation of arsenic and H Two shipments of 10.4 M H 97% tributyl phosphate (TBP) ( Dilution of TBP, DBBP and Cyanex 923 in Exxsol D80 resulted in third phase formation when extraction from 10.4 M H Total concentration of arsenic and metal concentrations were measured from aqueous samples using ICP-MS (Agilent 7900). Samples from the organic phases were back-extracted with pure water at A/O = 30, and concentrations in the back-extraction raffinates were measured to obtain the organic phase equilibrium concentrations. As(III) concentrations in the feed solution were analyzed in an external accredited laboratory. H All extraction experiments were performed in glass separation funnels at 21 ± 1 °C. Phases were mixed by using an orbital shaker. Equilibration time of 20 min and shaking rate of 300 min Separation of arsenic and sulfuric acid in countercurrent liquid-liquid extraction cascades was experimentally studied by batch extractions according to a pseudo-countercurrent (pseudo-cc) scheme ( Speciation calculations ( 97 vol-% TBP and the mixture of 6 wt-% 1,2-octanediol in 2-ethylhexanol behaved quite similarly in extraction ( Mass balance calculations showed a 1:2:1 ratio of H Arsenic was more selectively extracted by TBP at O/A between 0.1 and 1, whereas at O/A ratios 2 and 3.5 the alcohol mixture was more selective to arsenic.  Change in phase ratio, Δ(O/A), with alcohol mixture at initial O/A ratios between 0.1 and 1.5 is slightly more extensive than Δ(O/A) for TBP ( The feed acid became completely miscible with TBP at initial O/A = 6.5. With complete or near-complete uptake of feed acid into the organic phase there would be little or no raffinate stream coming from the extraction stages. Therefore, O/A ratios above 4 were not tested with the alcohol mixture after miscibility observations with TBP. In general, phase behavior at room temperature favors the use of TBP. Samples from backextraction analyses (A/O = 30) of the alcohol mixture had to be centrifuged, since the backextracted samples were still hazy four days after shaking. In the case of TBP, backextracted organic samples were separated by gravity and no centrifugation was required. Baradel et al. ( McCabe–Thiele interpolation with linear operating lines has been used by several authors ( Three stages with O/A = 0.8 (higher Concentration profiles for arsenic and H Simplified McCabe–Thiele analysis suggests that five stages are required to extract 83.7% of the arsenic at O/A = 0.79 ( Separation of arsenic and H Theoretically it would be favorable to increase O/A ratio stage by stage in H Organic phases were prepared for the batch scrubbing experiments by loading both extractants with the feed solution from Shipment #1 at O/A = 0.1. Water scrubbing of loaded TBP exhibited very similar behavior to that reported by Navarro & Alguacil ( Another issue with using the mixture of 1,2-octanediol in 2-ethylhexanol is the reactivity of the alcohols. Etherification of 2-ethylhexanol is likely to occur, especially at slightly elevated temperatures ( In scrubbing of the loaded TBP, O/A ratios decreased as expected, due to back-extraction of H As the literature ( TBP was loaded for the pseudo-cc scrubbing and stripping experiments by contacting it with the feed acid from Shipment #2 at O/A = 0.1. TBP prepared in this way contained initially 35.3 g dm The organic phase for the stripping experiments was prepared by scrubbing loaded TBP twice with an aliquot of pure water equivalent to O/A = 4 in single contact. TBP produced by this method contained 25 g dm Results from pseudo-cc back-extraction experiments are summarized in Two-stage stripping with pure water is enough to back-extract arsenic almost completely (98.6%) at O/A = 0.5. The resulting stripping raffinate at O/A = 0.5 contained 11.7 g dm Stripping efficiency and phase separation could be further improved by increasing temperature. Travkin et al. ( Concentration of arsenic peaked 29 g dm Two-dimensional graphical constructions ( No established model describes the chemical equilibria of the system, and thus rigorous mass balance iterations are currently impossible. Furthermore, McCabe–Thiele and Hunter–Nash diagrams or mass balance iterations as such provide only theoretical prediction and can only serve as tools to give initial estimates for piloting studies. Pseudo-cc extraction provides information also about the practical feasibility of a process, and the equilibrium compositions of the streams can be experimentally verified. Drawbacks of the pseudo-cc method are that completing the schemes requires a lot of manual labor and recycle streams are hard to embed in the design by pseudo-cc method. The number of extractions increases rapidly when the number of countercurrent stages increases and the schemes must be replicated in order to carry out sensitivity analyses for process parameters. Despite these weaknesses it is a cost-effective intermediate design method for continuous processes involving hazardous materials or processes that require instrumentation with expensive materials. Pseudo-cc experiments showed that with certain adjustments and considerations, a similar flowsheet to the one patented by De Schepper & Van Peteghem ( Increasing O/A in extraction would provide higher The solvent extraction circuit discussed here aims at bulk recovery of arsenic. Raffinates of the process are classified as hazardous waste not only because of the arsenic but also because of other heavy metals ( TBP extracts arsenic and H Liquid-liquid extraction of arsenic and H McCabe–Thiele analyses were shown to be inaccurate in design of liquid-liquid extraction cascades for the system at hand. The Hunter–Nash method could predict H A conventional solvent extraction flowsheet utilizing TBP can also be used for very concentrated H Russian-English translations given by Mr. Fedor Vasilyev and experimental assistance provided by Mr. Tommi Huhtanen are gratefully acknowledged. This work was supported by