Hydrocyclones are state of the art technology for treating produced water offshore. In the acceleration field inside the hydrocyclone oil migrates to the cyclone centre as water is forced to the wall. Separation is depending on the characteristic two-fold vortex flow structure featuring hydrocyclones. Deoiling hydrocyclones do not always meet water quality requirements, however. This paper, describes experimental investigations and hydrocyclone efficiency during transient flow rates. A laboratory test rig exposed a hydrocyclone to severe transient flow rates. Efficiency disturbances may be detected by increased oil-in-underflow, which again is associated with vortex disturbances and plausible vortex breakdown. Experiments led to no such dramatic disturbances. However, separation effects traceable to a limited influence on the flow split were realized. This investigation emphasizes the importance of adequate hydrocyclone operational control. Based on experimental results it is concluded that hydrocyclone efficiency is unaffected by transient flow rates provided the hydrocyclone performance criteria are fulfilled.Produced water is water co-produced with oil and gas from hydrocarbon reservoirs. Well streams exceeding 90% water are not uncommon from older fields ( The objective of this paper is to describe the performance of a deoiling hydrocyclone during variable flow rates. The importance of having adequate operational control in fulfilling hydrocyclones performance criteria is emphasized. Fluid under pressure is administrated as a tangential inlet to a cyclonic body shown in The flow mechanisms in hydrocyclones are relatively complicated ( Hydrocyclone performance depends on appropriate hydrocyclone design, flow rate and flow split. A sufficient flow rate, or quantity of energy, is necessary for obtaining a strong gravity field in a hydrocyclone. Likewise, an adequate flow split is needed to effectuate the separation. A classic definition of separation efficiency is In order to effectuate oil–water separation and maintain the internal flow structure of a hydrocyclone, a flow split is imposed ( A typical flow split – efficiency relationship is illustrated in Deoiling hydrocyclones are integrated in a dynamic operation where produced water rates may vary. A dynamic control system must therefore continuously include flow rate control as well as flow split control. The flow rate must be kept between In a typical deoiling application the primary objective of flow rate control is to maintain a preset water level in an upstream separator. A secondary objective is to maintain flow rates at the efficiency plateau ( The objective of the flow split control is to maintain an adequate flow split large enough to ensure optimal hydrocyclone efficiency ( A typical control scheme for deoiling hydrocyclones is presented in The purpose of the controller PDC01 ( A test rig was built where oil and water were pumped, mixed and sent through a hydrocyclone. In the test rig the performance of the hydrocyclone was studied as it was exposed to static and transient flow rates.  Pressure transmitters, PT01, PT02 and PT03, were installed at the hydrocyclone inlet and outlets. Samples for oil-in-water analysis were taken from the respective pipe outlets in the drain tank while samples for droplet size analysis were taken upstream the hydrocyclone inlet. The hydrocyclone used in the experiments had a diameter To operate the hydrocyclone pictured in the test rig ( Crude oil was used during all tests. The density of this oil is 0.871 Oil-in-water concentrations were measured in the hydrocyclone inlet and underflow, respectively. Samples were collected in bottles directly from the pipe-outlets in the drain tank ( Droplet size samples were collected at the hydrocyclone inlet ( Initially, the performance of the hydrocyclone in the test rig was determined under static flow rate conditions. Subsequently, through three experimental test series the hydrocyclone was exposed to linearly increasing, linearly decreasing and alternating (sinusoidal) flow rates as illustrated in the left diagram in The flow rate range used during experiments in the test rig was from 350 The inlet pressure to the hydrocyclone was kept constant at 4.5 Through the transient flow rate experiments the hydrocyclone inlet oil-in-water concentration was kept constant at 1650 The hydrocyclone used in the experiments was a custom-made model. The objective of the first experiments was to define the operational range of this hydrocyclone when tested under static flow rate conditions. Unfortunately, due to pump size and piping diameter the maximum flow rate was limited to 720 At a fixed flow rate of 500 The relationship between PDR and flow split was also developed at 500 l/h and is described in the right diagram in During each of 12 runs the flow rate was in this experiment increased from 600 The most important process variables were logged before, during and after each experimental run. The right diagram in In this experiment hydrocyclone performance was studied as flow rates were linearly decreased from 680 In this experiment the hydrocyclone was exposed to alternating (sinusoidal) flow rate variations. During 12 runs of increasing duration, the flow rate was altered between 540 Process variables were as before logged for each run. The right diagram of As demonstrated in As PDR in If d As the flow rate decreases, d According to the left diagram in During sinusoidal flow rate variations, the flow rate was both increased and reduced during a period. The previous increasing and decreasing flow rate experiments have demonstrated how negative and positive PDR deviations correspond to flow rate variations. The PDR – efficiency curve in  The mean hydraulic residence times in the hydrocyclone were between 1 A conventional hydrocyclone working above 90% separation efficiency and with a flow split of 2–3% might be more sensitive to transient flow rates than what was found for the hydrocyclone in the test rig. In addition, a conventional hydrocyclone would normally be operated at a PDR closer to the efficiency breakdown point ( Through these experiments it has been demonstrated that the effect on hydrocyclone efficiency from variable flow rates could be correlated to PDR deviations and hence control system response time. Beforehand, however, the possibility that transient flow rates may cause serious disturbances to the vortex structure ( The experiences from exposing a deoiling hydrocyclone to transient flow rates include: Increasing flow rates reduce PDR. A PDR – efficiency curve will determine how affected hydrocyclone efficiency is by a given PDR reduction. If the reduction is too large, hydrocyclone efficiency drops off. Reducing flow rates increase PDR. An increase in PDR increases the flow split and may marginally increase hydrocyclone efficiency. The magnitude of PDR deviations during transient flow rates depends on the capability of the hydrocyclone control system. Through the experiments it is demonstrated how a responsive control system maintains PDR and hence avoids dramatic efficiency drops during transient flow rates. On the basis of the results it can be concluded that maintaining hydrocyclone efficiency during varying flow rates means maintaining hydrocyclone performance criteria. Accordingly, hydrocyclone efficiency is maintained during transient flow rates if PDR is maintained, provided the hydrocyclone is operated on its efficiency plateau. Before generalizing this conclusion, however, investigations should continue on hydrocyclones operating at higher efficiencies (above 90%). None of the experiments indicates that transient flow rates were destructive for the essential vortex structure in a deoiling hydrocyclone. A destruction of the vortex system would have been critical for hydrocyclone efficiency. Through this work it is emphasized that insufficient hydrocyclone efficiency may be a consequence of an inadequate control system not being able to fulfil the hydrocyclones performance criteria. In full-scale hydrocyclone optimisation programs, therefore, the hydrocyclones’ operational control should be verified. Trygve Husveg thanks Total EP Norge AS for financing the Ph.D. and for the permission to publish this paper. Furthermore, thanks go to co-workers and laboratory personnel at Total’s CSTJF in Pau, France.