The bioactive glass (BG) system of 60SiO2–4P2O5–31CaO-xSrO-(5-x) ZnO (0 ≤ x ≤ 5 %mol) was synthesized by sol-gel route. The role of zinc contents and strontium on the in-vitro formation of hydroxyapatite (HA), antibacterial properties, and cell viability of BGs were investigated. XRD (X-ray diffraction analysis), SEM (Scanning electron microscopy) and FTIR (Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy) were utilized to study the HA morphology, its functional groups and obtained phases, respectively. The results established the formation of HA on the surface of strontium and zinc-containing BGs. The 3-(4,5 dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay after one day immersion in SBF, implied that the viability of samples containing 4 %mol Sr and 1 %mol Zn (S4-Z1) and 3 %mol Sr and 2 %mol Zn (S3-Z2) increases by increasing immersion time, while the sample containing 1 %mol Sr and 4 %mol Zn (S1-Z4) showed a statistically significant increase in osteoblast G292 proliferation. Furthermore, the antibacterial tests showed that all Zn containing BGs created clear inhabitation zones. The zone of clearance around the bioactive glasses demonstrated that sufficient Zn ion was released to create an antibacterial activity around the bioactive glasses.A large number of investigations have been conducted on bioactive glasses (BGs) which are known as the third generation of biomaterials. In 1971, Hench and Polak introduced BGs [ Two general processes have been reported for BG synthesis: melting and sol-gel methods. In the former, after mixing the oxide precursors through ball mill method, the mixture is melted in a Pt-crucible, followed by quenching to 25 °C so that an amorphous BG forms [ Due to limitations mentioned, the sol-gel process has ever-increasingly been applied [ Silicon has numerous applications in different areas such as: surface coating [ SiO Accordingly, this study aims to study the effect of SrO and ZnO substitution in SiO The bioactive glasses were synthesized through modified sol–gel route [ In the beginning, TEOS was added to 0.1 M nitric acid solution and the solution was magnetically stirred to 1 h at ambient temperature. In the following, (5.3–5.9) ml TEP, (28.8–32.2) g calcium nitrate tetrahydrate, (0–4.23) g strontium nitrate, and (0–5.8) g zinc nitrate hexahydrate were added to the solution in sequence. Then, the solution was stirred for 1 h to complete the hydrolysis process. Afterward, the solution was maintained in a sealed fluoride bottle for 7 days at ambient temperature to allow the gel was formed. The produced gel was heated at 85 °C for 72 h to remove the existing water. The obtained gel was calcined at 580 °C for 5 h to stabilize and remove residual nitrates in the glassy phase so produced. Finally, the calcined specimens were firstly grinded and pressed into disks (with about 0.5 g weight, 3 mm in height and 14 mm in diameter) by compacting the glass powder at 10 MPa ACM. The chemical compound of BGs is listed in TGA and DSC results were obtained from Simultaneous Thermal Analysis (STA) (PL-STA 1640), under normal atmosphere in the range of 25–980 °C, with an increasing rate at temperature of 10 °C/min (as increment), using alumina crucibles. The phase constituents of BGs and hydroxyapatite were evaluated with XRD (INEL-Equinox-3000) using the Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.540510 Å) by current and voltage settings of 30 mA and 40 kV, in order. All patterns were accumulated in the 2 theta range (10°–90°) at a scanning speed of 2°/min. FT-IR spectra of the powders were obtained using Bomem MB 100 instrument. The Potassium bromide and glass powders were blended by a ratio of 9–1. The spectra of transmittance mode were examined in the 400–4000 cm The morphology and microstructure of the formed hydroxyapatite were evaluated using SEM analysis (SEM-AIS 2100-Seron Tech) with a voltage of 20 kV. All bioactive glasses were soaked in the SBF solution for 1–21 days at 38 °C. The concentrations of Si, Ca, P, Zn and Sr ions in the SBF were measured with ICP-AES (Varian Vista Pro, Palo Alto, USA). Bioactivity assessments of the glasses were examined by immersing specimen in the solution. This solution was made according to the route depicted via the last work [ In order to Study the role of Zn and Sr on morphology and size of the produced hydroxyapatite, the BG samples surfaces were investigated through (SEM, Philips XL30, Netherlands) after immersion of the specimens in the SBF. Avoiding the charges accumulation on the samples surface, the BGs were covered by a layer of Au. The powder was cut into a disc shape with a diameter of 1.5 cm, followed by sterilizing through autoclaving 15 min at 120 °C. The gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus was used as test bacterium. The bacterium was then isolated and some bacterial colonies were taken and resolved in the sterile saline solution. 100 μl of the bacterial suspension was then seeded on Mueller Hinton agar plates, in which the medium pH should be between 7.3 and 7.5. The pills were thermoset at 37 °C for 24 h, followed by their examination under visible light and measurement of the non-growth zone diameter with the Digimzer software. Each of the tests was performed five times. In order to measure the viability of the cells (G292 osteoblasts), samples were exposed to BG samples, applying MTT assay. The data on cytotoxicity from BG samples vs. cells line (G292 osteoblast) were provided from the Pasteur Institute of Iran (National Cell Bank of Iran). Under conditions of 37 °C and 90% humidity, the cells were cultured and incubated for 24 h. The cells (G292 osteoblast) were seeded in small plates in a density of 6 × 10 The results of quantitative tests were presented at least five frequency as mean ± SD (standard deviation). The GraphPad program (GraphPad Prism, USA) was applied to examine the quantitative significance of tests. P value was evaluated less than 0.05 as quantitative significant.  All patterns of the BGs, gathered before (S5 and Z5) and after immersing of all samples in the SBF for 3 days are illustrated in It can be seen in These results demonstrated that bioactivity of bioactive glass decreased by increasing both Sr and Zn content. Meanwhile, Zinc had more pronounced effect on rate of hydroxyapatite formation compared to strontium. FTIR spectra were applied to evaluate the formation of HA on the surface of samples.     The Zn and Sr release in the solution was a same trend in   The SiO The morphology of apatite was spherical on the S4-Z1 bioactive glass surfaces and the formation of hydroxyapatite on this sample increased over time up to day 7th. The antibacterial analysis represented that, all bioactive glasses containing Zn created clear inhabitation zones. The zone of clearance around the bioactive glasses, demonstrated that sufficient Zn ion was released to create antibacterial activity around the bioactive glasses.