The stability, deactivation and regeneration of a Ni/AC catalyst for methanol carbonylation in the vapor phase were studied. The results revealed that deactivation was mainly caused by carbon deposition and an increase in Ni particle size. Limitation of the internal diffusion of acetic acid and/or methyl acetate was confirmed by Py-FTIR, as could explain the slow deactivation observed in the initial stage of the reaction. Further study revealed that the deactivated catalyst was easily regenerated in H2 flow at 400°C. The deactivation of regenerated catalyst occurred more rapidly due to the bigger Ni particle size.Methanol carbonylation is currently one of the C1 processes replacing the petrochemical route for the manufacture of industrial chemicals. Current technology for acetic acid production is mainly based on the Celanese and BP processes, in which Rh or Ir catalysts are dissolved in the liquid phase To overcome the limitations of homogeneous catalyst systems, vapor-phase carbonylation of methanol has been the subject of investigation for several years. After comparing various catalysts supported on polymers, zeolites or activated carbon (AC), Fujimoto Vapor-phase carbonylation of methanol is believed to proceed through a set of parallel and series reactions described by Fujimoto Merenov et al. The catalyst was prepared by incipient wetness impregnation. Prior to impregnation, AC was pretreated with 0.4 Catalyst activity was evaluated in a stainless steel fixed-bed reactor under pressurized conditions using methyl iodide as the promoter. A sample of 2.3 Catalyst activity is indicated by the conversion of methanol and yield of carbonylation products. The selectivity and yield were calculated according to the following equations: The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of catalyst samples was measured by nitrogen adsorption measurements using a Micromeritics ASAP 2000 system (USA). All samples were degassed at 200 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using a H-600-2 instrument (Hitachi, Japan) to observe the morphological structure of samples of the catalyst. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were analyzed using Digital Micrography 3.4 to determine Ni dispersion over the catalyst support. Pyrolysis-Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (Py-FTIR) studies were carried out at a resolution of 8 Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) measurements were performed using an Atomscan 16 instrument (TJA, USA) to determine the loss of Ni from the support. The catalyst test was continued for 300 Values for the surface area, pore volume and pore size distribution of the Ni/AC catalyst before and after reaction are listed in SEM images are shown in The dispersion of nickel on the surface of the support is a critical parameter for catalytic activity Py-FTIR spectra of the Ni/AC catalyst at different stages during reaction are shown in Only the cat Samples of the catalyst after 4 and 300 The Ni content of catalyst samples was measured by ICP-AES. During the first 4 After 300 A TEM image of the regenerated catalyst is shown in Characterization of the catalyst before and after reaction revealed that catalyst deactivation is due to: (i) the strong adsorption of reaction products on the catalyst, which plug the catalyst pores and strongly limit diffusion in the initial stage of the reaction; (ii) the increase in the size and aggregation of Ni particles on the catalyst surface over the course of the reaction; and (iii) carbon deposition on the catalyst surface. The deactivated catalyst was easily regenerated in H The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support (Project No. 29276265) of this study.