Crushing and grinding consume most of the energy in mineral processing. Ball mill is an important kind of grinding equipment used to decrease the size of ore particles. The power consumption of a ball mill is one of the most important parameters to consider in the design of a ball mill because it determines its economic efficiency. The power consumption is usually determined by charge fill level, lifter height, lifter number, and mill speed. However, almost all of the classical theories for calculating the power consumption of ball mills disregard the effect of lifters and only focus on rotation rate, charge fill level, as well as size and shape of grinding media, thereby may causing errors. Discrete element method (DEM) can simulate the motion and interaction of particle materials. Thus, this method is widely used to simulate the working process of ball mills, which yields many valuable research outcomes. Moreover, the results obtained from DEM usually should be validated with experiments. In this paper, simulation results of particle behaviour, mill torque, and power consumption obtained from DEM simulation are compared with experimental results in detail to validate the correctness of the simulation results. Especially, the particle behaviour is validated both qualitatively and quantitatively. The DEM results are shown to be highly consistent with the experimental results. The torque of liners and baffles are affected by lifter height, lifter number, and mill speed. Moreover, the changes in the torque and power consumption of a ball mill can be effectively explained using two important factors: lifter and particle area ratio.Mill liners protect mill shells from abrasion and lift ore particles and grinding media to a high position. Therefore, liners/lifters must be able to bear high-impact loads during the grinding process. The wear rate of these components is high, and these parts tend to break or incur wear-out failure, which can seriously affect the production efficiency of ball mills. Thus, the research on liner structure and configuration of ball mills is crucial to improve the production ability and economy of ball mills. The DEM is a powerful tool to effectively explain the movement of ore particles and improve the operation, production, and efficiency of ball mills by optimizing their structure. Many researchers have used DEM to extensively study ball mills, and they have obtained valuable results in the last two decades ( The structural characteristics of liners/lifters and mill speed substantially influence particle motion in ball mills and dramatically influence the grinding process and power draw of ball mills. DEM was first used by Major progress has also been achieved in the study of particle motion in ball mills and validation of the results obtained from DEM ( None of the empirical formulas for computing the power consumption of ball mills considers the effect of lifters ( Many formulas can be used to calculate the net power of a mill. These formulas come in two basic types: those used when a ball mill works at a relatively low speed and those used when a ball mill works at a relatively high speed. The dividing line is shown in When a ball mill works at a relatively low speed, its net power can be obtained from Formula (1) as follows: When a ball mill works at a relatively high speed, its net power consumption can be determined, as indicated in DEM is a numerical method to deal with the kinematic and mechanical behaviour of complex granular systems. DEM regards the discrete system as many discrete units with certain shapes and masses. DEM is mainly used in kinematics and mechanics research on discrete particles, such as rocks, soils, and powders, to conduct a complex dynamic calculation of granules under complex physical conditions. DEM has been widelyused in mining, chemical engineering, and biological medicine, particularly in the research on ball mills. DEM is a highly convenient approach to determine the particle behaviour, torque, and power draw of ball mills in different conditions. Consequently, DEM is used in the present study as a tool to examine the effect of lifters and mill speed on the particle behaviour, torque, and power draw of a ball mill. The material and numerical parameters used in the DEM model are shown in A laboratory-scale ball mill with an internal diameter of 573 As shown in The detailed structure of the drum is shown in In conducting the experiment, one of the semicircle perspex is removed, and the steel balls are placed in the drum. The distribution of different steel balls is shown in In this section,  When the rotation rate of the ball mill increases to The ability of DEM to predict particle behaviour can be validated qualitatively in Given that the parameters used in the simulation and experiment are exactly same, we can confirm that the magnitudes of According to the previous analysis, when the mill speed is extremely low (   For a mill speed of formula (47.1% higher than the standard result). This result demonstrates that the accuracy of empirical formulas is the highest when the rotation rate is approximately 80%. In industries, ball mills usually operate at speeds near 80%, which indicates that the given formulas are appropriate. For a speed of 90% ( The accuracy of different empirical formulas changes when the rotation rate varies. The accuracy of empirical formulas is obviously lower than that of the DEM simulation when mill speed changes. This difference can be mainly explained by the fact that the effect of lifters is not considered in the empirical formulas. When the rotation rate is 60%–90%, the DEM simulation results and standard results are noticeably similar. This similarity demonstrates that DEM is an accurate numerical calculation method that can predict the power consumption of ball mills more accurately than other methods could. Liners/lifters gradually experience wear and fatigue failure because of the effect of impact and erosion. During the working process, lifter height gradually declines and becomes too low to bring the particles to a sufficiently high location. This condition adversely affects the working efficiency of ball mills. Under this condition, liners must be replaced to recover the working ability of the ball mills. In this section, we employ DEM simulation to study the effect of lifter height and mill speed on the particle behaviour, torque, and power of a ball mill. The parameters in this section are as follows: fill level is 35%, The falling trajectory of the particles in the present study is similar to that in the work of All the magnitudes of torque decrease as the mill speed increases, except for the torque corresponding to When the drum rotates, the particles are forced to flow by the lifting force of the lifters, the friction of the liners, and the friction of the front and back end-walls. The specific torque can be obtained by multiplying each force with the corresponding distance to the center of the drum. The total torque provided by the lifters and liners is called liner torque. In addition, the total torque provided by the front and back end-walls is called baffle torque.  Generally, torque behaviour can be explained by two factors, namely, lifter and particle area ratio. Baffle torque is approximately inversely proportional to the particle area ratio. Liner torque is determined by the effect of the particle area ratio and lifter. Moreover, the lifter is a decisive factor when a ball mill works at a relatively low speed; a high lifter height causes a large liner torque. By contrast, the particle area ratio is the main factor when a ball mill works at a relatively high speed; an increased particle area ratio causes a small liner torque. When a ball mill rotates at a low speed, almost all the particles move at a low speed, and the particle area ratio is low. However, an increasing number of particles behave in a high-speed state as the mill speed increases. The overall distribution of particles becomes sparse, and many particles become cataracting particles. The particle area ratio then increases gradually. When a ball mill rotates at a specific speed, the particle area ratio is known to increase as the lifter height increases, and the baffle torque decreases when the particle area ratio increases. Thus, baffle torque is approximately inversely proportional to lifter height. Similarly, baffle torque is approximately inversely proportional to mill speed. In addition, when  Lifter number is an important parameter that needs to be carefully considered in designing a ball mill. However, no theory has been developed to determine lifter number. Thus, lifter number is generally decided according to empirical knowledge and analogy. The effect of lifter number on the particle behaviour, torque, and power of a ball mill is examined in this study. In this section, the fill level of the ball mill is 35%,  In summary, the lifter number of ball mills crucially affects particle behaviour. The cyclic process of particles in which the particles move up from the toe position to the shoulder position and are thrown from the shoulder back down to the toe position is closely related to the lifter number. The lifting ability of lifters decreases with the reduction of the lifter number, thereby causing the majority of particles to move in a low-speed condition. Thus, the kinetic energy of particles is extremely low that high-energy collisions cannot effectively occur. As a result, the breaking and grinding ability of ball mills decreases. Therefore, the lifter number should be selected reasonably in the practical design and usage of ball mills, and a relatively increasing lifter number is favorable, as indicated by the results of this study.   The character of the baffle torque shown in  According to the preceding analysis, mill speed, lifter height, and lifter number significantly affect the particle behaviour, torque, and power of a ball mill. The comprehensive effect of mill speed, lifter height, and lifter number on the torque and power of a ball mill is discussed using DEM in the following section.  At The result in The power of a ball mill is obtained by multiplying the corresponding torque with the mill speed. Thus, the torque curves and power curves are similar. At Additionally, when In this study, the effects of mill speed, lifter height, and lifter number on the particle behaviour, torque, and power of a ball mill are examined by combining DEM simulation and experiment validation. The conclusions based on the observations, calculations, and analysis are as follows: Mill speed significantly affects particle behaviour. The DEM simulation results for particle behaviour are highly consistent with the experimental results when the mill rotates at various speeds (from qualitative and quantitative validation). Particle trajectory is reasonable near the rotation rate of 75%–80%. Under a specific mill speed, lifter height affects the falling trajectory of particles. When the lifter height is too low, most of the particles move at a relatively low speed and consequently decrease the work efficiency of the ball mill. However, the falling trajectory of the particles becomes too high, and many particles directly hit the liners and lifters when the lifter height is too high. This condition can accelerate the wear rate of liners and lifters. The reasonable range of lifter height is 10–17 The simulation and experimental results show that the torque of a ball mill increases first and then decreases during the process of improving the rotation rate. Furthermore, when the lifters are high, the corresponding curve of the torque begins to decline early. Moreover, the torque of the ball mill and the lifter height exhibit a degree of direct proportionality when the ball mill runs at a relatively low speed ( The relationship between baffle torque and particle area ratio shows a degree of inverse proportionality. Thus, any measure that can increase the particle area ratio decreases the baffle torque; examples include increasing mill speed, increasing lifter number and lifter height, and so on. The liner torque depends on two factors, namely, lifter (including lifter number and lifter height) and particle area ratio. The former one is the decisive factor at a low mill speed, whereas the latter is the decisive factor at a high mill speed. Consequently, when a ball mill runs at a relatively low speed, the liner torque becomes large when the ball mill has a high lifter height and large lifter number. However, when a ball mill runs at a relatively high speed, the liner torque becomes small when a ball mill has a high lifter height and large lifter number. The computational accuracy of the empirical formulas changes when the ball mill runs at different speeds. All of the five formulas achieve the highest accuracy near the mill speed of The torque and power of a ball mill usually increase with an increase in mill speed when no lifter exists in the mill ( Lifter height and lifter number exert a slight effect on the power consumption of a mill at a relatively low speed ( The authors acknowledge the financial support from the