Different materials have been ground in Comex jets mills and the influence of the mill operating parameters such as mill filling level, distance between nozzles, feed material and rotor speed, on the grinding capacity was investigated. Additionally, the influence of the construction parameters on the operation of the mill were also established. The Comex mill was tested to produce different size fractions from various feed materials, and it was also found, if desired, that it is capable of producing fine particles with a small size reduction ratio.
                  Comex jet mills were installed in a plant operating under different conditions. Further, they were compared in terms of product stability and particle size. After optimisation, some jet mills have operated at a higher grinding capacity for the same feed material and final product, when compared with other units.Jet milling is a common method for grinding high value materials. It mainly concerns materials which are abrasive and when the grinding process has to be carried out under ultra-high purity conditions. The extremely low wear rate of the mill parts provides an increasing range of interesting new applications. On the other hand, jet milling requires a high-energy input, which often cannot be justified by the final product value. It is therefore of critical importance to provide improvements to this process to achieve a higher energy efficiency. It mainly concerns optimisation of the operating and construction parameters such as; air flow rate, rotor speed, nozzle distance and mill filling level ( The industrial plant was equipped with many jet mill units to provide different products and specifications. The plant was controlled by a Malvern–Insitec on-line particle size analyser for accurate monitoring of the product sizes. The mills were of the JMX200 type ( The JMX 200 mill (rotor diameter of 200 Nozzle diameter: 6 Number of nozzles: 4, Air flow rate for grinding: 656 Air pressure: 8 Testing was carried out on an industrial scale and included optimisation of the main operating parameters of the mill. The investigated parameters included: filling level of the mill chamber, nozzle position and product size. It is already known that the filling level of a jet mill chamber has to be optimised (  The fill level in the mill also has an influence on the product stability. The size was measured with a Malvern on-line analyser, indicating the product size variations expressed as d97, d90, d50, d10 and by transmission. The transmission signal has an opposite function to material concentration in the mill outlet pipe and shows the production level (lower transmission indicates a higher production and visa versa). It should be noticed that lower mill filling levels produce much higher product instability due to turbulence in the nozzle area and simultaneously a lower material layer which could produce a damping effect. At the beginning when the mill filling level was about 50 The distance between nozzles is also important to utilise the energy in the air steam. When the nozzles are too far apart the particles are accelerated very efficiently, but after a critical distance, the surrounding material slows them down. Consequently, they collide at a low velocity and the grinding process is less efficient. When the nozzles are placed too close together, the particles have insufficient time to be accelerated and the grinding efficiency is reduced. Therefore, it is necessary to find the optimal distance to provide the best milling conditions. It is commonly known that the distance between the nozzle and the centre of collision should be 15–20 times the nozzle diameter. However, this will depend on the ground material properties and size of the product. It is clearly shown that the best operating conditions are achieved when the nozzle distance is in the range of 220–240 This investigation has shown that the operating and construction parameters of a jet mill are of critical importance for the milling process. The filling level in the mill is the most critical operating parameter, which should be optimised for both the size of the feed material and the required product size. It is very simple to control this parameter by simply changing the set point of the weighing platform placed under the mill. The optimal filling level will increase for smaller material inside the mill chamber and will be lower for coarser material. It should be noticed that finer material inside the mill chamber is a result of a combination of both the feed and product size. The distance between nozzles is another important parameter which has to be optimised. However, this parameter is not so simple to adjust as in the case of the filling level of the mill. It is generally known that the distance between the nozzles should range between 30 and 40 times the nozzle diameter. Testing has shown that the capacity was dramatically increased when this distance ratio was changed from 30 to 40 times the nozzle diameter. Product size stability was additionally influenced by the distance between nozzles, especially with shorter nozzle distances, which provided an unstable size distribution in the product.