Background
                  Fracture-dislocation is the extreme variant of injury to the proximal humerus that occurs more commonly in young adults as a result of high-velocity trauma. We evaluated the functional and radiologic outcome of fixation of proximal humeral fracture-dislocations with locked plates.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a retrospective review of 33 proximal humeral fracture-dislocations in 29 patients with a mean age of 35 years (range, 19-60 years) treated by open reduction and internal fixation with locked plates between January 2009 and December 2013. The fracture-dislocation in 85% was the result of high-energy trauma resulting in 3- or 4-part fracture-dislocation. The fracture-dislocation was anterior in 27 and posterior in 6.
               
                  Results
                  The average delay from injury to surgery was 7 days (range, 1-35 days), with a mean follow-up of 40 months (range, 24-66 months). All of the fractures united at an average of 15 weeks after surgery. At the final follow-up, the mean forward flexion was 129° (range, 100°-160°), and mean abduction was 128° (range, 100°-150°). The mean Constant score at the final follow-up was 78 points (range, 68-88 points). One case of complete osteonecrosis of the humeral head and 1 case of partial osteonecrosis of the humeral head were noted. Two cases of screw perforation of the humeral head were seen, with subsequent restricted range of motion improving after removal of the offending screws.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Most young patients with 3- and 4-part proximal humeral fracture-dislocations can achieve good functional outcome after fixation with locked plates.Fractures of the proximal humerus are common injuries and generally follow a bimodal age distribution pattern. Fracture-dislocation is the extreme variant of injury to the proximal humerus where the head fragment is dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly, with little or no soft tissue attachments. Locking plates have shown promising outcome after fixation of complex proximal humeral fractures. All patients with proximal humeral fracture-dislocations between the ages of 18 and 60 years, managed in our hospital between January 2009 and December 2013, were retrospectively reviewed. We identified 49 patients during the stipulated time frame. The study excluded patients with associated ipsilateral upper limb fractures, open injuries, age older than 60 years, or those with associated vascular injuries. After exclusion, 34 patients were included for evaluation, of which 5 patients were lost to follow-up. The final evaluation was done on 33 proximal humeral fracture-dislocations in 29 patients. No patient younger than age of 60 received prosthetic replacement for this injury during the study period. Most of these injuries were the result of high-velocity trauma resulting in 3- or 4-part fracture-dislocations. Before surgery, routine radiographs and computed tomography scans with 3-dimensional reconstruction were obtained to determine the accurate fracture configuration. All shoulders were operated on by a single surgeon (V.T.) using a deltopectoral approach or deltoid-splitting approach. An anterior deltopectoral approach was used when the dislocation was anterior. The deltoid-splitting approach was used when the dislocation itself was in the posterior direction. Dissection to mobilize the head fragment was performed meticulously to preserve the soft tissue attachments to the fractured fragments. The head fragment was then reduced by gentle manipulations. In patients with good bone stock, a threaded Kirschner wire or a thin Schanz pin was used to pull the humeral head back into place. For surgical neck fractures, the medial calcar was followed to ascertain reduction, whereas for anatomic neck fractures, the biceps groove was evaluated for assessment of reduction. The fracture fragments were reduced and provisionally stabilized with Kirschner wires. The plate was positioned to avoid subacromial impingement. Care was also taken to ensure that the plate was placed lateral to the tendon of the long head of the biceps. Every effort was made to put the lower calcar screws to prevent varus collapse of the head fragment. Bone substitute material was used in 11 cases where there was void caused by severe comminution. In 3 shoulders with a 4-part fracture-dislocation with absent medial cortical support, a tricortical graft from the iliac crest was also used. This helped to maintain medial continuity and provide biological support. The surgery in a few patients was delayed for more than 7 days because of associated injuries, comorbidities, or referral from other hospitals. Relocating the head fragment in these neglected patients was difficult. In these cases, gentle mobilization of the head fragment was done to remove the adhesions, followed by identification of head fragment with the help of pointed retractors. The average operative time was 2.5 hours (range, 2-3.5 hours), and the average blood loss was 300 mL (range, 250-450 mL). Postoperatively, patients were placed in a sling except for the period of exercises. An aggressive physiotherapy regimen was initiated without stressing the bony fixation or the soft tissue repair. The course of physiotherapy was based on the injury pattern, fixation strength, bone quality, and patient compliance. Early passive range of motion (ROM) exercises were started on postoperative day 1 with pendulum exercises. Passive or active, or both, assisted forward elevation and external rotation were commenced up to 90° and 30°, respectively; restrictions were placed on passive adduction and internal rotation. Patients were discharged with a home-based physiotherapy regimen along with intermittent follow-up because most of the patients had limited access to regular formal physiotherapy. After 3 to 4 weeks, submaximal isometric internal rotation, external rotation, flexion, extension, and abduction were initiated as tolerated with the aim of achieving full passive ROM by 4 to 6 weeks; at that time active ROM was gradually initiated. As early as 8 weeks postoperatively, resisted ROM was commenced, which generally progressed to an aggressive stretching and strengthening phase after 10 to 12 weeks. Patients were assessed regularly, and anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were taken at each follow-up visit to evaluate fracture healing. Follow-up radiographs were carefully scrutinized to detect any secondary loss of reduction, displacement of fragments, varus or valgus deformity, and osteonecrosis of the humeral head (ONHH). An assessment was also done of various implant-related problems such as screw perforation of the humeral head, loosening, backout, and plate pullout or breakage. The Constant score We reviewed 33 shoulders with proximal humeral fracture-dislocations in 29 patients managed with locked plates between January 2009 and December 2013. The fracture-dislocations were bilateral in 4 patients. There were 23 men (79%) and 6 women (21%), with a mean age of 35 years (range, 19-60 years). The fracture-dislocations in 28 shoulders (85%) were caused by high-energy trauma to the involved extremity. The fracture-dislocations were on the left side in 14 and on the right side in 19. The dominant arm was involved in 20 patients (68%). The dislocation was anterior in 27 shoulders (81%) and posterior in 6 (19%), with all the patients having 3- or 4-part fracture dislocations. There were 4 patients with 5 fractures who presented more than 2 weeks late. The average delay from injury to surgery was 7 days (range, 1-35 days), and all of the patients were monitored for a mean of 40 months (range, 24-66 months). All of the fractures united at an average of 15 weeks after surgery. At the final follow-up visit, the mean forward flexion was 129° (range, 100°-160°), mean abduction was 128° (range, 100°-150°), mean external rotation was 42° (range, 35°-60°), and mean internal rotation was 67° (range, 40°-90°). The mean Constant score at the latest follow-up was 78 points (range, 68-88 points). Patient characteristics and all treatment details are reported in Complete ONHH was noted at 18 months follow-up in a 60-year-old woman with an anterior fracture-dislocation. One patient with a head-split type of anterior fracture-dislocation had a partial ONHH with restricted shoulder ROM and a Constant score of 66. Two cases of screw perforation of the humeral head were noted with subsequent restricted ROM, which was improved after the offending screws were removed. Fracture-dislocations of the shoulder are regarded as the most severe form of proximal humeral injuries, and occur more frequently in younger individuals involved in high-velocity trauma compared with osteoporotic fractures occurring in older patients. It is disquieting to observe increased risk of nonunion and ONHH in these complex injuries The most appropriate treatment of these complex injuries in younger, high-demand patients remains controversial. Although the realm of prosthetic replacement is still evolving and contentious in these patients, there is no denying that ORIF with salvage of humeral head presents an attractive management paradigm. Even so, regardless of the procedure and the implant chosen, optimal functional outcome is contingent on astute anatomic reduction with stable fixation, followed by early initiation of physical therapy. Certain technical points during surgery are noteworthy. We reiterate the importance of meticulous dissection so that the soft tissue attachments are not disturbed. The surgeon should strive for gentle manipulation of the humeral head for reduction and fixation. Baring 2 patients initially, we used the PHILOS plate (DePuy Synthes, Davos, Switzerland) for all of the patients. The plate has 9 proximal holes through A to E sections for 3.5-mm locking screw insertion providing a fixed-angle construct. Every effort was made to reduce the medial hinge and put the lower calcar-specific screws (E section). In addition, we put a screw in the superior set of screw holes in the A section and criss-cross screws in the B section. The requirement of additional screws was dictated by fracture morphology and bone quality to provide optimal stability. Every effort was made to reconstruct and fix comminuted tuberosity fragments by tying the tendinous insertions of the rotator cuff with nonabsorbable suture to the designated holes provided in the proximal part of the PHILOS plate. We prefer to keep the tip of the proximal screws at least 6 to 10 mm away from the joint surface, particularly in osteoporotic fractures, to avoid the risk of screw perforation. In 4-part fracture-dislocations with absent and comminuted medial cortical support, use of a tricortical graft was considered to prevent varus collapse of the proximal fragment. Many of these patients presented late (up to 35 days in the present series) due to causes unique to developing countries. There was difficulty in relocating the head in these neglected cases caused by the formation of adhesions. Gentle mobilization of the head was done to remove the adhesions. Elbow flexion during the procedure helped in relocation of the head fragment. Pulling the humeral shaft distally with simultaneous moving of tuberosities away from the glenoid also helped in relocation of the head. Posterior humeral fracture-dislocations, although occurring less frequently, present a daunting challenge to orthopedic surgeons to optimally reduce and reconstruct. The deltoid-splitting approach was used for all posterior dislocations. After shoulder arthrotomy, a critical step was disengagement of the dislocated humeral head from the glenoid rim, which was facilitated by shoulder flexion and adduction. The humeral head was then delivered in the glenoid fossa by gentle manipulation, traction, and gradual external rotation. Manipulating the head by fingers slid posteriorly through the deltoid-splitting approach, and lesser tuberosity osteotomy, if not fractured, could make reduction easier. Humeral head perforation by locking screws has been attributed to secondary impaction of the head and loss of fixation, which is not an uncommon complication. ONHH developed in only 2 patients (6%) in our study. These were an anatomic neck fracture in a 60-year-old patient and a head-split type fracture in a 54-year-old patient. An analysis by Hertel et al This posteromedial hinge was absent in 8 fractures in our study. ORIF was still performed in these patients, considering their young age, carefully preserving the existing vascularity of the fracture fragments. These fractures united without showing any signs of ONHH at the last follow-up. Our rate of ONHH is comparable with several other studies that used locking plates in proximal humeral fractures (without dislocation), with reported rates from 4% to 16%. Our study is not without pitfalls. Apart from the retrospective study design, the lack of long-term follow-up and absence of a control cohort are the downsides of our study. Loss of follow-up was difficult to control; even a single negative result could potentially influence the outcome of the study. The strengths of our study are in the application of a standardized surgical approach and treatment of these complex injuries with angular stable locked plates in all patients aged younger than 60 years, systematic clinical and radiologic evaluation, and outcome assessment. Although concrete guidelines are difficult to formulate, we could garner important information regarding the therapeutic option of humeral head salvage and the potential benefits of ORIF with locked plates in a carefully selected patient population, which supports our hypothesis. We are also aware that this study is single-center based, conducted in a level 1 trauma center, and all of the surgical procedures were performed by the senior author (V.T.), with extensive experience in orthopedics and traumatology. Proximal humeral fracture-dislocations are complex injuries in traumatology and demand a substantive level of expertise to achieve satisfactory results. Following the tips to reduce and stabilize these fracture-dislocations with adequate fixation might help the general orthopedic community in managing these complex injuries. After a thorough search of the literature, we found only 1 study focusing on 3- or 4-part fracture-dislocations of the proximal humerus in young age group. Soliman and Koptan Our study supports ORIF in younger active patients with 3- and 4-part proximal humeral fracture-dislocations. Complications in this study were observed in patients older than 50 years with anatomic neck fractures and head-split fracture-dislocations. Hence, caution should be exercised in patients older than 50 years with unfavorable fracture morphology because the risk of ONHH might be higher. This is evident from the results emanating from our study. Most patients with 3- and 4-part proximal humeral fracture-dislocations can achieve good function and return to their normal preinjury work and activities after ORIF with locked plates. Meticulous surgical dissection, stable anatomic reconstruction, and early physiotherapy are the cornerstones to achieve a satisfactory outcome. Caution should be observed in patients with a certain fracture pattern and age profile (>50 years). The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following is the supplementary data to this article:   