An understanding of lignin chemical structure and properties is required before connections can be drawn between lignin sources and utilisation. Of particular interest, and one cause for the limited use of lignin, is chemical heterogeneity. The principal applications for lignin are power/fuel (short term), macromolecules (medium term) and aromatic chemicals (long term), with the preferred use ultimately directed by the global price of oil and biomass. The intention of this chapter is to compile and evaluate the properties of lignins from various sources and to identify applications that match the unique properties of each lignin.Lignin has traditionally been derived from the kraft and sulfite processes that are ubiquitous in the pulp and paper industry. Over 50 million tonnes are produced annually worldwide ( A multitude of lignin applications have been explored at the research level so far. The current industrial products are primarily produced from lignosulfonates and sulfonated kraft lignin. Products include dispersants, emulsifiers, raw material for vanillin and dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) production and road-dust suppression agents. There is the opportunity to classify and refine lignin for use in many polymeric products currently being served by synthetic petroleum-derived polymers. Many biorefinery Lignin is a highly branched aromatic biopolymer only exceeded by cellulose in its abundance. Lignin is found in the cell walls of woody plants where its content reaches up to 30%. It plays a significant role in trees by giving rigidity to the cell walls and making the wood resistant to compression, impact and bending. It is also involved in the transport of water from the roots to the leaves. Through covalent bonds, lignin is interlaced with hemicellulose and forms a matrix that is reinforced by cellulose. Lignin is produced by enzyme-initiated dehydrogenative polymerisation of phenyl-propanoid groups derived from coniferyl alcohol (G), sinapyl alcohol (S), and Softwoods, hardwoods and grasses each have different proportions of S, G and H monomers, and proportions can vary greatly between species and growing conditions (see The enzymatic dehydrogenation yields several resonance-stabilised phenoxy radicals that can couple randomly with another radical and therefore form a variety of different bonds with exceptional stability (see Although it has been intensely studied for many years, the structure of native lignin still remains unclear. However, several structures have been proposed based on the analysis of degradation products and the identification of the dominant linkages between the phenylpropane units and their abundance, as well as the abundance and frequency of certain functional groups (see  The process of extracting lignin from biomass is known as delignification and disintegrates lignocellulosic material into its fibrous components. Two main categories of chemical delignification processes, namely aqueous and organic solvent-based, have been developed and include a wide range of methods. The chemical aqueous pulping processes include alkaline (or kraft pulping) and sulfite pulping, which are the two industrially most widely used methods ( ‘initial delignification’ occurring at < ‘bulk delignification’; the delignification rate is accelerated at increased temperature and stays high until 90% of the lignin is removed ‘residual delignification’ is characterized by a slow delignification rate while the degradation of carbohydrates becomes dominant. The degree of delignification is typically indicated by the ‘kappa number’ of a pulp, where a high kappa number stands for high lignin content. The kappa number of unbleached softwood and hardwood pulps is 30–40 and 18–20, respectively ( Soda pulping dates back to 1851, when it was invented in England by Burgess and Watts ( The kraft process (or sulfate process) was invented in 1879 by the German chemist Dahl. It is a modified soda process in that it uses NaOH and Na The technological advantage of kraft pulping over other delignification processes is also one of the largest impediments to the utilisation of kraft lignin: the recovery of chemicals and energy from residual black liquor is at the core of the kraft process. It has been claimed that kraft lignin is not a viable feedstock for chemical production because of its energy value as a heat source in chemical recovery furnaces ( The sulfite process has been practised since 1874, when the first mill using the process was opened in Sweden. The active species are sulfur dioxide, hydrogen sulfite Worldwide, 1.06 mega tonnes of lignosulfonate are produced annually ( At the present time, solvent-based or organosolv processes are either in the developmental stage or used in small-scale production (bio-based polymers and composites). As the name implies, these processes use organic solvents to delignify lignocellulosic materials. This kind of delignification is in general more effective for hardwoods than softwoods due to the differences in the chemical structure of their respective lignins. However, they promise higher value by-products, lower capital costs and lower emissions (  The best known organosolv process is the Alcell® process (from: alcohol cellulose) using ethanol–water mixtures to delignify wood. It was developed by General Electric Corporation in the early 1970s and commercialised by Repap Enterprises Inc. (Stamford, USA) between 1978 and 1997 in a pulp mill in New Brunswick, Canada. It was later modified by Lignol Energy Corporation (Burnaby, Canada). The principal advantage of the Alcell® process is that it provides lignin, hemicelluloses and cellulose in separate streams of relatively high purity. The lignin is un-sulfonated and has a higher purity than other lignins ( Acid hydrolysis, which entails the use of dilute acid at high temperature or concentrated acid at mild temperatures, is used to hydrolyse the cellulose and hemicelluloses portion of biomass for fermentation to ethanol. The lignin residue that remains is highly condensed, has high contamination with carbohydrates and is recovered in low yields from 50 to 70%. Nevertheless, NREL has developed a one-stage dilute acid biorefinery and acid hydrolysis lignin may be available for product development. In the 1980s, a South African company, C.G. Smith Sugar Limited, developed an acid hydrolysis lignin product with the trade name Sucrolin. It is produced by treating bagasse with superheated steam at 180°C in the presence of small quantities of acetic acid. The lignin is isolated from the lignin–cellulose residue by dissolution in sodium hydroxide, followed by neutralisation of the solution which precipitates the lignin (  Formic acid pulping allows lower temperatures to be used (120°C), but results in higher cellulose losses compared to ethanol pulping ( Lignin can also be recovered from the pyrolysis process, which heats lignocellulosic material to around 450°C in limited oxygen atmosphere to thermally degrade all components into hydrocarbons. A water insoluble product that contains lignin can be isolated from the pyrolysis oil. It is distinct from other forms of lignin because it is derived from oligomers containing up to 8 monolignols ( The physical delignification process of steam explosion uses saturated steam at high pressures (150–230°C) and elevated temperatures (450–500°C) for a period of time to hydrolyse lignin and hemicellulose from lignocellulosic material ( Recently, novel solvent systems such as ionic liquids (ILs) have attracted a great deal of interest. The ability to process at atmospheric pressure and dissolve any component with a well-tuned solvent has spurred significant research into ILs for lignocellulosic processing ( One major benefit of IL processes includes the potential for Whole wood solubilisation can be achieved but separation of the lignin from the IL is problematic. Selective dissolution of holocellulose can be The cost of manufacturing ILs is limiting their use. Higher IL recovery rates or cheaper production must be achieved. Furthermore, separating solubilised wood components from the IL may require complicated processing ( Lignin is an excellent source of energy as it has a higher heating value than the other constituents in wood and is comparable to lignite ( Addition of lignin to improve particular products and development of novel products, rather than replace existing products and chemicals, is a promising area of research. The value of such products and additives will not be subject to competition with the oil-derived equivalent. However, in many cases, addition of lignin to a product resulted in a product with strictly worse properties, which is unacceptable. Besides large volume, low value applications, also high value, low volume products are needed to operate pulp mills economically and to make the extraction of lignin practicable. Platform chemicals that are indistinguishable from their petroleum-derived version can be made already. Although aromatics such as benzene, toluene and xylene have a large market and high value, the cost to produce these from lignin is high and spot prices are volatile. The only lignin products obtained from a pulping process that have found a vast range of applications up to now are lignosulfonates. These are non-hazardous materials with excellent properties that are used as binders, emulsifiers and dispersants for a great variety of materials. As inexpensive components in binders, lignosulfonates are commonly used for commodities like coal briquettes, ceramics, briquetting of mineral dust, and the production of plywood or particle boards. Their ability to retain moisture and suppress dust makes them a useful tool for construction works, gravel roads, airports and sports facilities. As an anti-settling agent that also prevents lumping, lignosulfonates are used in concrete mixtures, ceramics, gypsumboard production and for leather tanning. Lignosulfonates provide flowability and plasticity to cement. This is a replacement for more expensive materials that Copolymers and resins are a large market of medium to high value for lignin, provided lignin can improve material performance. In order to prepare formulations with lignin, it can be either used in an unmodified or chemically modified form. Due to its aromatic structure, lignin can undergo a wide range of chemical modifications that include, but are not limited to, alkylation, acylation, amination, carboxylation, halogenation, oxidation and reduction, nitration and sulfonation ( Lignin has been blended with other polymers or used as simple filler for decades in order to obtain biodegradable materials with improved mechanical properties, thermal and light stability. However, the practical results are still moderate and leave lots of room for further research ( Organosolv lignin has been incorporated into inks, varnishes and paints with positive effects on viscosity and misting with the addition of up to 10% w/w lignin. There were no negative side-effects of the addition apart from a brown discoloration, which was deemed irrelevant for most applications (  The resin market represents a large potential sink especially for kraft and organosolv lignin, which have been incorporated into PF or epoxy resins in many studies ( Lignin has also successfully been used in epoxy resins (EP resins) since the 1960s and has been sold for example by Lenox Polymers Ltd (Port Huron, USA) until they liquidated in 2000. Epoxy resin containing 50% lignin can be produced with electrical and mechanical properties equivalent to non-lignin-containing epoxy. It is possible to produce large quantities of lignin-epoxy resin on the order of 500 kL/year using relatively simple purification methods ( Another application for lignin is its use in the production of polyurethane films or foam. Polyurethane films have been produced incorporating Alcell® lignin. Flexible but weak polyurethanes were produced at low lignin content. However, relatively tough polyurethane could be produced with lignin content from 15 to 25% w/w. Above 30% w/w lignin, the polyurethanes were hard and brittle ( Some recent research showed that bioplastics can be produced from lignin by mixing a specific low-sulfur lignin with natural fibres and natural additives such as wax. The resulting thermoplastic material is recyclable and due to the additives can survive contact with water or saliva. The bioplastic can be injection-molded and is commercially available under the brand name ARBOFORM® ( Quite a few studies have shown that lignin can be used as a good adsorbent for metal ions as well as dyes, bile acids, cholesterol, surfactants, pesticides and phenols. For kraft pine lignin, the binding strength for metals was found to be in the following order Pb(II) Due to the pulping process under high pressure and temperature, also low molecular weight products are obtained that can be transformed into high value products by oxidation. For instance, vanillin has been produced from lignosulfonates since 1937, and this was the dominant procedure for many years until environmental issues forced these mills to close. However, the Norwegian company Borregaard continued to produce vanillin from lignin and developed an environmentally friendly process, including an oxidation step with a copper catalyst that is economically viable and emits less CO If used directly without blending with other polymers, lignin shows some interesting antioxidant behaviour and acts as a free-radical scavenger. It could be shown that free phenolic hydroxyl groups are involved in that mechanism and that ortho-methoxyl substituents help to stabilise the phenoxyl radicals by resonance ( During wartime, lignin was investigated as a substitute for carbon black and other fillers for rubbers. Since the studies could not be completed before Because of their highly porous structure with a large internal surface area, activated carbons have a good adsorption capacity for many substances. They are able to remove organic and inorganic pollutants from liquid as well as gaseous phases. Activated carbons are available as powdered activated carbons (PAC) or granular activated carbons (GAC) and differ in diameter and surface area. Coal, lignite, peat, wood and coconut shells are commonly used to prepare activated carbons but also lots of other materials have been investigated as a source material. Among them, lignin is a very promising material from which activated carbon with a high surface area and pore volume can be produced that is comparable to common activated carbon. The adsorption capacity of activated carbons can be controlled by the parameters of either physical or chemical activation or a post-activation treatment. The results of sorption studies of inorganic or Carbon fibres are some of the most important and widely used advanced engineering materials: they are lightweight, fatigue resistant materials that possess high strength/modulus and high stiffness. These unique properties result from their flawless structure and the development of highly anisotropic graphic crystallites orientated along the fibre axis during the production process. Carbon fibres are manufactured by thermally treating fibres at 1,000–2,000°C in an inert atmosphere while maintaining the fibrous structure. This is aided by a stabilisation stage in which the precursor fibres are heated under tension at 200–300°C in the presence of air. This causes crosslinking on the fibre surface, among other reactions, and prevents shrinking, melting and fusing ( Advanced fibres, such as carbon fibres, are routinely used in sports equipment, marine products and the transportation industries. There are primarily two types of precursor materials of commercial significance: pitch (petroleum or coal) and polyacrylonitrile (PAN). However, increasing demand, rising energy costs and concern over the sustainability and environmental impact of fossil fuels is driving the need to find sustainable alternatives. Lignin, as a polyaromatic macromolecule, is thought to be a petroleum progenitor and therefore an ideal biopolymer precursor for the production of carbon fibres. Although widely studied for the production of carbon fibres ( Production of functional fibres by adding carbon nanotubes or magnetic particles to the lignin can open the market to applications like magnetic shielding or conductive materials. The mechanical expectations for these materials are not as high as for other applications and fibres with lower tensile strength can readily be used. The properties of lignin-based carbon fibres depend largely upon the source of lignin. Lignosulfonates and kraft lignin typically have sodium impurities, which can lead to inclusions and microvoids arising from catalytic graphitisation and thereby decrease mechanical performance ( Several thermochemical methods have been studied in the recent past in order to depolymerise lignin and to convert it into value-added chemicals. Pyrolysis, gasification, hydrogenolysis, chemical oxidation and hydrolysis under supercritical conditions are the major methods to produce pyrolytic oil, syngas or phenols. An overview of these methods and the resulting products is shown in  When pyrolysis is performed in the presence of hydrogen, it is known as hydrogenolysis or hydrogenation. Different solvents or catalysts can be added in order to speed up the reaction and to increase the yield. While neat pyrolysis is not the best choice for the production of liquid fuels or chemicals because it produces mainly gases and solid coke, hydrogenolysis is a very promising method with a high net conversion, high yield of monophenols and low solid residue.  Just like wood-derived and vegetable bio-oils, lignin (Alcell® lignin) can be turned into gasoline range hydrocarbons by pyrolysis using the zeolite catalyst HZSM-5 ( All these procedures seem to be promising for the depolymerisation of lignin and therefore the production of platform chemicals and gasoline. But they require quite harsh reaction conditions (temperature and pressure), expensive catalysts and the separation of a variety of different reaction products. It will be a challenging task for the future to establish an economically viable process that can compete with common petrochemical processes. Even though the platform chemical market is large, the value is not yet high enough to warrant production from isolated lignin. This is As a result of governmental requirements and also consumer demand for eco-friendly, biodegradable and non-toxic products, the focus of research and production worldwide has turned towards renewable and natural raw materials and cleaner industrial practices. One emerging trend is the application of biotechnological processes, which includes the use of bacteria and fungi or treatment with isolated enzymes. Also in lignin chemistry, the utilisation of enzymatic treatment is becoming increasingly popular for breakdown of lignin or the modification of the functional groups. Up to now, lignin degradation has been studied mainly in white-rot and brown-rot fungi, which produce enzymes that can metabolise lignin ( The various functional groups present in lignin are highly accessible for modification by chemical, physical as well as enzymatic reactions. Compared to chemical or physical treatments, enzymatic modifications possess the advantages of high selectivity and efficiency, they are performable under mild conditions and a wide range of substrates can be used. However, enzymes are only reusable when sufficiently immobilised and they are quite sensitive to denaturating agents and several sensory or toxicological effects ( In the short term, a large market for lignin from the ubiquitous kraft process must be found. This is necessary for the de-bottlenecking of kraft mills around the world. The most promising market for kraft lignin is the resins and adhesives market, which is substantial and represents an increase in value over traditional heat and power generation. Given the push for renewables and the phenolic nature of lignin, penetration into this market is considered inevitable by some ( In the medium term, more lignin from unsulfonated sources will become available. This lignin, from biorefinery platforms, will be unique in properties compared to other feedstocks and have small-scale availability. Initially, the resin and adhesives market may act as a catch-all for this more reactive lignin. However, a product niche of high value and sufficient market size must be found for each lignin source. For example, hydrophobic organosolv lignins could add value to resins used for water resistant particleboard. Platform chemicals are an attractive medium-term market as there is already an existing market and no product development is needed. In the long term, biorefineries will be tuned to produce lignin for specific materials of high value, and lignin is expected to yield greater incomes than the other components of wood. Key books, major trade/professional bodies, research and interest groups, web sites:    