Coal fly ash (CFA) is one of the most promising secondary sources of rare earth elements and yttrium (REY). This research first studied the modes of occurrence of REY in CFA collected from a China’s power generation plant which utilizes a coal feedstock with an elevated REY content. The fact that rare earth minerals remain in CFA and REY associate with metal oxides was proved by emission-scanning electron microscope with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer. The technical feasibility of recovery of REY from CFA was then studied through conducting various physical separation methods followed by acid leaching. It was found that REY are concentrated in fine particle size, non-magnetic and middle density fractions. Using combined physical separation processes, the REY of CFA was enriched from 782 μg·g−1to 1025 μg g−1. The acid leaching process was optimized for various parameters via the Taguchi three-level experimental design. Upon optimization, the physical separation product was leached at the optimum condition and 79.85% leaching efficiency was obtained. Based on the obtained results, a conceptual process flowsheet was developed for recovery of REY from CFA. Such recovery maximizes REY resources utilization and enhances sustainability of CFA disposal.Rare earth elements and yttrium (REY) are vital to the modern society as they are used in high-tech industry and a variety of consumer goods such as computers, cell phones, catalysis, fluorescent lighting, permanent magnets, medical devices and advanced defense technology ( Coal fly ash (CFA), is the main coal combustion byproduct of which large amounts worldwide are just disposed in the way of landfill or accumulation and might cause water and soil pollution, disruption of ecological cycles ( Several studies have investigated the modes of occurrence and distribution of REY in different CFA samples collected from US ( It has been suggested that the REY in CFA can be potentially recovered by acid leaching ( Representative CFA samples were received from a power generation plant, located in Southwest China, and utilizing the late Permian coal which contains elevated content of REY and other critical elements. REY-bearing minerals in the coal sources, identified by Scanning Electron Microscopy/Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) analysis, included rhabdophane, silicorhabdophane and florencite ( The minerals present in the CFA sample were identified and their content quantified using X-ray Diffraction (XRD) by the Rietveld method ( The elemental content of CFA was analyzed using Inductivity Coupled Plasma – Mass Spectroscopy (ICP-MS) ( The modes of occurrence of-of REY in the CFA sample were studied using a sequential chemical extraction procedure as outlined in A scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM; ZEISS ΣIGMA), in conjunction with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometer (Oxford X-MaxN 20) (collectively, SEM-EDS), was applied to show morphology and microstructure of REY carriers and also to assume its phase by HSC Geo software. Images were captured via a retractable solid-state backscatter electron detector, which was used to more easily find REY-containing minerals as well as heavy element-containing minerals. The distribution of REY in the CFA as a function of particle size, magnetic susceptibility, and density was studied to identify the potential processing methods for preconcentration of REY prior to the leaching process. Screening tests according to Chinese standard GB/T477-2008 were conducted to reveal the distribution of REY in each size fraction. A combination of sieves of desired size (125, 100, 74, 55, 45, 38, 25 μm) was selected to wet sieve the fly ash (typically 50 g) in sequence. Magnetic tube tester (i.e., Davis tube) was used to investigate the REY fractionation as a function of magnetic susceptibility. For this test, a 20 g representative sample of CFA was mixed with 2 mL of alcohol and 500 mL of water, stirred uniformly, and fed to the tube. The magnetic field strength was successively adjusted by changing the electric current to 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 A values, generating 5 fractions with corresponding magnetic field strengths, viz., S The density fractionation process was conducted using heavy organic liquids, namely tribromomethane, dibromomethane, and trichloromethane, which were mixed to obtain different specific gravity (SG) values as 2.0, 2.2, 2.4, 2.6, and 2.8 g cm Based on the results of the physical separations, a representative CFA sample was subjected to a sequence of effective physical processes to maximize the grade of the feed reported to the downstream leaching process. To maximize the REY recovery through acid leaching of the physically processed CFA, the process was optimized for the process parameters, i.e., acid concentration, solid to liquid ratio and stirring rate. For optimization, a three-level statistically designed program was conducted. The three-level based test program was based on an orthogonal array of L In each experiment, a 5 g representative CFA sample was mixed with HCl solution with a specified acid concentration, amount of liquid, and stirring rate. The experiments were conducted in capped flasks to prevent liquid loss due to evaporation, and the solutions were mixed using magnetic stirrers. Each experiment was conducted at a constant temperature of 60 °C for 2 h, as they were found to be optimal conditions in our previous study ( Upon optimization, the CFA, and product streams with the maximum REE content obtained from each and combined physical separation processes were leached at the optimum condition and the results were compared. The comparison results were utilized in developing the conceptual recovery flowsheet. The sequential chemical extraction procedure was employed to study the modes of occurrence of REY in the CFA sample. As the results are depicted in It was found that the REY occurs in five modes as discussed in section It was found that the monazite [(Ce,Nd)PO To maximize the recovery and grade of the REY, and removal of the impurities prior to leaching, thereby minimizing acid consumption and environmental issues of downstream purification processes, REY distribution as a function of material properties were studied. The properties used in this study were particles size, density and magnetic susceptibility that can be potentially used for segregation of the elements of interest. The results are discussed in the following sections. Wet sieve analysis was conducted to study REY distribution in various size fractions, i.e., 150-100 μm, 100-74 μm, 74-55 μm, 55-35 μm, 38-25 μm and minus 25 μm. The REY concentration, distribution, and mass yield of particle size fractions are shown in Fractionation of the CFA sample based on the particles’ magnetic susceptibility was conducted using the Davis tube. The magnetic susceptibility of the particles decreased from S1 to S6 (i.e., the non-magnetic fraction). As illustrated in Through the destiny separation, REY were concentrated to a maximum value of 855 μg g As for the individual REY, more variations were observed ( Since size classification and magnetic separation processes were found to be most effective physical separation processes for REY recovery, the combination of both processes was utilized to preconcentrate REY prior to the leaching process. Based on the results, 38 μm cut size and 5 A were selected for the size classification and magnetic separation processes, correspondingly, in a sequence. The fine size fraction of the size classification with 873 μg g After physical pre-concentration, acid leaching experiments were performed on product 2 to optimize process parameters for maximizing the leaching efficiency and develop a conceptual process flowsheetprocess. Experimenets were conducted to explore the effect of process parameters, namely, stirring rate, acid concentration, and solid-liquid ratio. The optimal conditions were selected based on the final product concentration and overall recovery of REY ( The results showed that the largest R values were corresponding to the acid concentration (the most influential factor), followed by solid-liquid ratio and then the stirring rate. This is due to the fact that the acid leaching for the recovery of REY from CFA is a chemical reaction for which the efficiency is more effected by the reactant concentration than the other process parameters ( As shown in After optimization, the raw CFA sample, product 1, and product 2 were leached at optimum condition to determine the effect of the physical separation on the enhancement of the leaching efficiency. The results ( Based on the obtained results, a conceptual process flowsheet was developed for recovery of REY from CFA (see The leaching efficiency has been found to be further increased through chemical roasting of CFA prior to leaching ( In this study, the modes of occurrence of REY in CFA was thoroughly studied using a sequential chemical extraction procedure. Physical separation processes were then evaluated for preconcentration of REY. Additionally, leaching process parameters were optimized for maximizing the leaching efficiency. Finally, a conceptual process flowsheet was developed for REY recovery from CFA. The sequential chemical extraction results showed that the glassy aluminosilicate phase is the dominant mode of occurrence of REY in CFA, as 69% of REY were found to be associated with this phase. The other major modes were acid soluble, and organic or sulfide forms, containing 11.58% and 13.56% of REY, correspondingly. The fact that rare earth minerals remain in CFA and REY associate with metal oxides was proved by SEM-EDS. Through physical separation, it was found that the REY can be enriched in fine, middle density and non-magnetic fractions using size classification, density and magnetic separations, correspondingly. The combination of size classification and magnetic separation, fund to be the most effective processes, resulted in enrichment of REY content of raw CFA with 782 μg g  J.P. acknowledges the financial supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at