Ciprofloxacin (CIP) is a pervasive ecosystematic contaminant which is classified as highly effective broad-spectrum antibiotic. In this work, CIP was degraded by a self-prepared ternary Ce3ZrFe4O14-x/CF composite cathode (x referred to oxygen vacancies) undergoing the heterogeneous electrocatalytic process. The influences of operating parameters such as pH, applied current and loading capacity, were estimated by removing efficiency. Compared with the pure carbon felt (CF), 3.8 wt% Ce3ZrFe4O14-x/CF composite cathode showed the efficient degradation of CIP in broad pH range 3.0–6.0 with 100 mA. The degradation rates reached more than 98.0% at the wide pH range in 3 h, even reached 100% at pH = 3. The results indicated that the Ce3ZrFe4O14-x/CF composite emerged a brilliant electrocatalysis in enhancing oxygen active species with converting reactions in Ce4+↔Ce3+ and Fe3+↔Fe2+. For further understanding the ternary Ce3ZrFe4O14-x/CF composite electrode, we used SEM, BET, TEM, XRD, XPS, TOC, HPLC–MS, EPR, CV and EIS to characterize and analyze. Also, it was deemed as a prospective cathode to accomplish industrialization for CIP degradation, based on lower energy consumption and wide pH range.Antibiotics are one of the most significant clinical medicines [ Nowadays, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) is seen as a favored pathway which utilizes high-activity fleeting species of hydroxyl radicals (∙OH) to oxidize the recalcitrant organic compounds into CO Because of the excellent valence switching between Ce Herein, in order to meet broad applications, we developed a novel ternary Ce Na Carbon felt (CF) was divided into the size of 5 cm × 3 cm × 0.6 cm in width-Carbone Lorraine. It was essential for the CF electrode to pretreat. Firstly, the tailoring electrode was dunked in 10% H After that, the processed CF was submerged into the mixed solution, including 20 mL deionized water and 60 mg total mass of three salts (molar ratio of Ce(NO The degradation experiments of CIP were performed in a cylindrical glass cell (250 mL) equipped with two electrodes: the Pt plate (1 × 0.5 cm, ≥99.9% purity) as anode, the synthetic Ce Morphology and composition analyzing of the pure CF and Ce Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) were used to detect the electrochemical properties of electrode in the typical three-electrode system. Ce The high performance liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (HPLC–MS, Waters XEVO TQS analyzer) was used to separate and identify the intermediates during the degradation process, so that we could carry out the reasonable degradation mechanism. The apparatus for chromatographic column was the Waters Acquity UPLC BEH C18 column (2.1 mm × 1.8 mm, 1.7 μm), working at 40 °C. 0.5% HCOOH aqueous solution and CH From As shown in The crystalline phases of all the calcined oxides, composite oxides, pury CF and ternary electrode material detected by XRD were clarified in We investigated thoroughly the degradation of CIP using the pure CF and the 3.8 wt% Ce  XPS is a superior means that assess the surface elements qualitatively and quantitatively through the chemical bonding energy (BE). As shown in The O 1s spectra for Ce    As shown in In order to reach high efficient degradation of CIP, we synthesized four different proportions composites and the total mass kept 60 mg. According to our previous work [ As shown in The different loading capacities on the CF were obtained by adding 15 mg, 45 mg, 60 mg and 75 mg total mass of three salts, respectively. And we used them as cathodes to degrade 50 mg L The oxidative degradation of CIP in EF process was regulated by the formation rate of H  The ultimate purpose to treat wastewater is that organic pollutants are fully converted into inorganic ions, CO We tested CIP removal rates using CF, Ce When the Ce The possible heterogeneous electrocatalytic degradation mechanism by using 3.8 wt% Ce In addition, the standard redox potential of Ce In order to grasp the electrocatalytic oxidation process of CIP by using 3.8 wt% Ce Another path was that CIP lost H In this paper, a series of ternary Ce This work was supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: