Purpose
                  To evaluate and compare the biomechanical properties of 8 different locked fixed-angle volar distal radius plates under conditions designed to reflect forces seen in early fracture healing and postoperative rehabilitation.
               
                  Methods
                  We evaluated the Acumed Acu-Loc (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR), Hand Innovations DVR (Hand Innovations, Miami, FL), SBi SCS volar distal radial plate (Small Bone Innovations, Morrisville, PA), Synthes volar distal radius plate and EA extra-articular volar distal radius plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA), Stryker Matrix-SmartLock (Stryker Leibinger, Kalamazoo, MI), Wright Medical Technology Locon VLS (Wright Medical Technology, Arlington, TN), and Zimmer periarticular distal radius locking plate (Zimmer, Warsaw, IN). After affixing each plate to a synthetic corticocancellous radius, we created a standardized dorsal wedge osteotomy. Each construct had cyclic loading of 100 N, 200 N, and 300 N for a total of 6000 cycles. Outcomes, including load deformation curves, displacement, and ultimate yield strengths, were collected for each construct.
               
                  Results
                  The Wright plate was significantly stiffer at the 100 N load than the Zimmer plate and was stiffer at the 300 N load than 4 other plates. The Zimmer and Hand Innovations plates had the highest yield strengths and significantly higher yield strengths than the Wright, SBi, Stryker, and Synthes EA plates.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Given the biomechanical properties of the plates tested, in light of the loads transmitted across the native wrist, all plate constructs met the anticipated demands. It seems clear that fracture configuration, screw placement, cost, and surgeon familiarity with instrumentation should take priority in selecting a plating system for distal radius fracture treatment.
               
                  Clinical relevance
                  This study provides further information to surgeons regarding the relative strengths of different plate options for the treatment of distal radius fractures.