We compared the mechanical behaviour of osteosynthesis with the percutaneous compression plate (PCCP) compared with the standard osteosynthesis sliding hip screw (SHS) in intracapsular hip fractures. We created 10 stable and 10 unstable intracapsular hip fractures in 20 synthetic femurs. Each fracture was fixed with either the SHS or PCCP. In six pairs of cadaver femurs, we created unstable intracapsular hip fractures and fixed them with the SHS or PCCP, at random on the left or right side. All femoral heads were exposed to a cyclic, combined axial and torque load until failure. In each group, the PCCP resisted a significantly higher load than the SHS. Clinical prospective studies are needed to confirm these in vitro findings that the PCCP is more stable than the SHS.The main goal of treatment of intracapsular fractures of the proximal femur is restoration of pre-injury function without associated morbidity. Therefore prerequisites are anatomical or near anatomical reduction and stable fracture fixation, The percutaneous compression plate (PCCP) was developed by Gotfried, as a double-axis, minimally invasive implant providing rotational stability, preventing fracture dislocation and allowing immediate full weight bearing. Does the PCCP withstand higher rotational loads because of its double-axis neck screw configuration, and thus prevent early failure following fracture collapse and varus retroversion of the head? Is the PCCP, with posteromedial comminution, a more rotational stable implant in intracapsular hip fracture than the SHS? Is the PCCP, from a biomechanical perspective, capable of reducing the number of failures? This study was carried out in two phases. First, we used 20 composite femora (type 3306, Sawbones™, Pacific Research Laboratories, Vamont, WA, USA) to assess the inherent characteristics of the two implant devices, and subdivided the femora into four groups of 5. These synthetic models have been shown to behave adequately in a mechanical sense, according to Cristofolini et al. In the second phase, identical experiments, with simulated comminuted fractures, were performed using six pairs of fresh cadaver femora. The right and left cadaver femurs were randomised for fixation either with the PCCP or the SHS in a paired way. The procedure for fracturing, fixation and creating comminution was identical to that followed for the synthetic femora. The fractures were fixed with either the SHS (DHS, Synthes We classified the types of fracture-osteosynthesis into six groups as follows: Intracapsular hip fracture, reconstructed with the SHS (stable fracture type), synthetic femur. Intracapsular hip fracture, reconstructed with the PCCP (stable fracture type), synthetic femur. Intracapsular hip fracture with posterior comminution; reconstructed with the SHS (unstable fracture type), synthetic femur. Intracapsular hip fracture with posterior comminution, reconstructed with the PCCP (unstable fracture type), synthetic femur. Intracapsular hip fracture with posterior comminution, reconstructed with the SHS (unstable fracture type), cadaver femur. Intracapsular hip fracture with posterior comminution, reconstructed with the PCCP (unstable fracture type), cadaver femur. The distal end of each synthetic and cadaver bone was resected 30 and 20 The typical mode of failure for the SHS reconstructions was posterior rotation with retroverted varus deviation of the head, as would be observed clinically. For the PCCP reconstructions, failure usually involved posterior rotation with twisting of the two neck screws, for the comminuted and non-comminuted fracture groups. The specimens in groups 1 and 3 (SHS) maintained maximal loads to failure of 36.0 Intracapsular hip fractures require superior fixation We used a drill-mould to create a standardised fracture instead of the smooth osteomised fracture used by others, In treating these types of fractures, the SHS is most often used, The higher failure loads for the unstable fractures can be explained by the way in which failure was initiated and progressed. In the unstable fracture-type reconstructions treated in by the SHS (group 3), directly after starting the testing secondary stabilisation occurred because of slight posterior rotation impaction and indentation of fracture parts. The reconstructions then resisted a higher load than the stable fracture treated with the SHS. This secondary stabilisation is shown in The PCCP is a minimally invasive implant originally developed for the treatment of pertrochanteric hip fractures. It has two stable angular parallel neck screws which should resist higher rotational forces, as required particularly in comminuted intracapsular hip fractures, to prevent posterior rotation and retroverted varus deviation of the head and failure of fixation, seen often in fractures treated with the SHS. The failure mode of the PCCP reconstruction in our study was posterior rotation with twisting of the two neck screws. This study shows that the PCCP indeed enhances the stability of the reconstruction in a combined axial and rotational loading configuration. It was not feasible to compare our failure loads with those reported by Goodman et al., Husby et al., Seto et al.,Neustadt et al. and Engesaeter et al., Our results suggest that the PCCP will perform clinically at least as well as the SHS, and should reduce the failure rate in displaced, comminuted or unstable intracapsular hip fractures treated with osteosynthesis. In addition, the PCCP can be inserted using a minimally invasive surgical technique, as has already been demonstrated in the treatment of the pertrochanteric hip fractures by Gotfried, Janzing and Brandt and coworkers. Clinical prospective studies are needed to establish whether these experimental findings can be confirmed in vivo. The authors thank Willem van de Wijdeven for his technical support. This study was partly financed by RxMedical and Mathys.