A production type-curve solution for coalbed methane reservoirs is presented in this paper. The proposed production type curves were generated in terms of dimensionless production rate and dimensionless time groups that are based on the diffusivity equations of the two-phase flow in dual-porosity, dual-permeability coalbed methane reservoirs. The dual-porosity, dual-permeability reservoir simulation model is used as a tool in constructing the production type curves with constant sandface pressure specifications at the inner boundary. Sensitivity analyses are performed to investigate the capability of the proposed production type curves. Several sets of type-curve matching exercises are successfully performed to predict reservoir properties on different systems exhibiting a variety of reservoir and fluid properties. The proposed production type curves can be used to estimate reservoir properties including fracture permeability, fracture porosity, matrix porosity and water saturations in the fracture and matrix systems.gas formation volume factor in the fracture domain (RB/SCF) gas formation volume factor in the matrix domain (RB/SCF) water formation volume factor in the fracture domain (RB/STB) water formation volume factor in the matrix domain (RB/STB) thickness (ft) relative permeability to gas relative permeability to water pressure (psia) dimensionless fracture pressure dimensionless matrix pressure initial pressure (psia) pressure in the fracture domain (psia) pressure in the matrix domain (psia) sandface pressure (psia) dimensionless gas production rate dimensionless water production rate gas production rate (SCF/D) water production rate (STB/D) sorption rate (SCF/D) water saturation in the fracture domain water saturation in the matrix domain initial water saturation in the fracture domain initial water saturation in the matrix domain time (day) temperature (R) dimensionless time volume of adsorbed gas (SCF) compressibility factor fracture porosity matrix porosity gas viscosity (cp) water viscosity (cp) coal density (ton/ft interporosity term of gas phase (SCF/D) interporosity term of water phase (STB/D) fracture storage Type-curve analysis is one of the fundamental tools in well test analysis to determine reservoir characteristics such as reservoir permeability and reservoir boundaries. There are two major applications of type curves: pressure type curves and production type curves. Pressure type curves, which consist of a series of dimensionless pressure drop values plotted against dimensionless time, can be used for pressure transient analysis when a well testing is conducted under a specified constant flow rate and the corresponding pressure response is measured. In contrast, production type curves consist of a series of dimensionless production rate values versus dimensionless time and can be used for decline curve analysis purposes where the well is flowing at a constant sandface pressure, which can also be considered as a transient production analysis. Both applications yield similar accuracy levels as flow rate and pressure are related and controlled by individual reservoir characteristics.  A type-curve solution was proposed for coalbed methane (CBM) reservoirs by In Eq. The dimensionless form of the equation can be written as: The type curves were generated using a two-phase, one-dimensional, radial numerical simulator (  The gas desorption term was accounted in the total compressibility, In this study, a dimensionless diffusivity equation that describes the two-phase flow in dual-porosity CBM systems is developed using the gas and water flow equations in the fracture and matrix domains of CBM systems. The proposed dimensionless diffusivity equation combines two applications developed by The development of the dimensionless equation that describes the flow of gas and water in the dual-porosity, dual-permeability CBM systems is presented here. The formulation involves deriving the governing equations of the two-phase flow in dual-porosity, dual-permeability CBM reservoirs as proposed and implemented by Gas flow equations in fracture and matrix systems can be written as: In Eq. Water flow equations in the macropore (fracture) and micropore (matrix) systems of the reservoir domains can be written as: In Eq. Substituting Eq. And multiplying Eq. Furthermore, multiplying Eq. And multiplying Eq. Similarly, multiplying Eq. Adding Eqs. Now, one can focus on the right-hand side (RHS) of Eq. The expanded form of the RHS becomes: Differentiating Eq. Substituting Eq. Now, we can recall the following saturation constraints: Differentiating Eqs. Substituting Eqs. For the sake of simplicity, Eq. Substituting Eq. Since the terms Expanding the left-hand side of Eq. Let Substitution of Eqs. A simple manipulation of Eq. Recognizing that, Eq. Numerical trials conducted by Arrangement of Eq. Multiplying Eq. Eq. Transforming Eq. The dimensionless time group of Eq. Now, under the presence of assumptions presented earlier, relationships between the dimensionless diffusivity equation and dimensionless groups and the numerical dual-porosity, dual-permeability CBM reservoir model developed by Sensitivity of the proposed gas and water production type curves is investigated in this section. The aforementioned dual-porosity, dual-permeability numerical simulation model was used to generate gas and water flow rates as a function of time. Such production data were used to calculate the dimensionless time, dimensionless gas and water rate groups. All parameters in the dimensionless groups including gas and water formation volume factors, compressibility factor ( The value of The production type curves are found to be weakly sensitive to matrix permeability, diffusion coefficient and sorption time constant, all of which are related to the multi-mechanistic flow in the matrix system and to the delay of gas desorption. Based on the results of the sensitivity analysis, the aforementioned parameters with strong sensitivity to the production type curves including fracture storage, water saturations in the fracture and matrix systems, ratio of initial pressure to sandface pressure and ratio of the distance between the wellbore and the reservoir boundary to wellbore radius are used in generating the gas and water production type curves for coalbed methane systems. Matrix permeability, diffusion coefficient and sorption time constant are excluded from the generation of the type curves; however, the application of the production type curves is still valid particularly at early-time and late-time periods. This is due to the fact that not only is the sensitivity of the production type curves to these three parameters small at the intermediate production period but also these three parameters show no sensitivity to the production type curves during the early-time and late-time periods. Thus, it is important to note that the application of the proposed type curves should be emphasized at the early and late periods of the production to avoid the effects of the matrix permeability, diffusion coefficient and sorption time constant. In this part of the study, the use of the proposed production type curves for two-phase flow in CBM systems for reservoir characterization is demonstrated. The reservoir and fluid properties used in generating the proposed production type curves are presented in Case 1 is presented here to illustrate the validation of the proposed production type curves for determining reservoir properties. Case 2 demonstrates the procedure for the systems with different relative permeability curves. Both cases exhibit a variety of reservoir and fluid properties, which are presented in In this case study, a simulation run was conducted for a rather tight CBM system with For the match of gas production rate, the coordinates of the match point, which is denoted in Different match points can be read once the match is achieved but they will yield the same solution. Also, it can be observed that good match at later-time period can be achieved where Relative gas permeability, Using the match point data above and Eqs. The fracture permeability can be calculated using the definition of the dimensionless water flow rate. Using the match point data and Eqs. In this case, a simulation run was conducted on a coalbed methane system with different relative permeability characteristics. The production type curves were found to be sensitive to different initial water saturations. This implies that the production type curves are expected to be sensitive to relative permeability due to their intrinsic dependence on saturation. Find the gas relative permeability at the initial water saturation. Find the water saturation that corresponds to the same value of gas relative permeability obtained from Step (1) using the relative permeability curves used in generating the production type curves ( Use the production type curves with the same value of water saturation obtained from Step (2) for the analysis. In this exercise, the relative permeability curves in The fracture permeability can be calculated as 11.78 In this study, the governing equations of the two-phase flow in dual-porosity, dual-permeability CBM reservoirs are combined into a single transport equation for CBM systems. The diffusivity equation was transformed into a dimensionless form and additional dimensionless groups were developed to construct a type-curve solution. The dual-porosity, dual-porosity CBM numerical model developed at Penn State ( 