“ Abraham Warshawsky was a very special individual. He was a talented, original and inventive chemist, highly active and skilled in organizing scientific meetings, a fluent and appealing lecturer and an excellent teacher and instructor. Abraham had an ‘applied attitude’ towards research. He always asked himself, “what can be done with the compounds?” and not only “how can they be made?” He was not only interested in understanding nature, he wanted to be able to harness it to do a job! This approach, which is presently accepted, and often crucial, directed him throughout his research career, even in times when such an attitude hindered obtaining positions in prestigious centers, like the Weizmann Institute, and he paid a personal price. His fields of interest embraced organic and polymer chemistry; hydrometallurgy and extraction of metal ions from wastes and water bodies; catalysis; metal complexes; chelating therapy; and, recently, he became fascinated by combinatorial chemistry. Abraham was captivated by the potential of the last-named field since it signified for him the combination of pure and applied chemistry. He committed himself to teach the subject in the Feinberg Graduate School of the Weizmann Institute of Science and to organize scientific meetings in this area. The last time I met him, rushing about and happy, was during the ISCT CombiTech 2001 conference, which he organized a few days before his untimely death. I remember him being full of energy, in high spirits and very proud of the establishment of the Israeli Society for Combinatorial Technologies, of which he was elected Chairman. Abraham was a very warm individual and highly esteemed by his students and collaborators. He was an easy-going person, never imposing his opinion on the people around him, allowing many degrees of freedom to his students; in this way he helped educate a group of young, independent scientists. I worked with Abraham for many years, at first as a senior member in his group and later, as a neighbor, sharing the same laboratory. I shall always remember the long talks that we had regarding scientific subjects, our families, politics, trips abroad and many versatile topics. I was always impressed by his common sense, good advice and sincerity. He was a special person and this is how I will remember him.    