The lack of information concerning the compositions and erosion-induced redistributions of soil aggregates will limit our understanding regarding the stability and the fate of eroded soil organic carbon (SOC). In this work, we develop a tool for modeling the erosion-induced fractionation of soil aggregates and characterizing their compositions and redistribution pathways in the landscapes. Erosion-induced redistributions of soil organic carbon (SOC) on cultivated hill slopes with contour hedgerows planted to reduce soil and nutrient losses were investigated by the 137Cs tracing technique combined with soil composition characterization. The soil composition in 56 samples taken across cultivated plots was treated using the positive matrix factorization (PMF) method of receptor modeling. Five factors driving the interrelationships between the soil parameters and 137Cs in the plots were interpreted as representing the five types of soil aggregates, which were fractionated in situ according to their compositions, specific densities, and redistribution pathways under erosion forces combined with tillage and conservation measures. According to the PMF model, approximately three quarters of the 137Cs activity was attributed to the SOC aggregated with sand particles, which accounted for 33% of the SOC concentration and was identified as the light, labile SOC fraction. There was another labile SOC-sand aggregates, which did not contain 137Cs and accounted for 13% of the SOC concentration. The heavy, stable fraction that accounted for 44% of SOC concentration was in the SOC-clay aggregates, which contain the largest amounts of N, P, K, Kdis, and the highest CEC. The labile SOC-sand aggregates were concentrated in the depositional areas above the hedgerows whereas the stable SOC-clay aggregates were found in the eroding areas between the hedgerows. Labile SOC was depleted in the cultivated plot without conservation measures, but it was retained appreciably in the four cultivated plots with hedgerows.Soil erosion degrades agricultural lands and also contributes to the land use-associated flux of CO  Weak correlations between Significant correlations between various soil components, both positive and negative, were determined in our previous work ( To further elaborate on this idea, this report presents a method for modeling the erosion-induced fractionation of soil aggregates. Positive matrix factorization (PMF) of factor analysis is used to derive factors driving the intercorrelations between soil components in the landscape. These factors will be interpreted as representing the various types of soil aggregates involved in erosion transport. The PMF model consists of the factor contributions and the factor compositions. The former represents the redistribution pathways of soil aggregates on the landscape. The latter characterizes the compositions of the fractionated soil aggregates, particularly those incorporating The experiments were carried out at the erosion control demonstration site of the National Institute for Soils and Fertilizers (NISF), some 50 The plots run parallel to each other from the top of the hillslope to the bottom, where runoff sediments are collected in observation ponds to gauge soil loss by a conventional technique ( A total of 66 samples were collected down to a depth of 30 The measured concentrations of Modeling the fractionation of soil aggregates to derive their composition profiles and redistribution patterns using the PMF method is the focus of this study. The input data employed in modeling are the measured concentrations of The redistribution patterns of  In contrast, clay and BD followed quite opposite redistribution patterns, with the minimum being observed above the hedgerows, followed by an increase downslope reaching maximum in the middle area between the hedgerows ( Unlike the above-mentioned soil components, K, K For the plot without hedgerows, T5, the concentrations of Underlying the observed interrelationships among the soil constituents was the erosion-induced redistribution of soil aggregates, in which organic matter, mineral particles, soil constituents, and water pores are held together ( Factor analysis is a statistical method that decomposes a matrix of composition data Factor analysis has been widely used in air pollution studies in which factors are interpreted as representing emission sources affecting the chemical compositions at the monitoring site. Initially, the conventional method of principal component factor analysis (PCFA) was often used, but due to the limitations and ambiguity in resolving the emission sources ( PMF is a weighted least-square fit of the composition data matrix in which the weights are determined depending on the error estimates of individual data values. The fitting is done by minimizing the so-called object function Q with respect to The PMF method was applied for the first time in this work for the characterization of soil aggregates and modeling their erosion-induced redistributions on the landscape. The PMF software version 3.0 of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency ( Of the 15 soil parameters measured in our experiments, only 13 were included in the composition data set for factor analysis. BD and pH were removed because they do not match the properties specified for the composition value The PMF model was obtained by executing the base run of EPA PMF v. 3.0, and the uncertainty of the model was then estimated via bootstrapping. In the base run, the optimal PMF solution was achieved with five factors. The matrix of factor compositions, The factor contributions at the sampling points, or the redistributions of factors in the plots, are plotted in The residual The results of the PMF model agreed well with the measured average concentrations of soil components that are presented in the last column of The uncertainties in the factor compositions that were obtained in the base run were estimated by bootstrapping. One hundred bootstrap runs were executed, providing the uncertainties of the factor loadings in The factors can be interpreted as representing soil aggregates that exhibit different composition profiles and redistribution pathways, as shown in  The The remaining 10% of the The soil aggregates corresponding to factors 1, 2, and 3 accumulated in the areas above the hedgerows ( Thirteen percent of the total average concentration of SOC was attributed to factor 5, the largest sand fraction, which did not incorporate The SOC-sand aggregates and the SOC-clay aggregates were well resolved in the PMF model. The light SOC-sand aggregates were found to be more labile than the heavy SOC-clay aggregates. Erosion forces can easily break bonds between SOC and sand particles, leaving organic matter to be washed away with water runoff. As a result, the light SOC-sand aggregates became depleted in plot T5, which was cultivated without conservation measures ( On the other hand, the heavy SOC-clay aggregates were more stable, and the SOC-clay bond appeared to be sufficiently strong to withstand erosion forces in the conditions without conservation measures. In plot T5, the SOC-clay aggregates account for 58% of the SOC content. No information about the structure and biological activity of soil aggregates was available from the PMF model. (To obtain information on these properties, appropriate soil indicators should be measured and included in the input data for PMF modeling). However, it can be expected from the results of aggregate fractionation experiments performed in the laboratory ( The PMF model constructed from the composition data for the soil labeled with the environmental radionuclide Approximately three quarters of the detected Labile and stable SOC were assigned to the SOC-sand and SOC-clay aggregates, respectively. Labile SOC was almost completely removed from the cultivated plot without hedgerows by water erosion, whereas it was retained to an appreciable extent in the four cultivated plots with hedgerows. It can be expected that carbon sequestration in stable SOC aggregates will occur in the middle areas between the hedgerows, whereas SOC in the labile aggregates deposited above the hedgerows will be prone to decomposition into CO