The classic biomimetic apatite coating process can be accelerated by first immersing substrates into concentrated simulated body fluid, 5× SBF (SBF1), at 37°C, to form an initial coating of precursor apatite spheres, and subsequently transferring to a second 5× SBF (SBF2) solution which is devoid of crystal growth inhibitors to promote phase transformation of SBF1-derived precursor apatite spheres into final crystalline apatite plates. Since SBF1 governs the formation kinetics and composition of the initial precursor spheres, we hypothesized that the pH of the SBF1 solution will also influence the final structure of the SBF2-derived crystalline apatite. To test this hypothesis, polystyrene substrates were immersed into SBF1 with different pH (5.8 or 6.5), and then immersed into the identical SBF2 (pH=6.0). The resultant apatites exhibited similar 2θ XRD peaks; FTIR spectra in terms of hydroxyl, phosphate and carbonate groups; and Ca/P atomic ratio (1.42 for SBF15.8 apatite; 1.48 for SBF16.5 apatite). SEM, TEM and electron diffraction show that while SBF16.5 (pH 6.5) precursor spheres transform into larger, single crystals plates, SBF15.8 (pH 5.8) precursor spheres developed minute, polycrystalline plate-like structures over predominantly spherical precursor substrate.Formation of a carbonated apatite layer has been shown to be an important phenomenon leading to direct bone bonding onto bioactive ceramic surfaces in vivo Recently, Barrere et al. We recently described the detailed structural evolution of apatite under a similar accelerated process All reagents were purchased from EM science. 5× SBF was prepared by sequentially dissolving CaCl Mg All solutions were sterile filtered through 0.22 Accelerated biomimetic apatite coatings were prepared in two different conditions.   After 1 day immersion in SBF1 and 2 days immersion in SBF2, all substrate surfaces were gently rinsed with sterile ddH The apatite coated polystyrene dishes were cut to the SEM stub size. The specimens were then coated with a thin layer of carbon to improve the conductivity. The biomimetic apatite was observed with a field emission SEM (Phillips/FEI XL-30) that equipped with EDX (energy-dispersive spectrometer) for microchemical analysis. For TEM observation, the apatite was scraped gently from the surface of substrate, and re-suspended in isopropanol. One or 2 drops of the suspension were pipetted onto a Holey carbon grid and observed in a TEM (Phillips/FEI CM-20). While low magnification images were taken to analyze the apatite morphology, high-resolution TEM and electron diffraction were applied to obtain lattice images and diffraction patterns for crystallographic study, respectively. XRD spectra were obtained using Siemens D5000 X-ray diffractometer (CuK Apatite powders were gently scraped from substrate, and placed in contact with diamond ATR window. FTIR (Avatar 360 Thermo Nicolet spectrometer) transmittance spectra from 4000 to 500 After 1 day immersion in SBF1 After 1 day immersion in SBF1 and 2 days in SBF2, all precursor spheres from both high and low pH conditions were transformed into plate-like morphology ( ATR-FTIR spectra ( The presence of CO The XRD spectra are shown in TEM observation, however, shows that final apatites formed from high and low pH SBF1 solutions are quite different morphologically. Apatite formed in SBF1 Conversely, apatite morphology of low initial pH condition (SBF1 SBF1 and SBF2 were freshly prepared in this study. This is important since the pH of SBF solutions can increase during storage. Within 1 week of storage at 4°C, the pH of SBF1 Jianguo It is not known whether the difference in surface texture and surface roughness is significant or not in terms of biological response Accelerated biomimetic apatite coating process can be achieved by first immersing substrates into concentrated simulated body fluid, 5× SBF (SBF1), at 37°C, to form an initial coating of precursor apatite spheres, and subsequently transferring to a second 5× SBF (SBF2) solution which is devoid of crystal growth inhibitors to promote phase transformation of SBF1-derived precursor apatite spheres into final crystalline apatite plates. Since SBF1 governs the formation kinetics and composition of the initial precursor spheres, this study showed that the pH of the SBF1 solution also influenced the final structure of the SBF2-derived crystalline apatite. SEM, TEM, and electron diffraction showed that while SBF1 This research was sponsored by NIH/NIDCR (1RO3 DE12956-01A).