Mesoporous magnesium substituted β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCMP) nanospheres have been fabricated by the direction of EDTA. Metastable nanoparticles were firstly grown from the amorphous Mg2P2O7. Next, the EDTA ions were adsorbed on the surface of the metastable precursor nanoparticles and controlled their self-assembly into aggregates. The adsorption of the EDTA ions increased the surface charge of the precursor nanoparticles, driving the formation of interspaces in the aggregates. Then, nucleation and growth of β-TCMP occurred along the interspaces under the influence of EDTA. As a result, the mesoporous β-TCMP nanospheres formed by the self-transformation of the metastable precursor nanoparticles within the aggregates. Further, the particle size and specific surface area of the obtained porous β-TCMP nanospheres were tuned by a facile way. Interestingly, the mesoporous β-TCMP nanospheres were capable of loading Dox with a maximum drug loading efficiency of 96.9%. The Dox-loaded mesoporous β-TCMP nanospheres held properties of slow sustained release and easy cellular uptake. The materials could be potential biomaterials for drug delivery and tissue regeneration.Calcium phosphates (CaP) are attractive biomaterials for the application in bone substitutes and drug delivery systems because of their excellent biocompatibility and biodegradability As far, diverse methods have been developed to prepare β-TCMP materials, and the solid-state reaction technique and the chemical precipitation approach were the most common methods Alternatively, inorganic materials of higher-order architectures can be spontaneously fabricated by mesoscale assembly and transformation of metastable inorganic aggregates controlled by various organic molecules in aqueous solution In this paper, mesoporous β-TCMP nanospheres were successfully prepared by a self-assembly and transformation process controlled by EDTA ions. Generally, β-TCP cannot form in aqueous solution for the involvement of proton and hydroxyl ions Ethylenediaminetetraacetic disodium salt (Na In a typical synthesis, the mixed solution of Na The feasibility of sample 6 as drug delivery systems has been studied. Typically, 10 The property of drug release from the porous β-TCMP nanoparticles in vitro was investigated. Phosphate buffer solution (PBS, pH 7.4) with different pH was used as the release medium. Generally, the aforementioned Dox-loaded β-TCMP collected by centrifugation was redispersed into 2 The viability of the obtained β-TCMP powders, the Dox-loaded β-TCMP and the free Dox has been estimated by MTT assays. Cos7 cells were seeded onto a 96-well plate at a seeding density of 8000 Cos-7 and Sk-ov-3 cells were seeded onto the pre-sterilized cover glass in a 24-well plate at a seeding density of 80 Samples for SEM, TEM analysis were dispersed in ethanol by sonication. The suspension was dropped onto copper mesh and dried in air. Specially, the specimens were sputtered with gold to increase conductivity for SEM analysis. SEM analysis was obtained on a Hitachi S-4800 electron microscope at an acceleration voltage of 25.0 Polycrystalline calcium phosphate nanospheres with mesoporous structures were produced by heating the starting mixtures with pH of 8–9 at 170 The presence of EDTA in the reaction mixtures was crucial for the formation of porous β-TCMP nanospheres. As shown in The process for the formation of the porous β-TCMP nanospheres was studied by the analysis of the structures and chemical composition of the samples isolated from the heating reaction mixtures with pH 8–9 at 170 As other researches reported in earlier studies, EDTA can exist in seven forms: H The above discussion indicated that EDTA played the dominant role on the formation of porous β-TCMP nanoparticles, and a three-key-step process was suggested (described in Because of the larger specific surface area and the colloidal stability, the porous particles of sample 6 were used for application in drug delivery. It has been evidenced that the porous β-TCMP nanoparticles were effective drug deliveries. Doxorubicin hydrochloride (Dox·HCl), a typical anticancer drug, was chosen as model drug to investigate the drug loading and release behaviors of the porous materials. The adsorption kinetics of Dox·HCl were measured in the Dox·HCl aqueous solution ranged from 50 To study the release properties, the cumulative drug-release behaviors of Dox-loaded porous β-TCMP nanoparticles were recorded in PBS with different pH at 37 The in vitro cytotoxicity of the porous β-TCMP nanoparticles was tested by MTT assays in Cos7 cell lines, indicating that the sample had no significant toxicity on Cos7 cells ( Polycrystalline β-TCMP nanospheres with mesoporous structures have been prepared by the self-transformation and assembly of metastable precursor nanoparticles under the influence of EDTA. The adsorption of EDTA increased the surface charge of the precursor nanoparticles, ascending the electrical repulsion, and thus retarding the aggregation of the precursor nanoparticles. Consequently, the interspaces occurred in the aggregates. Later, the nucleation and growth of β-TCMP took place along the interspaces with the dissolution of the metastable precursor nanoparticles. It was inferred that the transformation process was controlled by the dissociation of the Ca-EDTA complexes and the hydrolysis of the precursor nanoparticles under heat treating. In this case, the aggregates of metastable precursor nanoparticles underwent self-transformation and assembly with proper relative rates to produce porous β-TCMP nanospheres. Further, the particle size and specific surface area of the obtained porous β-TCMP nanospheres were simply tuned by varying the molar ratio and concentration of the starting materials. In summary, the mesoporous β-TCMP nanospheres with a maximum surface area of 132.1 According to this study, we could expect that by introducing various chelating ions to control the self-transformation and assembly process, porous nanoparticles of other inorganic materials may be easily produced, which is of significant benefit in drug delivery, catalysis and biomedical engineering. This work was supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 