Sludge flotation was reported to cause several operational problems in anaerobic systems including UASB reactors treating both strong domestic sewage and some industrial wastewater. This research is to investigate the effect of anaerobic digestion on scum-forming potential (SFP) of sludge and other physical–chemical properties. A simple test was developed to measure and compare the tendency of different sludge to form a scum layer. Results showed that anaerobic digestion affects chemical composition of sludge flocs and consequently, SFP, which was found to be inversely proportional to the degree of digestion (both SRT and temperature). It was suggested that higher protein concentration at elevated SRT and 25°C increased the negative surface charge of sludge flocs and ,consequently, reduced the ability of sludge to attach to gas bubbles and float. Floc average size increased with increasing SRT and temperature, especially for sludge with 75d SRT at 25°C. On the other hand, settling properties of sludge were negatively affected by increasing SRT to 75d at 25°C. Filterability had a strong positive correlation with average floc size, but also polymeric constituents correlated positively with filterability at 25°C.SRT is known to be the key parameter affecting biochemical and physical properties of sludge. It affects the conversion of different polymers during primary sludge digestion and anaerobic treatment of domestic sewage ( In this research, the effect of anaerobic digestion on sludge potential to form a scum layer is considered. A simple test for measuring scum-forming potential (SFP) is described, and compared for different SRTs and temperatures. The effect of the degree of anaerobic digestion on PSD and the following effect on the physical sludge characteristics were investigated. Two sets of CSTRs were operated at temperatures of 25±0.05 This experiment was based on observation of the occurred flotation caused by entrapment of gas bubbles in or to sludge particles. The thickness of scum layer formed was used to express the sludge potential for scum formation. In this test, half a Steradent (denature cleaning by Reckitt toiletry products, Hull, England) tablet was placed on the bottom of 500 The size of a stable floc is used to define sludge particles, which cannot be dispersed by small shearing forces like smooth stirring ( TS, VS, Nkj and VFA concentrations were analyzed according to Hydrolysis, acidogenesis, and methanogenesis were determined using the following equations: One gram carbohydrate (assumed as glucose, C Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 10.0 for Windows to compare means of the measured parameters at different SRTs and temperatures, with Hydrolysis, acidification and methanogenesis at 15 and 25 Conversion efficiencies calculated for lipids, proteins, and carbohydrates are shown in Both SRT and temperature affect SFP of sludge as shown in SRT has also an effect on lipids concentration, which tends to adsorb to sludge particles and float ( PSD for each sludge is shown in Digestion had a negative effect on sludge settleability for reactors operated at 15, 30, 50 and 75 days SRT and 25 Moreover, suggesting that negative surface charge of sludge flocs is proportional to SRT under anaerobic conditions correlates well with SFP results ( For reactors operated at 15 For reactors operated at 25 Protein and lipid concentrations in sludge were also found to have good correlation with filterability (  The strong effect of temperature on anaerobic sludge digestion was confirmed. Methanogenesis starts at an SRT between 5 and 15 days at 25 Anaerobic digestion process, which is determined by temperature and SRT, affected SFP of sludge and its physical characteristics. Increasing SRT and temperature resulted in significantly lower SFP of sludge. Digestion process changed also polymeric constituents of sludge, which was suggested to increase the negative surface charge of sludge particles and resulted in the lower SFP and poorer settleability. Sludge filterability was affected by the average floc size as well as protein and lipid concentrations. However, the effect of the average floc size was more significant.