This paper examines the effects of phosphorous (P) and boron (B) of Nb–Ti added interstitial free (IF) steel on dynamic recrystallization, mechanical properties and microstructures. For this purpose, four Nb–Ti added IF steels that contain different contents of P and B were selected. The dynamic recrystallization behavior was investigated using hot compression testing. Mechanical properties and microstructures of pilot hot-rolled IF steel sheet were analyzed as well using uni-axial tensile test and electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD) following pilot hot rolling experiment.
                  It has been found that B strongly retarded dynamic recrystallization of the IF steel in the temperature range of 900–1100°C. However, P did not delay dynamic recrystallization at 1100°C. The effect of P on dynamic recrystallization was less than that of B. EBSD analysis revealed that absence of P and B induced fine ferrite grain size and many high angle grain boundaries. The ferrite grain size of P and B free IF steel was 46.4% smaller than that of IF steel having 0.1% of P and 0.001% of B.Owing to a great demand for fuel efficiency of automobiles, the steelmakers have focused on manufacturing steel sheets with high strength and good formability for automobile panels. Interstitial free steels meet these requirements. From now on, the interstitial free steel is referred to as IF steel. To enhance the strength and formability of IF steel more, additional alloying elements, such as phosphorous (P) and boron (B) have been supplemented. Hereafter, phosphorous and boron are referred to as ‘P’ and ‘B’ for convenience. Kato et al. All previous works have focused on examining the effect of B of IF steel on the mechanical properties, recrystallization, phase transformation and, etc., while amount of P is fixed. However, P and B are usually added together as chemical components to IF steel. It should be noted that P not only increases strength of IF steel but it also causes embrittlement at the grain boundary. For this reason, B is generally added with P to prevent the embrittlement. Besides, adding P and B components to IF steels may give a negative influence on the surface quality of the IF steel when its final form is hot-dip galvannealed state In this paper, we examine a combined effect of P and B on dynamic recrystallization of IF steel through hot deformation test and then on mechanical properties and microstructures of pilot hot-rolled IF steel sheet. We selected Nb–Ti added IF steel in which niobium and titanium were added so that almost all interstitial atoms such as C, N and S could be stabilized as precipitates. Note that the IF steel used in this work has much higher strength (390–440 To begin with, the effect of P and B on flow stress softening has been examined separately by analyzing the measured stress–strain curves. For the study of the combined effect of P and B, we have investigated the critical strains triggering dynamic recrystallization, flow stress curves dependent of strain rates and activation energy for deformation through extensive uni-axial hot compression testing. We have then examined microstructures and mechanical properties of the hot-rolled IF steel sheet (manufactured in pilot strip rolling mill) using EBSD analysis and uni-axial tensile test. Three materials (Steels I, II and III) are used to examine a combined effect of P and B on the IF steel. In addition, a material (Steel I-B0) is also used to study separately the influences of P and B on the IF steel. Their chemical components are listed in The hot compression test has been used to investigate dynamic softening behavior of the IF steels with different contents of P and B. The hot compression test has been performed by a GLEEBLE We have performed a five-pass pilot hot strip rolling experiment to observe ferrite grain size (FGS) change, texture evolution and grain boundary characteristics of the IF steels after rolling. Tension test (Zwick, 10 Electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD) technique, which is conjunction with JSM-6500F FE-SEM, was employed to examine the size and shape of grains of hot-rolled sheet. The section containing rolling direction (RD) and normal direction (ND) of the samples were studied. The INCA software (Oxford instruments) was used for indexing EBSD patterns and enhancement of unsolved data. Micro-texture analysis software (MTAS)   These different behaviors of stress softening due to P and B can be explained using the diffusion kinetics of the solute atoms in austenite phase, which is expressed as follows:  The effect of P and B on the dynamic recrystallization can be investigated quantitatively by calculating the critical strain and peak strain. The critical strain which onsets dynamic recrystallization can be calculated from the inflection points of the work hardening rate,   The activation energy for hot deformation gives information about the difficulty of the atomic rearrangements involved in the rate-controlled mechanism, such as recrystallization To examine the influence of P and B on activation energy for deformation, we used the equation associated with the Arrhenius-type temperature sensitivity term proposed by Sellars and Tegart  Cho et al.    In order to understand grain boundary characteristic, we evaluated grain boundary misorientation maps in We have studied the effect of phosphorous (P) and boron (B) of Nb–Ti added IF steels on recrystallization (DRX) and microstructural feature using hot compression testing, pilot hot rolling experiments and EBSD analysis. Four Nb–Ti added IF steels which have different contents of P and B were selected (see It has been found that B strongly retarded dynamic recrystallization of IF steel in the temperature range of 900–1100 Considering that increasing the P and B components has a negative influence on the surface quality of the hot-dip galvannealed IF steel