Rare earth elements (REE) are critical to a wide range of technologies ranging from mobile phones to wind turbines. Processing and extraction of REE minerals from ore bodies is, however, both challenging and relatively poorly understood, as the majority of deposits contain only limited enrichment of REEs. An improved understanding of the surface properties of the minerals is important in informing and optimising their processing, in particular for separation by froth flotation. The measurement of zeta potential can be used to extract information regarding the electrical double layer, and hence surface properties of these minerals.
                  There are over 34 REE fluorcarbonate minerals currently identified, however bastnäsite, synchysite and parisite are of most economic importance. Bastnäsite–(Ce), the most common REE fluorcarbonate, supplies over 50% of the world's REE. Previous studies of bastnäsite have showed a wide range of surface behaviour, with the iso-electric point (IEP), being measured between pH values of 4.6 and 9.3. In contrast, no values of IEP have been reported for parisite or synchysite.
                  In this work, we review previous studies of the zeta potentials of bastnäsite to investigate the effects of different methodologies and sample preparation. In addition, measurements of zeta potentials of parisite under water, collector and supernatant conditions were conducted, the first to be reported. These results showed an iso-electric point for parisite of 5.6 under water, with a shift to a more negative zeta potential with both collector (hydroxamic and fatty acids) and supernatant conditions. The IEP with collectors and supernatant was <3.5. As zeta potential measurements in the presence of reagents and supernatants are the most rigorous way of determining the efficiency of a flotation reagent, the agreement between parisite zeta potentials obtained here and previous work on bastnäsite suggests that parisite may be processed using similar reagent schemes to bastnäsite. This is important for future processing of REE deposits, comprising of more complex REE mineralogy.Rare earth elements (REE), which consist of the lanthanide (=lanthanoid) series of elements plus scandium and yttrium, as designated by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), and are used in a wide range of products in the engineering, space and energy sectors [ REE fluorcarbonates are minerals which, consist of, but are not limited to, REE, F and CO REE fluorcarbonates can be differentiated by X-ray diffraction (XRD) which highlights differences in the crystal lattice and calcium content. Bastnäsite is calcium depleted, whereas synchysite contains over 16% calcium. Parisite and röntgenite form middle members of the series with 11% and 13% Ca content respectively. Röntgenite and parisite are formed of layers along the c crystalline axis, the composition of which can be subdivided into bastnäsite (B) and synchysite (S) layers [ REE fluorcarbonate minerals often exhibit irregularities in crystal structure such as syntaxial intergrowth and stacking faults [ REE minerals, in particular bastnäsite, are typically separated from the associated gangue minerals via froth flotation. Although REE deposits are sometimes processed additionally via other methods such as magnetic separation or gravity separation [ Leaching if often conducted using sulfuric acid, which breaks down the crystal structure of the mineral [ Froth flotation makes use of the differences in the surface properties between desired minerals and gangue; these differences can be optimised by altering the surface chemistry through the addition of chemical reagents. Flotation reagents for REE processing include collectors such as potassium lauryl phosphate, hydroxamic acids and fatty acids, which render the REE mineral particles hydrophobic, and depressants such as sodium carbonate, sodium silicate and lignin sulfonate, which act to increase the hydrophilicity and/or dispersion of the gangue minerals [ Surface behaviour describes a wide range of phenomena ranging from kinetic to electrochemistry, however as this review focuses on zeta potential measurements, the electrical double layer is described in detail. When a mineral is submerged in water the surface will acquire a charge due to a number of processes liberating ions including but not limited to preferential dissolution, hydration and surface group dissociation within the water, these free ions will form a counter layer or diffuse layer [ There have been many investigations into the mechanisms of fatty acid and hydroxamate adsorption onto REE minerals, using a range of methods from adsorption kinetic models to infrared spectroscopy [ The electrical double layer (EDL) describes the charged area between the mineral surface and the charged and counter charged ions attracted to that surface [ Both electrophoresis and streaming potentials as methods for measuring zeta potential contain limitations within the methodology [ The most often quoted value for zeta potentials is the iso-electric point (IEP), when the zeta potential equals zero. This is of particular value in waste water treatment but is also utilised in many other fields such as mineral processing [ Although zeta potential measurements are used to give indications of flotation they are often conducted in conjunction with micro-flotation or ultra-violet spectroscopy investigations to elucidate information on either floatability or adsorption of the mineral reagent system [ Bastnäsite is the only REE fluorcarbonate with published data for zeta potential measurements, with Smith and Steiner [ In previous studies there is inconsistency in notation between PZC and IEP, with some authors referencing the point of zero charge of bastnäsite, whereas others reference the iso-electric point [ In most studies multiple samples of bastnäsite are not investigated, however Jordens et al. [  The effect of background solution has previously been investigated by a number of authors, with the concentration and ions present affecting the magnitude and value of zeta potential [ The two main background electrolytes used in the studies reviewed in The purity of samples used is also difficult to determine, with some authors stating that the sample is handpicked (under UV light bastnäsite should glow green) and some stating % purity by conventional methods such as XRF or QEMSCAN [ The majority of studies used electrophoresis to measure the zeta potential by applying the Helmholtz-Smoluchowski equation. One study used the electroacoustic technique [  From the results summarised in In the review, we have consolidated previous studies of bastnäsite zeta potential for future research. We have also investigated the surface behaviour of the other REE fluorcarbonates, specifically parisite. Parisite is important as a possible accessory REE ore mineral in a range of deposits including Kamthai deposit, India and Khanneshin, Afghanistan [ A mineral sample of parisite-(Ce) from Snow Bird Mine, Mineral Country, Montana, USA was acquired from Ikon Minerals. Parisite-(Ce) is the only REE fluorcarbonate mineral identified at the Snowbird Fluorite REE deposit. The sample used was large (approximately 10 cm long), and yellowish brown/brown in colour, consistent with parisite samples from this locality [ A mineral sample of parisite-(Ce) from Snow Bird Mine, Mineral Country, Montana, USA was acquired from Ikon Minerals. Parisite-(Ce) is the only REE fluorcarbonate mineral identified at the Snowbird Fluorite REE deposit. The sample used was large (approximately 10 cm long), and yellowish brown/brown in colour, consistent with parisite samples from this locality [  Two types of collectors were acquired, a fatty acid supplied by Betachem (product name Betacol CKF 30B) and hydroxamic acid (product name AM810) supplied by Axis House, South Africa. These collectors were selected as hydroxamic and fatty acids are the most common collectors used in bastnäsite flotation, therefore zeta potential results from parisite can be compared to bastnäsite [ The supernatant from a mixed calcite/ankerite/synchysite/apatite ore was created by diluting the ore to 20% (wt) with DI water and heating to 60C for 30 min whilst agitating with a magnetic stirrer at 120 rpm. The solids were then separated via filtration. The supernatant was generated to approximate conditions in a flotation system of a mixed ore. Measurements using ICP-OES on an identical sample showed 11.97 mg/L of Ca ions, 1.5 mg/L Mg ions and 0.05 mg/L of Fe ions in the supernatant. The parisite-(Ce) sample was a single mineral, virtually free from contamination and was first ground via steel ring mill (Angstrom Model TE250 Ring Pulverizer) to 100% passing 80 μm. Due to the paucity of the mineral sample, grinding curves to establish the time to reach the target particle size distribution were produced using proxy samples of calcite [ The surface charge of parisite was measured as a function of pH, between pH 3.5 and pH 11, the results are shown in Both hydroxamic acid and betacol (fatty acid) are anionic collectors and as such it can be expected that they would reduce the surface charge of the mineral surface. In  The zeta potential measurements obtained for parisite can be compared to previous research conducted on bastnäsite ( Of the twenty one previous studies of bastnäsite, fifteen were identified as having extractable zeta potential values. Of these fifteen, five were selected due to their specification of purity of the sample of bastnäsite used in the study [ As can be seen in While absolute values of zeta potential are of interest, it is the response to different surfactants that is of particular importance for REE processing. Values from literature suggest that under collector (hydroxamate) conditions, parisite also behaves similarly to bastnäsite. The shift of the parisite IEP to a lower value under hydroxamate conditioning agrees with the majority of previous investigations, excluding Jordens et al. [ Two studies were selected to compare the effect of hydroxamic acid on bastnäsite and parisite (Ren et al. [ To compare the effect of the supernatant on parisite to the effect on bastnäsite, results from this research were compared to values from Espiritu et al. [ Collector adsorption under supernatant conditions has recently been explored by Espiritu et al. [ As the main difference between parisite, bastnäsite, röntgenite and synchysite is small changes within the calcium content, and parisite and bastnäsite appear to have corresponding surface behaviour it is reasonable to expect this would extend to röntgenite and synchysite. Although further work is required to investigate the application of these findings to mineral separations, if the surface behaviour of REE fluorcarbonates is the same across the series, then much of the research that has been conducted on bastnäsite deposits could be applied to synchysite, röntgenite and parisite deposits. Currently there are multiple deposits with REE fluorcarbonates under exploration such as Springer Lavergne, Quebec containing synchysite (Ce) and Mt. Prindle, AK, USA containing synchysite and parisite [ Applying bastnäsite surface behaviour, in particular the Mountain Pass and Bayan Obo deposit research, to other REE fluorcarbonate deposits already occurs, particularly when synchysite is not the principle ore mineral [ In exploration and development of REE deposits, not only is the deposit size vital but, particularly in the case of REE, the ease of extraction is extremely important. If it is possible to predict that all REE fluorcarbonates behave in a similar way to bastnäsite during flotation, then much of the research that has already been conducted into surface behaviour with regards to reagent addition remains valid. In conclusion, zeta potentials measurements of parisite, the first of their kind produced an iso-electric point (IEP) of pH 5.6. This value is at the lower end of the IEP values of bastnäsite, which range from pH 4.6 to pH 9.3 in the literature. Under reagent collector conditions parisite behaves in a similar way to bastnäsite, with the value of zeta potential decreasing with increasing pH, and the IEP shifting to lower values compared to those obtained under water conditions. This similar behaviour extends to zeta potential values under supernatant conditions, where a decrease in zeta potential values was measured, compared to those obtained under water, as have previously been observed for bastnäsite. As many REE fluorcarbonate deposits, particularly those containing synchysite and parisite are already processed in a similar way to bastnäsite, this research validates this approach. This is important for future processing of REE deposits, comprising of more complex REE mineralogy. The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This research was conducted thanks to funding by the UK's Data presented in the graphs relating to Parisite-(Ce) are publicly accessible through the British Geological Survey National Geoscience Data Centre [ None.