The impact of disinfection efficacy in natural waters was evaluated by performing disinfection assays using four untreated surface waters of various qualities and ultra-pure buffered waters as a baseline condition for comparison. Bacillus subtilis spores were spiked in these waters and disinfection assays were conducted at 22°C using either free chlorine or chlorine dioxide. Assays using indigenous aerobic spores were also completed. The inactivation kinetics in natural and ultra-pure buffered waters were not statistically different (at 
                        
                           p
                           =
                           0.05
                        
                     ) while using free chlorine, as long as disinfectant decay was taken into account. Filtering natural waters through a 0.45μm did not improve the sporicidal efficacy of chlorine. For three out of the four waters tested, the efficacy of chlorine dioxide was greater in natural waters compared to that observed in ultra-pure buffered waters. Such results are consistent with previous observations using ultra-pure waters supplemented with NOM-extract from the Suwannee River. Similar to free chlorine results, the impact of filtration (0.45μm) on the efficacy of chlorine dioxide was not statistically significant.The impact of water quality on the efficacy of disinfection has been recognized for several decades. In accordance with the scientific methodology, scientists have avoided the potential confounding effects of water quality by using synthetic waters, typically ultra-pure buffered water with minimal disinfectant demand. This approach has been useful to study the resistance of microorganisms to various disinfectants in a reproducible manner and to describe the influence of fundamental variables that can be easily adjusted in the laboratory (such as temperature and pH). Variables influencing the efficacy of disinfection can be classified into three groups: (i) variables influencing the The first group of variables (activity) includes water quality parameters such as pH and temperature, which can both alter the activity of free chlorine through the modification of HOCl/OCl Temperature is the most important variable impacting the activity of oxidant-based disinfectants. The only exception to this affirmation comes from the role of pH on free chlorine activity, although it could also be argued that free chlorine is actually composed of two disinfectants (HOCl and OCl The second group of variables (availability) concerns all inorganic and organic reduced compounds (e.g. iron, sulfide, ammonia, etc.) able to react with the disinfectant and, therefore, reduce its availability for disinfection. Traditionally, the influence of these variables has been accounted for through the use of various kinetic models. For example, disinfection efficacy can be described using the CT concept, in which C represents the residual concentration of disinfectant ( The last group of variables (accessibility) is undoubtedly the most difficult to study and describe mechanistically. Microorganism shielding or entrapment may cause interference with the disinfectant action ( Disinfection efficacy will be optimal for conditions where the activity, availability, and accessibility of the disinfectant are maximized. Yet, these factors do not necessarily bear the same weight in predicting disinfection efficacy. A bench-scale project was developed in order to assess the importance of these three variables on free chlorine and chlorine dioxide in natural waters. More specifically, the role of pH (activity), natural organic matter (availability), turbidity (accessibility), and spore clumping (accessibility) was evaluated by studying The impact of water quality parameters on disinfection efficacy was studied using surface waters provided by four participating utilities located across the Americas. The utilities provided raw waters by overnight mail delivery. The rationale about using untreated surface waters (instead of filtered waters) was to increase the opportunity to observe impacts related to natural organic matter and turbidity. Prior to initiating the disinfection assays, the waters were characterized for the following parameters: pH, turbidity, ammonia, alkalinity, hardness, dissolved organic carbon (DOC), UV absorbance and background indigenous aerobic spores. These parameters are provided in The surface waters used for this study had relatively low turbidities (1.0–2.7 NTU). However, DOC concentrations varied from 1.96   Condition #1 is the baseline condition. For this condition,  A culture of Free chlorine was measured using the DPD colorimetric method ( Inactivation data were analyzed using the effective CT concept, for which the effective microbiological dose delivered at time The inactivation kinetic with free chlorine exhibited a shoulder, which was accounted for by using a delayed Chick–Watson model ( Statistical analyses were completed using Statistica 6.0 (Statsoft, OK, USA).  With respect to free chlorine, inactivation kinetic data indicated no statistically significant (at In the case of chlorine dioxide ( Due to the dominant effect of pH on chlorination efficiency, it was necessary to use a phosphate buffer to maintain a stable pH. The impact of buffering natural waters to a pH of 6.5 was explored by performing disinfection assays under ambient pH conditions. As expected, it was observed that inactivation was more efficient under low pH conditions (data not shown). Instead, Results using chlorine dioxide in unbuffered natural waters are presented in It was expected a priori that buffering at pH 6.5 would not impact chlorine dioxide efficacy since pH does not improve or impair its efficacy in this pH range (6.5–7.8) ( The effect of turbidity was evaluated by comparing several disinfection assays performed in unfiltered and 0.45 It was observed that filtering surface waters through a 0.45 Similar to the evaluation of buffering, the impact of filtration on chlorine dioxide efficacy was studied by comparing filtered disinfection reactors from Montreal, Clayton, and Michigan with the average inactivation kinetic (excluding Puerto-Rico) in buffered unfiltered waters, even though the rwa water turbidities were reduced from 1.0–2.7 NTU to 0.2–0.8 NTU. As with free chlorine, disinfection efficiency was not significantly (at Inactivation assays were conducted using the spore population naturally occurring in surface waters. The main challenge in this type of assay arises from the low spore concentrations observed in surface waters (typically 1 to 100  Results using free chlorine ( Results with chlorine dioxide confirmed the importance of tailing for the spores and waters from Puerto-Rico ( It has been suggested by previous studies ( Apart from the obvious case where an organism is entirely occluded inside a particle or within another organism, the clumping of microorganisms is probably the most difficult challenge for water disinfection. As early as 1967, In the current project, tailing was observed especially while disinfecting indigenous spores. However, Aggregation may also be promoted by the disinfectant itself, as disinfectants, especially ozone ( Disinfectant activity can be reduced tenfold by temperature alone; the efficacy of a disinfectant may also be reduced by more a greater magnitude due to reduced microorganism accessibility. In comparison, disinfectant availability (i.e. disinfectant persistence in treated waters) is typically a variable of less importance to water treatment specialists. Although the presence of reducing agents (ammonia, sulfides, etc.) may compromise disinfection by reducing the effective disinfectant concentration, it has become standard practice, through the use of the CT concept, to maintain a residual disinfectant concentration after a given period of time. Incorporating disinfectant demand into CT calculations enables comparison of different surface waters having variable disinfectant demands ( Studies evaluating the role of natural water matrix on drinking water disinfection efficacy are limited in the literature. This situation arises from the difficulty in providing robust data sets, which can be reproduced by other scientists, the basis of the scientific methodology. Nevertheless,  In 2001, The impact of disinfection efficacy in natural waters was evaluated by performing disinfection assays using four untreated surface waters and one ultra-pure buffered water. The following conclusions were drawn from this investigation. Inactivation kinetics in natural and ultra-pure buffered waters were not statistically different while using free chlorine, as long as disinfectant decay was taken into account. For three out of the four waters tested, chlorine dioxide efficacy was improved in natural waters compared to ultra-pure buffered waters. Such a result is consistent with previous observations while using ultra-pure waters supplemented with NOM-extract from the Suwannee River. Filtering natural waters through 0.45 The inactivation kinetic of indigenous spores varies from one source water to another. This result indicates that the inactivation of indigenous spores should only be used as a site-specific measure of treatment performance. This work was funded by the American Water Works Association Research Foundation and was also supported by the NSERC-Industrial Chair on Drinking Water at the École Polytechnique de Montréal. The authors wish to thank Mélanie Rivard and Géraldine El-Baz for their assistance in completing the laboratory experiments.