Composite with aluminium 6061 matrix using red mud reinforcement to reduce the cost have been fabricated by stir casting method. A stirring arrangement has been used to ensure the uniform distribution. Scanning electron microscopy has been used to verify the uniform distribution of the reinforcement particles and energy dispersive spectroscopy has been used to confirm the presence of reinforcement inside Aluminium 6061 matrix. Macro Hardness has been obtained using Rockwell hardness tester at 60kg load by using 1/8inch steel ball at H scale and Vickers micro hardness measured using Vickers micro-hardness tester. The results have been analysed by applying Taguchi technique. The value of macro hardness and micro hardness has been found to be increased with an increase in percentage of reinforcement and ageing time, while it shows a reverse trend with increase in particle size of the reinforcement. The ANOVA analysis of the data observes that the ageing time has significant effect and particle size has least effect on both macro and micro hardness of the developed composite. Further, the experimental and predicted results have been found in close proximity to each other.In Metal matrix composites (MMCs), hard ceramic reinforcements have been distributed in a matrix of metal or alloy. In such composites, both matrix and reinforcements has been physically and chemically separate phases Literature reveals that very limited work on the effect of different parameters on macro and micro hardness of red mud based aluminium composite has been reported. Based on the findings of the literature, the authors have decided to work towards the development of red mud based aluminium composite with varying percentage and particles size of the reinforcement (Red mud), and their influence on the macro and micro hardness of the developed composite. During experimentation, to ensure the uniform distribution proper stirring arrangements has been done. Taguchi technique has been used to design the experiments for macro and micro hardness. SEM has been carried out to observe the uniform distribution in the developed composite matrix. Predicted results has also been validated by confirmation experiment and the ranking of influencing parameters has been ranked. Al 6061 which has been commercially available was selected as matrix material. Red Mud, an industrial waste has been selected as reinforcement material. Red mud has been procured from HINDALCO, Renukut, Uttar Pradesh, India. XRF analysis of red mud has been carried out and the major constituents have been Fe Using stir casting technique, Aluminium has been melted in a graphite crucible to a temperature of 900 Stirring of melted aluminium has been done with a mechanical stirrer shown in Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) confirms the presence of constituents of red mud inside the aluminium 6061 matrix. Spectrum of EDS has been shown in Macro (Rockwell) hardness of the prepared specimens has been done on Standard Rockwell hardness testing machine. Specimens of size 10 Vicker's Micro hardness of the prepared specimens has been done on vicker's micro hardness tester. For conducting the tests, specimens of size 10 In order to find out the effect of parameters under study on hardness, these parameters have been studied at five levels. L  The analysis of variance (ANOVA) has been used to find out which parameters significantly affect the macro hardness. ANOVA table for S/N ratios has been given in The optimum value of Rockwell hardness and its confidence interval has been predicted theoretically using Taguchi's approach. By recognising the effect of factors, optimum value of Rockwell hardness has been calculated. The significant process parameters for Rockwell hardness are A Where, T Predicted value of confidence interval can be obtained using the relation Where, CI= Using the following values: V The confidence interval obtained was given as 2.19. The CI of predicted Rockwell hardness at 95% confidence Interval The optimum value of process parameters for the predicted range of Rockwell hardness obtained has been given as: Reinforcement: 20%; Grain size: 74; Ageing time: 24 Hr. On the basis of conclusions drawn based on Taguchi's method, predicted results are verified by confirmation experiments. The castings have been done and experiments are conducted using optimum values of significant parameters. The average value of results has been reported in The way in how variables affect Rockwell hardness has been shown in  To find out the effect of chosen parameters on Vicker's micro-hardness, five levels of the parameters have been considered. L The The analysis of variance (ANOVA) has been done to find out which parameters significantly affect the macro hardness. ANOVA table for S/N ratios has been given in The optimum value of micro-hardness and its confidence interval have been predicted theoretically using Taguchi's approach. By recognising the effect of factors, optimum value of micro hardness has been calculated. The significant process parameters for micro hardness are A Where, Using the following values: V The confidence interval The CI of predicted micro-hardness at 95% confidence Interval is The optimum value of process parameters for the predicted range of micro-hardness given as: Reinforcement: 20%; Grain size: 74 On the basis of conclusions drawn based on Taguchi's method predicted results have been verified by confirmation experiments. The castings have been done and experiments have been conducted using optimum values of significant parameters. The average value of results has been reported in The pattern of micro hardness behaviour with variables has been shown in The micro-hardness has been found of increasing nature with an increase in percentage of red mud and similar trend of micro-hardness has been observed in composites reported by Karabulut et al. Red mud based Aluminium 6061 composite has been successfully fabricated using stir casting method by achieving uniform dispersion of reinforcement particles. SEM images verify that uniform distribution of red mud particles has been obtained in Aluminium matrix. It has been found that the value of Rockwell hardness increased with an increase in percentage of reinforcement particles and ageing time, whereas, it shows a reverse trend with an increase in particle size. From ANOVA analysis, it has been found that the effect of percentage of reinforcement is 15.22% and ageing time is 77.75% and has significant effect on macro hardness of the composite, however, the effect of particle size is 2.12% and has not been found significantly effecting the hardness. Hence, it can be concluded that the ageing time has been most influencing parameter for macro hardness followed by percentage reinforcement and particle size. Further, micro hardness shows an improvement with an increase in percentage of reinforcement particles and ageing time and has been found to be decreased with an increase in size of reinforcement particles. ANOVA analysis for micro-hardness concludes that all parameters are significantly affecting the micro hardness and the order of significance with their contribution is ageing time (48.5%), percentage of reinforcement (28.39%), and particle size (17.52%), respectively. Also, theoretically predicted and practically obtained results of confirmation experiments for macro and micro-hardness have been found within the calculated limits. Finally, it can be concluded that ageing time has significant effect on hardness and particle size of the reinforcement has least effect on hardness of the developed composite under study. Authors are very much thankful to the Science and Engineering Research Board, New Delhi (India) for funding this research project through Fast Track Young Scientist Engineering Science Scheme vide their letter No. SB/FTP/ETA-148/2013, Dated: 31/10/2013.