Background
                  Supracondylar humeral fractures (SCHFs) are very common in paediatric patients. In France, percutaneous fixation with two lateral-entry pins is widely used after successful closed reduction. Postoperative immobilisation is typically with a long arm cast combined with a tubular-bandage sling that immobilises the shoulder and holds the arm in adduction and internal rotation to prevent external rotation of the shoulder, which might cause secondary displacement. The objective of this study was to compare this standard immobilisation technique to a posterior plaster splint with a simple sling.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Secondary displacement is not more common with a posterior plaster splint and sling than with a long arm cast.
               
                  Material and methods
                  One hundred patients with extension Gartland type III SCHFs managed by closed reduction and percutaneous fixation with two lateral-entry pins between December 2011 and December 2015 were assessed retrospectively. Postoperative immobilisation was with a posterior plaster splint and a simple sling worn for 4 weeks. Radiographs were obtained on days 1, 45, and 90.
               
                  Results
                  Secondary displacement occurred in 8% of patients. No patient required revision surgery.
               
                  Discussion
                  The secondary displacement rate was comparable to earlier reports. Of the 8 secondary displacements, 5 were ascribable to technical errors. The remaining 3 were not caused by rotation of the arm and would probably not have been prevented by using the tubular-bandage sling.
               
                  Conclusion
                  A posterior plaster splint combined with a simple sling is a simple and effective immobilisation method for SCHFs provided internal fixation is technically optimal.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV retrospective observational study.Supracondylar humeral fractures (SCHFs) occur chiefly before 10 years of age The many techniques described to ensure immobilisation range from a shoulder spica cast to a posterior splint. In France, the recommended technique after percutaneous lateral pinning is a long arm cast combined with a sling that immobilises the shoulder and holds the arm in adduction and internal rotation The primary objective of this study was to compare the standard immobilisation technique to a posterior plaster splint with a simple sling. The secondary objective was to identify risk factors for secondary displacement. The working hypothesis was that secondary displacement was not more common with posterior plaster splint and sling immobilisation than with a long arm cast. The electronic database of our hospital was searched for patients younger than 16 years of age with extension Gartland type II or III SCHFs treated by percutaneous pinning between December 2011 and December 2015. Of the 135 patients identified, 26 were excluded due to the unavailability of radiographs. In addition, 9 patients were excluded because the day-1 radiographs showed early displacement requiring early revision surgery, which was taken to indicate failed primary reduction as opposed to secondary displacement. This left 100 patients for inclusion in the retrospective study. Mean follow-up was 2.5 Closed reduction was performed in the operating theatre, under general anaesthesia, and with image intensifier guidance. A blood-sampling tourniquet was applied with the elbow maximally flexed to maintain the reduction ( Postoperative immobilisation was with a posterior plaster splint composed of two bandages, one in an L shape at the posterior aspect of the elbow and the other wrapped in a U shape from one side of the elbow to the other ( The evaluation criteria assessed on the antero-posterior radiographs were Baumann's angle Secondary displacement was defined, as published previously, based on the following findings on the day-45 and day-90 radiographs: greater than 10° change in Baumann's angle and/or the lateral capitello-humeral angle All radiographic measurements were performed by an orthopaedic surgeon. The statistical analyses were performed using SPSS version 12.0 software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Numerical data were described as mean The analysis of the radiographs taken on d-45 showed secondary displacement in 8 (8%) patients, confirming our hypothesis. Pure rotational displacement characterised by a greater than 2  The only reported complication in the study population was trochlear necrosis in 1 patient after 3 months of follow-up. No cases of infection or non-union were seen. Radial nerve palsy was present in 1 patient preoperatively and resolved within 6 months. Lateral percutaneous pinning is among the options that have been proven effective and safe for treating Gartland type III SCHFs The values of Baumann's angle and the lateral capitello-humeral angle in the study population were close to the normal values reported by Shank et al. The limitations of this study include the retrospective design, which resulted in patient attrition and missing data. To confirm our findings, a randomised study would be needed to compare L-U posterior splinting combined with a simple sling to long arm casting combined with a tubular-bandage sling. Mean follow-up in our study was 2.5 months, which seems adequate given the healing times in our population and in earlier studies Sankar et al. An L-and-U-shaped posterior plaster cast combined with a simple sling is a simple and effective immobilisation method provided optimal reduction is achieved. Loss of reduction after percutaneous pinning of SCHFs seems chiefly ascribable to errors in the fixation technique. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None. Study conception: Lucas Azzolin, Audrey Angelliaume, Anaïs Delgove and Yan Lefèvre. Data collection: Lucas Azzolin. Statistic analysis: Lucas Azzolin and Audrey Angelliaume. Article writing: Lucas Azzolin, Audrey Angelliaume and Yan Lefèvre. Critic analysis: Audrey Angelliaume, Luke Harper, Abdelfetah Lalioui, Anaïs Delgove and Yan Lefèvre. Final article validation: Lucas Azzolin, Audrey Angelliaume, Luke Harper, Abdelfetah Lalioui, Anais Delgove and Yan Lefèvre.