By means of cyclic voltammetry, the influence of manganese ions on zinc electroextraction from pure sulphate electrolyte and electrolytes, containing antimony ions and hydroxyethylated-butyne-2-diol-1,4 (EAA), has been studied. It was established that manganese ions (5 g L−1) have a negligible effect on the zinc deposition from a pure electrolyte. The separation of electrode compartments by a cation exchange membrane leads to an increase of the amount of deposited zinc. This is due to the prevention of the diffusion to the cathode of MnO4
                     − ions and other oxidized products, which decrease the amount of deposited zinc and enhance the deleterious influence of antimony ions. It was proved that the organic additive EAA inhibits the process of zinc redissolution taking place in the presence of antimony ions and the inhibition is stronger when the electrode compartments are separated with a diaphragm.Manganese dioxide or potassium permanganate are added to zinc sulphate electrolyte during the leaching process in order to oxidize iron impurities. About 1.5–3 g L  Kiryakov and co-workers have found that divalent manganese (0.1–20 g L According to other authors     The aim of this study is to elucidate the influence of manganese on the zinc electroextraction from sulphate electrolyte in the presence of antimony ions and an organic inhibitor (hydroxyethylated-butyne-2-diol-1,4) of zinc redissolution. Experiments were carried out in a glass, three-electrode cell without stirring of the electrolyte (1 L). The cell was supplied with a diaphragm (2×2 cm) from “Nafion” 423 (DuPont de Nemours) separating the cathodic from the anodic compartment. “Nafion” 423 is reinforced with Teflon membrane of 1200 equivalent weight copolymer with a thickness of 0.02–0.04 cm and with specific electric resistance of 4.7 Ω cm (0.05–0.1 Ω total resistance). It is, typically, used for metal ion recovery in acidic media. A sheet of aluminium (containing iron 0.2%) supplied by Riedel de Haen with an area of 1.0 cm The studies were carried out using a cyclic potentiodynamic technique. Potential scanning, at a rate of 600 mV min The composition of the electrolyte without additives, named the ‘base electrolyte’ (BE) was as follows: 130 g L Mn Sb EAA: 0.1 and 1.0 ml L The initial potential of zinc deposition (    When the inhibitor concentration is increased to 1.0 mL L • Manganese ions (5 g L • Manganese ions intensify the process of zinc redissolution caused by Sb • The organic additive hydroxyethylated-butyne-2-diol-1,4 (EAA) inhibits the process of zinc redissolution taking place in the presence of Sb