Machining chips of commercially pure Ti (ASTM grade 2) were consolidated into full density by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) with an average grain size as low as 0.8μm, yield strength up to 650MPa, and ductility of ∼16%. Effect of recycling condition on the microstructure and mechanical properties were investigated in terms of ECAP temperature, number of passes and chemical composition. Using electron backscatter diffraction it is evident that continuous dynamic recrystallization (however, which is purely a phenomenological terminology) plays a significant role in grain (with misorientation ≥15°) formation, whilst benefitting from high stacking fault energy, this continuous conversion of subgrain (<15°) into grain can be essentially considered as an extended recovery with a substantial presence of low angle grain boundaries in the recycled Ti. The Hall–Petch relationship is adapted to explain the strengthening of the recycled Ti. Additionally, using scanning electron microscopy fractography, the ductility was analyzed by a modified Griffith criterion. Last, superior energy efficiency of ECAP reduces environmental impact when comparing to conventional melting/casting. ECAP develops an innovative solid-state process for improving the recycling value of waste Ti.Of importance practically, Ti is extensively applied to biomedical engineering (primarily referring to pure Ti of excellent biocompatibility) and aerospace manufacturing (employing preferably Ti–6Al–4V alloy due to high strength and good ductility), leading to a large quantity of waste since up to 80% of the costive raw materials may be lost to valueless chips in order to machine the component with a complex profile in particular. To reduce waste recycling by melting is widely conducted in spite of the high energy consumption. A solid-state process is thus in urgent need. In the last decade, an extensive literature on equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) has indicated that as a commonly used severe plastic deformation process ECAP is effective to produce ultrafine grains. For example, aiming to tailor submicron grains To the present, a variety of studies have been reported on solid-state recycling of nonferrous metals including Mg and Al, however, without resorting to severe plastic deformation consolidation. For example, AZ91 Mg alloy was recycled by combining ball milling, sintering (at 500 In view of solid-state process, nevertheless, it is difficult to consolidate Ti due to its inferior formability at ambient temperature. As a promising structural material with high strength and good ductility, to date, little was done to recycle Ti machining chips particularly by novel severe plastic deformation consolidation in spite of the investigations conducted in recent years by the authors developing ECAP consolidation of Ti chips ( The chips of commercially pure (CP) titanium (ASTM grade 2) with an average size of 5 Densities of ≥4.50 With high angle grain boundaries (HAGBs, ≥15°) in black and low angle grain boundaries (LAGBs, <15°) in white, EBSD microstructures of the recycled CP Ti chips at 450 and 590 In addition, as presented in The yield strength (0.2% proof stress, On the other hand, the strength of Ti is sensitive to the contents of interstitials such as oxygen and nitrogen. A chemical analysis was conducted for the recycled Ti under various conditions as presented in In addition to the high yield strength (up to 650 Moreover, composition takes effect on ductility. For example, In addition, SEM fractography reveals clearly a dimpled ductile fracture surface ( Finally, it is worth comparing the energy required by ECAP ( On the other hand, the energy whereby to melt the same quantity of Ti,  Machining chips of commercially pure Ti (ASTM grade 2) were successfully recycled by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP), a promising solid-state process. Full density and good bonding were achieved at temperatures between 450 and 590 High yield strength (up to 650 Owing to melting avoidance, less energy is required for the solid-state recycling until the eighth pass. ECAP is promising in value-adding recycling of Ti chips. This work was supported by the