Ion-exchange textiles can be used in electroremediation of heavy metal contaminated liquid effluents. In this work, the behavior of FIBAN ion-exchange textiles was tested for the transportation of two heavy metals: lead and zinc, under the effect of a constant direct electric current. Detailed characterization of fibers has been carried out in order to determine the effect of their structure on the retention of heavy metal during their electrokinetic transport. Ion-exchange fibers structure was studied by electronic scan microscopy, X-ray fluorescence, spectrogammametric analysis and Fourier Transformed Infrared Spectroscopy/Attenuated Total Reflectance. Hittorf method was used to determine the transport number of Pb2+ and Zn2+ during the electrokinetic treatment.Ion-exchange textiles have been recently reported to be successful in several environmental applications such as: water treatment, hydrogen sulfide removal from gases, solvent extraction and heavy metal removal from effluents and soils Polluting elements such as heavy metals are very difficult to eliminate completely from the contaminated industrial effluents, and usually, low metal concentration remains in the effluents. Electrokinetic remediation is one of Ion exchange textiles shows good mechanical properties and have a high ion-exchange capacity with the particular characteristic of being hydrophilic materials In this work, the electrokinetic transportation two heavy metals: lead and zinc, in aqueous solution through ion-exchange textiles is studied, and the textile structure is examined in order to explain the ionic transportation through the textiles. Ion-exchange textiles were supplied by the Institute of the organic chemistry and physics of the Belarus National Academy of Sciences. Textile fibers were manufactured with two types of polymer matrices. The first group of fibers was made of polypropylene (PP) modified by radiochemical grafting of polystyrene (ST), using as co-polymer divinyl-benzene (DVB) The second group of ion-exchange fibers used in this work is an anion-exchange fiber. The FIBAN A-6 fiber was selected in this study. This fiber contains the amine group. This is a basic fiber with a polymeric matrix of industrial polyacrylonitrile NITRO D. The experimental setup is depicted in The cell compartments were filled with lead(II) or zinc(II) nitrate solution at the concentration of 10 After 4 Transport number for the selected ions in each experiment was determined using the three FIBAN ion-exchange textiles: K-1, K-4 and A-6. The anionic textile, FIBAN A-6, was used on the cathode side, and one of the cationic textiles, K-1 or K-4, was used on the anode side in each experiment. The migration of each ion/counter-ion through each textile was determined. Then, the transference number was calculated using the method of Hittorf The method of Hittorf is directly based on the definition of the ion transference number. Transference number is defined as the fraction of the electric current transported by ions and counter-ions (Eq. After a predefined treatment time Ion-exchange textiles were dried and then weighted. Textiles were immersed in distilled water at room temperature (298 The absorption of water in the textiles can be followed by weight variation. The swelling ratio can be expressed with Eq. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using secondary electron mode allows obtaining surface images of the microscopic structure of the ion-exchange textile. Those images permit the determination of the microscopic structure of fibers. X ray fluorescence Spectrometry (XRF) was used for the quantification of elemental composition. XRF was carried out using Oxford ED2000 equipment. The acquisition time of the FIBAN K-4 spectrum obtained with Cd-109 is 40,000 The maximum adsorption capacity of Pb In this work, the behavior of ion-exchange textiles is determined for the electrokinetic transport of lead and zinc in solution. It is supposed that the chemical nature of fibers, and especially their hydrophilicity, can enhance the electrokinetic transport of metal ions through the textile. In order to determine the goodness of the ion-exchange textiles for the electrokinetic treatment of heavy metal contaminated effluents, physical and chemical characterization of ion-exchange textiles have been performed. Textiles were analyzed by X-ray fluorescence (XRF), spectrogammametric analysis, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy/attenuated total reflectance (ATR-IR) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The transference number of ionic species in the electrokinetic transport through the textiles was also determined. SEM analysis was performed for each textile in duplicate. It is known that the characteristics of the ion-exchange fibers can slightly vary due to the manufacturing process. The images of the two samples will be used to confirm the uniformity of the textiles used in this study. Images of the three ion-exchange fibers (FIBAN K-1, K-4 and A-6) are shown in  After the electrokinetic treatment with lead(II) nitrate, ion-exchange fibers retain a significant amount of Pb Fibers were analyzed by FTIR spectroscopy. A sample of the fiber underwent to an infra-red radiation and the reflected radiation was analyzed. The penetration of the IR beam depends on the wavelength value, the refraction index of the fiber and the angle of incidence as it is indicated by Harrick equation The characterization of the fibers by in Attenuated Total Reflectance (ATR-IR) made possible to identify the following functional groups in the fibers: FIBAN A-6 ( FIBAN K-1 ( FIBAN K-4 ( However, this analysis does not inform about the distribution of the functional groups in the chemical structure of the fiber. Ion-exchange textiles are absorbent materials. When they are immersed in an aqueous solution, a certain quantity of water is absorbed in fibrous material increasing the thickness and volume of the textile. The increase in volume can be very important for the design and operation of separation units. The ratio of swelling increases with the ion-exchange capacity of the textile and decreases with the reticulation among the molecular chains ( The study of the ratio of water uptake of the three fibers confirms that the FIBAN textiles showed a significant absorption capacity. The FIBAN A6 shows the highest value ( The swelling of the textiles in water or another polar solvent is caused by the tendency of hydration functional sites and against ions, by the osmotic activity of the against-ions and the electrostatic repulsion between neighboring functional sites. Thus, the matrix of the textile extends until the balance of hydration is reached. The balance of hydration is the result of a balance between various opposite forces: electrostatic and osmotic forces on the one hand, and the forces of cohesion of the matrix on the other The transport number was evaluated using the method of Hittorf for lead and zinc at a concentration that ranged from 10 It should be noted that several authors The experimental results for transport number obtained by the method of Hittorf are in general coherent. The Hittorf method make possible to determine the influence of the current intensity, concentration and ion-exchange textile nature on the transport number. The results of the transport number are reported in The ion-exchange textiles are made of uniform monofilament fibers (diameter 20–55 The ion-exchange textile FIBAN K-4 shows very promising properties for the decontamination of water contaminated with Zn The results obtained in this work suggest that the textiles can be used in environmental applications for the removal of heavy metals from liquid effluents, soils and other wastes. In order to improve the removal, the adsorption of heavy metals on the fibers and the possible saturation needs to be determined along the treatment time. It lets to know if the retention of the heavy metals is uniform in the whole textile surface or not and the possible reasons for the non-uniform adsorption. Furthermore, alternative polymers such as cellulose can be tested as a base material for the manufacturing of new ion-exchange fibers. Multiple functional groups can be inserted in the base material using the radiographic grafting technique. The authors are grateful to the University of Science and Technology Houari Boumediene (Algiers, Algeria) for its financial support and the University of Vigo for 1