In the present paper, solvent extraction process has been used for extraction of cadmium from sulfate solution using di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) with 1% isodecanol in kerosene diluent expected from industrial effluents or leaching of ores/secondary materials. Different process parameters such as pH, contact time, extractant concentration, O/A ratio etc. were investigated. Results demonstrated that quantitative extraction of cadmium was feasible from 4.45 mM cadmium feed solution in single stage at equilibrium pH 4.5, time 2 min and O/A ratio 1:1 with 0.15 mM D2EHPA. The extraction mechanism of cadmium from sulfate solution by D2EHPA in kerosene could be represented at equilibrium by Cd2
                     +
                     +3/2 (H2A2)org
                     ⇔CdA2(HA)org
                     +2H+. The loading capacity of 0.15 mM D2EHPA in sulfate solution was determined to be ∼8.9 mM cadmium. The loaded cadmium was effectively stripped using 180 g/L sulfuric acid. The metal or salt could be produced by electrolysis or crystallization from the stripped solution.Cadmium is an important metal which is extensively employed in solar battery, electronic, electroplating, metallurgical industries etc. ( In order to establish the condition for extraction of cadmium from the effluents/leach solutions expected from the waste materials viz. electronic scraps, spent batteries etc., the studies have been made using solvent extraction process. The optimum condition i.e. pH, time, extractant for cadmium extraction has been established. The aqueous feed solution containing cadmium was prepared by dissolving appropriate amount of its sulfate salt in double distilled water. The sulfuric acid (H Solvent extraction studies were carried out by mixing equal volume (50 mL) each of cadmium solution and organic extractant using glass stirrer for specified time. After equilibration, the phases were allowed to separate and cadmium content to the raffinate was determined with the help of atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS) (GBC, Avanta). Concentration of cadmium in organic phase was deduced from the difference between initial concentration of cadmium in aqueous phase and the concentration of cadmium in the raffinate. 1.8 M H Initially, the solvents 5% (v/v) diluted in kerosene viz. Cyanex 923, Cyanex 272 and D2EHPA studied for selection of a suitable extractant for extraction of cadmium from sulfate solution ( The kinetics of cadmium extraction was studied by equilibrating aqueous solution containing 4.45 mM cadmium with 5% D2EHPA at aqueous pH 6.03. The results obtained are shown in In order to determine the formation of metal–organic complex during extraction of cadmium, a dimer state of D2EHPA has been considered as reported by various authors ( The distribution coefficient, By taking the logarithm of the above equation: The experimental studies for cadmium extraction with equilibrium pH were carried out using aqueous feed concentrations of 0.89 mM, 4.45 mM, and 8.9 mM cadmium with a constant concentration of the extractant D2EHPA i.e. 0.15 M with 1% (v/v) isodecanol in kerosene. The results show increase in cadmium extraction with the rise in equilibrium pH for each feed concentration ( In this investigation concentration of D2EHPA was varied in the range 0.04–0.20 mol/L (M) in kerosene using 1% isodecanol in each case during the cadmium extraction from 1.72 mM Cd aqueous feed concentration. It indicates that cadmium is solvated with 1.5 molecule of dimeric D2EHPA with formation of The effect of O/A ratio has been studied using aqueous feed containing 4.45 mM Cd with 0.15 M D2EHPA and 1% isodecanol in kerosene. The results presented in To investigate the loading capacity of 5% (v/v) D2EHPA diluted in kerosene, extraction studies were carried out with two different aqueous feeds 3.56 mM and 1.78 mM Cd at 4.0 pH. The same organic was contacted with fresh aqueous feed maintaining O/A ratio one up to 13 stages in repeated contact mode. The extraction of cadmium presented in Stripping of cadmium from the loaded organic was conducted using 180 g/L sulfuric acid (H The following conclusions are drawn from solvent extraction studies of cadmium from sulfate solution: On comparing the performance for extraction of cadmium with different extractants, the extraction was found to be in the following order with pH D2EHPA The total cadmium can be quantitatively extracted at equilibrium pH 4.5 with 5% D2EHPA (v/v) in kerosene in single contact, however, it requires three stages at lower equilibrium pH 3.0 from 4.45 mM cadmium solution. The extraction studies showed the formation of CdA The authors wish to thank the Director, National Metallurgical Laboratory, Jamshedpur, India for giving the permission to publish this article. The work reported in this paper was made under the project funded by the Korea Institute of Geo-science and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), Korea. The financial support is gratefully acknowledged.