The geometric and electronic structure properties of complexes of copper (Cu) and iron (Fe) ions with various valences and spin states with ethyl xanthate (EX) were calculated by the density functional theory (DFT/B3LYP). Analyses on the geometric parameters, interaction energies, natural bond orbital (NBO), and frontier molecular orbital reveal that there are two main structures in the metal–ethyl xanthate complexes, whose structure of metal atom with two sulfur atoms was more stable. Different spin status significantly influences the interaction of Fe ions with EX as well as the geometric structure of its complex. The most spin state for Fe2+ was spin-V, while it was spin-IV for Fe3+. The binding energy of Fe3+ and EX is larger than that of Fe2+ and EX. Similarly, the binding energy of Cu2+ and EX is larger than that of Cu+ and EX. The covalent interaction between EX ion and Cu+ is relatively weak, whereas the ionic bond interaction is relatively strong. The solution effect hasn't been taken into account, but important information related to multi-spin states has been gained. The theoretical calculations in the present work may help explain the flotation mechanism and flotability difference of iron-bearing and copper-bearing minerals.Flotation is a common processing method for the separation and recovery of various minerals, especially sulfide minerals ( Atoms composed of chalcopyrite and other chalcopyrite-like minerals possess various bonding properties. Qualitative information on different complexes can be obtained from quantum chemical calculation based on density functional theory (DFT) to explain the formation mechanism. Metal–xanthate complexes have been previously analyzed by calculations using various functional methods ( It's important to note that the theoretical calculations in this study did not consider in detail the effects of solvent molecules. Therefore, the energy calculated had deviations. However, the results obtained can be used to analyze and compare qualitatively the interaction of ethyl xanthate with iron and copper ions contained in minerals, and can serve as a reference for flotation mechanism studies. Moreover, the results of this study can extend research on the ethyl xanthate complexes with multi-spin-state and multi-valence metal ions. Future studies may focus on the adsorption and reaction mechanisms of ethyl xanthate with mineral surfaces containing copper and iron. All of calculations in this work were carried out by the Gaussian 03 package ( The longer the hydrocarbon chain of xanthate, the better its hydrophobicity, but the lower its selectivity ( Two stable structures were obtained ( In structure (a), the calculated Wiberg bond indices of both S10–C9 and S11–C9 are 1.39, which formed a noticeably conjugated structure. By contrast, the bond index of Na–S bond is only 0.10, indicating that Na–S bond is an ionic bond. In structure (b), the bond indices of S10–C9 and S11–C9 are 1.33 and 1.64, respectively. Although possessing conjugated structure, the latter had more double bond characteristic. The latter had a larger molecular polarity, whose dipole moment is 10.44 We first discuss the interaction of ferrous ions with EX. Fe Meanwhile, Fe  Comparing the stability of structures (a) and (b), the calculating results show that in structure (b) with spin-VI, the interaction energy of Fe Subsequently, we compared the calculation results of the Fe–EX complexes with two valences in The HOMO and LUMO are very important parameters in quantum chemistry calculation. The parameters can be used to determine molecular interactions among substances, which is often referred to as the frontier molecular orbital theory ( When ethyl xanthate ion reacted with Fe Combined analyses of the interaction energy, NBO charge and molecular orbital reveal that the interaction of Fe Considering the theory and practice of flotation, during the flotation process of iron-bearing minerals, divalent or trivalent iron ions resulting from surface dissolution will interact with xanthate ions. Xanthate ions can be oxidized to dixanthogen by the trivalent iron ions, which promote the flotation performance of iron-bearing minerals. The theoretical calculations in the present work will help explain the flotation mechanism of iron-bearing minerals. The two most common valence states of copper-bearing minerals and flotation solution are Cu With regard to the Cu–EX complexes, We further analyzed the natural population and molecular orbital. The NBO charge distribution is shown in The d-orbital of Cu Considering the flotation characteristics of copper-bearing minerals, some minerals containing copper (II) have better flotability than that containing copper (I). For example, when xanthate was used as collecting agent, malachite has better flotation response than cuprite. The theoretical calculations show that the stronger interaction exists between copper (II) and xanthate ion, which can explain the flotability difference of copper-bearing minerals. At last it should be pointed out that the experimental condition is in aqueous solution. The water molecular may be coordinated to the metal atom center. The solution effect can be considered in Gaussian software with some methods, such as CPM and CPCM model. But they are validated only when the interaction of complex and solution is weak. In our case the coordination of water to the metal center is strong interaction. Further study of their structures and properties is needed. Copper and iron in minerals have various valences and spin states. Metal–EX complexes have good selectivity as a flotation collector because of their short hydrocarbon chain. In this paper, the geometric and electronic structures of (Cu, Fe)–EX complexes with different valences and spin states were comprehensively calculated based on the DFT/B3LYP method. The major conclusions are as follows. Two kinds of structures exist in the metal–ethyl xanthate complexes, i.e., structures (a) and (b) in Different spin quantum numbers significantly influence the interaction of iron ion with ethyl xanthate. The interaction of Fe Structure (a) is more stable among the two structures of two valence Cu–EX complexes. The interaction of Cu This research project was supported by the