Having proved its success in energy efficiency, the High Pressure Grinding Rolls became widespread all over the world in many plants. The first application of the HPGR was in 1985 in a cement plant, mainly for capacity improvement purpose. Then various circuit configurations were derived to achieve reduction in overall specific energy consumption by transferring more of the grinding required to the HPGR. By mid 1990s, HPGR installations have been used in minerals industry. The HPGR was introduced to minerals industry as a replacement for tertiary crushers, SAG mills and rod mills. In some applications it appears as a pebble crusher in AG milling.
                  HPGR has attracted the attention of many researchers for around two decades, resulting in various modeling approaches for throughput or size reduction of the equipment. This paper will discuss the method of applying population balance model to size reduction of HPGR. Data collected from both cement and minerals industry was used for this study. The breakage rate was defined as a function of the operating pressure and the material characteristics. The material characteristics were determined by compressed bed breakage tests. The relationships between the operating parameters and the model variables lead to predicting the product size distributions of the HPGRs for the given operating conditions. By mid 1990s, HPGR installations were being used in minerals industry, mainly in iron ore pelletizing and diamond. This was followed by applications in hard rock grinding as copper, gold and platinum ore. The HPGR has been introduced to minerals industry as a replacement for tertiary crushers, SAG mills and rod mills. In some applications it appears as a pebble crusher in AG milling. Interparticle breakage in the compression zone between the rollers is achieved by choke feeding the material to the HPGR, otherwise the HPGR runs like a conventional roll crusher ( HPGR has attracted the attention of many researchers for around two decades, resulting in various modeling approaches for throughput or size reduction of the equipment ( The population balance model is referred to as a simple mass balance for the size reduction. The population balance model, introduced by particles coarser than particles in new The mass balance equation can be written as follows: In the population balance model two functions are defined; breakage rate function ( The research on application of the population balance model to HPGR crushing was commenced using cement grinding data and gone through mineral data.  The required breakage distribution function of the material was determined by lab-scale compressed bed breakage tests. The representation of the compressed bed breakage test is given in The data evaluation for the compression breakage results is carried out using an evaluation method developed for single particle impact breakage tests by   After achieving such relationships represented in A smooth breakage rates were obtained by fitting the From By using the feed and product size distributions with the breakage distribution function obtained by compressed bed breakage test, the breakage rate was back-calculated using the mass balance equation of the population balance model. For each data set the The parameter As can be seen from The relationship between After fitting the The  The new modeling approach for HPGR crushing is based on population balance model. The breakage rate of the particles was defined as a function of specific grinding force and material characteristics. The model was developed for a wide range of data acquired from hard rock and cement grinding but only a few data was presented in the paper. The data used for the modeling study includes the rolls ranging from 1 Narrow sized compression tests create data for the breakage function and the disappearance rate of the materials. The breakage function used for the modeling is not size specific for now, but a research on size specific breakage function is in progress to make the model more comprehensive. The parameter The authors wish to thank AMIRA International and the sponsors for permission to publish the work done in minerals industry. The authors also acknowledge the funding for this work through AMIRA International’s Project P9O.