In order to highlight the importance of the complex stoichiometry during ion imprinted polymer (IIP) synthesis, we investigated the effect of the complex structure on IIPs selectivity by adjusting the complex stoichiometry before polymerization. 2-(aminomethyl)pyridine monomer (amp) was chosen as a functionalized ligand for nickel(II) ions and a polymerizable vinylbenzyl derivative (Vbamp) was prepared. Complex formation was studied by varying the nickel/Vbamp ratio and recording absorption spectra of the complexes at the polymerization conditions. Using a least-squares minimization scheme, the complex species distribution was successfully established. From these results, it was possible to choose the metal/ligand stoichiometry in the complex (1:1; 1:2 or 1:3) by adjusting the initial metal/ligand ratio. IIPs were then prepared by inverse suspension copolymerization of Vbamp with ethyleneglycol dimethacrylate (EDMA). Highly porous particles with good nickel binding capacity and good Ni/Zn selectivity even at acidic conditions were obtained. Equilibrium uptake of Ni(II) at pH 7 ranged from 0.12 to 0.2mmolg−1 and relative selective coefficient was as high as 260 for the IIP prepared using the Ni(Vbamp)2 complex.Ion exchange and adsorption are safe and environmentally acceptable technologies for the recovery of valuable metals from either dilute or concentrated aqueous solutions. Industrial applications such as hydrometallurgy require selective, fast, inexpensive and stable ion-exchangers and adsorbents. Furthermore, it is also essential that the separation material can be regenerated using minimum amount of chemicals and energy. One type of ion exchangers and adsorbents are solid chelating separation materials, in which chelating ligands have been attached to solid matrix. These ligands act as donors of electrons and form coordinative bonds with metal cation acting as the central atom in metal chelates and complexes Imprinting technology is one solution for the preparation of separation materials with high selectivity. Synthetic imprinted polymers include in their network selective recognition sites prepared using a template (usually a molecule or an ion) incorporated in the polymer matrix during the polymerization process. Subsequent removal of the template is necessary for recognition to occur in the spaces created by the template Four approaches have been used for the preparation of IIPs; co-polymerization of a ligand carrying a polymerizable functionality, trapping of a ligand (without such a functionality), crosslinking of linear polymer chains and surface imprinting (which can involve chemical immobilization or trapping procedure) The objective of the present study is to investigate the effect of the template–ligand complex structure on IIP selectivity by adjusting the complex distribution before polymerization. For that purpose, absorption spectra were recorded at different metal/ligand ratios and the complex species distributions were obtained by analyzing the spectral data with a least-squares (LS) minimization scheme Using this strategy, nickel-selective IIPs were prepared with 2-(aminomethyl)pyridine (amp) as the ligand. Amp is known to form complexes with nickel even at mildly acidic conditions The complex formation was therefore studied with Vbamp by varying the Ni(II)/Vbamp ratio and the anion (nitrate or perchlorate). Ni-selective IIP particles were prepared by inverse suspension polymerization with initial Nickel/Vbamp ratios corresponding to 1:1, 1:2 and 1:3 Ni/Vbamp complexes. The effect of this complex stoichiometry on the Ni(II)/Zn(II) selectivity was investigated at pH 4 and 7 in sulfate media. As has been shown in our previous studies, chelating adsorbents are potential also for purification of concentrated ZnSO The chemicals 2-(aminomethyl)pyridine (2-picolylamine, 99%, Sigma-Aldrich), 3-vinylbenzaldehyde (97%, Sigma-Aldrich), NaBH Mineral oil (heavy, Sigma-Aldrich), 2,2-azobis(2-methylpropionitrile) (AIBN) (98%, Sigma-Aldrich), methanol (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), 2-methoxyethanol (99.9%, Sigma-Aldrich), Ni(NO Zn(NO  BET surface area, BJH pore volume and pore size were measured using N The absorption spectra of the Ni–Vbamp complexes were measured at 25 and 80 FTIR spectra were obtained using the standard KBr pellet method (Perkin–Elmer Frontier FTIR). Number of scans was 64 and resolution was 4 Total amount of N, C and H in the polymers was determined by elemental analysis according to DIN 51732. Metal ion concentrations were determined by plasma emission spectroscopy (Iris Intrepid II XDL ICP-AES). All samples were analyzed at least twice and the duplicate determinations agreed within 5%. 1-(Pyridin-2-yl)-N-(3-vinylbenzyl)methanamine (Vbamp) was synthesized according to well-known Schiff base reaction and reduction of the corresponding imine. 1.0 Complexation between nickel and Vbamp monomer was studied in methanol and 2-methoxyethanol mixture (50:50, v/v) using Ni(NO The Ni/Vbamp complex was prepared by dissolving Vbamp and Ni(NO The Ni/Vbamp complex was first formed by stirring the solution of Vbamp and nickel salt for 1 Leaching of the template was studied by treating 0.01 After Soxhlet extraction and drying, 0.01 Before batch sorption measurements, polymers were subjected to an acid–base pretreatment in a glass column. The polymer particles were treated consecutively with 1 BV of 5 Acid titration curves of NIP and IIPs were measured in nitrate and sulfate solutions in order to determine the nitrogen contents of these polymers. All measurements were made at 25 Sorption isotherms of nickel from pure solutions and nickel and zinc from their mixtures in NIP and IIPs were measured at room temperature ( Selectivity coefficient, The ligand 2-(aminomethyl)pyridine (amp) was modified into a polymerizable monomer in order to be covalently bound in the polymer matrix. For that purpose, Vbamp (Vinylbenzyl-amp) was prepared in two steps according to The structure and species distribution of the Ni–Vbamp complexes were investigated in order to control the stoichiometry of the complexes introduced in the IIPs. Distribution of the complex species was determined by analyzing the absorption spectra recorded in a solvent mixture of methanol/2-methoxyethanol (50:50, v/v) (solvent of polymerization), at 25 The influence of Ni/Vbamp mole ratio on the distribution of nickel and Vbamp in complexes of different stoichiometry is displayed in The data measured with nitrate anion are shown in Temperature affects significantly the complex formation between nickel and Vbamp. Moreover, when temperature was increased from 25 to 80 According to these results, it appears that the stoichiometry of the complex(es) formed in the polymerization medium at the polymerization temperature can be simply controlled by the initial Ni/Vbamp ratio. For instance, the 1:3 complex can be selectively formed in nitrate medium in a solvent mixture that is suitable for IIP synthesis by using a four-fold excess of Vbamp with respect to nickel ( Non-imprinted polymers (NIP) and ion-imprinted polymers (IIP) were prepared by polymerizing Vbamp in the absence or presence of nickel salt, respectively, with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate (EDMA) as the cross-linker. In order to obtain regular polymer particles, inverse suspension polymerization was applied using a previously published procedure Four different IIPs were prepared by varying the Ni/Vbamp ratio and the anion ( FTIR analyses were made on the NIP and the IIPs before and after leaching ( According to Bruda et al. In the case of ion-imprinted polymers, leaching of the template ion can be difficult because of strong interactions between the ion and the polymer matrix via the ligand moiety. Leaching of nickel from the polymers with 0.5, 1, 3, and 5 Nitrogen adsorption measurements were performed on the IIPs and NIP leading to the determination of BET surface areas, pore volumes and average pore sizes ( Theoretical nickel contents can be compared with nickel contents in the IIPs determined by ICP-AES in acid leaching solutions ( The nitrogen contents of the NIP and IIPs were analyzed by elemental analysis for unleached and leached polymers ( Nickel binding properties were studied using NIP and leached IIPs at pH 4 and 7 in sulfate and nitrate solutions. As no significant effect of the anion on the nickel uptake was observed, nickel binding isotherms are shown only for sulfate solutions ( Lowest uptake capacities of nickel were reached in the case of NIP and IIPNO3 1:4 at both pH values. Highest nickel capacity was found for the IIPNO3 2:1 polymer, but at pH 4 there was no significant difference between IIPNO3 2:1, IIPNO3 1:2 and IIPClO4 1:2 polymers. Imprinting factors (defined as the ratio of the IIP maximum binding capacity divided by that of the NIP) at pH 4 for the IIPNO3 2:1, IIPNO3 1:2, IIPNO3 1:4 and IIPClO4 1:2 are 1.5, 1.3, 1.0 and 1.3, respectively. At pH 7 a slight increase of imprinting factors (1.8, 1.5, 1.1 and 1.7, respectively) is observed. Because the amount of Vbamp was the same in NIP and IIPs before complex formation and polymerization, the explanation must be found from the complex structures in the polymers before polymerization. In the IIPNO3 2:1 polymer, only 1:1 complex was present before polymerization. Thus, it seems that when there is only 1:1 complex in the polymer structure, it has a positive effect at neutral conditions on the nickel capacity as compared with other complex distributions studied here. At pH 4, where also competition between acid and nickel is important, this effect cannot be seen from the isotherm results so clearly. In the case of IIPNO3 1:4, only the 1:3 complex is found in the solution before polymerization ( As mentioned in In this study, the synthesized polymers were characterized in terms of nickel/zinc selectivity and therefore also zinc isotherms were needed. Measurements were again done at pH 4 and 7 and the results are shown in IIPNO3 1:2 and IIPNO3 1:4 have the highest zinc capacity at pH 4 ( The effect of the Ni–Vbamp complex structure on the selectivity of the IIPs was investigated in the case of the competitive uptake of nickel and zinc. According to the results shown in The selectivity experiments were done in sulfate solutions at pH values 4 and 7. At pH 7, selectivity is identical for NIP and IIPs. At pH 4, the situation is completely different and an imprinting effect can be observed. According to Higher selectivity coefficients observed at pH 4 are most probably due to competition by the acid. As discussed in In this study, the effect of template complex structure on selectivity of ion-imprinted polymers was investigated. According to the results obtained, the relative amounts of complexes with different stoichiometry depend significantly on the initial Ni/Vbamp ratio, nickel salt anion, and temperature. It was shown that determining the complex distribution before polymerization gives a stronger basis for explaining selectivity and imprinting factors of the imprinted polymers and offers new tools in developing highly selective ion-imprinted polymers. The results obtained indicate that the template complex structure adjusted before polymerization also determines the complex structure in the polymer, and has major effect on selectivity of polymers and also metal capacities of the polymers. The highest Ni/Zn selectivity was reached with the IIPClO4 1:2 polymer, which was polymerized from a mixture containing 20% of nickel as [Ni(Vbamp)] Financial support from the Research Foundation of