To exploit an underground mine effectively and safely, it is important to have a good understanding of the geotechnical behavior around the underground excavations made in the mine. The aim of this study was to investigate the geotechnical behavior around a tunnel excavated in a metal mine in China at the three-dimensional level. Using the information available on lithology, geological structures, in situ stress measurements, physical and mechanical properties of intact rock, discontinuities and interfaces between different rocks, a three-dimensional numerical model was built by using the 3DEC software package to simulate a tunnel excavation under a high in situ stress condition. Effect of the discontinuity network, possible intact rock and discontinuity parameter variability, representation of rock masses as discontinuum or equivalent continuum material and rock support system on the deformation, and stability around the tunnel was investigated. A very good agreement was obtained between the collected field deformation monitoring results and the results of the conducted numerical stress analyses.The Chengchao Iron Mine is a large size, currently active underground metal mine located in China. The ore-body runs several km approximately in the N 65° W–S 65° E direction with plus or minus 15° variation. The width of the ore-body in the horizontal direction is in the hundreds of meters and thickness of the ore-body in the vertical direction is in the tens of meters. The ore-body is divided into East and West mining areas by the No. 15 exploration line. It is expected to produce two million tons of ore in the East mining area and an annual output of 800,000 tons of ore in the West mining area. There are 32 million tons of industrial reserves to be exploited and prospective reserves are estimated to be more than 200 million tons. The ore-body exists at a number of different levels. The mining method used is sublevel caving without sill pillar. To extract and transport the ore, for economic reasons, roadway tunnels are excavated approximately in the length direction of the ore and perpendicular to that. The maximum horizontal principal stress direction is approximately N 75° W. This means some of the roadway tunnels in the mine need to be excavated approximately perpendicular to the maximum horizontal principal stress direction. With respect to the effect of in situ stress on stability, this is the worst direction to excavate a tunnel. Even though this direction is avoided in civil engineering applications, in mining engineering, extraction of ore sometimes requires excavation of tunnels in this direction. Therefore, for the considered mine, it is important to study stability of tunnels excavated in the direction perpendicular to the maximum horizontal principal stress direction. This paper deals with such a study. The rock mass consists of four different rock types: (1) Magnetite, (2) Granite, (3) Diorite and (4) Marble. The main factors which influence the stability, safety and efficient exploitation in Chengchao Iron Mine are: (1) Complex ore body structure in magnetite rock approximately along the maximum horizontal principal stress direction; (2) High in situ stress zones located in the heavy areas of ore body; (3) Existence of 2–3 fracture sets in each rock type and wide spread direction of these fracture sets; (4) High average fracture density (between 4 and 22 fractures/m); (5) Variability and uncertainty associated with estimation of geo-mechanical parameters of intact rock and discontinuities. Excavation of an underground tunnel in a mine can lead to deformation and stress redistribution. A good understanding of the geotechnical behavior through a stress analysis around a tunnel excavation helps one to design a proper support system and to ensure exploitation of the mine effectively and safely. Most naturally occurring discontinuous rock masses comprise of intact rock interspaced with different types of discontinuities. Such discontinuities include fissures, fractures, joints, faults, bedding planes, shear zones and dykes. In underground excavations, discontinuities play a significant role on the deformation and stability of the rock mass around a tunnel or cavern. In general, either the rock mass classification systems or discontinuum or equivalent continuum method has been used to incorporate the influence of joints in rock mass mechanical behavior in evaluating the stability in underground excavations in jointed rock masses. Out of the aforementioned three methods, discontinuum stress analysis methods have the best capability of capturing the directional effects arising on deformability and stability from various orientations of discontinuity sets. In addition, it has the capability of simulating large displacements and rotations that can occur with discontinuous rock masses. Also, it can be used to perform equivalent continuum stress analysis. Section 2 of the paper provides a brief literature review on application of numerical methods to investigate tunnel stability in jointed rock masses, which is the topic dealt with in this paper. Due to the above reasons, a three-dimensional numerical model is built by using the 3DEC (3 Dimensional Distinct Element Code) software package ( Several numerical methods have been used to perform stress analyses and to evaluate stability of underground excavations in jointed rock masses by incorporating discontinuities explicitly. The finite element, boundary element and Lagrangian finite difference programs have been used with interface elements or “slidelines” to model a discontinuous material to some extent. However, their formulation is usually restricted in one or more of the following ways: first, the logic may break down when many intersecting interfaces are used; second, there may not be an automatic scheme for recognizing new contacts; and third, the formulation may be limited to small displacements and/or rotations ( The distinct element method introduced by The DDA ( Equivalent continuum method has been used to incorporate the effect of joints in underground excavation stability evaluations. The length The physical and mechanical properties selected to represent different lithologies and to perform stress-deformation analysis are shown in The joint systems that exist in different lithologies are very complex with short spacing and high density and multiple directions (see The values selected to represent discontinuity mechanical properties in different rock types in the numerical model are shown in In situ stress measurements were not available exactly at a depth of 460 In Chengchao Iron Mine, the fully grouted bolts of diameter 18  All the plots for this section are given on the plane perpendicular to the tunnel axis at The computational time increases with the number of discontinuities present in the model. To reduce the computational time, the length of the model in the    In this study, to conduct tunnel excavation analyses, the intact rock mechanical properties and the discontinuity mechanical properties have been used. Two inch diameter samples used for intact rock in the laboratory at least contain micro-cracks. The spatial distribution of these cracks varies from one sample to another. In addition, some material heterogeneity can exist in two inch diameter samples. The discontinuities that exist in a rock mass can be open, closed or filled with some gouge or cementing material. In addition, different levels of roughness spanning between slickensided surfaces to very rough surfaces can be expected on open discontinuities. Therefore, unfortunately, a significant variability or uncertainty exists in estimating the aforementioned mechanical properties either through laboratory tests or field tests. Therefore, it is important to study the effect of geo-mechanical parameter variability on the stability around the excavated tunnel. In this section it is conducted in a very systematic way by changing one parameter at a time and keeping all the other parameters the same. With respect to the numerical analyses conducted without both joints and rock support system, the individual geo-mechanical parameter value was changed as follows to study the influence of intact rock mechanical parameter value on the stability of the tunnel: (a) changed the cohesion value (Case 4), (b) changed the tensile strength value (Case 5), and (c) changed the internal friction angle value (Case 6) in a range, keeping the other parameter values the same as in Case 1. With respect to the numerical analyses with joints but without rock support system, the individual joint geo-mechanical parameter value was changed as follows to study the influence of each of them on the stability of the tunnel: (a) changed the JKN value (Case 7), (b) changed the JKS value (Case 8), and (c) changed the joint friction angle value (Case 9) in a range, keeping the other parameter values the same as in Case 2. The reference value and the range used for each geo-mechanical parameter for the aforementioned study can be seen in Percentage change of maximum displacement In the calculations, for each parameter, only the left tunnel wall maximum displacement was used. According to The previous section dealt with changing the value of one geo-mechanical parameter at a time and keeping the values of the rest of the geo-mechanical parameters the same and investigating the effect of that on maximum tunnel displacements. In this section, the values of either all the intact rock geo-mechanical parameters or the values of all the intact rock and discontinuity geo-mechanical parameters have been either increased or decreased from the average (reference) values as a group and the effect of that on maximum tunnel displacements has been investigated. The increased set of values is termed as the stiff system and the decreased set of values is termed as the soft system. For intact rock parameters, a 20% increase or decrease (equivalent to the coefficient of variation of 0.2) have been used and for joint and discontinuity interface parameters, a 30% increase or decrease (equivalent to the coefficient of variation of 0.3) have been applied (see In the presence of joints, rock mass mechanical properties show both the scale effects and anisotropic behavior. Due to the presence of joints both the rock mass strength and deformability parameter values reduce significantly from the corresponding intact rock values. The amount of reduction depends on the fracture network and the difference between the intact rock and discontinuity mechanical property values. Several previous studies have been performed at the three dimensional level by the research group of Kulatilake to find the Representative Elementary Volume (REV) and equivalent continuum mechanical properties of different real world rock masses. For a granitic gneiss rock, For the study described in this paper, no attempt was made to estimate REV and equivalent continuum mechanical properties as in the three previous studies stated in the previous paragraph. Instead, it was decided to perform 3DEC calculations using different percentages (80–30% in steps of 10%) for the ratio of rock mass properties/intact rock properties. Because all these calculations attempt to simulate equivalent continuum behavior, joints were not included at all for all the lithologies. Some of the calculations were conducted without rock support (Cases 10 and 16 through 20 in     JSS30A-10 multi-point extensometers manufactured by Bsida Instrument company, China, having a measuring range of 0.5–30  The following conclusions can be made from the conducted study. Under no rock support condition, the maximum deformations around the tunnel increased by about 2.4–4.4 times by adding discontinuities to the geo-mechanical model which had only intact rock. The highest increase was observed on the walls of the tunnel. Note that in this application, the maximum in situ stress was acting perpendicular to the tunnel walls. Note that in this rock mass, three discontinuity sets exist around the tunnel in the magnetite rock mass. These discontinuity sets have contributed to high wall deformations. The presence of discontinuities also leads to greater chance of instability around the tunnel excavation. The sensitivity of the geo-mechanical parameters on maximum tunnel displacements can be listed in the following order from the most sensitive to least sensitive: internal friction angle of intact rock For change in only the intact rock geo-mechanical parameters, 2.5–2.8 times differences resulted for the maximum displacements between the soft and stiff intact rock property systems. For change in both the intact rock and discontinuity geomechanical parameters, 1.8–4.9 times differences were obtained for the maximum displacements between the soft and stiff combined geo-mechanical property systems covering both the with and without rock support systems. For both under the no support as well as with rock support conditions, the best comparison between the discontinuum analysis results and continuum analysis results was obtained for the continuum analysis cases which used 40–50% of the intact rock property values. This result agree very well with the previous equivalent continuum case study results obtained by The applied rock support decreased the wall deformations by about 43–51%, roof deformations by about 29–39% and floor deformations by about 9–10%. Note that the rock supports were installed only to the walls and the roof of the tunnel but not to the floor. This is the reason why floor deformations were reduced only by a small amount. The applied rock support increased the stability of the tunnel to use it for exploitation of magnetite resources satisfactorily. The monitored field deformations compared very well with the numerical results. For the discontinuum analysis, a perfect agreement can be obtained between the field monitored deformations and numerical stress analyses results if about 92% of the intact rock average values and about 87.5% of the discontinuity average values are used for the geo-mechanical parameters in performing the discontinuum analysis. For the equivalent continuum analysis, a perfect agreement can be obtained between the field monitored deformations and numerical stress analyses results if about 35% of the intact rock average values are used as the rock mass geo-mechanical parameters in the equivalent continuum analysis. The first author of the paper is grateful to the Chinese Scholarship Foundation for providing a scholarship to conduct the research described in this paper as a Visiting Research Scholar at the University of Arizona. The study described in this paper was also partially supported by the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team at the University of Science and Technology Beijing (IRT0950). This support is also greatly appreciated. Miss. Qiong Wu’s participation in this research working as a Visiting Research Scholar at the University of Arizona is also very much appreciated.