Transformation of calcium sulfate dihydrate (gypsum) into anhydrous calcium sulfate (anhydrite) proceeds slowly in a manganese sulfate/sulfuric acid medium (36 g Mn2+/kg of solution and 36 g H2SO4/kg of solution) at 95 °C, conditions pertinent to some industrial processes, without any apparent intermediate species. The kinetics of the transformation have been probed by following the change in mole fraction of gypsum and/or anhydrite versus time in both solution (dissolved [Ca], by ICP-AES) and solid-state (XRD and TGA). The kinetics fit an autocatalytic process, with a very small initial [product]o (typically ∼10−4 M, consistent with a high purity gypsum starting material) and a rate constant k∼0.12 h−1 at 95 °C. Variations in the observed half-life for transformation found between the solid-state (∼65 h) and the solution (∼77 h) measurements may reflect non-equilibrium solution behaviour associated with slow crystallization of anhydrite, consistent with a dissolution–precipitation mechanism. Addition of an anhydrite seed at commencement of the reaction diminishes the induction period and accelerates the transformation, as expected for an autocatalytic process.Calcium sulfate appears as an undesirable byproduct in many industrial processes, mostly as scale. This results from the ubiquitous presence of calcium ion in natural ores and is linked to the common use of sulfuric acid in industrial processing. As a consequence, studies involving calcium sulfate in its major forms [CaSO The study of the kinetics of transformation between the various forms of hydration of calcium sulfate also has a venerable history; for example, solid phase water loss through the stages from dihydrate to hemihydrate to anhydrite were probed even before the 1930s ( During an investigation in our laboratory of the solubility of gypsum in acidic manganese sulfate solutions it was noted that, at temperatures between 80 and 100 °C, solubility and solid phase characterisation data derived from short equilibration times indicated that gypsum remained as the solid phase, whereas similar data from longer equilibration times indicated the presence of only anhydrite. For what is thus a relatively slow reaction, the prospect of conveniently following the kinetics of the dehydration process drew our attention. This paper presents a study of the kinetics of this solid phase transformation at 95 °C. At the temperature considered in this paper, anhydrite is the thermodynamically preferred phase in solution and the question arises as to the mechanism by which gypsum is transformed to anhydrite. Three possible mechanisms, (i) a solution–precipitation process, (ii) direct dehydration to anhydrite and (iii) step-wise dehydration through the intermediate hemihydrate, are discussed in a detailed study ( The transformation we have probed in this study in a sulfuric acid medium up to 120 h has all the hallmarks of an autocatalytic mechanism, influenced by the presence of anhydrite and accelerated by its addition at the commencement of the reaction. Induction periods in calcium sulfate transformations have been noted as long ago as the 1930s ( This study has followed the course of the transition of gypsum to anhydrite by several different physical methods—monitoring calcium in the solution phase by inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), and using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) for the solid phase. This provides complementary data from solution and solid phases for examination, and is an approach that does not appear to have been employed previously to follow the kinetics of such transformations. A series of mixtures each containing 1.5 g AR grade CaSO For reactions carried out with the addition of anhydrite as initial ‘seed’, the solution contained 72 g Mn For calcium determination of the liquid phase, a preheated syringe fitted with a 13-mm 0.4-μm cellulose acetate syringe filter (Advantec MFS, California) was used to deliver (in duplicate) sufficient sample for an approximately 90–100-fold dilution into a preweighed quantity of 0.1 M HNO The solid from each sample was recovered by suction filtration, washed with 3–5 ml ethanol and air dried. XRD analysis of the solids was conducted on a Philips Diffractometer PW1710 using Cu K For all samples in the kinetic run, gypsum and/or anhydrite were the only crystalline species identified. Numerical integration of four peaks for gypsum (2 Since the theoretical water loss from gypsum on forming anhydrite is 20.9%, a loss of less than this value for samples taken during the kinetic run indicates a mixture of gypsum and anhydrite, these being the only two crystalline components identified by XRD analysis. In the case where no loss was recorded, the product is pure anhydrite. From the TGA results, the proportion of gypsum and anhydrite was calculated for all samples with the results ranging from 100% gypsum to 100% anhydrite. This information was plotted as mole fraction against time, again resulting in s-shaped curves ( The calcium concentration at the beginning and end of the kinetic run was taken to be the calcium solubility value of 100% gypsum and 100% anhydrite, respectively, the identity of these crystalline solids being confirmed by XRD; no other crystalline solid phases were identified. From the two calcium concentration limits, the percentages of gypsum and anhydrite were readily calculated for intermediate calcium levels and converted to mole fractions. The typical s-shaped curve for the gypsum depletion is presented ( The uncertainty in each of the measurement techniques was assessed by examining the variation in the measured mole fractions at the beginning and at the end of the transformation. Error bars of ±0.1 mole fraction represent the upper error limit and have been included on the XRD and solubility plots in The experimental data was compared with the autocatalytic Eq. The dehydration of gypsum to form anhydrite, driven particularly by its industrial significance, has attracted both practical and theoretical interest. Although gypsum solubility is low, that of anhydrite is lower at 95 °C, and hence the form of calcium sulfate crystallized and its process and rate of transformation into other forms is of practical concern. Studies in pure aqueous solution have provided good modelling of the processes involved. Of more applied focus, transformations under conditions approximating those found in industrial processes have been pursued, particularly in phosphoric acid solutions (   Hemihydrate was not detected in any of the XRD patterns, a finding which is in accord with a detailed study ( The kinetic data for the conversion based on TGA and calcium solubility are presented in The degree of scatter in the data points is greater for the XRD method than for the TGA or solubility methods, and in part, arises from varying crystallinity between samples. Under the optical microscope, both gypsum and anhydrite appear as crystalline material with larger tabular crystals present in gypsum samples, and needle-like crystals dominating in anhydrite samples ( The point of inflection in autocatalytic plots corresponds to the instant when half of the reagent is converted into the product if the amount of initial primer (reaction product ‘seed’) is sufficiently small ( For the solid phase techniques, note is made of the similar [B] It is clear that the conversion of gypsum to anhydrite at 95 °C in the presence of an acidic manganese sulfate solution shows an induction period typical of autocatalytic reactions. A very small, though undetectable, amount of anhydrite may be present in the original gypsum and acts as the catalyst in the transformation process. However, it takes many hours before a significant amount of anhydrite is detected. The mechanism for the transformation appears to be one of dissolution and reprecipitation. Addition of anhydrite as seed to the process initially accelerates the transformation and contracts the induction period markedly, consistent with expectations for an autocatalytic process. Support of this work by the Australian Research Council in the form of a SPIRT grant in association with Delta EMD Australia Pty Ltd., is gratefully acknowledged.