The crystal lattice images of the two faces of kaolinite (the silica face and the alumina face) have been obtained using contact-mode atomic force microscopy (AFM) under ambient conditions. Lattice resolution images reveal the hexagonal surface lattice of these two faces of kaolinite. Analysis of the silica face of kaolinite showed that the hexagonal surface lattice ring of oxygen atoms had a periodicity of 0.50±0.04nm between neighboring oxygen atoms, which is in good agreement with the surface lattice structure of the mica basal plane. The center of the hexagonal ring of oxygen atoms is vacant.
                  Analysis of the alumina face of kaolinite showed that the hexagonal surface lattice ring of hydroxyls surround a hydroxyl in the center of the ring. The atomic spacing between neighboring hydroxyls was determined as 0.36±0.04nm. Ordering of the kaolinite particles for examination of the silica and alumina surfaces was accomplished using different substrates, a procedure previously established. Crystal lattice imaging supports previous results and independently confirms that the two faces of kaolinite have been properly identified.Kaolinite [Al Kaolinite naturally exists as pseudo-hexagonal, platy-shaped, thin particles generally having a size of less than 1 Limited research has been reported on the experimental characterization of these face surfaces It is now well established with some success that AFM can also be used to investigate the crystal lattice structure of mineral surfaces. Atomic resolution has been successfully obtained on graphite Wicks et al. Recently, Kumai et al. A recent study by Gupta and Miller A clean English kaolin (Imerys Inc., UK) was obtained from the St. Austell area in Cornwall, UK. The sample was cleaned with water and elutriation was used to achieve classification at a size of less than 2 Two substrates – a mica disc (ProSciTech, Queensland, Australia) and a fused alumina substrate (Red Optronics, Mountain View, CA), were used to order the kaolinite particles The fused alumina substrate was cleaned using piranha solution (a mixture of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide in a ratio of 3:1) at 120 The samples were prepared the night before AFM analysis and stored in a desiccator until their use. Just prior to the AFM experiments the substrates were sonicated for a minute in Milli-Q water to remove loosely adhered kaolinite particles, washed with Milli-Q water, and gently blown with N A Nanoscope AFM with Nanoscope IV controller (Veeco Instruments Inc., Santa Barbara, CA) was used with an E-type scanner. Triangular beam silicon nitride (Si During offline image processing, flattening and low pass filtering were applied to obtain clear images using Nanoscope vs. 5.31R1 software. The images were further Fourier-filtered (2D FFT) to obtain the crystal lattice images using SPIP software (Image Metrology A/S, Denmark). In order to obtain the crystal lattice imaging of the silica face and alumina face of kaolinite, the scanner was first calibrated using a mica substrate.  The crystal lattice imaging of the alumina face of kaolinite on a fused alumina substrate is shown in Recently, Gupta and Miller More importantly, the experimental technique developed by Gupta and Miller Crystal lattice images were obtained on the silica tetrahedral and alumina octahedral faces of kaolinite using atomic force microscopy. The images showed the repeated tetrahedral oxygen atoms on the silica face forming a closed hexagonal ring-like network with a hole in the center. On the other hand, as expected, the alumina face of kaolinite showed the hexagonal ring of hydroxyls surrounding a central hydroxyl. These results validate the procedure to order kaolinite particles with the desired face exposed The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of Grant DE-FG-03-93-ER14315 from DOE Basic Sciences, the financial support from the University of Queensland, Brisbane, Australia and the CMM, the University of Queensland, for the use of the Veeco Nanoscope IV AFM.