Crystallization fouling and cleaning mechanisms of calcium sulphate from phosphoric acid solution have been studied experimentally and theoretically during forced convective heat transfer. The effects of flow velocity, foulant concentration, surface and bulk temperatures on the formation of scale and its removal are investigated. Close examination of the heat transfer surface at the end of a cleaning period with a cleaning agent containing 5wt% sulphuric acid reveals that significant deposits still remained on the surface. The remaining deposits were rippled, hard and difficult to remove chemically. After clarification of the effects of operating parameters on the deposition and cleaning processes, the results of the experiments are used to develop mechanistic models for the prediction of fouling resistances of calcium sulphate during forced convective heat transfer, and for removal of the deposits by dilute sulphuric acid solutions. The predictions of the suggested models for fouling and cleaning are compared with measured data. Deviations ranging from 7% to 12% are observed which confirm the suitability of the models.area, m concentration, kg diffusion coefficient, m hydraulic diameter, m activation energy, J flux by molecular diffusion, kg Arrhenius rate constant, m reaction rate constant, m length, m mass of deposit, kg mass flux of deposition, kg removal rate, kg order of deposition reaction molar flow of species, mol heat flux, W distance between thermocouple location and heat transfer surface, m radius, m universal gas constant, J defined by equation Reynolds number fouling resistance, m Schmidt number time, s temperature, K velocity, m volume, m length, m heat transfer coefficient, W mass transfer constant, m number of water molecules in the structure of calcium sulphate deposit thermal conductivity, W density, kg kinematic viscosity, m solute average solvent bulk column or convective deposit film interface thermocouples wall saturation initial or clean conditions Phosphorous, nitrogen and potassium, which stimulate the processes of metabolism in plants cells, growth and its fruit are needed by plants in relatively large quantities. Intensive farming of the land results in depletion of the soil from these elements leading to small crops and low quality of plant products. Therefore, the reduction of the content of these elements in the soil must be continually compensated by the addition of fertilizers in the form of ammonium and potassium phosphate. Phosphoric acid is generally produced in the fertilizer industry by the low temperature dihydrate or high temperature semi-hydrate processes. In the dihydrate process, phosphate rock is grounded to a particle size usually finer than 75 The major operating costs in modern phosphoric acid plants are the cost for energy. Hence, the efficient recuperation of heat between steam and phosphoric acid solution in the heat exchangers is critical to the economic operation of phosphoric acid plants. The primary problem in concentrating phosphoric acid is due to rapid fouling of the heat transfer surfaces. The fouling problem can be very serious if the heat exchangers are incorrectly over-designed or operated improperly, and may reduce the uninterrupted processing time to less than 1 week. The serious effect of scale formation on the overall heat transfer coefficient and energy consumption has long being appreciated by all who are involved with the production of phosphoric acid for the fertilizer industry. It may be safely said that scale formation and subsequent cleaning of the fouled heat exchangers are the most important factors in design and operation of phosphoric acid plant. The scale, which mainly consists of calcium sulphate together with some metallic silica fluorides, is very hard and difficult to remove. Therefore, regular cleaning of heat exchangers is required. A typical operating schedule is shown in A thorough understanding of the fouling mechanisms resulting from precipitation of calcium sulphate during forced convective heat transfer to phosphoric acid solutions is required to improve operation and design of the heat exchangers in phosphoric acid plant. Furthermore, this information and the knowledge of the physical and chemical nature of the deposit are needed to identify appropriate cleaning methods and schedules. The deposit layer formed during the fouling process obviously is the starting point for any in-depth study of cleaning mechanisms. A review of the existing literature on calcium sulphate scale formation from phosphoric acid solutions and of the cleaning techniques used for fouled heat exchangers in the dihydrate process reveals that hardly any information is available on these subjects. Furthermore, there is a general lack of experimental evidence and fundamental understanding of cleaning mechanisms for mineral deposits. Previous publications (i.e.,  Two different test heaters with tubular and annular geometry have been installed in parallel to study heat transfer fouling of phosphoric acid solutions in the presence of calcium sulphate dihydrate. The detailed tubular test section is shown in The second test section is shown schematically in The ratio between the distance of the thermocouples from the surface and the thermal conductivity of the tube material ( The solubility of calcium sulphate in phosphoric acid is given in The deposition of calcium sulphate dihydrate on heat transfer surfaces can be expressed by the following reaction: Many studies have attempted to clarify the effect of flow velocity on scale formation during forced convective heat transfer. High velocities can sometimes reduce fouling ( The first term on the right hand side of equation The primary cause of scale formation is the supersaturation of the solution with respect to the dissolved foulants. When the concentration product of calcium sulphate ions exceeds the saturation value, calcium sulphate precipitates and forms scale. As long as the removal rate can be ignored, the rate of deposition can be expressed by  The effect of bulk temperature is shown in Assuming constant thermal conductivity and density of the deposit, the fouling resistance of the annular test section is related to the deposit radius through the following equation: Sooner or later, heat exchangers will inevitably require off-line cleaning to restore their heat transfer efficiency, even though steps have been taken to minimize potential fouling problems at design and during subsequent operation. Where frequent off-line cleaning is anticipated, such as in dihydrate and Bayer processes for the production of phosphoric acid and alumina, it may be prudent to consider the installation of stand-by heat exchangers which can be taken on-stream, when the operating heat exchanger performance becomes unacceptably low. Thereby the possibility is provided to clean the fouled heat exchangers while at the same time maintaining production. Cleaning of heat transfer surfaces was reviewed by The effect of cleaning solution velocity on the dissolution of calcium sulphate deposits is illustrated in However, the experimental results also indicate that the deposits have not been completely removed within the investigated cleaning times, since the restored heat transfer coefficients were always less than the clean coefficients under the specified conditions. Examination of the heat transfer surface at the end of the cleaning period revealed that some deposit still remained despite the acid wash. The residual deposits on the heat transfer surface were rippled, tenacious and adherent as shown in the photographs of The considerable influence of the heat transfer surface temperature on the dissolution of fouling deposit in the cleaning solution is shown in As the interface temperature is raised, the saturation concentration of calcium sulphate deposit in dilute sulphuric cleaning agent is increased and, therefore, the concentration driving force for mass transfer of dissolved deposit through the laminar sublayer is increased. Since the mass transfer coefficient is a linear function of temperature, the dissolution rate of calcium sulfate should increase similarly with interface temperature. This trend was indeed observed for the range of liquid velocities which was used in the present investigation (see The lattice structure of the calcium sulphate deposit which is formed on the heat transfer surface at different surface temperatures varies widely. Three distinct lattice structures have been reported for calcium sulphate deposits ( The effectiveness of a chemical cleaning agent depends mainly on its ability to react with the deposit and to dissolve it. Due to the common ion effect of sulphate SO Nevertheless, it should be considered that the above model only applies for cleaning processes which do not experience significant shear-related removal of deposits, swelling effects or changes in the deposit chemistry. Fouling and cleaning are the two main problems in the dihydrate process for the production of phosphoric acid in the fertilizer industry. Calcium sulphate dihydrate with negative solubility in the phosphoric acid reduces the forced convective heat transfer coefficient considerably. Foulant concentration, surface temperature and fluid velocity have the main influence on the deposition process. The deposition rate increases and heat transfer coefficient decreases faster, as concentration and surface temperature increase. Depending on the fluid velocity, the deposition rate is controlled by different mechanisms. At low velocities the deposition process is mainly controlled by the mass transfer of reactants to the heat transfer surface and hence the fouling rate is increased by increasing velocity. At higher fluid velocity the deposition is influenced mostly by chemical reaction on the surface, and velocity does not have a significant effect on the fouling process. The effects of surface temperature, sulphuric acid concentration and flow velocity on the cleaning rate of fouled surfaces are examined. It has been shown that the cleaning process is controlled by mass transfer of the cleaning acid to the deposit surface and by the reaction product away from the surface. Finally, the experimental results are used to develop mechanistic models for the prediction of fouling resistances and for the removal rates of deposit by dilute sulphuric acid solutions. Considering the complexity of the fouling and cleaning processes, the quantitative agreement between measured and predicted values is very good.