In this paper, the shear behaviour and mechanisms of asperity degradation of rock joints under direct shear tests were studied using numerical and experimental approaches. PFC2D was used for numerical simulations, in which the intact material is simulated by a dense packing of circular particles bonded together at their contact points and by breakage of these bonds under loading regimes, the damage process is simulated. The joint interfaces were simulated by a newly developed modified smooth joint model in which micro-scale slip surfaces are applied at contacts between particles of upper and lower blocks of the shear box. In order to study the ability of this numerical approach in reproducing the shearing mechanisms and asperity degradation of rock joints in direct shear tests, a comparative study was carried out against the physical experiments. Experimental and numerical direct shear tests were carried out on saw-tooth triangular joints with the base angles of 20° and 30° under different normal stresses. Three shearing mechanisms of sliding, surface wear and asperity shearing off were observed in these experiments. The comparison of the shear behaviour and mechanisms of asperity degradation of physical and numerical experiments showed that the results of numerical models are in good agreement with physical experiments and this numerical approach can reproduce the shear behaviour of rock joints under different loading conditions.It is well understood that the mechanical behaviour of jointed rock masses is greatly influenced by the mechanical properties of joints, especially at shallow depths (  where where where The Barton model ( where joint roughness coefficient A large number of studies can be found in literature that have tried to investigate the effect of joint roughness on the shear behaviour of rock joints by means of experimental, practical and analytical approaches. However, it is still not well understood which is related to difficulty in quantitative representation of the joint roughness and unknown mechanisms of asperity degradation in the shearing process ( Some attempts have been carried out to estimate the shear behaviour of rock joints using numerical approaches. Most of these studies have employed constitutive models ( Particle flow code (PFC) is a discrete element code which has been used by several researchers to study the shear behaviour of rock joints. In PFC, the intact rock is simulated by a dense packing of spherical (PFC3D) or circular (PFC2D) particles bonded together at their contact points. The generated material is called bonded particle model (BPM) and the mechanical behaviour of BPM is governed by the micro-properties of its constituents; particles and bonds. The deformation behaviour of the BPM is controlled by two sets of stiffness; normal and shear stiffness of particles, This paper aims to study the shearing mechanism and asperity degradation of rock joints in the direct shear tests using PFC2D. Traditionally, joint interfaces have been modelled in PFC by the bond removal or smooth joint models. In the following section, shortcomings of these approaches have been investigated. To overcome the deficiencies of these methods, recently The most commonly used method for generation of rock joints in PFC is the bond removal method. In this approach, the positions of bonds between particles are checked relative to the joint plane and bonds of particles which lie along the joint plane are removed. A generated joint plane using the bond removal approach is shown in Smooth joint (SJ) model is a recently developed approach to overcome the shortcomings of the bond removal method ( Recently, To overcome this issue, The validity of this approach was investigated by undertaking direct shear tests on ten standard This approach can also be employed in PFC3D for 3D simulation of rock joints. The minimum size of asperities that can be simulated in PFC is controlled by the size of particles. Size of particles should be small enough to simulate the micro-scale asperities. However, selection of a small particle size leads to an increase in the number of particles and consequently an increase in the computation time. This problem can be very restrictive for large scale joints and numerical simulation of 3D joint surfaces. Application of pbricks and parallel processing or Adaptive Continuum/DisContinuum logic may resolve this problem ( As discussed, the intact material in PFC is represented as an assembly of particles bonded together and the micro-properties of these particles and bonds control the macro-scale behaviour. The joint surface is also defined by micro-scale SJ contacts and the properties of these contacts need to be determined before undertaking the numerical experiments. There is no direct method or experiment to obtain these micro-scale parameters in the laboratory and the only conventional method to estimate these parameters is by trial and error through a direct comparison of the macro-scale behaviour of the material by undertaking conventional laboratory experiments ( The synthetic material used for the experimental study of this research was the gypsum cement, Hydro-Stone TB,. Hydro-Stone TB is a mixture of plaster of Paris, Portland cement and crystalline silica. For sample preparation, the Hydro-Stone TB was mixed with water in the ratio of 3.125:1 by the weight (32 parts of water per 100 parts of Hydro-Stone TB). The mixture was poured into moulds and after 24 To measure the mechanical properties of the Hydro-Stone TB, the uniaxial compressive test, triaxial and Brazilian tests were undertaken. These experiments were carried out using an MTS test machine. For uniaxial and triaxial tests, cylindrical samples with diameters of 41 Three joint types of planar, triangular joints with the base angles of 20° and 30° were prepared and direct shear tests under different normal stresses were carried out. To prepare the test samples, metal moulds having a length of 100 A servo-control hydraulic testing machine (RDS-300 manufactured by Geotechnical Consulting and Testing Systems) was employed for direct shear tests. Different sections of this machine are shown in Based on the procedure explained in In order to calibrate the micro-scale properties of BPM, numerical samples having a width of 41 The SJ micro-properties were calibrated against the experimental normal deformability and direct shear tests on planar joints. The SJ normal stiffness In the physical normal deformability tests, the planar jointed block of synthetic material having a length of 100 In the numerical normal deformability tests, samples with the same geometry of experimental samples were generated. The side and interface walls (which were used for sample generation) were removed and the sample allowed reaching static equilibrium. A constant normal velocity was applied to the upper wall and the normal stress and normal displacement were recorded during the test. The SJ normal stiffness was calibrated by trial and error to reproduce the normal deformation behaviour of experimental normal deformability tests. In order to reproduce the hyperbolic shape of normal stress-normal displacement curve, two values of initial and final SJ normal stiffness ( In order to calibrate the SJ shear stiffness and SJ coefficient of friction, numerical direct shear tests on planar joints were carried out. To calibrate the SJ shear stiffness, the numerical direct shear test under a constant normal stress of 1 Experimental direct shear tests were undertaken on triangular joints with the base angles of 20° and 30°. Direct shear tests were carried out under different normal stresses to investigate the shearing mechanisms and asperity degradation of these two sets of joints at different normal stresses. In order to observe different modes of asperity failure for both joint profiles, the normal stress of 1 to 5 To undertake the direct shear test, the specimen was placed in the shear box and a small seating normal load was applied to the sample. Then, the shear actuator and normal LVDTs were set to the zero position and the normal load was increased continuously at a constant rate until the desired normal stress was attained. Following the stabilisation of the normal load on upper block, the shear load was applied ( Results of experimental direct shear tests on triangular joints with base angles of 20° and 30° are presented in Numerical specimens with similar geometry to the experimental specimens were generated and direct shear tests under different normal stresses were carried out. Results of numerical direct shear tests on triangular joints with the base angle of 20° are illustrated in Most of the studies on the shear behaviour of rock joints have been focused on the peak shear strength and the pre-peak behaviour of rock joints. However, the residual shear strength and the post-peak behaviour of rock joints can be of great importance for long term stability of rock structures. Results of this study show that PFC has the intrinsic ability to reproduce the post peak behaviour. The coefficient of friction of broken particles has a controlling effect on the residual strength of the joint. However, as the broken particles are stiff and cannot be degraded during the shearing process at the residual stage, more studies are required to solve the problem of shear stress fluctuation at the residual stage. In order to investigate the ability of the suggested numerical model to reproduce the shear behaviour of rock joints, results of numerical and experimental methods were compared. The shearing failure modes of experimental and numerical shear tests under different normal stresses for triangular joint with the base angle of 20° are shown in At the normal stress of 1 A comparison between the peak shear strength of numerical and experimental tests for the triangular joints with the base angle of 20° is presented in The shearing mechanisms of triangular joints with the base angle of 30° for experimental and numerical shear tests are shown in A comparison between the peak shear strength of experimental, numerical and analytical models is presented in The results presented in this study clearly show that the shear box genesis approach can reproduce the shear behaviour of rock joints well and also has the ability to investigate the asperity degradation and shearing mechanisms of rock joints. This approach provides a useful tool to predict the shear behaviour of rock joints without a need to a quantitative value for estimation of the joint roughness and also study the shear behaviour of large scale joints in which the current knowledge is very limited ( One of the main difficulties in the estimation of the shear behaviour of rough rock joints is related to unknown mechanism of asperity degradation during the shearing process. Recent development in numerical modelling using Particle flow code has shown that this code has the ability to trace the crack initiation and propagation inside the rock asperities and intact materials. In this paper, the validity of this numerical approach in reproducing the shear mechanisms and asperity degradation of rock joints was investigated by undertaking experimental and numerical direct shear tests under different loading regimes. Synthetic triangular joints with base angles of 20° and 30° were prepared in the laboratory and experimental direct shear tests under different normal stresses were carried out. Three shearing mechanisms of sliding, asperity surface wear and asperity shearing off were observed in both experimental and numerical tests. The shearing mechanism is controlled by the applied normal stress and the asperity base angle. For gentle slope asperities or under low normal stress, when the shear stress reaches the peak value, sliding takes place along the asperities while for steep asperities or under high normal stress, tensile cracks propagate inside the asperities which led to shearing off and crushing the asperities. It was found that the initiation and propagation of tensile cracks inside the asperities controls the asperity shearing off process. The results of this study clearly show that PFC has the ability to reproduce the shear behaviour and shearing mechanisms of rock joints under different loading regimes. Unlike the empirical, analytical and constitutive numerical models, in this numerical approach the real geometry can be explicitly simulated and there is no need for a quantitative value for description of the joint roughness. Furthermore, as the previous studies have been mostly focused on the pre-peak and the peak strength, this approach can provide a useful and scientific tool to study the post peak behaviour of rock joints. Results of this study show that this numerical approach has the intrinsic ability to reproduce the post-peak behaviour of rock joints. However, further studies are required to investigate the process of broken asperities degradation at the residual stage and considering the relation between asperity degradation and the residual strength which is recommended for future studies. The authors would like to express their gratitude to Dr. Glenn Sharrock, Dr. David Potyondy, Dr. Mathew Pierce and Dr. Xavier Garcia from Itasca Consulting group for their useful suggestions and technical help.