Using mechanical miners such as roadheaders may be a solution to increase the production rate and to decrease the costs in metallic mines. In this study, the performance prediction and cutter consumption of roadheaders were investigated for the eight different ore types. Small-scale linear cutting tests, Cerchar abrasivity tests and physico-mechanical tests were carried out on the ore samples collected from the site. The instantaneous cutting rates of a selected roadheader were calculated using specific energy (SE) values and compared to the previous models. The amount of cutter consumption was also calculated for each ore type and it was seen that the estimated cutter consumption values for the tested ores are generally lower than the proposed economical upper limit. Since only the performance prediction and cutter consumption of roadheaders were investigated for the excavation of ores in the current study, analyzing all mining operations is necessary for the adaptation of roadheader excavation to a mine. Simple and multiple regression models were also derived for the estimation of SE from the ore properties. A significant practical model including the Schmidt hammer value and density of ores was produced from the multiple regression analysis. This regression model can be reliably used for the estimation of SE especially for the preliminary studies.The small-scale mines are easily affected by changing market conditions and fluctuations in the global demand for metallic ores. Therefore, the small-scale mine operations need to be more efficient to increase their competitiveness. Using mechanical miners such as roadheaders will increase the production rate and decrease the costs in the metal mines. A successful application of roadheaders in underground gold mining was reported by Numerous underground metal mines are present in Turkey. Most of these mines are small-scale, and the excavation methods applied in these mines are drilling and blasting. Operations for these small-scale mines need to be more efficient to increase their competitiveness. In this study, the excavation capacity of roadheaders was estimated for eight different metallic ores, and some prediction equations were derived for the assessment of specific energy. The specific energy (   Based on the in situ observation of many tunnelling and mining projects,  Ore mineral deposits are common in the Taurus Mountain Belt, which runs from west to east in the south of Turkey. This mountain belt is subdivided into three parts: the western, the middle and the eastern Taurus Mountains. The boundary between the middle and the eastern part is called Aladaglar. The block samples of chromite, hematite, galena and smithsonite were collected from the mines or outcrops in the vicinity of Aladaglar ( Uniaxial compressive strength tests were conducted on trimmed core samples, which had a diameter of 38 Brazilian tensile strength tests were conducted on core samples having a diameter of 38 The samples cored perpendicular to any visible weakness plane and the samples having weakness plane were discarded. The diametral point load test was carried out on the cores having a diameter of 38 70 P-wave velocities ( Trimmed core samples were used in the determination of dry density. The specimen volume was calculated from the average of several calliper readings. The dry weight of the specimen was determined by a balance, capable of weighing to an accuracy of 0.01 of the sample weight. The density values were obtained from the ratio of the specimen weight to the specimen volume. At least three samples were tested for each ore type and the results were averaged. Porosity values were determined using the saturation and calliper techniques. Pore volumes were calculated from the dry and saturated weights, and sample volumes were obtained from calliper readings. The porosity values were obtained from the ratio of the pore volumes to the specimen volume. The test was repeated at least three times for each ore type and the results were averaged. The details of this test were presented by The Cerchar abrasivity index ( The average results of all tests are given in According to the In the model used in this study (Eq. The cutter consumption of a roadheader (cutters per solid bank of excavated material-m The cutter consumption value for each ore type was calculated using Eq. Specific energy ( In this study, the test results given in A good correlation was found between A moderate correlation was found between porosity and The The multiple linear regression analysis was applied to the data for the expectation of obtaining stronger models. At the first stage, all independent variables except Although the Eq. As shown above, the determination coefficients of some equations derived are good or very good, but they do not necessarily identify valid model. Validation of the Eqs. ( The significance of The significance of regressions was determined by the analysis of variance. In this test, a 95% level of confidence was chosen. If the computed Both the Small-scale linear cutting tests were carried out on the core samples of eight different metallic ores and the instantaneous cutting rates of a selected roadheader were calculated using the In addition, the relations between It should be noted that small scale cutting tests do not account for in situ jointing of the rock or ore mass, stress state, humidity and other mine conditions that usually play a relevant role in actual roadheader performance. In situ conditions can positively or negatively affect Rock cutting tests were performed on the different types of metallic ores having wide strength values. Therefore, the results of the paper can be used in other parts of the country or worldwide mines using similar strength values of ores. This study has been supported by the Scientific Research Project Unit of Nigde University, under the project number FEB 2009/04. The automatic cutting machine used in the sample preparation was financed by Alexander von Humboldt Foundation. Authors thank to Professor Nuh Bilgin and his colleagues from Istanbul Technical University for their support on performing of the linear cutting tests.