Based on a prior study on air-fluidized dense media for 6–50-mm coal preparation, this paper presents results on magnetically stabilized fluidized bed (MSFB) on fine 1–6-mm coal preparation. Magnetic stabilization improves separation by lowering the lower size limit of separation and by preventing back mixing of the separated solids. This work addresses the fluidization media characteristics, the experimental system and separation results.As the requirement for environmental protection increases and the quality of raw coals decreases, both the quantity of the coal being separated and the level of separation required are increasing. Wet coal cleaning needs water, but adequate water resources are not always available. For example, two-thirds of China's coal are being mined in arid areas. Dry separation is an alternative approach. Of the dry coal separation methods, the air-fluidized dense media can be used to separate 6–50-mm coal We studied many fluidization media from which we chose the magnetic beads recovered from coal-fired power plant cinder. The magnetic beads are mainly composed of Fe The real density and bulk density of the magnetic beads are shown in The specific magnetization susceptibility ( The experimental system shown in Run-of-mine coal was separated into three particle size groups: 0–1, 1–6 and 6–50 mm. The 1–6-mm coal was used in the present MSFB study since the 6–50-mm coal can be separated in air-fluidized dense media, and the 0–1-mm coal can be separated by static electricity technology. We chose Zouxian magnetic beads (size distribution shown in After 40 s of separation, both the fluidizing gas flow and the magnetic field were shut off. Then, two samples of the float product in the top bed stratum and the sink product in the bottom bed stratum were taken. The float and sink results and the partition coefficients are shown in The partition curve between 25% and 75% gives a reasonable straight-line relationship, which shows the efficiency of the separation process. The The The density at which 50% of the particles report to sinks is known as the Magnetic beads recovered from coal-fired power plant cinder produce the heavy media, which are suitable for the magnetically stabilized fluidized bed (MSFB) to separate fine coal into light and heavy fractions. Experimental results show that the probable error of separation ( The authors wish to thank the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (No. 50025411) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 59974030) for financing the project.