The fracture geometric characteristics (FGC) have considerable influence on fluid flow in the fractured rock mass. The present work took experimental approaches to investigate the quantitative relationship between the FGC of a rough-walled fracture (RWF) and its hydraulic properties, particularly for the deformable fractures subjected to applied stresses. Taking into account the complexity of the FGC in realistic practice, the FGC studied in this work are comprised of three types: the size of apertures of interconnected void spaces, the contact areas of fracture surfaces, and the heterogeneous distribution of interconnected void spaces. In the proposed mathematical model, the above three FGC were represented by the corresponding parameters: the effective mechanical aperture, the contact ratio and the relative fractal dimension, respectively. In the experiment, six single fractured sandstone samples, divided into three groups by different grain sizes, were adopted for high-precision fluid flow tests under a variety of confining stresses. Firstly, to obtain the three-dimensional distribution of fracture morphology for each sample, we proposed a so-called point-cloud data matching method. This method is easy to operate and possesses high spatial resolution accuracy, meanwhile avoiding the destruction of the fracture surfaces. To explore effective percolation networks, the isolated void spaces between the two fracture surfaces, which are surrounded by contact regions and have no contribution to flow seepage, were identified and precluded from whole void spaces. Secondly, for each sample, the variation of the FGC representation parameters with confining stresses was quantitatively estimated in the laboratory. Lastly, an improved mathematical model was constructed to represent the relationship between fracture permeability and FGC representation parameters for RWF, which is also dependent on the confining stress. The theoretical values of hydraulic apertures predicted by our model were in good agreement with the experimental results. These results can account for the effect of the evolution of FGC on fracture permeability of deformable RWF.The main fluid flow channels in strata are normally composed of a large number of natural and mining-induced fractures, The Cubic Law was validated for laminar flow through smooth parallel plates, and the fracture permeability Many efforts have been made to take into account the effect of fracture surface irregularities (roughness) on fluid flow. However, the surface irregularities alone are still not sufficient to characterise the tortuous seepage channels of fluid flow through RWF. Thus, the Fracture Geometric Characteristics (FGC) were proposed to consider more factors in addition to surface irregularities. FGC are intrinsically heterogeneous and sensitive to applied stresses, which results in the occurrence of the non-uniform flow field. Although intensive research has been carried out pertaining to the tortuosity effect of FGC on fluid flow through RWF, several issues remain to be further investigated. Firstly, the isolated voids surrounded by contact regions between the fracture surfaces should be precluded from whole void spaces, because the effective percolation network was only related to interconnected void spaces. Secondly, to the best of the authors’ knowledge, there are no publications quantitatively studying the characteristic of the heterogeneous distribution of interconnected void spaces and its effect on the permeability of RWF. Thirdly, in the deformable fracture, the variations of these FGC with the applied stress have not been investigated. Fourthly, the models above were established mainly based on the numerical simulation, thus lacking an experimental validation. The article is aimed at addressing the issues above-mentioned using experimental methods, in order to better describe the relationship between geometric characteristics and permeability of deformable RWF subjected to confining stresses. Firstly, three FGC that affect the fracture permeability of RWF were identified, and the corresponding representation parameters were proposed. Subsequently, a series of high-precision hydraulic tests of fractured sandstone samples with three different groups of grain sizes were conducted in a triaxial cell under a wide range of confining stresses. The fracture surfaces were scanned by the 3D scanner, and the surface morphology was obtained by using a newly proposed point-cloud data matching method. Based on this, the evolution of three-dimensional fracture morphology under different confining stresses can be calculated by monitoring the average closure magnitude. Afterwards, three proposed FGC representation parameters, including the effective mechanical aperture (average apertures of interconnected void spaces), the contact ratio (the ratio of contact area over total area of fracture surface), and the relative fractal dimension (representation of the heterogeneity level of the interconnected void spaces), and their evolution with increasing confining stresses were calculated. Throughout this procedure, only the interconnected void spaces are considered, because the isolated void spaces have no contribution to seepage and thus are precluded from whole void spaces. Lastly, a so-called FGC model was established to reflect the quantitative relationship between FGC representation parameters and fracture permeability in the deformable fracture, which was compared with classical Yeo model for different samples under increasing confining stresses. Most of the previous publications have considered the aperture sizes and contact areas as the two main geometric characteristics in RWF. This study synthetically considered the effects of geometric characteristics, including the size of apertures of interconnected void space, the contact areas of fractures and the heterogeneous distribution of interconnected void spaces. In addition, it is worth noting that the percolation network between two fracture surfaces was only constituted by interconnected void spaces, so the isolated voids surrounded by contact areas, which have no effect on flow seepage, should be identified and not taken into account in the calculation. Before proceeding to discuss how to represent the FGC, we firstly introduce the approach for the measurement of the fracture morphology, A 3D scanner is used to capture the spatial coordinates of the exterior surface of the fractured sample Open the sample and scan the spatial coordinates of the exterior surface By matching Then the point-cloud data of the upper and lower surfaces of the fracture are fitted with high-precision meshes, respectively. The grid intervals in x- and y- directions were 0.01 In the experiment, the hydraulic test is performed with the increasing confining stresses. The high-precision displacement sensors continuously measure the variation of the average closure magnitude of the fracture, After obtaining the fracture aperture In this study, the accuracy of the scanner is ranged between 0.01 The effective mechanical aperture The contact areas are represented by the contact ratio Concerning the representation of the spatial distribution of interconnected void spaces, the fractal method, which was widely used to quantitatively describe the rough and irregular configuration existing in nature since firstly proposed by Mandelbrot  The length and width direction of the point-cloud data of the mated fracture should be aligned with the X- and Y- axis, respectively. Then, the whole point-cloud data, which have been fitted by a high-precision mesh, should be placed into an evenly-spaced grid with the space being  The UTSP with the thickness  Through calculating how In this method, the various measurement lengths  We define Thus, in this study, the FGC representation parameters, including the effective mechanical aperture In this experiment, six single fractured sandstone samples, divided into three groups by different grain sizes, were adopted for the fluid flow test. All these samples were taken from the depth between 100 A total of six cylindrical sandstone specimens (Φ50 The experiment of the unidirectional fluid flow through fractured samples with the application of normal stresses is commonly conducted by using the triaxial test system.    The curves in the form of the hydraulic gradient ( The dominant conductive pathways of fluid flow through RWF are only comprised of interconnected void spaces in the fractures. As shown in As seen in According to By using the approach proposed in According to The UTSP covering method which has been explained in After obtaining the values of From As discussed in Among the existing models However, Eq. It can be seen from Eq. In order to validate the FGC model, the experimental hydraulic aperture From It is noteworthy that Eq. The proposed FGC model provides a method for quantitatively establishing the relationship between FGC and the fracture permeability for deformable RWF, giving us insights into the hydro-mechanical behaviour of rough rock fractures. To employ Eq. The complexity of fracture geometric characteristics in RWF renders the accurate prediction of the seepage of fluid flow through fractured rock mass exceedingly difficult. Three FGC representation parameters, effective mechanical aperture In this study, a series of high-precision hydraulic tests for single fractured sandstone samples with three types of grain sizes were conducted in a triaxial cell under a variety of confining stresses. Three fracture geometric characteristics (FGC), including the aperture sizes of the interconnected void space, the fracture surface contact areas and the heterogeneous distribution of interconnected void spaces, were quantitatively represented in the laboratory, and each FGC is represented by a specific parameter. In the calculation of each parameter, the isolated void spaces have been precluded from our model, because the percolation network is formed by the interconnected void spaces. In addition, the variation of each parameter with the confining stress was calculated, and then the influences of these FGC representation parameters on the fracture permeability of fluid flow through RWF were investigated. The newly proposed point-cloud data matching method can accurately represent the three-dimensional distribution of fracture morphology. In addition, the effective mechanical aperture, which is the arithmetic average aperture of interconnected void spaces, proves to be capable of representing the variation of the apertures of interconnected void space with confining stresses. In our case, the effective mechanical aperture of each sandstone sample was negatively correlated with the increasing confining stress. Among these, the effective mechanical aperture of fine sandstones has the largest decrease magnitude. The coarse sandstone samples have the largest residual effective mechanical aperture. In addition, the relative fractal dimension representing the heterogeneity level of the distribution of interconnected void spaces shows nonlinear growth correlation with increasing confining stresses, which is fitted well with exponential distribution. As for the contact ratio, with the increase of the confining stress, the residual contact ratio of fine and medium samples is generally larger than that of coarse ones, and this regularity is opposite to the variation of effective mechanical apertures. Lastly, a quantitative relationship between FGC representation parameters and fracture permeability was established, which was named FGC model. Through comparing the experimental hydraulic aperture with the theoretical prediction values from Yeo and FGC models, it can be found that the effect of the flow channel tortuosity on the fluid flow has been greatly exaggerated for fine fractured sandstone in Yeo model, and the FGC model fits the experimental value Therefore, the FGC model can be regarded as an improved model to represent the effect of geometric characteristics of the permeability evolution of fluid flow through deformable RWF subjected to applied stresses. It established a foundation for simulating the mechanical behaviour and hydraulic properties in fractures as a function of applied normal stresses. However, the results were limited to small-scale fractures. The future work is to investigate the relationship between the fracture geometric characteristic and the fracture permeability for different scales of the fractured rock mass in fields. In addition, the nonlinear flow that exists in the fractured rock mass is worthy to be explored. This work was supported by the