Ultrafine grained (UFG) ferrite–martensite dual phase steels containing different amounts of vanadium were fabricated by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) and subsequent intercritical annealing. Their room temperature tensile properties were examined and compared to those of a coarse grained counterpart. The formation of UFG martensite islands of ∼1 μm was not confined to the former pearlite colonies but they were uniformly distributed throughout UFG ferrite matrix. A diffusion analysis showed that this specific microstructure may result from dissolution of carbon atoms from pearlitic cementite and their concurrent diffusion into UFG ferrite during ECAP, making the average carbon content reach the equilibrium content to form austenite during subsequent intercritical annealing. The strength of UFG dual phase steels was much higher than that of the coarse grained counterpart, but uniform and total elongations were not degraded. More importantly, the present UFG dual phase steels exhibited extensive rapid strain hardening unlike most UFG materials. The addition of vanadium slightly increased the strength and elongation of the present UFG dual phase steels, but it was found that excessive vanadium addition did not lead to further improvement of their mechanical properties. An excellent combination of strength, elongation and strain hardening of the present UFG dual phase steels was explained in terms of their specific microstructural features.The advent of innovative severe plastic deformation (SPD) techniques allows for the grain size of metallic materials to be easily refined to the submicrometer level, to form the so-called ultrafine grained (UFG) materials. UFG materials are quite attractive due to their ultrahigh strength, which is more than twice that of their coarse grained counterparts. However, in general, UFG materials have an inherent mechanical drawback, i.e., a lack of strain hardening, resulting from the fact that the grain size is comparable to the dislocation cell size which corresponds to the dislocation mean free length In steels, a wide range of mechanical properties can be achieved by microstructural modification without compositional change through various thermomechanical treatments. In this regard, the mechanical properties of dual phase steels consisting of ferrite and martensite are quite noticeable. They are manifested by continuous yielding, low yield strength, moderately high uniform elongation, high ultimate tensile strength, and rapid strain hardening at the initial plastic deformation stage The present investigation was motivated by two main considerations. First, little information is available at present on the fabrication of UFG ferrite–martensite dual phase steels by SPD and their mechanical properties. Second, it is unclear whether rapid strain hardening appears in UFG ferrite–martensite dual phase steels in a similar way to coarse grained ones or diminishes like UFG ferrite–pearlite steels. Accordingly, in this study, three UFG ferrite–martensite low carbon dual phase steels with different amounts of vanadium were fabricated by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) Three grades of low carbon steel used in the present investigation were prepared as 50 From the heat-treated plates, rods of 10 The size and volume fraction of ferrite and martensite were measured by scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL 6330F with 15 Tensile specimens with a gage length of 25.4 The microstructural characteristics of dual phase steels are primarily determined by not only the intercritical annealing conditions but by the starting microstructure before intercritical annealing. Since identical intercritical annealing conditions were used in this study, the microstructures before and after intercritical annealing are presented in this section. Optical microstructures of DP0 steel before and after ECAP are shown in TEM microstructures of DP0 steel before and after ECAP, and DP1 steel after ECAP are compared in Microstructures of CG-DP0 and UFG-DP0 steels are shown in Martensite substructure of UFG-DP0 steel ( The microstructural parameters of CG-DP0 and UFG-DP steels are presented in The representative engineering and true stress–strain curves and the corresponding tensile data are presented in As mentioned previously, one of the unique mechanical characteristics of dual phase steels is rapid strain hardening at the initial plastic deformation stage. Since strain hardening is directly associated with formability, the strain hardening behavior of dual phase steels has been studied extensively. Of those studies, the three empirical fitting equations and the mathematical analyses based on these equations are used the most commonly: they are the Hollomon analysis The three equations are: The values of the strain hardening exponent of the two stages, In order to obtain the uniformly distributed UFG martensite islands shown in The previous investigations  The strength of dual phase steels generally increases with decreasing In spite of higher strength, elongation of the present UFG-DP0 steel was comparable to that of CG-DP0 steel. Uniform elongation of dual phase steels showing the two deformation stages, as shown in The two stage hardening behavior in the modified C–J analysis is often observed in conventional dual phase steels. At the first stage with the low slope, the ferrite matrix deforms plastically but the martensite remains elastic and, at the second stage with the high slope, both phases deform plastically As shown in For the present UFG-DP steels, the V addition resulted in a slight increase of the strength without degradation of uniform elongation but decreased strain hardening at the first stage. As mentioned before, the higher strength and comparable uniform elongation in UFG-DP steels with V are attributed to larger  Ultrafine grained ferrite–martensite dual phase steels were fabricated by equal channel angular pressing (ECAP) with an effective strain of ∼4 at 500 The strength of UFG dual phase steels was much higher than that of their coarse-grained counterpart due to UFG ferrite and larger martensite volume fraction. However, uniform and total elongations of the former were comparable to those of the latter. More importantly, unlike other UFG materials, UFG dual phase steels exhibited extensive rapid strain hardening in spite of a UFG structure. The addition of vanadium slightly improved the strength and elongation but resulted in the decrease of strain hardening in the first stage. Also, the excessive addition of vanadium was found not to be beneficial to improve the mechanical properties of UFG-DP steels. This work was supported in part by a grant from the Center for Nanostructured Materials Technology under the ‘21st Century Frontier R&D Programs’ of the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), Korea and in part by a grant from the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy of Korea. One of the authors (C.S.L.) is grateful for support from the ‘2003 National Research Laboratory Program’ of the MOST, Korea.