A lithium substituted 58S bioactive glass (BG) containing from 0 to 10mol% Li2O was synthesized through the sol-gel technique and the effect of Lithium substitutions on in vitro hydroxycarbonate apatite formation, osteoblast-like cell responses and antibacterial efficiency was studied. Structural and morphological evaluation using X-ray diffraction analysis, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy revealed that 58S BG with 5mol% Li2O (BG-5) had no significant effect on the formation rate of crystalline hydroxycarbonate apatite however 58S BG with 10mol% Li2O lowered the bioactivity of the BG. The lower bioactivity of BG-10 was associated with a lower rate of Si and Ca ion release into the simulated body fluid. The 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) assessment methods revealed that the presence of Li had a stimulating influence on increasing of both proliferation and differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells. A qualitative assessment of cell viability with Live/Dead technique and visualization of the morphology of actin fibers and nuclei of MC3T3 cells treated with Li-BGs with DAPI/Actin staining techniques showed that addition of Li resulted in an increase in the mean number of DAPI-labeled nuclei which was in reasonable agreement with MTT test. The Li substituted BGs exhibited a potential antibacterial effect against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus bacteria (MRSA). Results suggest that sample BG-5 is a good candidate for bone tissue engineering with optimal cell proliferation and ALP activity, good bioactivity and significant high antibacterial potential against MRSA.The first bioactive glass (BG) based on amorphous silicate compositions (45S5 Bioglass: 45 SiO Bioactive glasses form an apatite-like layer on their surfaces when in contact with simulated body fluid (SBF) Previous studies documented that the osteoconductivity properties of BGs lead to adhesion, differentiation and proliferation of osteogenesis-related cells Studies show that the presence of lithium in a composition of bioactive glass improves its therapeutic properties. For example, lithium compounds such as lithium carbonate can increase remyelination of peripheral nerves Lithium-doped bioactive glasses (Li-BGs) have higher proliferation, differentiation and cementogenic gene expression in human periodontal ligament-derived cells and osteogenic differentiation in mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) A bacterial infection delays the process of wound healing and potentially leads to a surgical failure The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of substituting up to 10 The quaternary lithium substituted bioactive glass was synthesized through the sol-gel process. Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), triethyl phosphate (TEP), calcium nitrate tetrahydrate (Ca(NO TEOS, distilled water, and 0.1 All chemical reagents used for preparation of SBF were extra pure grade including NaCl, NaHCO The SBF solution was prepared according to Kokubo's protocol The thermal behavior of as-prepared powder samples BG-0 and BG-10 were studied by differential thermal analysis (DTA) and thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) in order to determine proper stabilizing temperature for the removal of residual organic and nitrate precursors without any crystallization in BGs. The DTA/TGA curves were obtained in Shimadzu DSC-50 apparatus under a N To examine the formation of apatite in the glass, specimen surfaces were subjected to X-ray diffraction (XRD, INEL-Equinox-3000, France), after soaking in SBF for 1, 3, 7 and 14 days, with a Cu-Kα radiation source (λ = 1.5405 FTIR spectroscopy (Nicolet Avatar 660, USA) was employed to investigate the apatite phase formation on the surface of specimens before and after soaking in SBF by analyzing the change of functional groups in the wavenumber range of 400–4000 After immersion in the SBF, a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Philips XL30, Netherland) was used to observe the morphology of the BG disc's surface to assess apatite formation and growth over time. The samples that were kept in the SBF solutions were removed after 1, 3, 7 and 14 days and the solutions were analyzed for Ca, Si, P and Li ions by ICP-OES (Varian Vista Pro, Palo Alto, USA). Moreover, variation of pH with immersion time in SBF was measured by a pH meter at each step (Corning pH meter 340). To study the effect of Li In order to qualitatively assess cell viability in presence of Li in BG composition, the live-dead cell staining technique was performed on BG-0 (control sample) and BG-5 (sample with the highest cell proliferation based on MTT results) as previously described For assessments of cell morphology of actin fibers and nuclei of MC3T3-E1 cells, after incubation periods of 1 day and 7 days, cell-seeded samples were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde (Sigma-Aldrich, UK) solution for 30 The proliferation of the MC3T3-E1 was measured after exposure to different bioactive glass powder, using 3-{4,5-dimethylthiazol-2yl}-2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay. For this purpose, cells were seeded on samples into a 24-well plate at a density of 6 × 10 The osteoblastic activity of the MC3T3-E1 cells was investigated in vitro by measuring ALP enzyme. Three samples of each composition were tested and each experiment was repeated three times according to Lawry et al. MRSA were cultured in liquid lysogenybroth (LB) medium at 37 Bactericidal fraction = 1 − (number of survived bacteria/number of total bacteria). Quantitative data were presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) of at least 3 experiments. GraphPad Prism (GraphPad Software, USA) was used to assess the statistical significance between experimental groups. The probability value (p) lower than 0.05 was considered as statistically significant.  Lithium ion has a smaller ionic radius (76  Results showed that increasing the Li The FTIR spectra of BGs immersed in SBF for different time periods 0, 1, 3, 7 and 14 days are shown in After 3 days, the FTIR spectra of the BG-0 and BG-5 revealed two peaks around 1455 FTIR spectra were in good agreement with XRD results that confirmed HCA formation on surfaces of the BG-0 and BG-5 after 3 days and on BG-10 after 7 days.  A similar trend was observed for Si where the Si release was decreased by the substitution of Li for Ca in the BG. The decrease in Si concentration showed that the rate of precipitation of Si in a form of SiO The P concentration (  Previous reports indicated that the incorporation of elements such as Mg The SEM images in Results showed an increase in the size of the hydroxyapatite with an increase in the Li content of the glass. The larger particles may be attributed to a lower rate of nucleation as a result of lower supersaturation of the groups that are involved in the formation of the hydroxyapatite and silica. This result agreed with the Si and Ca ion release rate that was described in the previous section. The biocompatibility of control (BG-0) and BG-5 samples was assessed by cell viability test using live/dead fluorescent staining. As it seen from Fluorescent staining for the cytoskeletal filamentous actin fibers and nuclei is shown in  The alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity of osteoblast-like cell line MC3T3-E1, cultured on various specimens for different times are shown in Based on the MTT and alkaline phosphatase activity results, BG-5 and BG-10 had the maximum proliferation and osteoblastic activity of the MC3T3-E1 cells. On the other hand, XRD and FTIR results showed that BG-5 had a nearly same rate of HCA formation whereas BG-10 delayed the HCA formation and lowered the bioactivity of the BG. Therefore, in this research, BG-5 was selected as a sample for comparison with the control for examination such as Live-dead assay and Actin staining of cells. As shown in One of the possible reasons for antibacterial activity of bioactive glasses is attributed to the release of alkali ions which leads to an increase in pH value The SiO In vitro experiments with MC3T3-E1 cells revealed that lithium-doped 58S-BG incorporating 5