Due to the excellent mechanical and durability properties, ultra-high performance cement-based composites (UHPCCs) have attracted a lot of attention during the past decades. It is noted that most existing UHPCCs are manufactured from raw materials with high quality, for instance, well-graded river sands. However, the huge consumption of river sands as construction materials has inevitably resulted in some serious ecological impacts, as reported around the world. In this regard, it shall be much beneficial if some substitutes, such as recycled sands produced through processing of construction and demolition waste (CDW), could be used to replace natural sands to manufacture the qualified UHPCCs. This paper presents such a preliminary study on the feasibility of manufacturing UHPCCs with recycled sands. A total of five UHPCCs are designed and cast with different replacement percentages of recycled sand, i.e., 0%, 30% 50%, 70% and 100% (in mass). The associated packing density of the mixed sands is estimated based on the linear packing model. The fresh and hardened properties of the UHPCCs, including the workability, strength and shrinkage, are experimentally examined. The test results indicate that it is possible to use recycled sand to replace natural river sand in the manufacture of UHPCCs; however, the amount of the recycled sand needs to be limited. In the case when the replacement percentage of the recycled sand is lower than 50% (in mass), the properties of the UHPCCs with the recycled sand are comparable with those containing river sand only.Due to their excellent strength properties, i.e., a compressive strength of 120–150 MPa and flexural strength of 15–25 MPa, ultra-high performance cement-based composites (UHPCCs) have attracted a lot of interests during the past decades ( Natural aggregates such as river sands and gravels are directly mined from the earth, which account for the largest volume of solid material extracted globally. Formed through erosive processes over thousands of years, however, these materials are now being extracted at a rate much greater than their renewal. Most of the consumptions of the materials are found in the construction industry. As a matter of fact, nowadays, river sands are rather rarer than expected. Moreover, some serious ecological impacts have been caused in along with the indiscriminate extraction of river sands ( In conventional cement-based composites of moderate/low strength grades, normally both coarse and fine aggregates are used. The fine aggregates have a much larger specific surface area than the coarse ones. In practice, the specific surface area directly influences the water demand and consequently increases the binder amount in a set w/b ratio with the increase of the specific area. If the same fraction of binder is maintained, the free water in the cement paste rises and this leads to an increase of the porosity in the mixtures ( Taking into account the ecological impacts caused by an indiscriminate extraction of natural river sand, this paper aims to perform a preliminary investigation on the feasibility of using recycled sands to manufacture UHPCCs. In addition to the aforementioned workability and strength properties of UHPCCs, the shrinkage behavior is also studied with respect to the high binder content and a low w/b ratio in UHPCCs. In particular, for ordinary concrete, the self-shrinkage rate is usually less than 100 × 10 The cementitious materials used in this work include Portland cement (PC) P•II52.5, fly ash (FA) and silica fume (SF). The natural sand used in this work is river sand provided from a local company while the recycled sand is generated from low and medium-strength waste concrete. The procedure of recycled sand consists of crushing, comminution by impact crusher, magnetic separation to remove the remaining steel bars, and finally, a two-deck screen to perform the dry sieving and grading of the products into size fractions: 0.08–5.0 mm. The appearances of the natural sand and recycled sand, as observed by naked eyes are shown in The objective of this study is to investigate the influence of the recycled sand content on the properties of UHPCCs. To this end, a total of five UHPCCs mixtures are designed and produced. The difference among the various mixtures is the replacement percentage of the recycled sand. The five mixtures are denoted as R0N100, R30N70, R50N50, R70N30 and R100N0, where the character R and N is short for recycled and natural sand, respectively. The mixture R0N100 means the mixture contains 0% recycled and while 100% natural sand, which is used to serve as the reference mixture. The mix proportions of the UHPCCs mixtures in this study are shown in In the present study, the packing density of the mixed sands is estimated based on the linear packing model (LPM). The theoretical background and relevant validations of the LPM can be found in ( Based on Eqs. As shown in A forced single-axis mixer with a rotational speed of 45 rpm was used to prepare UHPCCs in this study. All mixtures were mixed using the following procedures: first, mix binders, expansive agent and sand, stir conctantly for 120 s; second, mix water and water reducer evenly in advance and then add the mixed solution in the mixer, stir for 180 s; third, pour the steel fiber within 120 s; next, discharge the fresh UHPCCs to place into the molds of the corresponding experiments; finally, place the molds on vibration table for 60 s. The specimens were placed in a room at a temperature of (20 ± 2) °C and no less than 50% relative humidity and demolded approximately 48 h after casting, and then cured in the moist room at a temperature of (20 ± 2) °C and no less than 95% relative humidity until testing. The flow table test is widely used to evaluate the flowability or the consistency of cement-based composites due to its advantage of easy implementation. After mixing of the raw materials and vibrating of the mixtures, the flow table test is carried out according to the standard ( The rheology test using a rheometer allows measuring the yield stress and viscosity for a wide range of deformation rates simultaneously. The present rheology test uses samples without containing any steel fibers. The whole test program referred to three stages, i.e., the pre-shearing, the settling and the data collection. As shown in The compressive and three-point bending tests are carried out to characterize the compressive and flexural strength of the hardened UHPCCs. Cubic and prismatic specimens in 100 × 100 × 100 mm For the three-point bending test, a loading rate of 50 ± 10 N/s was employed until the prismatic specimen fails, according to the standard ( in which, The corrugated tube test is performed to evaluate the early age autogenous shrinkage of the mixture. The current corrugated tube test used samples without containing any steel fiber. The setup of the autogenous shrinkage measurement adopt the polyethylene corrugated tube that has a length of 420 ± 5 mm and a diameter of 5.8 ± 0.2 mm. The test is carried out according to the standard ( where The results of the flow table test are shown in The results of the rheology test are presented in The measured compressive strengths of the UHPCCs are given in The test results for the flexural bending strength of the UHPCCs are shown in As a result of the low w/b ratio, the UHPCC is more susceptible to self-desiccation and consequently to autogenous shrinkage at an early age than conventional ones ( Moreover, according to the standard ( with Eqs. Based on the least square theorem, the coefficient The measured results of the long-term drying shrinkage of the UHPCCs are presented in A large amount of natural river sand is consumed in construction industry. The indiscriminate extraction of this material has caused some serious ecological impacts. Therefore, it is necessary to explore alternative materials. UHPCCs have excellent strength and durability properties. The use of UHPCCs can lead to a significant saving of the materials since with these materials, a reduction of the dimension and self-weight of the structural components is possible. This paper presents a preliminary study on the manufacture of UHPCCs with recycled sand, which is derived from processing of construction and demolition waste (CDW). Five mixture are designed and tested, in which the replacement percentage of the recycled sand varies from 0%, 30% 50%, 70% to 100% in mass. A series of laboratory tests are carried out on the workability, the compressive strength and bending strength as well as the shrinkage of the UHPCCs. The test results indicate that it is possible to use the recycled sand to replace natural sand in the manufacture of UHPCCs. In the case that the replacement percentage of the recycled sand does not exceed 50%, the UHPCCs incorporating recycled sand exhibit comparable properties, including the workability (spread: 517 mm), the compressive strength (28 days: 160.64 MPa) and bending strength (28 days: 35.91 MPa) as well as the shrinkage (3 days: 152.75 × 10 Although the test results in this paper are very encouraging of using of recycled sand to produce UHPCCs, more extensive studies are required to investigate other properties of UHPCCs manufactured with recycled sand, such as the impact and the fatigue toughness, the transport properties and the durability aspects, the creep properties, and so forth. Furthermore, more studies are needed to study the effect of the quality of recycled sands on the properties of the UHPCCs. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support from the