This research was aimed at evaluating the inhibition of oxidative changes of beef patties packaged in modified atmosphere (70% O2+20% CO2+10% N2) by natural antioxidants: ascorbic acid (500 ppm), taurine (50 mM), carnosine (50 mM), rosemary powder (1000 ppm) and their combinations with the first. Beef patties stored at 2±1°C for 20 days were evaluated for colour (L*, a*, b*, C* and H*), TBARS, metmyoglobin formation (% of total myoglobin), psychrotrophic microbial counts and sensory odour and discolouration. Rosemary, either alone or with ascorbic acid, was highly effective in inhibiting both metmyoglobin formation and lipid oxidation; sensory analysis was in agreement with these results. Ascorbic acid, ascorbic acid+taurine and ascorbic acid+carnosine treatments showed a limited inhibitory effect of myoglobin oxidation, while carnosine and carnosine+ascorbic acid were effective in inhibiting lipid oxidation. Taurine alone failed to exert any antioxidant effect. Principal components analysis confirmed these results.During production, processing, distribution and storage, food undergoes deterioration from chemical and microbial processes. Typically, oxidative deterioration of meat and meat products result from degradative reactions of fats in raw meat. The mechanism involves the peroxidation of unsaturated fatty acids, most often from the phospholipids ( Comminution of meat and subsequent exposure to air can result in oxidised flavour within 1 h ( A common approach to extending the colour shelf-life of fresh red meats is the use of modified atmosphere packaging (MAP), preferably in the dark or under lighting free of UV radiation ( In addition to MAP, the rate and extent of oxidative deterioration can be reduced by various means, including the use of antioxidants. The incorporation of antioxidants protects lipids from oxidation and also stabilises oxymyoglobin ( Ascorbic acid possesses antioxidant properties, although it can act as an antioxidant or as a prooxidant depending on the concentration, the presence of metal ions and the tocopherol content ( A large number of authors found rosemary to have a very favourable effect on slowing down the process of oxidation of fat in various meats, such as sausages ( Carnosine is a β-alanyl-histidine dipeptide found in skeletal muscle. Pork, beef, and chicken muscle contain approximately 4.0, 8.0, and 15.0 mM carnosine, respectively ( Taurine is a natural component in foods, and has been considered for antioxidant activity ( The aim of the present research was to investigate the effect of these natural antioxidants on the extension of quality characteristics of fresh beef patties packaged in modified atmosphere. Carnosine, ascorbic acid and taurine were obtained from Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, MO, USA). Rosemary powder (Flavor Guard P) was kindly supplied as a gift from Chr. Hansen GmbH (Holdorf, Germany). The muscle Objective measurement of colour (CIE Metmyoglobin percentage was estimated spectrophotometrically by measuring the reflectance at 525 and 572 nm according to Lipid oxidation was measured by the 2-thiobarbituric acid method of Twenty-five grams of the meat mixture were taken from the patties, and diluted in 225 ml 0.1% peptone water. Each sample was homogenised in a Stomacher Lab Blender (model BA6021, Seward Laboratory, London) for 1 min. Serial 10-fold dilutions were prepared by diluting 1 ml in 9 ml of 0.1% peptone water. Two plates were prepared from each dilution by pouring 1 ml in fluid agar. Counts of aerobic psychrotrophic flora were determined from plates bearing 20–200 colonies in plate count agar (PCA; Merck; Darmstadt, Germany) incubated at 7°C for 10 days ( Samples of beef patties were evaluated by a six-member trained panel, according to the method described by The significance of differences among samples at each day of storage was determined by analysis of variance (ANOVA) using the Least Square Difference method of the General Linear Model procedure of SPSS (  Thus, according to our results, rosemary powder improved considerably the redness of beef patties, and this effect was enhanced by the presence of ascorbic acid. However, Ascorbic acid also had an additive effect with carnosine and taurine on meat redness. So far, very few reports have been published on the effect of these antioxidants on meat colour. Our results regarding carnosine and ascorbic acid are in good agreement with those of Of all the colour parameters measured, only  Ascorbic acid (500 ppm) alone was effective ( The use of rosemary (powder, extract and oleoresins) as an antioxidant in meat and meat products has been increasingly studied within the last years. However, results concerned thus far its antioxidant effect on lipid oxidation, but not on metmyoglobin formation. Therefore, our results strongly suggest for the first time a direct antioxidant effect on metmyoglobin formation and, as a consequence, in colour protection.  As stated above, rosemary and rosemary+ascorbic acid had a pronounced antioxidant effect at all storage times. The antioxidant properties of rosemary have been attributed to a variety of isoprenoid quinones ( The addition of ascorbic acid was completely ineffective in preventing lipid oxidation. Nevertheless, the antioxidant activity of ascorbic acid may depend on its concentration. Regarding taurine, its antioxidant effect was suggested by The mean values of log cfu/g of total psychrotrophic aerobes (PCA) are shown in As a consequence, any variation in the sensory characteristics of beef patties due to the antioxidants used must be attributed to inhibition of oxidative reactions and not to differences in microbial growth. The sensory scores of off odour are summarised in Sensory results of odour were very similar to the results regarding lipid oxidation, as revealed by the TBARS values discussed above. In fact, taking into account that the microbial growth exhibited no differences due to antioxidant treatments, differences in odour scoring ought to refer to differences in the oxidative degradation of lipids. Scores for discolouration of beef patties are shown in  The second component assigned the highest coefficients to Rosemary powder and rosemary+ascorbic acid were most effective in inhibiting oxidation of both lipid and myoglobin, as revealed by the results of TBARS and the percentage of metmyoglobin, respectively. Both effects contributed to maintaining desirable sensory characteristics of fresh beef patties and, therefore, extending their shelf-life. Ascorbic acid, taurine+ascorbic acid and carnosine+ascorbic acid treatments showed a small inhibitory effect on myoglobin oxidation, probably due to ascorbic acid alone. Taurine alone was unable to exert any antioxidant effect. Carnosine and carnosine+ascorbic acid were effective in inhibiting lipid oxidation, though this effect might be due to hydrazine contamination of the commercial preparations of carnosine. This research was supported by the Comisión Interministerial de Ciencia y Tecnologı&#x0301;a (Project No ALI 96-0587); Abelló Linde, S.A. (Spain), which provided the packaging equipment and gas mixtures; Chr. Hansen GmbH (Holdorf, Germany), which provided the rosemary extract; and the Agencia Española de Cooperación Internacional (fellowships of authors Sánchez-Escalante and Djenane). The technical assistance of A. Martı&#x0301;nez is also greatly acknowledged.