In the present study, roller, double disc and vertical disc mills were used to determine their effects on the quality of bulgur (surface characteristics, shape, dimension (x,
                     y,
                     z), particle volume (V), bulk density, one-thousand particles weight and size). Eighteen kilowatt motor was used and gap width was fixed at 2.50mm for the mills.
                  The roller mill had the highest milling yield (99.19%). Smooth and glassy particle surface was obtained due to the sharp-to-sharp operational principle of the roller mill (cutting effect). The quantity of coarse (/2.20) bulgur particle was higher than that of middle (2.20/2.00) and fine (2.00/0.50) bulgur particles. One-thousand particles weight and bulk density were found as 6.93g and 63.76g/100mL, respectively. However, uniform particle shape was not obtained from the roller mill. It could be due to the irregular cutting of the particles between teeth of the roller mill.
                  The coarse, middle and fine bulgur were obtained using the double disc mill at the percentage of 22.30, 34.60 and 37.94, respectively. The double disc mill caused low surface quality in contrast to obtained ovoid or elliptical shape. Moreover, its yield was 94.84%.
                  Vertical milling position of the vertical disc mill decreased the retention time of bulgur particles in the milling zone therefore, ellipticity (ovoid) of bulgur particles was lower than that of the double disc mills. The milling yield of vertical disc mill was 97.60%, which was higher than the double disc mill (94.84%).Due to the lack of extra-ordinary potentials of the well-known commercial products, i.e., pasta, biscuit, rice, flour etc., food producers, distributors and market directors investigate new commercial food products to place with them in markets. R&D departments also spend too much money and time to develop new commercial and acceptable food products to generate new shelves. Perhaps the most difficult R&D activity is the design of a new food product due to unacceptability risk of consumers. Therefore, a good procedure may be investigate the ancient traditional and regional products, which is cheap and high potential acceptable. Due to above objectives, the investigators and researchers pay attention to bulgur, recently. The trials have been showing that the result is always great when bulgur is experienced for the first time by a person. Bulgur is main ingredient presently used in more than 250 delicious meals. Bulgur is a whole grain product, which is generally produced from Bulgur is the one of ancient food products. The first historical knowledge about bulgur was found in the Çatalhöyük (Anatolia) archaeological studies (the history of Çatalhöyük goes back to 7000–8000 years ago). The production of this ancient grain product recently reached to important level around the world. For example, one million ton of bulgur (∼$ 800 million) is produced in Turkey by 500 plants. About twenty percent of bulgur production is exported. Out of Turkey, there is also important amount of bulgur production. In addition, 250,000–300,000 The consumption of bulgur is also important to understand its economical and nutritional properties. It is approximately 2.5 and 2.0 times higher than that of pasta and rice in Turkey, respectively. The average annual consumption of bulgur is about 12 Due to the significant trend to produce bulgur in developing and developed countries, some technological upgrades are required. Therefore, each step in the bulgur production system should be strictly controlled and adapted with new technologies. In the literature, there are too many studies related to the milling of semolina and flour ( Granular materials are commonly produced by compression, impaction, attrition or rubbing and cutting. Generally, compression reduces hard solids to coarse particles with relatively few fines; impaction gives coarse, medium or fine products; attrition yields very fine particles from soft and non-abrasive materials. Cutting gives particles of a uniform size, sometimes with a defined shape ( In a roller mill, the solid particles are caught and crushed between rolling members, i.e., face of a ring or casing. In the roller mill, cylindrical rollers press outward with great force against a stationary anvil ring or bull ring with the cutting effect of tooth. It is extensively used in the production of flour and semolina. Two types of disc mill (single and double disc mills) are also used in the milling industry ( In the present study, the different mills, i.e., roller, double disc and vertical disc were investigated to determine their effects on the milling quality of bulgur and to find the optimum mill type. Cleaned, classified, cooked, dried and peeled The roller (Tanmak Milling Ind. Co., Gaziantep, Turkey), double disc (Günmak South Milling and Screw Conveyor Ind. Co., Gaziantep, Turkey) and vertical disc (Toprakcıoğlu Mills Co., Karaman, Turkey) mills were used for the milling operation. The each mill had an 18 The gap between discs was 2.5 The main shared properties in the mills were gap, power and rpm as 2.5 The moisture (w.b.) and protein (d.b.) contents of cooked, dried and peeled intact wheat were determined using the oven drying (105 Bulgur was imaged before and after the milling operations using a Digital Jenoptik 4.1 Exclusiv camera (4.1 The dimensions of one hundred bulgur particles were measured using a micrometer (Mutitoyo No. 505-633, Japan). Ellipsoidal particle volumes (V “mm The weight of one-thousand of bulgur particles were measured using an analytical balance (sensitivity ±0.0001, Shimadzu, Japan). Bulk densities (hectolitre-weight) were determined using a graduated cylinder and an analytical balance. Sieve analyses were performed using 2.20, 2.00 and 0.50 Maximum, minimum, mean values, standard deviations and coefficient of variances (CV, %) of the dimensions of bulgur particles were determined. An ANOVA analysis was performed for the mean values of dimensions ( Main problems during the bulgur milling operation can be classified as follows: (i) deformation, scratching and formation of burrs on the surface of particles (especially for abrasive type mills), (ii) the formation of sharp edges on the particles (the loss of ovoid shape causes adhesiveness, breakage, flour formation and loss of quality during preparation of pilaf and köfte from bulgur), (iii) the loss of translucency, smoothness and appearance, (iv) decrease in yield due to flour formation (particles Some particles obtained from the roller mill was long, which were ground along the crease of the wheat particles ( During the double disc milling operation, the bulgur particles lost their surface appearances due to the deformation with abrasion. Cracking, scratching, burr formation and splitting on the bulgur particles were observed. However, the abrasion effect prevented the existing of long bulgur particles, therefore extreme sharp edges were not obtained (nearly ovoid) ( The objective of the use of double disc mill was to obtain the uniform size and shape (ovoid shape like an ant-head). However, double milling increased the quantity of by-product (flour). It might be acceptable because of its ovoid shape production. Due to the vertical working principle of vertical disc mill, the vertical disc milled bulgur was more elliptical than the roller milled bulgur; however it was less elliptical than the double disc milled bulgur ( The changes in the dimensions were illustrated in The mean values of the The overall yield (/0.50) for the roller, double disc and vertical disc mills were 99.19%, 94.84% and 97.60%, respectively. Due to the cutting effect of roller mill, its yield was greater than the others. Also, the vertical position of disc mill, i.e., short residence time increased the milling yield (97.60%) compared with the double disc mill. Maximum amount of coarse bulgur (/2.20) was obtained from the roller mill (88.56%) due to its cutting effect. Middle (2.20/2.00) and fine (2.00/0.50) bulgur were 5.96% and 4.65%, respectively ( The amount of coarse, middle and fine bulgur in the double disc mill were 22.30%, 34.60% and 37.94%, respectively. The double milling operation increased the amount of middle bulgur, fine bulgur and by-product in contrast to decrease in the coarse bulgur due to abrasion effect. The coarse, middle and fine bulgur were obtained from the vertical disc mill as 46.61%, 27.05% and 23.94%, respectively. By-product was 2.40%. The quantity of coarse bulgur in the vertical disc mill was greater than the double disc mill. Similar to the double disc mill, the high amount of middle and fine bulgur was obtained from the vertical disc mill. The bulk densities of bulgur obtained from the roller, double disc and vertical disc mills were 63.76, 74.12 and 70.70 The 1000-particle weights of the bulgur particles obtained from the roller, double disc and vertical disc mills were 6.93, 1.91 and 5.04 As a result, in the present study, the roller mill (sharp-to-sharp) had cutting effect due to the tooth of rolls. The double disc mill had compression, rubbing and cutting effects. The vertical disc mill had also compression, rubbing and cutting effects, but forces were lower than the single or double disc mills due to the position of disc. Vertical position caused the gravitational force and short residence time. Therefore, bulgur particles were less affected from the available forces. The residence time in the disc mill installed horizontally was controlled by centrifugal force and conveying capabilities of the tooth corrugations (there was additionally gravitation force in the vertical disc mill). The advantages and disadvantages of the mills used in this study were compared in However, the roller mill caused the formation of long bulgur particles. This problem could be solved using different feeder over the rolls, or recycling screen to separate and re-feeding into the mill, or double or triple roller mills, or a hard polisher etc. The roller mill is a famous mill used in flour and semolina industries. Due to its wide-use in the industry, its maintenance and arrangements could be made easily, and also it is easily installed into flow-diagrams and plant designs.