The goal of this review is to present the most updated knowledge derived from basic science, animal studies and clinical trials, concerning biophysical stimulation of bone repair through low-intensity pulsed ultrasound (LIPUS), with particular reference to the management of delayed unions and nonunions. Low-intensity pulsed ultrasound LIPUS has been proved to significantly stimulate and accelerate fresh fracture healing in animal studies and in randomized controlled clinical trials. LIPUS also appears as an effective and safe home treatment of aseptic and septic delayed-unions and nonunions, with a healing rate ranging from 70% to 93% in different, nonrandomized, studies. Advantages of the use of this technology that may avoid the need for additional complex operations for the treatment of nonunions, include efficacy, safety, ease of use and favourable cost/benefit ratio. Outcomes depend on the site of nonunion, time elapsed from trauma, stability at the site of nonunion and host type. The detailed biophysical process by which low-intensity pulsed ultrasound LIPUS stimulates bone regeneration still remains unknown, even if various effects on bone cells in vitro and in vivo have been described. (E-mail: carlo.romano@grupposandonato.it)Several millions of fractures occur annually worldwide, with nearly 6 million fractures reported in the United States alone ( Even with the most advanced treatment methods today available, approximately 5% to 10% of fractures do not heal. When the repair process is not sufficient to restore bony continuity within 3 mo from trauma or intervention, then a “delayed union” is said to occur; when bone healing does not take place after 9 mo, a “nonunion” occurs. Risk factors for delayed or nonunions include specific fracture site with poor blood supply, fracture comminution or bone gap, infection and/or extensive soft tissue damage, inadequate fracture fixation, and so on. Smoking, diabetes, alcohol abuse, old age and other systemic conditions are also important well known contributing factors to nonunions. Both delayed and nonunions lead to additional suffering and prolonged functional impairment to the patients and to increased costs for the health care systems ( Nonunions may often require additional complex surgical procedures to heal ( The possibility of stimulating bone healing through physical methods has been widely investigated in the last 50 y. In nonunion cases where surgery may not be required because there is acceptable stability, alignment and limb length discrepancy, several biophysical treatment methods have been proposed in recent years to achieve a heal rate similar to that of surgery: pulsed electromagnetic fields ( The first reports on the possibility to stimulate osteogenesis with ultrasound dates back to years 1949 to 1950 ( At the beginning of the 1980s in Brazil, While ultrasound has been shown to improve radiographic fracture healing and increase bone density in rat femora at intensities as low as 11.8mW/cm The most commonly used signal frequency to stimulate osteogenesis is 1.5 MHz but higher values (3 MHz) were also proven to be effective in different animal models and at various intensities ( Concerning LIPUS treatment modalities, the device is applied to the skin, previously covered by a gel, corresponding to the point of fracture, for 20 min a day. The treatment is usually self-administered by the patient at home, after being properly instructed on the correct positioning of the device, for a period ranging from 2 to 6 mo or more, until healing is completed. The efficacy of LIPUS to accelerate bone healing after fresh fractures has been largely described in animal models but experimental data supporting a similar effect for nonunions are scarce. In the clinical setting, nonunions appear as the result of different (and sometimes not well understood) conditions that prevented bone healing and the reasons for nonunion may vary in different patients, making it particularly difficult to establish an accepted experimental model of this complication. Using a rat model of nonunion by muscle interposition in the fractured tibia of both limbs, Several prospective clinical studies evaluated the efficacy of LIPUS for the treatment of delayed and nonunions in humans but ethical considerations and the difficulty of recruiting homogeneous series of patients prevents the possibility of doing double-blind, randomized, studies. In most of the available studies, each patient acts as his or her own control, the treatment with LIPUS being the only variable introduced in a patient with established delayed- or nonunion. It is worth to say that this limit also applies for all other current treatment methods of nonunions, including surgical treatments. The outcomes of most relevant published studies are reported in Duarte and coworkers, in the most recent of two retrospective studies, reported an 85% healing rate on 385 nonunions ( A recently published, nationwide, prospective study for LIPUS treatment on delayed union and nonunion in Japan, analyzed the factors that influence the union rate ( When LIPUS treatment was started within 6 mo of the most recent operation, 89.7% of all fractures healed. When an improvement in the radiologic changes at the fracture site was observed after 4 mo in those cases, then the sensitivity and specificity for predicting bone union were more than 90%. We recommend starting LIPUS treatment within 6 mo from the most recent operation and “because LIPUS has been shown to be effective without causing either serious invasiveness or any undue risk to the patient, it may be considered the treatment of first choice for cases of postoperative delayed union or nonunion.” The healing rate is higher for delayed unions than for nonunions and results differ among various nonunion locations. When a fracture does not show radiologic signs of healing, in the presence of a local bacterial infection, a septic delayed- or nonunion is said to occur. This is one of the most challenging clinical occurrences since infection adds significant delay in bone healing and may require specific surgical treatments. LIPUS has been shown by our group to be effective even in the presence of septic nonunions ( The average time between trauma and start of ultrasound therapy ranged from 8 mo to 6 y. The average length of treatment was 126 ± 44 d (from a minimum of 90 to a maximum of 240 d). Bone healing was achieved in 39 patients (85.1 %), seven were considered failures, while three patients decided to discontinue the treatment. There were no side effects due to LIPUS, even in presence of metallic implants and infection. Patients felt no discomfort during therapy.  Experimental and clinical data prove that bone tissue metabolism is sensitive to the micromechanical strains induced by the acoustic pressure waves of LIPUS. Different hypotheses have been made to explain the exact mechanisms through which LIPUS acts on osteogenesis. Histologic studies show that LIPUS influences all major cell types involved in bone healing, including osteoblasts, osteoclasts, chondrocytes and mesenchymal stem cells. The effect of LIPUS seems to be limited to cells in soft tissue, whereas cells in calcified bone seem not to be affected. Even though the energy used by LIPUS treatment is low, the effects are evident. Cell cultures and research on experimental fractures in animal models have demonstrated changes in cytokine release ( LIPUS may induce a micromechanical stimulation of the bone and induce osteogenesis, according to Wolff's Law ( Cavitation mechanisms induced by ultrasound (500 mW/cm Ultrasound has a significant effect on biological tissues and cells involved in bone healing and in fracture repair and data from the literature support a positive effect on osteogenesis of LIPUS, applied percutaneously, in different experimental and clinical settings. LIPUS significantly stimulates and accelerates fresh fracture healing and is effective in promoting bone healing in aseptic and septic delayed- and nonunions. On the basis of the available studies, LIPUS was approved for the treatment of fresh fractures in 1994 and of established nonunions in February 2000, while reimbursement from different national or regional public or private payers is currently available in many European Countries. Even though the energy used by the LIPUS treatment is low, effects on cells Advantages and limits of LIPUS applied to nonunions may be summarized as follows:  Efficacy. Reported union rate ranges from 70% to 93%. The earlier the treatment is started, the better the results. High risk patients and long-lasting nonunions have the worst results. Outcomes may differ in different bones and hosts ( Safety. No side effects related to the low-intensity pulsed ultrasound LIPUS has been reported, even in the presence of metallic device, osteosynthesis and infection. Conservative. LIPUS is a conservative treatment that may avoid the need for additional complex operation. Compliance. LIPUS is a home, low time-consuming, treatment, easy to perform and self-administered by the instructed patient. Cost/benefit. Delayed- and nonunions increase dramatically the total cost of a fracture. LIPUS, as a home therapy and a conservative treatment that may lead to healing 8 out of 10 patients, has been shown to be a potential source of significant healthcare costs saving and has a positive cost/benefit ratio. Considering the incidence of delayed unions and nonunions in tibia fractures,  Long time to healing. The average time to healing (3 to more than 6 mo) remains long, even if most of possible alternative surgical procedures are not generally connected with significantly earlier results. Lack of randomized, controlled studies. Case series studies regarding the efficacy of LIPUS for delayed- and nonunions do not have a parallel control group, nor are they blinded, thus, raising the potential for bias. This limit is shared with all the available treatments of nonunions, including surgery. The large variability of fracture site, initial fracture severity and treatment, number of previous surgical interventions and host's type make extremely difficult to design a randomized study and to compare homogeneous series of patients. Indication to use. The results of LIPUS in the treatment of nonunions depend largely on correct indications. Unstable fractures or synthesis, bone loss larger that 15 mm, severe torsional or axial deformity, large soft tissue defects and low patient's compliance, are among the most common contraindications to the treatment.