Carbon capture and storage (CCS) by mineral carbonation is a promising way for CO2 emissions mitigation that has been under studied for decades. In this work, the preparation of magnesium hydroxide from Finnish serpentinite using sulfuric acid leaching as the first step of a CO2 mineral carbonation process was studied. Some details of leaching behavior of the ore were revealed and a valuable metal was recovered in this study. It was found that leaching yield of magnesium increased with sulfuric acid dosage, limited by a product layer formed on the ore particles, resulting in incomplete serpentinite decomposition. Agitation and ultrasonication were demonstrated to be effective in controlling the thickness of product layer. About 95% of iron was recovered from the leachate and leaching residues and valuable Fe-rich substances were obtained as by-products. After the iron extraction, a fine Mg(OH)2-rich powder could be prepared from the Mg-rich solution by precipitation using sodium hydroxide solution.In recent decades, the greenhouse effect has become an issue of common concern worldwide. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is considered as one of the main options for alleviating emissions of CO Serpentinite, containing mainly serpentine, is an excellent feedstock material for CO An acid leaching process is another option for magnesium extraction at relative low temperature, in which the magnesium ion could be leached out from the ore into solution, and the magnesium hydroxide can be easily prepared by adjusting pH value of the leachate (  Researchers admitted that the economy of CO This paper aims at a less energy-intensive process route to prepare magnesium hydroxide for CO Serpentinite used in this study was taken from the stockpile of the Finnish Hitura nickel mine of Belvedere Resources Ltd. (formerly Outokumpu Mining Oy). Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) analysis was carried out by Varian Vista-MPX against suitably calibrated standards (5–20 Serpentinite powder with a size smaller than 74 10 To study the product layer formed on ore particles, a batch of experiments was carried out using a serpentinite lump particle. Sulfuric acid (200 2-Ethylhexyl dihydrogen phosphate (P507) is regarded as an excellent extractant for Fe  Fe Magnesium hydroxide was precipitated from the aqueous phase when the pH value reached 10 using sodium hydroxide solution. 4 Both concentration (2, 3, 4 and 5 Leaching behavior of the Finnish serpentinite was investigated using the optimal sulfuric dosage. A batch of tests was conducted for different leaching durations, and the concentrations of all metallic elements in the leachates were determined by ICP-OES. The changes of leaching yield with duration are shown in To clarify the reasons for the low leaching yield of iron and nickel, the phase compositions of residues from 10 A polished serpentinite lump was immersed in 4 Furthermore, it was found that this product layer can be easily removed, exposing a relatively smooth inner surface of the lump (cf. “3” layer). Therefore, in the decomposition of serpentinite during the leaching process it could be speculated that hydrogen ions diffused through this layer from the solution to the surface of the ore particles to react with the inner core. The shrinking process of the particles progressed in a uniform way, so a smooth surface of the inner unreacted core was obtained. There is no doubt that the removal treatment for this passivating layer is critical for the leaching rate and for the completion of the reactions. Some lump experiments with an agitation at 400 A set of batch ore powder tests with different treatments was carried under the same conditions as the lump tests and some results are presented in An industrial hydrogen peroxide with a 1.2 times volume than the theoretical one was added in the leachate to oxidize Fe The separation factor of Fe Some extraction parameters including pH value (1.00, 1.25, 1.50, 1.75 and 2.00), concentration of P507 (20, 30, 40 and 50 The relative separation of the curves gives the possibility for the selective extraction of Fe Hydrochloric acid was used as the stripping agent as its stripping capacity is better than that of sulfuric acid and nitric acid according to preliminary experiments. 4 When the iron recovery process is applied in industrial scale, it is important to evaluate the possibility of material cyclic utilization. In this study, P507 was regenerated by the stripping treatment because H To recover the magnetite in the leaching residues, some magnetic separation tests with a magnetic field intensity of 50 After the iron extraction, magnesium hydroxide in micron scale was precipitated from the Mg-rich aqueous phase by a pH adjustment until the pH value reached about 10 (using sodium hydroxide solution), followed by a drying for 2 The preparation of magnesium hydroxide from Finnish serpentinite by sulfuric acid leaching for CO Based on the conclusions of this work, future research will focus on a comprehensive utilization of other valuable metallic elements, especially the nickel in the leaching residues, in a cleaner and economical way. Another line of future work would be to reduce acid consumption with the final goal to implement this low-energy process in industrial CO The authors gratefully acknowledge supports by