An optimal outcome of surgical treatment for a syndesmotic injury depends on accurate reduction and adequate fixation. It has been suggested that the use of a reduction clamp for reduction of the syndesmosis results in better reduction and a lower rate of redisplacement than manual reduction. However, these concepts have never been scientifically evaluated. We compared these 2 methods in a prospective randomized trial. A total of 85 acute ankle rotational fractures combined with syndesmotic injury were randomized to syndesmosis reduction with either a reduction clamp or manual manipulation. Reduction of the syndesmosis was assessed radiographically by measuring the tibiofibular clear space, tibiofibular overlap, and the medial clear space immediately postoperatively and at the final follow-up examination. Ankle joint range of motion, visual analog scale score, Olerud–Molander ankle scoring system, and complications were obtained at the last follow-up visit to assess the clinical outcomes. Of the 3 radiographic measurements, the tibiofibular clear space and tibiofibular overlap differed significantly between the 2 groups (p < .05). The clinical outcomes did not differ significantly between the 2 groups (p > .05). Although differences were found in the radiographic measurements, most syndesmoses in both groups were within the normal range at the final follow-up visit, and the 2 methods of syndesmosis reduction provided similar clinical outcomes. Accordingly, the results of the present study suggest that both of these methods are effective and reliable for reduction of the syndesmosis in rotational ankle fractures.Numerous studies have suggested that malreduction of syndesmosis in rotational ankle fracture is associated with worse outcomes Previous cadaveric studies have identified the advantages and precautions of using clamp reduction in the syndesmosis. Clamp placement in the neutral anatomic axis reduced the syndesmosis most accurately in a cadaveric model, although slight overcompression was frequently observed. However, placing the clamp obliquely resulted in malreduction of an unstable syndesmosis In addition to clamp reduction, manual reduction and stabilization have been used. The latter emerging method might decrease the risk of malreduction and overcompression associated with using clamps. Without the requirement for a special instrument, manual reduction could be readily applied to injuries of the syndesmosis The aim of the present study was to compare the results of clamp reduction and manual reduction for syndesmosis injury in rotational ankle fractures using radiographic outcome measures in a prospective, randomized trial. A total of 85 consecutive patients with 85 acute rotational ankle fractures combined with syndesmotic injury who presented to our institution from January 2010 to September 2015 were recruited for the present study. All fractures were Lauge-Hansen supination external rotation, Weber B type, or pronation external rotation, Weber C type. The exclusion criteria were <12 months of follow-up data available, age <16 years (skeletally immature), concomitant tibia shaft fracture, open fracture, history of previous fracture, and/or other notable ankle injury. Patients with marked comminution or displacement of articular surfaces considered for primary external fixation were also excluded ( Using sealed envelopes, the patients were randomly allocated, when the stress test result was positive, to either reduction with a reduction clamp or manual manipulative reduction. All the envelopes were evenly predetermined for each group, and the patients were unaware of the randomization process. After anatomic reduction and internal fixation of the lateral and medial malleolar or repair of the deltoid ligament, the syndesmosis stress test was performed. A bone hook was applied to the distal fibula, and lateral force was applied to the distal fibula in the coronal plane to assess the degree of syndesmosis widening. The hook test was considered positive if >2 mm of lateral fibula movement was observed. The senior orthopedic surgeon (H.J.K.), who was also the primary surgeon for all the cases, determined whether the results were positive or negative. Under fluoroscopic guidance, the syndesmosis was reduced and maintained with a reduction clamp or manual manipulation ( The patients were followed up at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months, and 12 months postoperatively with radiographic and clinical examinations. Radiographic measurements, including the tibiofibular clear space and tibiofibular overlap in the anteroposterior view and medial clear space in the mortise view, were performed by 2 orthopedic surgeons (Y.H.P., J.H.A.), who were unaware of the reduction method used, as described by Miller Data normality was assessed using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The baseline characteristics, radiographic measurements, and clinical outcomes of the 2 groups were compared using unpaired Of the 85 patients, 70 completed the study; 28 patients (40%) were female. Their mean age was 43.9 (range 19 to 83) years. In 39 patients (56%), the fracture had resulted from a simple fall. The other fractures had resulted from a sports injury in 16 patients, motor vehicle accident in 12, or other mechanisms in 3 patients. Of the 70 patients, 33 (47%) had a fracture on the right side. No patient had bilateral fractures. Of the 70 patients, 36 (51.4%) were randomized to treatment with a reduction clamp and 34 (48.6%) to treatment with manual manipulation. The 2 groups did not differ significantly in demographic or fracture characteristics ( Strong correlations were found between the measurements of the tibiofibular clear space, tibiofibular overlap, and medial clear space when measured by 2 orthopedic surgeons (Y.H.P., J.H.A.; Pearson's At the final follow-up examination, the VAS score, OMAS score, dorsiflexion and plantarflexion ROM, and time required to return to usual work showed satisfactory results that were not significantly different between the 2 groups ( It is widely believed that accurate reduction and adequate fixation of syndesmosis injuries will result in superior radiographic and functional outcomes Our data did not support the hypothesis that clamp reduction is more effective than manual reduction. Although 2 of the 3 radiographic measurements, the tibiofibular clear space and the tibiofibular overlap, differed significantly between the 2 groups, most of the syndesmoses in both groups were within the normal range at the final follow-up examination. In addition, we found no significant differences in the clinical outcomes, including the VAS score, OMAS score, ROM, time required to return to work, or complication rate. Furthermore, using the reduction clamp was not any faster than manual reduction in terms of the operative time. Two possible explanations exist for the discrepancy between the radiologic results and the clinical outcomes. Although the radiologic difference between the 2 groups was statistically significant, the mean difference was <1 mm. Small differences such as these would not influence the clinical outcomes in ankle motion. In addition, in the absence of a computed tomography (CT) assessment, the possibility exists of measurement errors in the radiologic results. However, the results of Pearson's correlation analysis showed consistency in the inter- and intraobserver agreement, with the former value more convincing. Overcompression, which could theoretically limit ankle motion, was reported in clamp reduction of the syndesmosis Several studies have revealed that syndesmosis malreduction might be present in 26% to 52% of cases The present study had some limitations. First, we did not perform CT postoperatively to evaluate reduction of the syndesmosis more accurately. Many studies have suggested that radiographic evaluation of the syndesmosis limited. However, because of the radiation hazard and the cost-effectiveness of postoperative CT scans, CT was not included in the study protocol. Second, a longer follow-up period would be needed to investigate the long-term effects and possible consequences, such as degenerative changes in the ankle joint. Third, our study lacked an appropriate power analysis, which left us with the possibility of a type II error. A post hoc power analysis using the measured parameters showed that we needed a larger sample size per randomized group to obtain a statistically significant difference in the OMAS score between the 2 groups, because the OMAS score for both groups was almost the same. The difference, however, would not have been clinically significant. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to compare the outcomes of clamp reduction and manual reduction of syndesmosis in rotational ankle fractures. The most important clinical application of our findings is that when a reduction clamp for syndesmosis reduction is not available, manual reduction can be performed. Manual reduction is an effective and reliable method for reduction of the syndesmosis in rotational ankle fractures, with outcomes similar to those with clamp reduction. In conclusion, the results of the present prospective, randomized study have demonstrated that, despite radiographic differences, the clinical outcomes of syndesmosis injury in rotational ankle fracture treated with manual reduction compared with clamp reduction did not significantly differ. Therefore, manual reduction of the syndesmosis can be used as an alternative to clamp reduction.