The goal of this project was to develop and test an innovative coal cleaning process to reduce the ash content of coal and produce ultra clean coal (UCC). Coal samples that were prepared from concentrates of Iran's Zirab and Tabas coal preparation plants were found to have initial ash contents of 8.31 and 10.36%, respectively. These coals were demineralized with the combination of microwave irradiation pretreatment and dual acid leaching processes with HF followed by HNO3 in a batch reactor. For samples that were microwaved and leached with HF, the reduction in ash ranged from 22 to 76% and from 22 to 82% for Zirab and Tabas coal samples, respectively, depending on leaching conditions. Microwave irradiation pretreatment had a positive effect on demineralization with HF, especially for the coarse size fractions. For the fine size fractions, reduced leaching times were found to enhance the effect of microwave irradiation. The microwave-irradiated, HF-leached product was leached further using a 1.4M HNO3 solution at a leaching temperature of 65°C to remove fluoride sediments and pyritic sulfur. The ash content of the Zirab coal was reduced from 2.57 to 0.69% by leaching with the HNO3 solution for 1h. The ash content of the Tabas coal was reduced from 2.44 to 0.39% by leaching with the HNO3 solution for 3h. The results show that microwave irradiation can be considered as a pretreatment process in the chemical leaching of coal to produce UCC.Iran's recoverable coal reserves are about 462 million short tons, most of which is bituminous coal. The four main operations and processing plants are located in the cities of Kerman, Tabas, Zirab, and Shahroud. Iran produces about 1.4 million short tons of coal annually, while it consumes about 2.0 million short tons in the same period Ultra clean coal (UCC) is defined as a coal that is washed using conventional methods, ground into fine particles, and then chemically treated to remove ash so that the final ash content of the coal is less than 1%. UCC has various potential uses, such as serving as the carbon source for the silicon smelting industry Generally, washing coal with physical techniques cannot decrease the mineral content of the coal sufficiently to produce UCC, so chemical demineralization processes, either alone or following physical cleaning processes, are used extensively in the production of UCC Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths that range from 1 to 300 The structural properties of coal, such as its porosity and pore size, are important to its effective chemical demineralization. Coal has pores that contain some water, which is a good absorber of microwave energy While some minerals, such as pyrite, are readily heated when they are in an applied electric field (average heating rate of approximately 1.9 Marland et al. A two-stage leaching sequence of aqueous HF followed by aqueous HNO Coal samples were prepared from concentrates in the Zirab and Tabas coal preparation plants. Proximate and ultimate analyses were conducted for the representative samples. The mineralogical compositions were determined by XRD. The results are shown in For all of the experiments, a coal sample of predetermined size was spread in a Pyrex container with a diameter of 9.65 Samples that had been irradiated with microwaves (900 As reported by Steel and Patrick Experiments were conducted in which complementary HNO The “Ash reductions” in both HF and HNO The transformations that occurred in the demineralized Zirab and Tabas coal samples were studied by FT-IR spectroscopy. The coal samples were milled with potassium bromide (KBr) to form a very fine powder. Then, this powder was compressed into a thin pellet, and the spectra were recorded with a Bomer MB-100 instrument equipped with Deuterated Triglycine Sulfate (DTGS) detector. A spectrum was obtained for each sample and analytical software provided by Bruker was used for spectral treatment. Hydrofluoric acid (2 After the native and microwaved coal samples from Tabas were reacted for 1.5 The same procedure was used for the native and microwaved samples from Zirab ( For a leaching time of 0.5 Since coal ash was removed effectively at a leaching time of 2.5 To evaluate the effect of particle size on ash reduction, representative coal samples from Zirab and Tabas were ground to − Concerning the effect of microwave pretreatment, it can be concluded that microwave irradiation is more effective when it is used with coarser coal particles. As particle sizes were decreased to − For coal particles as small as − The effect of HF concentration on ash removal at a leaching temperature of 25 Because of the small differences between ash removal by 3.5 HF with a concentration of 3.5 Again, for the fine coal particles that were used in this section (− Because there was no significant difference between ash removal from native and microwaved, fine-particle (−  Thus, at experimental conditions of a leaching temperature of 55  As a result of the microwave irradiation and leaching processes we used, the final products obtained using Zirab and Tabas coal samples that had ash contents of only 0.69 and 0.39%, respectively. The N and O contents increased and the S content decreased for samples from both locations ( The FT-IR spectra of coal structure before and after demineralization (dried in a vacuum oven at 70 The intense absorbance bands in the range of 3800 to 3600 cm Signals related to mineral matter contained in coal (at 1200–1000 As the spectra showed, the demineralization process we used caused significant changes in the peaks corresponding to mineral matter. Rubiera et al. Wu and Steel Steel and Patrick In the current work, coal samples from Tabas and Zirab were subjected to microwave pretreatments of 5 Particle size reduction had a positive effect on the HF leaching efficiency; however, microwave irradiation was more effective for coarser coal particles. Ash reduction improved as the concentration of the HF was increased from 0.5 to 3.5 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the