This paper presents an analysis of a “high-dollar” value safety and health citations and orders for the US coal mines using the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) data. Term “high-dollar” value relates to penalty of $10,000 and more per citation or order. The study was based on historical MSHA data for the period from 01/01/2009 to 12/31/2009. Data shows that there were 1161 “high-dollar” value citations and orders in 2009 with a total penalty of almost $31-million. The most cited standard was 75.400 – “Accumulation of combustible material” with a 259 “high-dollar” value citations and total penalty of almost $5.9-million. Among all US states, the West Virginia coal mines recorded the highest number of citations and the total penalty value. Results of this study can be used by coal mining industry to help in prioritizing resource allocations and determining control strategies.Surface and underground coal mines in the United States (US) are inspected by the Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA) inspectors to determine whether mines are complying with the mandatory health and safety standards. During inspections, MSHA inspectors issue citations for violations of standards and determine the degree of seriousness based on tabled criteria and their judgment. According to the Federal Mine Safety and Health Act (Mine Act of 1997), the following must be established in order to issue a citation: (i) a violation of a standard, regulation, or section of the Mine Act; (ii) the degree of hazard that exists; (iii) the degree of exposure to the hazard; and (iv) the degree of negligence by the mine operator ( If a violation is caused by an unwarrantable failure, where MSHA has determined that the “mine operator has engaged in aggravated conduct constituting more than ordinary negligence,” then a withdrawal order is generally issued, and “a reasonable amount of punitive charges” are assessed ( Penalties for violations of mine safety and health standards have risen dramatically since passage of the Mine Improvement and New Emergency Response Act of 2006 (MINER Act), which mandated new laws to address safety issues, and now represent a significant cost to mine operators. MSHA data indicate that there were 84,431 citations and orders issued for US coal mines in 2007 and 107,404 in 2008, with the total penalty of $53.5- and 152.7-million, respectively ( With the rising cost of penalties for violations of the regulations and the high level of public visibility and scrutiny, there has been a need to address a problem of violations of mandatory health and safety standards. Several researchers used a risk assessment approach in addressing this issue. This paper considers a “high-dollar” value citations and orders (penalties of $10,000 and more per citation or order) and includes the entire coal mining industry in the US in 2009. The text that follows explains the method used in this research, results and discussion, and conclusions. MSHA maintains the mining statistical database for each mine in the US pertaining to citations and orders for violation of all mine health and safety standards. This database is publicly accessible from the MSHA web site ( This research study is based on historical MSHA citation data for the US coal mines for the period from 01/01/2009 to 12/31/2009. Based on a review of the MSHA database, the following data is retrieved, cleaned and sorted in Excel spreadsheets: mine ID; name of company, name of mine, name of US state, citation/order number, date of citation/order issued, section of act violated, citation or order issued, S&S (yes or no), standard cited; proposed penalty, citation/order status, current status (paid or in contest), current penalty, and amount paid to date (in dollars). Total number of “high-dollar” value citations and orders and total penalty value for all US coal mines were determined. Data on number of citations and orders, and penalty values for the top 50 standards in 2009 were calculated and sorted by penalty value, from highest to lowest. In the next step, number of cited mines, number of citations and orders, and penalty values were calculated and assigned for specific US states. Data on “high-dollar” value citations and orders for the specific coal mines in West Virginia were analyzed since this state recorded the highest number of citations and the total penalty value. Data are sorted by specific coal mines (arbitrary name was given for each mine, from 1 to 84) and the total number of citations and orders, and the total penalty value were calculated for each mine. Standards with the highest penalty value and number of citations and orders were also determined. Energy Information Agency (EIA) of the US Department of Energy publishes data on production, number of coal mines, number of employees, number of employee hours, and productivity. These data are presented in annual coal reports and they are publicly accessible through the EIA web site ( MSHA data indicate that there were 102,606 citations and orders issued for US coal mines in 2009, with the total penalty value of $103.3 million. Data analysis shows that there were 1161 “high-dollar” value citations and orders with the total penalty value of $30,431,778 for 156 standards cited in 2009. This represents only 1.1% of the total number of issued citations and orders. However, it represents 29.4% in terms of total penalty value. MSHA inspectors issued 698 citations and 463 orders. Almost all (1149) citations and orders but 12 have been determined to be S&S.  There were 259 “high-dollar” value citations and orders issued by MSHA for the standard 75.400 – “Accumulation of combustible material” with a total penalty of $5,836,831. The second most cited standard was standard 75.370 – “Mine ventilation plan; submission and approval.” A total of 101 citations and orders were issued for this standard with a total penalty of $3,185,511. The third most cited standard was 75.202 – “Protection from falls of roof, face and ribs.” with total of 72 citations and orders and penalty value of $1,771,584; followed by standard 75.220 – “Roof control plan” with 56 citations and orders and total penalty value of $1,840,801. According to the MSHA Code of Federal Regulations (30 CFR Parts 1–199), standards starting with part 75 relate to “Mandatory safety standards – underground coal mines”; part 77 to “Mandatory safety standards, surface coal mines and surface work areas of underground coal mines”, part 48 to “Training and retraining of miners”, part 49 to “Mine rescue teams”, and part 50 to “Notification, investigation, reports and records of accidents, injuries, illnesses, employment, and coal production in mines”. Detailed explanation of each standard is provided at MSHA web site (   Since the West Virginia has the highest number of cited mines, number of citations and orders, and the total penalty value, the text that follows further examines citation data for this state. Data in    Penalties for violations of mine safety and health standards have risen dramatically in the last four years and now represent a significant cost to mine operators. MSHA maintains an extensive, publicly accessible database on citations and orders of mandatory health and safety standards. This paper pursued the opportunity of using the data for 2009, and an analysis of “high-dollar” value citations and orders was conducted for the US coal mines. Results of this study revealed that 75.400 – “Accumulation of combustible material” was the most cited “high-dollar” value standard, with the highest total penalty value. The West Virginia and Kentucky coal mines recorded the highest number of citations and the total penalty values. However, the highest Fatal IR was observed in Louisiana (0.366), while the highest NFDL IR and NDL IR were recorded in Tennessee (5.558) and Illinois (1.961), respectively. This study can be enhanced by, for example, developing risk matrixes for the specific mines within the US and mines with highest risks can be determined. By focusing on the mines of highest risk, good insights can be obtained regarding the most problematic set of standards. Results of this study should increase hazard awareness and enable coal mining industry to select and prioritize problem areas and safety system weaknesses in both underground and surface mining.