In the article, we are explaining a hydrometallurgical based process on leaching applied to recover Co from spent lithium ion batteries (LIBs). Glycine and ascorbic acid were introduced as leaching reagents and the leaching of Co with a solution containing glycine is investigated. An effective recovery of Co is possible when both glycine and ascorbic acid are used. A condition for achieving a recovery of more than 95% Co has been achieved experimentally by varying the concentrations of leachant and time of the reaction. Leaching with 0.5M glycine, 0.02M ascorbic acid and 0.2g LiCoO2 in a batch extractor, results in a highly efficient recovery of Co within 360min of the processing time at 80°C. This hydrometallurgical process is found to be simple, eco friendly and satisfactory for the recovery of cobalt from spent LIBs.Rechargeable lithium ion battery (LIB) is a device that meets certain crucial demands of our modern society, acting as the power source of various portable devices like mobile phones, laptop computers, electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) and grid level power systems Recycling processes of spent LIBs usually pretreat with physical separation techniques From previous studies, it has been found that the metals such as Co and Li can be leached out from the spent LIBs using inorganic acid such as HCl Even though there are many techniques which have been introduced to recycle valuable metals from spent LIBs, their economic and environmental compatibility is found to be less than satisfactory. Also, the leaching efficiency for valuable metals, such as Co and Li, is low and still needs to be improved. Therefore our aim is to develop the economically adequate and environmental benign recycling process i.e., to avoid the inorganic acids and to improve the leaching efficiency; we have used an aqueous mixture of glycine (leaching/chelating agent) and ascorbic acid (reductant). In this study to recover metals from spent LIB active cathode material, we have chosen glycine as leaching agent because it is low cast compared to citric acid, tartaric acid iminodiacetic acid and maleic acid. As well it is a naturally occurring simplest amino acid, soluble easily in water and was frequently used as a raw material in the manufacturing industries. Also it is well-known to act as a complexing agent for metal ions as it has amino group at the one end and carboxylic acid group at the other end. The dipolar (zwitter) ionic nature of glycine molecule can efficiently complex a metal ion of diverse ionic sizes, whose structure protonates or deprotonates depending on the pH of solution The details on leaching behavior of LiCoO The spent LIBs of BL-5CA (Nokia mobile) series used in this work were collected in the local market. The cathode material was separated from aluminum foil by using concentrated To prevent self-ignition and short-circuiting, the spent LIBs were discharged completely and dismantled to separate the cathode and anode materials coated on Al- and Cu-foil, respectively. The cathode material was uncurled and cut in to small pieces (about 1 The above cathode material (LiCoO The concentration of Li and Co metal ions in the dissolved solution was determined by using atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Model: AA-7000F, ROM version: 1.01, S/N: A30664801195). The results obtained here were found to carry a maximum of about 5% error. UV–vis spectra of the dissolved solution was also recorded using UV–vis spectrophotometer (Ocean optics, DH-2000 BAL). X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was obtained using Cu Kα radiation (λ=1.542  The effect of glycine concentration on the leaching efficiency of waste LiCoO There are many studies on organic acid leaching. They have obtained more than 90% leaching of Co and about 100% leaching of Li in about 90–120  During the leaching, 0.02 The energy consumption of leaching will be a function of the working temperature and time. The effect of temperature and time on the leaching efficiency was studied by fixing the concentration of ascorbic acid (0.02  After 6 A simple and environmental friendly hydrometallurgical route for the recovery of Co from spent LIBs has been developed by using mild, easily degradable organic acids. In this study we have determined the best conditions for Co leaching from spent LIBs (BL-5CA Nokia series). More than 95% of Co ions were extracted using 0.5