The potential to remove Pb2+ ion from aqueous solutions using the shells of hazelnut (HNS) (Corylus avellana) and almond (AS) (Prunus dulcis) through biosorption was investigated in batch experiments. The main parameters influencing Pb2+ ion sorption on HNS and AS were: initial metal ion concentration, amount of adsorbent, contact time and pH value of solution. The influences of initial Pb2+ ion concentration (0.1–1.0mM), pH (2–9), contact time (10–240min) and adsorbent amount (0.1–1.0g) have been investigated. Equilibrium isotherms have been measured and modelled. Adsorption of Pb2+ ions was in all cases pH-dependent showing a maximum at equilibrium pH values between 6.0 and 7.0, depending on the biomaterial, that corresponded to equilibrium pH values of 6.0 for HNS and 7.0 for AS. The equilibrium sorption capacities of HNS and AS were 28.18 and 8.08mg/g for lead, respectively after equilibrium time of 2h. The adsorption data fit well with the Langmuir isotherm model and the experimental result inferred that adsorption, chelation and ion exchange are major adsorption mechanisms for binding Pb2+ ion to the sorbents.Industrialization in many regions has increased the discharge of industrial wastes, especially those containing heavy metals, into natural water bodies. Metal ion contamination of drinking water and wastewater, especially with metal ions such as cadmium, copper, lead, nickel and zinc, is a serious and ongoing problem. Environmental contamination with heavy metals gained lately more concern because of their high persistence, and the nervous system damage, and even cancer, caused by their accumulation at certain levels. Pb The search for new technologies to remove toxic metals from wastewaters has directed attention to sorption, which is based on metal binding to various biological materials. Biosorption is a fast and reversible reaction of the heavy metals with biomass. The by-products obtained from biomaterial production are a cheap source of biosorbents. Biosorption systems may be based on biomasses derived from the waste products of wood industries or low-cost agricultural material. The term ‘biosorbent’ includes the usage of dead biomass (such as fiber, peat, and wool) as well as living plants and bacteria as sorbents. Biosorption is not restricted to one sorption mechanism only, but comprises several mechanisms such as ion exchange, chelation, precipitation, sorption by physical forces, and ion entrapment in inter- and intrafibrillar capillaries and spaces of the structural lignin and polysaccharide networks Basso et al. studied the correlation between lignin content of several lignocelluloses and their ability to remove heavy metals from aqueous solutions The removal of heavy metal ions using low-cost abundantly available adsorbents: agricultural and solid wastes such as tea waste, coffee and nut shells Lignocellulosic materials are very porous and have a very high free surface volume that allows accessibility of aqueous solutions to the cell wall components. Lignocellulosic materials are hygroscopic and have an affinity for water. Water is able to permeate the non-crystalline portion of cellulose and all of the hemicelluloses and lignin. Thus, through sorption, aqueous metal solution is exposed to a very large surface area of different cell wall components. The purpose of this research was to gain a fundamental understanding of the chemical and physical phenomena associated with the binding of Pb Shells of Turkish HNS and AS species were ground in a ball mill and the resulting crumbs were sieved to obtain particle size under 75 Shells were ground using a grinding machine (Retsch RM 100). The pH measurements were performed with an Orion 900S2 pH meter. A thermo stated shaker (GFL 3033) and magnetic stirrer (IKAMAG-RO15) were used for the sorption experiments. An atomic absorption spectrometer (AAS) (Unicam 929) operating with an air-acetylene flame was used to analyze the lead solutions. Deuterium background correction was used. AAS provides detection limit (0.04 In order to determine which functional groups were responsible for metal sorption, a Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis in solid phase with an IR Perkin Elmer 1600 Series FTIR Spectrometer was performed on the biomass prepared in a KBr disk. FTIR spectra were obtained for HNS and AS samples before and after the biosorption process. As shown in The initial pH of the lead solution was adjusted to values in the pH range of 2–9 by the addition of 0.1 Time dependent experiments were carried out by shaking the adsorption mixture at various predetermined intervals and analyzing the Pb It is well known that the pH of the solution–sorbent mixture is an important variable in the sorption process. Shells consist of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin. Cellulose is a common material in plant cell walls and lignin is relatively hydrophobic and aromatic in nature. HNS and AS carry the same polar functional groups such as alcoholic, carbonylic, carboxylic and phenolic which are potentially involved in binding with sorbed pollutants. Lignocelluloses and the cell walls of sorbents mainly consist of polyphenolic compounds and hydroxyl groups such as lignin, which are believed to be the active sites for attachment of Pb  The effect of Pb Isotherm studies provide information on the capacity of sorbent, which is the most important parameter for a sorption system. Adsorption isotherms are characterized by certain constants and describe the mathematical relationship between the quantity of adsorbate and concentration of adsorbate remaining in the solution at equilibrium. There are several isotherm equations describing the equilibrium and the most common of them are Langmuir, and Freundlich Langmuir isotherm: Freundlich isotherm: The experimental sorption equilibrium data of Pb Langmuir equation: Freundlich equation: The effect of the interfering ion KNO The effect of variation of sorbent amount on the removal of Pb  The biosorption of Pb We express our thanks to the Selcuk University Scientific Research Foundation, which has financed the project (05101014/2005), a part of which is presented in this study.