Imaging of the acetabulum in the trauma patient can be challenging but includes a number of well-established techniques. These include plain anteroposterior radiographs, 45° oblique Judet views, CT scanning and intraoperative fluoroscopy. An understanding of Letournel's lines is essential for the characterization of acetabular fractures from plain radiographs. A number of named features, for example the ‘gull sign’ and the ‘spur sign’ correlate with specific traumatic pathology. We define the role of CT scanning and describe the methods and potential utility of intraoperative fluoroscopy in acetabular trauma.Fractures of the acetabulum result when the head of the femur drives into the acetabulum. The position of the hip joint at the time of impact and the direction and magnitude of force determine the fracture pattern and degree of displacement. The Judet and Letournel classification describes the different fracture patterns that arise. This was originally based on three radiographic views, the anteroposterior (AP) pelvis and two Judet views. The classification is split into five elementary and five associated fracture patterns as detailed in the relevant chapter. Radiographic imaging is key for the diagnosis and management of acetabular fractures. In order to interpret images of acetabular trauma, the normal radiographic anatomy of the pelvis must be understood. This can be best appreciated on a standard AP radiograph. This view is taken with the patient lying supine, with the feet in 15° of internal rotation to visualize the femoral neck better by compensating for normal femoral neck anteversion. See Initial assessment of acetabular trauma frequently includes an emergency AP-pelvis X-ray. This image is obtained during the process of initial resuscitation and facilitates immediate diagnosis. Suboptimal image quality, due to patient rotation or inadequate exposure are frequently seen as resuscitation manouevres are prioritized over optimal radiographic positioning. See The pelvic girdle consists of paired innominate bones which are connected anteriorly by the pubic symphysis and posteriorly by the sacrum. Each hemi-pelvis comprises the blade-like ilium, the ischium inferiorly and the pubis anteriorly. The acetabulum or ‘hip-socket’ is the part of the pelvis where the ilium, ischium and pubis meet. The ‘acetabular column principle’ was described by Letournel in 1993 and remains a useful and accurate representation of acetabular anatomy. It is illustrated below. See This considers each hemi-pelvis as an inverted ‘Y’ shape. Weight is transmitted via two columns; anterior and posterior. Adjacent to the columns and extending over the femoral head are the anterior and posterior walls of the acetabulum. The femoral head articulates with the acetabulum. Letournel's lines are key radiographic identifiers of acetabular anatomy. The Additional radiographic views of the pelvis can be taken which give more information than the AP pelvis. Likewise when the hip under examination is more posterior (iliac oblique view), we see a profile view of the posterior column and anterior acetabular rim. See  CT scans have revolutionized the approach to evaluating acetabular fractures preoperatively and are routinely taken on arrival in the emergency department. The traditional imaging of acetabular fractures, in the form of AP and Judet views, is no longer practised by all pelvic units, since a modern CT can be re-formatted to give these views and much more besides. However, at the time of writing, intraoperative plain X-ray fluoroscopy (rather than CT or infra-red navigation) is the standard mode of imaging and therefore surgeons need to be familiar with the traditional X-ray views, even if they are not always obtained in the emergency department setting. Due to their higher resolution CT scans are also useful for Specific advantages of CT scanning include diagnosis of Finally, CT has a role in the comprehensive evaluation of post-operative fracture reduction and hardware placement. CT can act as a useful adjunct to surgical decision-making where a second approach with further fixation is contemplated and is invaluable in providing detailed, objective feedback as a tool for surgical learning and development. See This description is commonly used to describe a feature of ACPH fractures seen on a plain AP radiograph. It is frequently found also in other fracture types in fragile bone. Although marginal impaction is best appreciated on CT, gross impaction can be seen on the plain AP radiograph. This gross impaction is seen more often in fragile bone when the femoral head is driven up into the acetabular dome and creates an impacted hollow within the acetabulum. Two adjacent curves are seen like the two wings of a gull and represent a less reliable outcome from fixation alone ( This sign is most clearly seen on the obturator oblique view and is pathognomonic for an associated both column (ABC) fracture. The ‘spur’ of bone represents the sharp edge of the ilium remaining as the ‘constant fragment’ with the remainder of the entire acetabulum displaced medially. On the CT scan, secondary congruency is seen, where despite the overall medialization of the fracture, the fracture fragments are arranged concentrically around the head. On the AP and each of the Judet views, a point can be taken from the centre of the femoral head and two lines drawn medial and lateral at 45° to the vertical. If the fracture displacement is outside of this 90° cone, the acetabular dome is intact and so the fracture carries a good prognosis, provided the hip joint is congruent and the posterior wall is not displaced. Using all three views, medial, anterior and posterior acetabular roof arc angles can be drawn to qualify the extent of dome involvement. The images required are the AP pelvis (medial roof arc angle), obturator oblique (anterior roof arc angle) and iliac oblique (posterior roof arc angle). A value of less than 45° on any view is considered to indicate significant dome involvement and instability, favouring operative management. On the CT axial view, when passing from the very top of the hip joint, a depth of 10 mm (or 5 × 2 mm slices) represents this same roof arc ( The roof arc measurement technique has always had limited utility in the evaluation of both column fractures where the entire dome may be displaced (also known as secondary congruency). Posterior wall fractures also cannot be evaluated usefully as the fracture line is not related to the dome. This method has become less useful also for all other acetabular fractures as CT scanning is able to show other predictors of a poor outcome with non-operative management. Radiological predictors of poor outcome include: dome impaction posterior marginal impaction femoral head damage displaced posterior wall initial displacement >2 cm poor postoperative reduction osteopenia. Intraoperative fluoroscopy is used frequently to evaluate acetabular fracture reduction and hardware placement. The acetabular fracture configuration and method of fixation will determine which views are most useful. Iliac oblique and obturator oblique views are useful to confirm fracture reduction, joint congruency and hardware position ( In fractures with medialization of the acetabulum, a medial buttress plate can be useful. The correctly lateralized position of the acetabulum together with the plate can be visualized by rolling the image intensifier into inlet and obturator until the quadrilateral plate is seen tangentially edge-on (see Anterior and posterior column screws can be passed under image intensifier guidance with the patient in the supine, prone or lateral positions ( Anterior column screw placement can be guided by the use of two specific orthogonal views, the obturator outlet ( Navigation and augmented reality technology may prove to have advantages for the placement of column screws, in terms of accuracy of screw placement and reducing X-ray exposure to patient and surgical team. The main features to note when evaluating an AP radiograph of a pelvis for acetabular fractures are shown in Judet views can give a better perspective of the overall alignment of the anterior/posterior column CT can highlight marginal impaction and intra-articular fragments. It is useful in preoperative planning and post-operative evaluation. The Judet and Letournel classification is used when evaluating diagnostic imaging. Associated both column fractures may have a pathognmonic ‘spur sign’. Intraoperative fluoroscopy is of value in determining fracture reduction and hardware placement.