This paper deals with the results of variation of thermal conductivity of rocks both with pressure and moisture content in laboratory scale tests. For this purpose, a steady-state test apparatus has been used and several unique tests have been carried out. The results show that the thermal conductivity of rocks increases with increasing uniaxial stress and moisture content and display digressive behaviour in all rock types being taken into consideration. The results clearly show that the thermal conductivity values vary depending on stress level, water content, and porosity- and elastic-modulus-dependent rock parameters. The developed equations on the basis of this study can be used for the prediction of heat flow amount to the surfaces of underground openings.The most important parameters from the point of mine air conditioning, especially in deep underground mines related to safe and comfortable working conditions, are temperature, humidity and velocity of air. The possible depth-dependent increase of air temperature and humidity in mines may cause an unwanted impact on working conditions. These circumstances may diminish the productivity of the work force and deteriorate their well being, resulting in negligence and increase in accidents. All of these events may have profound effects on work safety, ethic values, production and cost behaviour of operations in underground mines. Therefore, in underground mine planning and mining activities, it is necessary to make an acceptable prediction concerning the amount and behaviour of heat flow from the surrounding rocks to the surfaces of underground openings in order to decide whether the measurements for air conditioning are sufficient or not. There are also related issues concerning production of geothermal energy and the storage of items such as frozen food and both energy and waste into underground openings. These activities also require the prediction of heat flow to and from underground openings The heat in the rocks around the underground openings is generally transmitted to the surfaces of these openings by conduction mechanism. According to the Fourier's law of conduction, the heat transferred through a cross-section of a solid rock material may generally amount to The heat amount transferred to the surfaces of underground openings depends on the thermal conductivity of rocks which is characterized by the thermal conductivity coefficient The determination of the Sibbitt Using the same data Zimmerman Duruturk The parameters Within the concept of this research work, the purpose of the authors is to study the influence of water content and stress level on the thermal conductivity of rocks and to determine the magnitude and interdependence of related parameters such as The measurements of thermal conductivity values were performed on the steady-state apparatus developed by Demirci et al. The tests were performed in two stages. In the first stage, the conductivity measurements were executed in dry samples consisting of igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary rocks with or without pressure application. In general, 19 different rock units were taken into consideration during these measurements. The second stage tests were implemented on the samples containing different moisture degrees, which vary between water-saturated and dry samples. Within the context of these tests five different rock units were taken into consideration. It was preferred to limit the number of tests with varying moisture content due to unsuitable test conditions and long-lasting test time. Regarding the second stage tests, first of all the specimens were saturated by water immersion in a vacuum of less than 800 In order to analyse the thermal conductivity of rocks with respect to uniaxial stress, the specimen of rocks being taken from different regions ( The graphs of these equations are in harmony with the graphs obtained from the laboratory test results as shown in The behaviour of moist rocks under uniaxial stress is given in The parameters The graphs related to this equation are in harmony with the graphs obtained from the laboratory tests results as given in One of the most important parameters for determining the amount of heat flow from the rocks around mine openings to the surfaces of these openings is the thermal conductivity coefficient of rocks. This study shows that the thermal conductivity coefficient of intact rocks increases with increasing uniaxial stress and moisture content as given by Eq. This study clearly shows that the thermal conductivity value varies on the basis of stress level, water content and also porosity- and static elastic-modulus-dependant rock parameters. This variation in the thermal conductivity value depends on the existence and properties of cracks and pores in the rocks. Applying the stress on the intact rock first of all the cracks begin to close. This gives rise to the increase of conductivity value in a digressive manner. Further increase of stress may cause that the rock pores close depending on shape, saturation degree, saturation fluid and intersection of pores. If the stress is sufficiently high the pores will begin to close. In this case, the increase of conductivity results in a linear relation with a steady slope up to some stress level unknown to us as seen in the plotted graphs. The developed equations within the contexts of this study can be used to predict the thermal conductivity of rocks on a condition that the porosity- and elastic modulus are determined in laboratory conditions. Further calculations concerning cooling load and other underground activities can be carried out on the basis of these assumptions. The authors thank Ismail Alaca for his assistance.