Deoxybenzoins are plant compounds with similar structure to isoflavones. In this study, we evaluated the ability of two synthesized deoxybenzoins (compound 1 and compound 2) (a) to influence the activity of the estrogen receptor subtypes ERα and ERβ in HeLa cells co-transfected with an estrogen response element-driven luciferase reporter gene and ERα- or ERβ-expression vectors, (b) to modulate the IGFBP-3 and pS2 protein in MCF-7 breast cancer cells, (c) to induce mineralization of KS483 osteoblasts and (d) to affect the cell viability of endometrial (Ishikawa) and breast (MCF-7, MDA-MB-231) cancer cells. Docking and binding energy calculations were performed using the mixed Monte Carlo/Low Mode search method (Macromodel 6.5). Compound 1 displayed significant estrogenic activity via ERβ but no activity via ERα. Compound 2 was an estrogen-agonist via ERα and antagonist via ERβ. Both compounds increased, like the pure antiestrogen ICI182780, the IGFBP-3 levels. Compound 2 induced, like 17β-estradiol, significant mineralization in osteoblasts. The cell viability of Ishikawa cells was unchanged in the presence of either compound. Compound 1 increased MCF-7 cell viability consistently with an increase in pS2 levels, whereas compound 2 inhibited the cell viability. Molecular modeling confirmed the agonistic or antagonistic behaviour of compound 2 via ER subtypes. Compound 2, being an agonist in osteoblasts, an antagonist in breast cancer cells, with no estrogenic effects in endometrial cancer cells, makes it a potential selective estrogen receptor modulator and a choice for hormone replacement therapy.Phytoestrogens are widely known plant compounds, which bind to estrogen receptor and affect the physiology of various systems. Mounting evidence points out that phytoestrogens exert estrogenic effects on skeleton, affect favourably the cardiovascular function, menopausal symptoms and depression, while demonstrate antiestrogenic action on breast and prostate tissue. This has led to the hypothesis that phytoestrogens may act as selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) and may be possibly considered therapeutically for the prevention of several diseases, such as breast and prostate cancer, postmenopausal osteoporosis and cardiovascular disease The estrogen receptors (subtypes ERα and ERβ) are nuclear receptors, which are activated by the ligand 17β-estradiol and other estrogens and regulate the transcription of particular genes via direct interaction to DNA at estrogen response elements (EREs) of their promoter Deoxybenzoins are intermediate in the synthesis of isoflavones and found in several plants, such as In this study, two recently synthesized deoxybenzoins Compounds HeLa cells (ATCC Cell Bank) were grown in Dulbecco's Minimal Essential Medium (DMEM) (Gibco BRL) supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco BRL). Stock cultures were subcultured every 4–5 days using a trypsin 0.25%–EDTA 0.02% solution (Gibco BRL). Before each transfection experiment cells were maintained for 2 days in DMEM phenol red (PR) free containing 10% dextran-coated charcoal stripped serum (FBS DCC treated). For each transfection experiment 2 MCF-7 cells (ATCC Cell Bank) were maintained in Dulbecco's Minimal Essential Medium (DMEM) (Gibco BRL) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco BRL). Cells were plated at an initial density of 25,000 After 24 MCF-7 cells were incubated for 48 Cultures of Ishikawa (ECCAC Cell Bank) or MCF-7 (ATCC Cell Bank) or HeLa (ECCAC Cell Bank) or MDA-MB-231 (ATCC Cell Bank) were grown in Dulbecco's Minimal Essential Medium (DMEM) (Gibco BRL) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco BRL), 1% penicillin–streptomycin (Gibco BRL) in T-75 The KS483 cell line is a non-transformed stable subclone of a parental cell line KS4 that has the ability to form mineralized nodules in vitro For our experiments, KS483 cells were seeded in 12-well plates (at a density of 45,000 cells per well) in α-MEM (Gibco BRL) supplemented with 10% FBS DCC treated. Three days after plating, cells reached confluence and were subsequently induced to differentiate by the addition to the culture medium 50 After 24 days, the cultures in 12-well plates were rinsed with PBS, followed by fixation with 5% formalin for 10 Docking calculations were performed using the mixed Monte Carlo/Low Mode search (MC/LMOD) method and AMBER* force field, as it is implemented in Macromodel 6.5 Binding energy To correct variations in transfection efficiencies, values of the luciferase assay were normalized using β-galactosidase activity. An effect of the tested compounds on the β-galactosidase measurement was not observed.   Levels of pS2 protein in MCF-7 cells were altered after incubation with compound In  In an attempt to obtain a better insight in the differences observed concerning the biological activity of compound Crystallography studies of both ERα and ERβ ligand binding domain (LBD) in complex with several estrogens, SERMs and the phytoestrogen genistein, showed that a ligand regulated repositioning of the C-terminal Helix-12 provide the structural basis of receptor agonism and antagonism. In the antagonist conformation of ER-LBD Helix-12 displacement inhibits the interaction with co-activators In the study by Fokialakis et al., compound The biological activity of compound The low energy structures resulted are depicted in The use of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) to reduce the risk of osteoporosis in postmenopausal women has been associated with a higher risk of developing breast and/or endometrial cancer. Inhibition of estrogen, on the other hand, is a common strategy for the treatment of estrogen-dependent breast tumours in postmenopausal females and tumour prevention in premenopausal women. Evidently, the development of new agents, which may exert beneficial only effects in estrogen dependent tissues, i.e. to favour bone function without increasing the estrogen dependent cancer risk in breast and endometrium, is a challenging issue. In this context, we assessed the estrogenicity of two newly synthesized deoxybenzoins, compound The use of an ERE-driven reporter gene assay assesses the ability of a substance to induce estrogen receptor activation, the receptor binding on its estrogen response elements and modulation of gene activation; therefore it reflects the estrogenicity of this substance Several studies support the effect of insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) on carcinogenesis, whereas IGF-binding proteins, especially IGFBP-3, modulate the availability of IGFs and show proapoptotic activities Defects on cell cycle and apoptotic machinery may result in an uncontrolled cellular growth, a main characteristic of most cancers including breast and endometrial cancer. Estrogens are known stimulants of breast cancer and uterine growth, whereas antiestrogens arrest the growth of cells Inspection of the gene transactivation activities ( To ensure that the tested deoxybenzoins do not stimulate endometrial cells, a necessary prerequisite for a compound to be characterized as SERM-like molecule, we examined the effect of compounds Osteoblasts and osteoclasts are important players in bone remodeling which is characterized by a balance between osteoclast bone resorption and osteoblast bone formation. Estrogens are known stimulants of osteoblasts’ proliferation, differentiation, mineralization and survival, via genomic and non-genomic mechanisms We then decided to look for features, e.g. the gene-transactivation potential, that could account for the differences between the two compounds in the mineralization activity. Comparison between compounds Concluding, our report based on biological assays and molecular modeling studies suggest that deoxybenzoins are novel selective estrogen receptor alpha and estrogen receptor beta modulators. Compound We would like to thank Professor J.-A. Gustafsson, director of the Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute of Medical University in Stockholm for providing the ERβ expression vector, Dr. Tomoshige Kino, Pediatric and Reproductive Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda USA for providing us with the ERα expression vector and Dr. Kenneth S. Korach, Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda USA and Dr. McDonnell of Duke University Medical Center for providing us with the ERE-Luc expression vector. We also would like to thank Dr. T. Yamashita, Head Nephrology, Pharmaceutical Research Laboratories, Kirin Brewery Co. Ltd., Japan and Dr. M. Karperien, Department of Endocrinology & Metabolic Diseases, Leiden University Medical Center the Netherlands for providing us with the cell line KS483. We also thank Bodossaki Foundation and the General Secretariat of Research and Technology, Ministry Development (EPET II) for financing the cell-culture facilities and the Special Account for Research Grants Committee of the University of Athens (Program Kapodistrias).