The solubilities of eight p-di-n-alkylaminomethylcalix[4]arenes (alkyl: methyl to n-octyl = 1–8) in saturated hydrocarbon diluents commonly used as industrial diluents were investigated. Calixarene-based amino extractants with longer alkyl chains dissolved more readily in the saturated hydrocarbon diluents. Although 8 dissolved in kerosene, 1-decanol had to be added as a “phase modifier’” in order to inhibit the formation of a third phase on the Pd(II) and Pt(IV) extraction systems. The optimal mixing ratio of kerosene with 1-deconol was found to be 5:5 (v/v). Pd(II) and Pt(IV) were effectively recovered from the leach liquors of automotive catalysts using 8 and this kerosene/1-decanol mixed diluent. Furthermore, the results of reusability tests performed using the regenerated organic phase consisting of 8 and the kerosene/1-decanol mixed diluent indicate that Pd(II) and Pt(IV) were extracted at relatively high efficiencies even after five extraction/stripping cycles.The elements Ru, Rh, Pd, Ag, Os, Ir, Pt, and Au are precious metals that are used extensively in industry for a wide range of applications ( Calix[ Calixarenes and their derivatives are highly soluble only in aromatic/chlorinated diluents. To date, the PGM extraction capabilities of calixarene extractants have been explored using chlorinated diluents. However, the use of chlorinated diluents has several disadvantages, including their low boiling points and potential environmental and health issues. Therefore, increasing the applicability of calixarenes as extractants for PGMs remains an important priority. One of the ways of accomplishing this is to increase their solubility in the organic diluents used. A wide range of alkali, transition, and lanthanide metals have been separated using calixarene-based extractants, employing halogenated or aromatic hydrocarbons such as chloroform and toluene as the diluent to dissolve the extractant during the liquid-liquid extraction process; calixarenes show high solubility in halogenated and aromatic diluents ( To address this issue, higher-chain-length alkyl amino derivatives based on calix[4]arene have been synthesized, because the presence of longer The solubility of calix[4]arene-based amino extractants containing The Solubility checks of Liquid-liquid extraction experiments were performed in triplicate at 20 ± 1 °C to ensure that the obtained extractability values ( A crushed powder of automotive catalyst residue was leached through treatment with HCl (11.6 M) and H The Pt(IV) and Pd(II) ions were stripped from the metal-extracted organic phases of A fraction of the organic phase (10 mL) obtained after stripping was added to 20 mL of water and shaken for 30 min at 300 rpm (20 ± 1 °C). The resulting phases were separated using a separating funnel and the organic phase was reused. Five consecutive extraction/stripping cycles of the liquid–liquid extraction process were carried out with the reused organic phase under conditions identical to those utilized for the leach liquors of the automotive catalysts. Finally, the concentrations of all metal ions in the aqueous phase, [M] First, the solubilities of macrocyclic extractants From these experiments, it is clear that the solubilities of macrocyclic extractants in aromatic and saturated hydrocarbon diluents are strongly dependent on the length of their alkyl chains. Thus, increasing the length of the alkyl chains of calixarene-based amino extractants improves their solubility in toluene, xylene, kerosene, and Shellsol D70 owing to increased extractant hydrophobicity. In this study, our aim was to develop calixarene-based amino extractants that exhibit good solubility in aliphatic saturated hydrocarbon diluents such as kerosene, which is cheap and widely utilized in industry. Hence, we focused on the extractabilities of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) using calix[4]arene-based amino extractant To examine the Pd(II) and Pt(IV) extraction behaviors of Halogenated hydrocarbon diluents, such as chloroform ( In order to determine the optimal ratio of kerosene and 1-decanol for the extraction of Pd(II) and Pt(IV), five different mixing ratios, namely kerosene/1-decanol ( Thus, based on the values listed in To analyze the feasibility of separating Pd(II) and Pt(IV) from automotive catalysts, which constitute actual recycling feedstock, using The extractions of Pd(II) and Pt(IV) were performed using the leach liquors (10 mL) and a 1.0 mM kerosene/1-decanol solution of The stripping of the extracted Pd(II) and Pt(IV) ions from the organic phase was examined using a 0.1 M solution of thiourea in 1.0 M HCl (10 mL) as the stripping reagent. After the process, the organic phase containing As mentioned above, Pd(II) and Pt(IV) recoveries can be achieved continuously by combining In the present work, we demonstrated that calixarene-based amino extractants can be made to dissolve in saturated hydrocarbon diluents such as kerosene and Shellsol D70 by introducing longer This work was supported by the