Pore structure of coal is known to be strongly heterogeneous in terms of size, shape and occurrence. The underlying sorption mechanisms are expected to be different depending on the type and size of pores. In this study, both experiments and numerical simulation were used to study sorption behavior of coal. Vitrinite maceral was chosen as the study material and the macerals were separated from Yilan subbituminous coals. Pores in vitrinite were categorized into two different types depending on the occurrence mechanisms and they are termed as elemental particle pore (EP pore) and molecular structure pores (MS pore). According to the pore structure and macromolecular structure, pore models of the two types of pores were established and used to numerically estimate the methane adsorption capacity. It was found that gas sorption varies significantly for different types of pores. Methane adsorption capacity of MS micropores is determined by the pore volume, and while that of EP pores is determined by the internal surface area due to the different sorption mechanisms. Methane adsorption in MS pores showed pore volume filling mechanism, and the methane adsorption results can be well modeled by Dubinin and Astakhov (D-A) model. On the contrary, two distinguishable adsorbed layers can be identified for in EP pore sorption, and the methane density of the first layer was much larger than that of the second layer, which is consistent with the BET model. Of the total gas adsorption amount in coal, the amount of absorbed methane in MS pores contributed a relatively large proportion compared to EP pores. With elevated gas pressure, the difference between these two mechanisms decreased, and when the pressure was 10 MPa, the proportion of methane adsorption in EP pores was ∼40%. The overall measured gas adsorption isotherm is a sum of methane adsorption in different types of pores. The combination of simulation and experimental methods can provide more accurate and detailed information and help understand methane adsorption in coal.Methane is primarily stored as adsorbed gas in coalbed methane (CBM) reservoirs, and the methane adsorption capacity is of great significant to define the gas content and gas-in-place (GIP) for CBM reservoirs ( High pressure mercury intrusion (MIP), low pressure nitrogen adsorption and low pressure carbon dioxide adsorption experiments are commonly employed to characterize the pore size distribution (PSD) of coal samples. Previous studies demonstrated macropores (>50 nm), mesopores (2–50 nm) and micropores (<2 nm) co-exist within the coal matrices ( For different types and ranks of coal, the macromolecular structure varies from one to another. However, it was found that the dimension of different coal macromolecules is significantly greater than 1.0 nm in size for all different coals ( By combining numerical simulation and experimental characterizations, significant achievements have been achieved to link the gas sorption capacity with the pore structures ( In this study, we attempted to perform a comprehensive investigation of methane adsorption on coal by considering methane adsorption in different types of pores. Subbituminous coal collected from Yilan coal mining of China was used in this study, and we chose the vitrain part as the samples. We employed high pressure mercury intrusion, low pressure nitrogen adsorption and low pressure carbon dioxide adsorption to characterize pore structure of coal. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) data, density data and pore volume data were used to establish coal macromolecular structures. Based on the pore characteristics and macromolecular structures, we established realistic pore models to study the methane adsorption mechanism in coal. In addition, isothermal adsorption experimental data were also used to verify our modeled results. The tested coal samples were collected from the Yilan coal field in Heilongjiang Province, China. The composition of coal includes vitrinite, inertinite, various minerals, and other trace components. Macromolecular structures and pore structure of different macerals are different ( The methane sorption isotherms were tested by using HPVA200 manufactured by Micromeritics Company, USA. The sorption isotherms were measured through the volumetric method and the detailed procedure was discussed in elsewhere ( The void volume was measured by helium expansion method, as helium is an inert gas. For the sorption experiment, the coal samples were pulverized and screened to 60–80 mesh according to the National Standard of China (GB/T 19560-2008). The powder samples were dried for more than 12 h at 80 °C before the actually experiments based on the National Standard of China (GB/T 19560-2008). After dried 12 h, most of moisture in coal samples would be removed and the state would keep unchanged. The experimental temperature was 30 °C, and the pressure was from 0 MPa to 12 MPa. The samples were characterized by both CO AutoPore IV 9500, manufactured by Micrometitics Instrument Corporation, was employed to perform the MIP experiments. The maximum pressure was approximately 414 MPa (60 000 psia), and the lower limit of tested coal pores was ∼3 nm. For each experiment, the sample was fully dried before testing. In the high pressure stage (>200 MPa), the compressibility of coal greatly influences the incremental volume in MIP ( The field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) was employed to observe the pore morphology for the coal samples. Coal samples were polished by Argon ion beam to make the pores clearer. Pores with size >2.0 nm can be probed in the FE-SEM experiments. Grand Canonical Monte Carlo (GCMC) methods were used to calculate methane adsorption in coal. In one of our previous studies, we constructed a real 3D macromolecular structure for Yilan coal as shown in In our calculation, 1000000 Monte Carlo steps were initially performed, and then, 1000000 Monte Carlo steps were performed to calculate the average values of the required physical parameters. More details regarding the GCMC methods can be found in refs (   SEM was used to observe the pore characteristics of the coal samples. The maximum magnification of the instrument was 100000, suggesting that the resolution of the used instrument is ∼2 nm. Therefore, 3–100 nm pores can be directly observed and 0.45–0.87 nm pores cannot be directly visualized by SEM. When the SEM magnification was greater than 70000, it was found that the surface of the coal sample was not smooth. The surface was formed by many small particles, and we labeled these particles as basic particles ( Based on SEM images, it was found that the 3–100 nm pores occur in two different ways. The larger pores with size exceeding 10 nm were appeared to be occurred by dislodging one or more elemental coal solid particles as shown in Based on SEM image analyses, there were few ellipse-like pores in the coal samples, but slit-like pores were widely distributed on the coal surface. These observations agreed with the MIP data as illustrated in It was noticed that considerable ultra micropores (<0.87 nm in size) occur within the coal sample ( As discussed above, the pores in coal matrices can be classified into two categories, namely, elemental particle (EP) pores and macromolecular structure pores (MS pores). EP pores can be directly observed and characterized by SEM, and they are usually larger than 3 nm. Moreover, EP pores are related to the elemental solid coal particles. MS pores occur within the macromolecular structure and are smaller than 0.87 nm, as shown in To determine the methane adsorption process, the macromolecule system was used to progressively adsorb 1, 5, 10, 15 and 20 methane molecules on the representative volume of coal macromolecule as shown in It is important to understand the primary controlling factors which determine the overall methane adsorption capacity. Song ( The type of functional group also had a large influence on the methane adsorption capacity in coal macromolecules. Two aspects should be considered when studying the influence of group functions on methane adsorption. Some types of functional groups are conducive to forming pores in macromolecules. It was found that aliphatic chains formed pores easier than other functional groups ( Methane adsorption in MS pore has an apparent feature as illustrated in In the theory of volume filling of micropores (TVFM), adsorption in micropores is volume filling, rather than adsorbed on the surface ( The data obtained from the calculation of methane adsorption in EP pores was the total gas in EP pores, including the adsorbed methane amount and free gas as shown in The total gas amount, excess adsorption amount and bulk phase gas amount are shown in The methane density distribution in EP pores was calculated, as shown in Gibbs adsorption has also been used to analyze methane adsorption in macromolecular pores ( When comparing methane adsorption in MS pores with EP pores, it was observed that these two were different in a number of ways. First, in MS pores, the methane adsorption amount reached a high value at a low pressure and then slightly increased with increasing pressure. However, EP pores showed a continuous increase before 8 MPa ( The wide range of pores size makes methane adsorption in coal more complex. As MS pores and EP pores both exist in coal, it is challenging and unreason to model and define the methane adsorption behavior by using only one adsorption model. In It should be noted that in the total methane adsorption amount, the adsorbed methane amount in MS pores contributed a larger proportion than that in BP pores, especially at the low pressure stage ( In this study, it is mainly aimed to get a better understanding of methane adsorption in coal, considering the macromolecular structure and pore size distribution. The following main conclusions can be summarized as: Pores with in the coal matrices can be classified into two categories: MS pores and EP pores as they are quite different in pore size and occurrence forms. The methane adsorption capacity of MS pores will be determined by the pore volume, but that of EP pores is determined by the surface due to the different mechanism. Methane adsorption in MS pores showed the typical behavior of the theory of volume filling of micropores, and the methane adsorption results can be well modeled by D-A model. On the contrary, two distinguishable adsorbed layers can be identified for in EP pore sorption, and the methane density of the first layer was much larger than that of the second layer. The methane adsorption behavior in EP pores was found to be consistent with the BET model. Of the total gas adsorption amount in coal, the amount of absorbed methane in MS pores contributed a relatively large proportion compared to EP pores. With increasing pressure, the difference between the two decreased, and when the pressure was 10 MPa, the proportion of methane adsorption in EP pores was ∼40%. The final methane adsorption isothermal is the comprehensive result of methane adsorption in different types of pores. Methane adsorption in different types of pores is different and has different effects for the coalbed methane production. Dividing methane adsorption into different types would help understand would help understand the final methane adsorption behavior in coal. The authors sincerely thank the financial support of the