Objectives
                  The aim for the present study was to determine whether projection error of measuring Pauwels’ angle in young femur neck fracture could be eliminated by CT plane manipulation.
               
                  Methods
                  Clinical data of displaced femur neck fractures in young adults aged 20 to 64years old (13 females and 17 males) were retrospectively analyzed. Their average age was 47.9years (range: 22–64years; SD: 11.3). Using modified measurement method for Pauwels’ angle using central line of the shaft as a guideline, the angle of a conventional coronal CT image was measured. CT images were imported into Mimics® software. The scanning plane was then reformatted parallel to the neck axis to eliminate projection error of injured limb. Measured angles were classified into three types (I<30°; II, 30–50°; and III>50°) and differences were analyzed.
               
                  Results
                  Average Pauwels’ angle was 52.9° (range: 28.6–68.3°; SD: 9.9; type II, 17 cases; type III, 13 cases) for conventional CT images and 68.7° (range: 29.8–91.2°; SD: 13.4; type II, 1 cases; type III, 29 cases) for reformatted CT images. Difference between these two measurements on average was 15.7° (range: 1.2–34.9°; SD: 7.3).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Reformatting CT scanning plane by manipulating the proximal fragment to be parallel with the neck axis of the distal neck-shaft fragment is a convenient and reliable technique for eliminating the projection error of measuring Pauwels’ angle in the femur neck fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV, cohort study.Among femur neck fractures in young adults, vertically oriented femur neck fracture (Pauwels type III) should be distinguished In the treatment of femoral neck fractures, a convenient and reproducible classification system helps the surgeon to decide the best surgical implant and predict the prognosis To the best of our knowledge, no study has reported the way to refine the projection error owing to fracture displacement or deformed position. Therefore, the hypothesis was that a manipulating CT scanning plane could eliminate the projection error to evaluate the Pauwels’ angle. The study protocol was approved by the ethics committee of our institution (GNUCH 2018-04-001). Medical records of femur neck fractures were retrospectively analyzed. This study excluded patients over 65 With the modified Pauwels angle, which was defined as the angle between the perpendicular line to central line of the femoral shaft and the fracture line All measurements were assessed by two orthopedic surgeons (G.H.J., J.M.K.). The inter-observer reliability for each measure was assessed using the intraclass correlation coefficient (ICC). Interpretation of the ICC was performed as described by Landis and Koch in 1977 Descriptive statistics included the mean, minimum, and maximum values. SPSS software package for Windows version 23.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used for all statistical analyses. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov normality test was conducted for continuous variables to evaluate the distribution of data composition. Statistical evaluation was performed using Wilcoxon signed rank test for continuous data and Chi The measurements with the conventional and reformatted CT imaging showed almost perfect agreement [conventional CT, 0.946 (95% CI: 0.889–0.974); reformatted CT, 0.904 (95% CI: 0.805–0.954)]. Average modified Pauwels angle of conventional CT coronal images was 52.9° (range: 28.6–68.3°; SD: 9.9). Pauwels type II had 13 cases and Pauwels type III had 17 cases. In reformatted CT coronal images, the average Pauwels angle was 68.7° (range: 29.8–91.2°; SD: 7.3). Pauwels type II had one case and Pauwels type III had 29 cases. Thus, 12 cases of Pauwels type II were converted into type III ( One case had Pauwels angle of 28.6° in the conventional CT image. It was changed to 30.4° in the reformatted image. Fracture fixation was performed because of angulated deformation of the fracture. In another case, the Pauwels angle was changed from 47.0° to 51.7° because the fracture line was curved-up into the medial junctional site. Despite the angle was 51.7°, conservative management was performed based on the principle of Pauwels’ biomechanical classification ( With the different measurement methods, Pauwels angles of the two groups showed statistically significant difference ( This study introduced a new method to eliminate projection error by the reformatting CT scanning plane. The main findings are: the initial obliquity of the fracture line in the conventional CT scanning does not affect the degree of projection error ( the radiographic position of the injured femur is significant to change Pauwels classification ( the degree of projection error is measured quantitatively and the average difference is 15.7.° (range: 1.2–34.9°; SD: 7.3). All measured values are increased with eliminating the projection error significantly ( Fixation failure of femur neck fractures is related to many variables, including fracture comminution, reduction adequacy, and bone purchase strength of different implants Regarding the modern application of Pauwels’ biomechanical classification, the modified measurement of fracture obliquity was proposed with the good inter-rater reproducibility with a higher reliability than conventional Pauwels’ angle. With the importance of the original Pauwels’ biomechanical concept Considering that the projection error may result from the deformation with an external rotation of the injured femur, the measurement of Pauwels angle with plain radiograph for a displaced femur neck might be a difficult issue with a great significance of the obliquity assessment Despite the interesting findings, the computational measurement has several limitations. First, since Pauwels angles were measured manually using the tool in Mimics® software, there might be intra- and inter-observer errors. Second, given the small sample size with only 30 enrolled fractures, the results could not be safely generalized. Third, the clinical significance of a projection error was not adequately proved because we had no postoperative follow-up outcome. Nevertheless, our simple technique of reformatting the CT scanning plane allowed to remove the projection error and more easily identify the vertically oriented femoral neck fractures in young adults. This will help orthopedic surgeons decide on the best implants and anticipate clinical problems of fracture healing. Reformatting CT scanning plane by manipulating the proximal fragment to be parallel with the neck axis of the distal neck-shaft fragment is a convenient and reliable technique for eliminating the projection error of measuring Pauwels’ angle in the femur neck fractures. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article. Gu-Hee Jung and Gyu Min Kong make substantial contributions to conception and design, and/or acquisition of data, and/or analysis and interpretation of data. Gu-Hee Jung, Gyu Min Kong and Jae-Man Kwak participate in drafting the article or revising it critically for important intellectual content. Gu-Hee Jung give final approval of the version to be submitted and any revised version. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 