Hybrid materials are promising candidates that make a great contribution to the development of nanoarchitectonics. In this section, design criteria and fabrication of hybrid materials, mainly based on molecular and nanoscale approaches, are described. Future prospects for the hybrid materials along this line are also stated.The author deeply thanks all colleagues for their contribution reading the works cited in this chapter. Today our daily lives are surrounded by various industrially produced objects composed by various types of materials, from huge ones such as buildings and vehicles, to the small ones such as smart phones or memory cards for electronic devices. They are constructed and assembled by proper structural and functional combinations of polymers, ceramics, metals, and other materials. Additional to pure components, composites such as glass- or carbon fiber reinforced plastics (GFRP, CFRP) are also used as raw materials. In nature, many natural products are composed of organic and inorganic components. Nacre is a hybrid consisted of an organic polymer, chitin, and calcium carbonate that exhibits well-ordered layered structures. Bone is a beautiful example that represents structural and functional properties of hybrid materials ( Generally speaking, over the past few decades, hybrid materials have been mainly regarded as materials composed of organic and inorganic or metallic components. Recently the situation has changed. When searching the term “hybrid” on literature databases, the papers relating to perovskite compounds (CHNH From the inorganic chemists’ side, the term “hybrid material” is defined by IUPAC as a “material composed of an intimate mixture of inorganic components, organic components, or both types of component. Note: The components usually interpenetrate on scales of less than 1 On the other hand, the analogous term “composite” is also defined by polymer chemists as: “Multicomponent material comprising multiple, different (nongaseous) phase domains in which at least one type of phase domain is a continuous phase. Note: Foamed substances, which are multiphase materials that consist of a gas dispersed in a liquid or solid, are not normally considered to be composites” From the viewpoint of material design and fabrication, such a categorization sometimes may not be important. Therefore, in this chapter, the term “hybrid” is mainly used for various systems. Why do we fabricate hybrid materials? For industrial materials, hybrid materials are prepared to improve mechanical strength and/or to add novel function to the target material. From the viewpoint of nanomaterial fabrications, it is a scientific challenge to prepare nanohybrids in a particular way The unit component (material), structure, and process are the factors that we need to consider for the design and fabrication of nanohybrid materials. The types of usable unit components are limitless. As for design of hybrid materials, various hybrid structures are imaginable ( Mixing and assembly In situ synthesis Polymerization of organic components in the presence of inorganic components Polymerization of inorganic components in the presence of organic components Simultaneous polymerizations of organic and inorganic components Polymerization of organic-inorganic hybrid molecules These categories may not completely cover all available hybrid materials. Because the topic is too widely distributed regarding unit components and fabrication processes, in this chapter we mainly focus on recent topics for organic-inorganic nanohybrids obtained using molecular or nano-based, solution-based approaches that are relating to the the author’s research fields. Characteristics and representative examples of each category are described in the following paragraphs.  Mixing and assembly Physical mixing of the organic and the inorganic components, such as solid polymer (resin) and silica particles in dry states, are the simplest approach to fabricate bulk hybrid materials. For both the cases of mixing the unit components without solvents and in dispersion systems, the control of intra- and inter-component interactions are important to obtain hybrid materials with ideal mixing states. Various types of interactions, such as van der Waals interactions, electrostatic interactions, hydrogen bonding, and ligand-receptor interactions are available to design the hybrids. To obtain the designed mixing structures, surface modification of the nanoparticles with thiol compounds or silane coupling agents is a well-used approach. The coating of organic layers on inorganic particles itself results in the formation of core-shell type hybrid nanoparticles ( Simple, homogeneous assembly of nanoparticles on solid substrates (in some cases, including surfaces of colloidal particles) are readily achieved using well-known techniques such as layer-by-layer assembly ( In situ synthesis In situ synthesis can be classified into the following four types. Here dispersion systems are mainly described. Polymerization of organic components in the presence of inorganic components In this category, polymerization of organic monomers (acrylates, methacrylates, and so on) is conducted in the presence of inorganic (or metallic) nanoparticles and nanosheets to obtain organic-inoganic (metallic) nanohybrids. Here the inorganic dispersants are spatially entrapped during polymerization, or bind to specific monomer units, or act as initiation points of polymerization. In the last case, “grafting-to” approach is a representative example. Metal oxide particles are firstly modified with silane coupling agents with an initiator unit of atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP) to form polymer brush layers on the particle surfaces. The resulting hybrid particles have core-shell structures ( Haraguchi et al demonstrated that polymerization of methacrylates in the presence of clay nanosheets resulted in formation of nanocomposite gels (NC gels) exhibiting remarkable, unique mechanical properties Using a different approach, raspberry-like, silica particle-decorated poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) microspheres were prepared Oaki et al. demonstrated crystal-mediated polymerization that utilized the interspace of nanocrystals, the surface of crystals, and the structure of crystals Polymerization of inorganic components in the presence of organic components Contrary to (b1), this category includes polymerization of inorganic components such as metal oxides and inorganic salts in the presence of organic molecules, supramolecular assemblies, nanoparticles and other nano- and colloidal objects. For inorganic salts, precipitation or deposition are more suitable terms instead of polymerization. Here we focus on the systems utilizing sol-gel process and biomimetic mineralization. When sol-gel reactions of metal alkoxides in the presence of emulsions of organic (pre)polymers are conducted, the resulting sols can be used for hybrid coatings on solid substrates. For the creation of nanohybrids, Shinkai et al. and others have extensively investigated precise inorganic coatings and replications of organic templates constructed by supramolecular assemblies and polymer chains Because many cases of biomineralizations occur in the presence of organic molecules and their assemblies, biomimetic mineralization processes have been received attention as the fabrication methods for organic-inorganic hybrids HAp mineralization on solid substrates have been widely investigated from the viewpoint of fabrication of bone implants, in addition to scientific interests for natural bone mineralization. For example, Kokubo et al. have developed simulated body fluid (SBF) that has similar inorganic ion concentrations to those of human plasma and is supersaturated with respect to HAp The author’s group has also been using SBFs for creation of HAp-deposited hybrids. We particularly focus on HAp deposition on the surfaces of commonly used polymers to expand potential of these polymers in biomedical applications. Because most of such polymer substances do not display effective functional groups for heterogeneous nucleation of HAp, we have developed several surface modification processes for HAp deposition. For example, protein adsorption layers are readily utilized to deposit HAp on polystyrene (PS) substrates in SBFs Preparation of colloidal organic-HAp nanohybrids in SBFs has also been investigated. As the organic molecule, we focused on HAp-binding peptides isolated from phage display library techniques. Recently various material binding peptides have been identified using this technique Material-binding peptides can be utilized for HAp deposition on specific material surfaces. Peptide conjugates with sequences of polyetherimide (PEI) binding peptide (TGADLNT, p1) Biomimetic mineralization of calcium carbonate has been extensively investigated by Kato et al. Other biomineralization systems have also been utilized for functional nanohybrid fabrication. Ferritin, known as a protein for iron storage in humans and other organisms, have been used as the templates for syntheses of various metal and metal-oxide nanoparticles exhibiting quantum size effects. Surface-modified ferritins obtained using bioengineering approaches that incorporate nanoparticles inside their cavities are directly used as hybrid nanocomponents for electronic nanodevices There are many examples regarding preparation of metallic nanocomponents in the presence of organic templates and some of them are used as organic-metallic hybrid materials. For example, LB films of fatty acid cadmium salts are utilized to produce CdS nanoparticles. Reduction of metal cations trapped in the organic templates is a well-used approach. Chemical reductions and electroless plating are useful for such systems. One recent topic is the use of dendrimers for organic templates Simultaneous polymerizations of organic and inorganic components Simultaneous polymerizations of organic and inorganic components are expected to obtain materials that have interpenetration polymer network (IPN) structures constructed by the organic and inorganic polymer components. Various organic monomers used for conventional polymer syntheses are available for the organic monomer and metal alkoxides are usually used for the inorganic monomers. Such attempts have been conducted not only as fundamental research but also in industry: for example, fabrication of contact lenses from metharylates and siloxane polymers. Generally it is difficult to obtain ideal IPN structures because polymerization tends to induce phase separation of the organic and the inorganic components. In addition to polymerization conditions, the design of monomer structures is important to enhance interactions between the organic and the inorganic components or to decrease self-aggregation of each monomer or its polymerized ones If ideal organic-inorganic IPN structures are constructed in the hybrid materials, they should exhibit remarkable improvement of mechanical properties. This point has been demonstrated by Kunitake et al. for the case of free-standing organic-inorganic hybrid nanofilms Polymerization of organic-inorganic hybrid molecules Polymerization of organic-inorganic hybrid molecules is another realistic approach to obtain organic-inorganic nanohybrids. At least one of the components (organic or inorganic) needs to be polymerizable. Polymerized products of commercially available silane-coupling agents such as 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane or 3-glycidyloxypropyltrimethoxysilane can be regarded as organic-inorganic nanohybrids: however, it is difficult to control their nanostrucutures. From the viewpoint of fabrication of organic-inorganic nanohybrids having precisely controlled nanostructures, a representative example is self-assembly and following polycondensation of organoalkoxysilanes, some of them have been inspired by the creation of mesoporous silica materials using surfactant templates Organoalkoxysilanes with vinyl or methacryl groups have also been developed. Three routes are possible for polymerization of vinyltrimethoxsilane: (i) polymerization of the organic moiety and then that of the inorganic one, (ii) polymerization of the inorganic moiety and then that of the organic one, (iii) simultaneous polymerization. Casting of products obtained through route (ii) resulted in production of transparent gel films When fabricating hybrid materials, the combinations of chosen type, and the sizes of the organic and the inorganic (or metallic) components are unlimited. However, the basic design and the fabrication strategies can be classified in several ways, not limited to only those shown in this chapter. Organic-inorganic nanohybrids are promising materials for use not only as fabricated but also as the joint compartments at the organic-inorganic interfaces of bulk materials. For example, self-assembled monolayers of silane-coupling agents should act as molecular adhesive layers between the surfaces of organic and inorganic or metallic (because many of metal surfaces are covered by ultrathin metal oxide layers) materials. Such a possibility has recently demonstrated by the author’s group