The thermochemical properties, electrochemical behavior, and potential use for cementation have been investigated for two ferromanganese alloys, standard ferromanganese (6.8% carbon) and medium carbon ferromanganese (1.4% carbon). Standard potentials are obtained by measuring the potential of the galvanic cell consisting of a ferromanganese sample and a saturated mercury-sulfate reference electrode and extrapolating to infinite dilution. Cementation of cobalt on ferromanganese has also been investigated. The rate is measured by rotating-disk experiments and the results show that cobalt cementation on ferromanganese is a first-order reaction controlled by mass transfer. Tests of cobalt cementation on the ferromanganese (1.4% C) powder are carried out at room temperature. The reaction is fast in the pure sulfate solution and the efficiency of use of manganese is close to 100%. Cementation of cobalt with ferromanganese does not proceed to a significant level in mixed cobalt and zinc-sulfate solution.Cementation is the simplest and oldest hydrometallurgical process. It has been used in extractive metallurgy to recover valuable metals as well as to remove unwanted impurities. Wadsworth Further applications of cementation for the purification of waste streams with recovery and recycling of valuable metals ought to be considered. DeBecker et al. The inhibition of cobalt reduction by zinc is related to another well-known phenomenon: the anomalous codeposition of zinc–cobalt alloys In summary, although cobalt is commonly removed from solutions by cementation on zinc, which requires elevated temperature, the process is rather complex, and still poorly understood. There is, therefore, a strong incentive to investigate the cementation of cobalt on various metals, in particular, its cementation on manganese and ferromanganese. In this paper, we have studied the electrochemistry of ferromanganese in relation to its application to the cementation of cobalt. Two grades of ferromanganese, standard ferromanganese (75–80% Mn, 6.8% C) and medium carbon ferromanganese (80–85% Mn, 1.4% C), produced by electric furnace reduction and kindly supplied by Elkem Metals were investigated. The galvanic cell consisted of a ferromanganese electrode and a commercial Hg–Hg A laboratory-prepared ferromanganese (6.8% C) rotating-disk electrode (RDE) with geometric area of 1.48 cm The corrosion resistance and corrosion current density of standard ferromanganese (6.8% C), medium carbon ferromanganese (1.4% C), and pure manganese were also measured. The electrodes were mechanically polished and rinsed with distilled water, then immediately immersed into the testing solution. All tests were carried out at room temperature (23±1 °C). A magnetic stir bar was used in order to remove the hydrogen bubbles aggregated on the electrode surface during experiments. In potentiodynamic experiments, the scan rate was 0.5 mV s A laboratory-prepared ferromanganese (1.4% C) rotating disk with geometric surface area of 3.0 cm The experiments of cobalt cementation with medium carbon ferromanganese (1.4% C, −200 mesh,<75 μm) and with zinc powder (−325 mesh,<45 μm) were carried out in a 0.02 M CoSO Cementation of cobalt with either medium ferromanganese or pure manganese powder (−325 mesh,<45 μm) was also carried out by stirring the powder and 100 ml solution with a magnetic stir bar for 90 min in a 200-ml Erlenmeyer flask. These tests were run in a pure cobalt-sulfate solution as well as a cobalt-sulfate solution containing Zn(II) at room temperature. The solution pH was adjusted to 3.3–3.5 with sulfuric acid prior to each test. In all experiments, the initial stoichiometric ratio of metal powder to total cobalt in solution was 2.5:1. In all cementation experiments, the concentration of dissolved species was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy. The galvanic cell can be represented by: The cell potential is then given by: The mean ionic activity coefficient, Inserting According to The existence of ion pairs affects the ionic strength. In a solution of MnSO The mercury–mercurous-sulfate electrode, which is in contact with a saturated K We have also measured the potential of pure manganese in order to confirm the consistency of the method and evaluate the experimental errors. As seen from Since the measured electrode potential of ferromanganese is more negative than the Co/Co Two cathodic and anodic polarization curves of ferromanganese in dilute sodium chloride and diluted sulfuric acid solutions are shown in Polarization resistance is used to estimate the corrosion rate of a material The cementation of cobalt on ferromanganese or manganese can be represented by the overall reaction: It is found in many cementation systems that the reaction obeys a first-order law: The cementation reaction is a heterogeneous reaction, which may be controlled either by mass transfer or by a chemical step at the surface of the metal. Reported studies For a rotating disk, the thickness of the Nernst diffusion layer is given as Substituting The rate constants measured by RDE experiments are scattered around the theoretically calculated line shown in The results obtained in the vessel stirred at 500 rpm, which are plotted in The results of cobalt cementation with ferromanganese carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks are summarized in The effect of zinc ions on cobalt cementation on ferromanganese has been investigated by the powder cementation experiments. The results are also summarized in The standard potentials of ferromanganese alloys have been obtained by extrapolation of the potential of the galvanic cell to infinite dilution. The values at 23 °C are −0.66 and −0.76 V vs. SHE for ferromanganese (6.8% C) and medium carbon ferromanganese (1.4% C), respectively. Since the standard potential of cobalt is −0.28 V vs. SHE, it is expected that cobalt cementation with ferromanganese is thermodynamically possible. This has been confirmed experimentally. Experiments with a rotating-disk electrode have shown that cobalt cementation with ferromanganese in a pure cobalt-sulfate solution is a diffusion-controlled process. Cobalt cementation on ferromanganese powder proceeds readily from a cobalt-sulfate solution, but it does not occur in the presence of zinc ions. Some of the zinc was reduced, but almost no cobalt. Constant parameters Bulk concentration [mol m Diffusion coefficient [m Measured galvanic cell potential [V] Standard reversible potential [V] Liquid-junction potential [V] Faradaic constant (96487 C/equiv) Ionic strength [mol kg Current density corresponding to applied polarization potential [A m Corrosion current density [A m Equilibrium association constant of ionic pairs [mol Cementation rate constant [m s Rate constant for surface reaction [m s Molality [mol kg The universal gas constant (8.314 J/mol K) Polarization resistance [Ω m Active area for reaction [m Kelvin temperature [K] Total volume of cementation electrolyte [m Total volume of cementation electrolyte at time, Dissociation fraction Tafel slope of anodic process [V] Tafel slope of cathodic process [V] Thickness of Nernst diffusion layer (boundary layer) [m] Polarization potential [V] Ionic activity coefficient of species Mean ionic activity coefficient Kinematic viscosity [cSt] Rotation speed [rad s The financial support of this study was provided by the former U.S. Bureau of Mines under grants no. G1155232-3623. The authors also would like to thank Elkem Metals for kindly supplying ferromanganese alloys for this investigation.