The ideal management of complex proximal humeral fractures continues to be debatable. Evolution of proximal humeral fracture management, during the past decade, led to the implementation of many innovations in surgical treatment. Even though the pendulum of treatment seems to swing towards new trends such as locked plating, hemiarthroplasty remains a valid and reliable option that serves the patient's needs well. Hemiarthroplasty is indicated for complex proximal humeral fractures in elderly patients with poor bone stock and when internal fixation is difficult or unreliable. Hemiarthroplasty provides a better result when it is performed early post-injury. Stem height, retroversion and tuberosity positioning are technical aspects of utmost importance. Additionally reverse total shoulder arthroplasty is an alternative new modality that can be used as a primary solution in selected patients with proximal humeral fracture treatment. Failed hemiarthroplasty and fracture sequelae can be successfully managed with reverse total shoulder arthroplasty. Individual decision-making and tailored treatment that takes into consideration the personality of the fracture and the patient's characteristics should be used.The changing epidemiology of adult fractures To date, no clear consensus about the optimal treatment of proximal humeral fractures has emerged. The lack of valid studies leads to inability to draw useful clinical conclusions and clear guidelines for treatment. The best treatment for the elderly patient with a three or four part upper humeral fracture remains controversial. There are some proponents of non-operative treatment of three part fractures of the upper humerus, Proximal humeral fractures are usually osteoporotic fractures. Internal fixation with angular stable locking fixation such as PHILOS plate, provides similar functional results to internal fixation with conventional plates, but the routine use of locking plates is not justified in all cases especially due to their high cost. To date, there is no consensus on the type of surgical treatment that should be used Lanting et al. Misra et al. Bhandari et al. Neer was a pioneer surgeon who revolutionised proximal humerus fracture treatment by the implementation and subsequent widespread use of prosthetic replacement of the humeral head. Despite the advent of promising contemporary techniques in the management of proximal humeral fractures, shoulder hemiarthroplasty remains a reliable solution for challenging cases. Hemiarthroplasty is generally used for a complex fracture, in cases where internal fixation is insecure or difficult, and in patients with poor bone stock such as elderly patients with osteoporosis. More specifically there is a tendency to use this modality in the elderly osteoporotic patients with selected (displaced) three part fractures (displaced) four-part fractures, fracture-dislocations, head-split fractures with more than 40% articular surface involvement, anatomic neck fractures, or dislocations present for longer than six months. With the advent of new modalities such as locking plates, a lively debate over the place of hemiarthroplasty as opposed to internal fixation occurs, mainly in regard to the treatment of osteoporotic fractures in elderly patients. Hertel On the other hand, despite the fact that the aforementioned treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures is prevalent amongst orthopaedic surgeons, this should be considered a belief rather that a scientifically based fact, as was shown by Bandhari. The literature seems to favour early versus late hemiarthroplasty for complex proximal humerus fractures. The surgical procedure is technically demanding and less favourable results are to be expected in the case of old trauma. Mehlhorn et al., The reasons for worse results in the case of late hemiarthroplasty are various and include nonunions and malunions of the proximal humerus (especially the greater tuberosity), tuberosity displacement, bone loss, rotator cuff tears, previous scars and contractions. The deltopectoral approach remains the gold standard for shoulder hemiarthroplasty in complex fractures. Specific care should be exercised to protect the deltoid muscle, especially during the posterior fracture segment exposure, in order to preserve its function and thus optimise rehabilitation and functional outcome. Levy et al. Stem position and especially stem height and rotation have been recognised as factors of paramount importance in shoulder hemiarthroplasty. Restoration of stem height provides the adequate lever arm for the rotator cuff to function properly. Shortening more than 1 Retroversion of the prosthesis is another issue of cardinal significance. Whilst Neer stated the normal retroversion is 20°, Tuberosity positioning has a major impact on functional outcome after a hemiarthroplasty; therefore particular attention must be drawn to this issue ( As shown by Frankle, inadequate stem height leads to inferior placement of tuberosities, mainly in cases of surgical neck comminution. Robinson et al. Boileau et al. Complications such as infection (superficial or deep), neurological injury (transient or permanent), intraoperative fracture (especially in cases of treatment of fracture sequelae), instability (superior or inferior), migration and malunion of tuberosities, malunion, tuberosity resorption and rotator cuff tears, malpositioning of the humeral stem, loosening, heterotopic ossification, loss of glenoid articular cartilage and stiffness can be confronted. In a recent systematic review Rehabilitation after shoulder hemiarthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures remains an issue of controversy. The ‘personality’ of osteosynthesis with special consideration to tuberosities’ healing should be taken into account. Many proponents of early shoulder mobilisation argue that passive motion should be started as early as possible. In a large series of patients treated with hemiarthroplasty for fracture, In what it is considered to be the only randomised controlled trial comparing an early versus the late rehabilitation protocol, Agorastides et al. There continues to be a significant debate in the literature regarding the outcome of hemiarthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures. Whilst most of the published studies show a better outcome of surgical treatment over conservative management of proximal fractures, there is no strong evidence in the current literature to support open reduction and internal fixation over hemiarthroplasty. In a systematic review Misra et al. It is common sense that although adequate pain relief is to be expected, functional outcome may vary after hemiarthroplasty Boileau et al. Robinson et al. On the other hand, Mighell et al. In another study Furthermore in an effort to appreciate the patient's perspective Padua et al. Another important topic that probably needs to be delineated is the impact of surgeons experience in the outcome of hemiarthroplasty for upper humeral fractures. Sufficient level of expertise is a prerequisite for optimal treatment of complex fractures. High level of surgeon's expertise and the need for supervision of junior surgeons have been shown to be required in order to treat other complex skeletal injuries successfully such as proximal femoral fractures. The reverse total shoulder prosthesis seems to have the potential to become a major breakthrough in the evolution of shoulder joint replacement surgery. The idea of replacing the glenoid articular surface with a concave component and the humeral head with a convex surface was initially suggested by Professor P. Grammont in the 1980s in an effort to address the challenging situation of the treatment of severe rotator cuff deficiency and concomitant severe glenohumeral arthritis. Substantial effort to address certain constraints of the conventional shoulder arthroplasty such as limited ability to manage glenohumeral translation, limited fixation of glenoid component to bone, limited intrinsic stability and limited ability to compensate for deltoid dysfunction, has led to the development of the reverse or deltoid total shoulder arthroplasty. Current indications for reverse total shoulder arthroplasty include refractory rotator cuff arthropathy, failed prosthetic reconstruction with instability or failed prosthetic reconstruction for traumatic injury with pseudoparalysis and instability. Of the various treatment options that are available for the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures, prosthetic replacement with the reverse shoulder prosthesis has recently gained considerable interest. With no clear guidance in the literature regarding the best option for complex upper humeral fractures in elderly patients, hemiarthroplasty remains a reliable solution. Wall and Walch In what we found to be the largest study to have dealt solely with reverse shoulder prosthesis in acute three and four part fractures of the proximal humerus, Bufquin et al., In another retrospective study, Cazeneuve and Cristofari The various concerns over the treatment of difficult clinical problems in shoulder reconstruction surgery created a renewed interest in the potential of the reverse shoulder prosthesis. Fracture sequelae constitute a challenging problem that had not been addressed in a systematic manner until recently. Boileau et al. In cases of failed shoulder arthroplasty due to a deficient rotator cuff, the reverse prosthesis represents a reasonable solution. In a study comparing the results of reverse prosthesis in rotator cuff arthropathy, fracture sequelae and failed arthroplasty, Boileau et al. used the Grammont prosthesis in five cases of fracture sequelae and in 19 cases of failed revision arthroplasty. Levy et al. Wall et al. On the other hand, Mansat et al. found no difference in functional outcome when hemiarthroplasty and conventional shoulder arthroplasty is used for the treatment of late sequelae of fractures. Hemiarthroplasty is an essential part of the surgeon's armamentarium in the treatment of complex proximal humeral fractures. The current challenge is to clearly re-define the indications for hemiarthroplasty taking into consideration the new methods of fracture treatment. Special attention should also be paid to determine the subpopulation of injured patients who will benefit most from prosthetic replacement ( The deltopectoral approach remains the gold standard for hemiarthroplasty. This procedure yields better results when performed in the acute setting. Strict adherence to good surgical technique is a To date, reverse total shoulder arthroplasty in trauma has been used in acute fracture treatment, late fracture sequelae and failed hemiarthroplasty. Early results are promising but the increasing enthusiasm surrounding the advent and worldwide use of this innovative modality needs to be further matched with randomised controlled studies in order to provide more scientifically validated information. Well-designed, multicentre, prospective, randomised studies are needed in order to provide true evidence-based treatment recommendation for complex proximal humeral fractures. The use of such trials will allow the comparison of prosthetic replacement with new methods of fracture fixation and will provide useful guidelines to the orthopaedic trauma and shoulder surgeon for the management of proximal humeral fractures. The authors state that there were no financial or personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence their work.