It is now accepted that replacement of natural aggregates in concrete with recycled concrete aggregates obtained from construction and demolition waste is a promising technology to conserve natural resources and reduce the environmental impact of concrete. This paper presents a study on long-term properties of concretes manufactured with recycled aggregates of different parent concrete strengths. A total of six batches of recycled aggregate concretes (RACs) were manufactured. Tests were undertaken to establish the long-term compressive strength, elastic modulus, splitting tensile strength, workability, drying shrinkage, and creep of each batch. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) characterizations were performed to explain the mechanisms behind the observed time-dependent and mechanical properties of RACs. Test parameters comprised the replacement ratio and parent concrete strength of the recycled aggregates used in the preparation of the new concrete mixes. The results indicate that the parent concrete strength of the recycled aggregates significantly affects the time-dependent and long-term mechanical properties of RACs. It is shown that concrete mixes containing lower strength recycled concrete aggregates develop lower mechanical properties and higher shrinkage strain and creep deformation compared to mixes prepared with higher strength recycled concrete aggregates. Normal-strength RAC mixes containing higher strength recycled concrete aggregates develop slightly lower splitting tensile strength at all curing ages but similar compressive strength and elastic modulus in longer term (i.e. over 90 days) compared to those of the control mix. It is also shown that high-strength RACs, prepared with full replacement of natural aggregates with recycled concrete aggregates having a higher parent concrete strength, exhibit time-dependent and long-term mechanical properties that are similar to or better than those of companion natural aggregate concretes.In recent decades, the increased use of concrete has resulted in excessive consumption of natural aggregates Over the past three decades, a large number of studies have been conducted to understand the performance of RAC containing coarse recycled concrete aggregates This paper presents an experimental study conducted to address the research gaps outlined above by investigating the variation of physical, mechanical, and time-dependent properties of normal- and high-strength RACs with the parent concrete strength of coarse recycled aggregates. The paper initially provides a summary of the experimental program, including material properties, specimen properties, and testing procedures, which is followed by the results of the experimental program. A detailed discussion together with microstructural analysis of different mixes using scanning electron micrographs (SEM) and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) at 28 days curing is subsequently presented to explain the mechanisms behind the test results. The natural aggregates (crushed basalt) were sourced from McLaren Vale Quarry in Fleurieu Peninsula in South Australia. The natural sand having a 2-mm maximum nominal size was obtained from Price Pit in Yorke Peninsula and used as the fine aggregate in all concrete mixes. Three different recycled concrete aggregates with parent concrete strength of 20, 40, and 110 MPa were used to study the influence of lower and higher parent concrete strength recycled aggregates on the properties of RACs. In the production of the recycled aggregates, three different concrete mixes with three target 28-day strengths of 20, 40, and 110 MPa were prepared in the Concrete Materials Laboratory of the University of Adelaide using the same crushed basalt as the coarse aggregate. Once the parent concretes attained their 28-day strengths, they were crushed using a jaw crusher, such that the particle size distribution of the resulting aggregates would be similar to that of the natural coarse aggregates (refer to The physical properties of natural and recycled aggregates are shown in The chemical composition of the ordinary Portland cement and silica fume used in this study are shown in Six unique batches of concrete were prepared, which included: two control batches of natural aggregate concrete and four batches of RAC. The control mixes were designed as normal- and high-strength concrete (NSC and HSC) mixes with a 28-day compressive strength of 40 and 80 MPa, respectively. A series of tests including: the workability, compressive strength, modulus of elasticity, splitting tensile strength, drying shrinkage, and creep were undertaken on each batch to evaluate the properties of fresh and hardened concrete. Two types of specimens were manufactured for testing, including: prisms and cylinders. The compressive strength and modulus of elasticity of the concretes were established by the compression tests using cylinder specimens with a 100 mm diameter and 200 mm height. The splitting tensile strength tests were conducted on the same size cylinder specimens. 75 × 75 × 285 mm prism specimens were used to monitor the drying shrinkages of the concrete. The creep tests were performed on 100 × 200 mm cylinders. The test parameters included: replacement ratio of natural aggregates with recycled coarse aggregate (  RAC mixes were prepared by two stage mixing approach (TSMA) The concrete series in The mechanical properties were measured up to 180 days of curing age to study the long-term behavior of RAC mixes. The shrinkage and creep strains were measured up to 450 days of curing age to study the time-dependent properties of the mixes. The experimental methods used in determining these properties are summarized in The crack formations and interfacial transition zones (ITZs) in the mixes were evaluated by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis, which was conducted by High Resolution Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FEI Quanta 450) on the polished fresh cut surface of the specimens. For composition analysis of the mixes, energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy was conducted using TEAM EDS with SDD Detector to determine the constituent elements of the concrete mixes. As can be seen from the results of the slump test shown in The results in  As can be seen in      It is evident from   The lower creep deformation of mixes containing higher strength recycled aggregates can be attributed to the higher stiffness of the higher strength recycled aggregates compared to that of lower strength recycled aggregates   High amount of silicon and aluminum in the old cement paste of higher strength recycled concrete aggregates (as shown in Section   The first experimental study on the time-dependent and long-term mechanical properties of high-strength RACs manufactured with coarse recycled aggregates of different parent concrete strength has been presented. On the basis of the experimental results and discussions the following conclusions can be drawn: The compressive strength of high-strength RACs containing high-strength recycled concrete aggregates of 110-MPa strength is slightly higher than that of the high-strength conventional concrete that is prepared with the same effective The elastic modulus of normal-strength RACs containing high-strength (i.e. 110 MPa) recycled concrete aggregates is similar to that of the normal-strength natural aggregate concrete that is prepared with the same effective RACs containing low-strength (i.e. 40 MPa) recycled concrete aggregates develop significantly higher shrinkage strain than the conventional concrete at all curing ages, whereas RACs containing high-strength (i.e. 110 MPa) recycled concrete aggregates exhibit only slightly higher shrinkage strain than the conventional concrete. RACs containing high-strength recycled concrete aggregates exhibit similar creep deformations, as defined by creep coefficient and specific creep, to those of the conventional concrete. On the other hand, RACs containing low-strength recycled concrete aggregates develop significantly higher creep deformations (∼60%) than RACs containing high-strength recycled concrete aggregates. The SEM analysis of RACs showed that, unlike in normal-strength RACs where the failure initiates in the new ITZ, in high-strength RACs the cracks initiate in the old ITZ between the old paste and aggregate. For this reason properties of high-strength RACs are highly sensitive to the quality of recycled concrete aggregates. The EDX analysis of RACs indicated that, unlike in normal-strength RACs that contain a higher amount of C The experimental results of this study indicate that properly designed mixes with high-quality recycled concrete aggregates can develop time-dependent and long-term mechanical properties similar to or better than those of natural aggregate concretes. These findings, especially those on the creep behavior, are very promising as they indicate that structural members prepared by such high-quality recycled concrete aggregates can be designed to exhibit similar long-term deflection/shortening behavior under sustained loading to conventional concrete members. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the