Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron (nZVI) represents a promising material for subsurface water remediation technology. However, dry, bare nZVI particles are highly reactive, being pyrophoric when they are in contact with air. The current trends of nZVI manufacturing lead to the surface passivation of dry nZVI particles with a thin oxide layer, which entails a decrease in their reactivity. In this work an activation procedure to recover the reactivity of air-stable nZVI particles is presented. The method consists of exposing nZVI to water for 36h just before the reaction with the pollutants. To assess the increase in nZVI reactivity based on the activation procedure, three types of nZVI particles with different oxide shell thicknesses have been tested for Cr(VI) removal. The two types of air-stable nZVI particles with an oxide shell thickness of around 3.4 and 6.5nm increased their reactivity by a factor of 4.7 and 3.4 after activation, respectively. However, the pyrophoric nZVI particles displayed no significant improvement in reactivity. The improvement in reactivity is related mainly to the degradation of the oxide shell, which enhances electron transfer and leads secondarily to an increase in the specific surface area of the nZVI after the activation process. In order to validate the activation process, additional tests with selected chlorinated compounds demonstrated an increase in the degradation rate by activated nZVI particles.Nanoscale Zero Valent Iron (nZVI) particles have been extensively studied and used to degrade a wide range of contaminants, such as: chlorinated organic and nitroaromatic compounds One of the most important features of nZVI is its high specific surface area, boosting its reactivity by several orders of magnitude compared to micrometric ZVI, which results in faster degradation rates of pollutants Surface passivation is typically performed by leaving the free atmosphere become slowly and progressively in contact with pristine particles. As a result of this process, a superficial and compact oxide layer is generated giving long-term air stability of nZVI Up to now, the majority of activation processes of nZVI particles described in literature are more focused on prevention of particle agglomeration or increase in their mobility than on removal of the oxide shell. The use of surfactants or polyelectrolyte polymers to promote colloidal stability is related to the first point Alternatively, the known reactivity of iron with water could be used as an activation process. On the one hand it has been clearly demonstrated that long-term water exposure decreases the reactivity of nZVI against a wide range of pollutants due to the growing of the oxide/hydroxide shell Because of this lack of definition, the aim of this work is to introduce an activation process to recover the reactivity of air stable nZVI and to describe the main mechanisms of this activation. Three types of nZVI particles, differing in the oxide shell thickness, were selected and subjected to an activation process based on their aging in water in the form of a dense nZVI slurry over a short period of time. The particles were characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and X-ray diffraction (XRD) before and after the activation process. In addition, the specific surface area (SSA), the particle size distribution and the Fe(0) content were determined. The reduction of hexavalent chromium has been chosen as a simple method of evaluating changes in nZVI reactivity after the activation process since the reduction of Cr(VI) to trivalent chromium is a common mitigation approach in contaminated waters where nZVI is widely studied as a remedial method in this case. Additional tests for degradation of chlorinated compounds have been included to demonstrate the ability of the nZVI activation process to be applicable also for efficient removal of organic pollutants. Iron nanoparticles with a different thickness of shielding oxide layer and Fe(0) to Fe-oxide ratio (labelled here as 25P, STAR 197 and STAR 400) were prepared according to a previously published procedure To prepare the nZVI slurries, 20 To enhance the reactivity of surface-passivated nZVI particles prior to their application, a simple activation procedure was investigated. Initially, the evaluation of the time required for a successful activation was carried out. For this purpose, slurries of STAR 197 and STAR 400 nanoparticles were aged for periods of 12, 24, 36, 48 and 72 During the course of the activation process, pH and oxidation redox potential (ORP) data were logged every 2 Batch experiments with two types of model contaminants, Cr(VI) and chlorinated aliphatic hydrocarbons (CAHs), were designed to determine the reactivity of the selected nZVI samples in the un-activated and the activated states. In the case of Cr(VI) removal, the experiments were conducted in the same conditions described in Section Additional tests with chlorinated hydrocarbons (CAH) were carried out to verify the recovery of reactivity after activation process also with these pollutants. In this case, the experiments were performed only with STAR 197 particles in both the un-activated and activated state. This was because A STAR 197 showed a clearly better Cr(VI) removal capacity than A STAR 400 and therefore A STAR 197 seems a more promising material for water remediation processes. In these tests, the batch reactors contained real polluted water from an industrial site to imitate real conditions. The physicochemical characterization of this water revealed a pH of 8.4, an ORP of +30 mv and an electrical conductivity of 518 The BET specific surface area (SSA) was determined from N For electron microscopy characterization, samples were prepared in a glove box under a nitrogen atmosphere with air locks (Jacomex 2P), keeping the oxygen concentration below 5 X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was performed on a q/q Bragg-Brentano powder diffractometer (X’Pert PRO MPD, PANalytical) using Cu-Kα radiation. Continuous scans from 12 to 120° 2θ were collected with a step size of 0.017° and a scan speed of 3.4·10 The as-prepared particles were initially characterized prior to the activation process. The morphology and particle size obtained by FE-SEM for the three types of un-activated nanoparticles are shown in The   The activated A 25P nanoparticles displayed only slight changes compared to their un-activated counterparts ( The changes in the Fe(0) content during the activation process are summarized in Another important aspect is the change in specific surface area (SSA) during the activation process. The results of BET measurements for the three types of nanoparticles in both states (A, UA) are presented in The XRD patterns measured on the nanoparticles in the un-activated and activated state are shown in Finally, the XPS spectra of the surface of activated and un-activated STAR 197 are exposed in The concentration trends of Cr(VI) as a function of the nZVI concentration and the calculated Cr(VI) removal capacities as mg of Cr(VI) removed by g of Fe(0) for the studied nanoparticles are shown in In full accordance with the activation process described in Section In this process, the transfer of electrons from Fe(0) (i.e., from the core of nZVI) to the outer surface is a crucial point and it can be produced basically through defects in the oxide layer or via the oxide conduction band At this point it is also important to note that although the batches were allowed to react for 24 Considering the above arguments, we will now discuss the reactivity of nZVI with various extents of surface passivation. In the case of the UA 25P nanoparticles with a very thin non-uniform oxide layer ( The increase in nZVI reactivity against some pollutants after aging in water for 1–2 A completely different development has been observed for the A STAR 197 and A STAR 400 nanoparticles, where a significant improvement in the removal of Cr(VI) occurred. In the case of A STAR 197, this increase can be related to the partial removal of the compact shell ( Finally, the role of the SSA in the enhanced reactivity of A STAR 197 and A STAR 400 should be taken into account. In the work of Sarathy et al. The results of the reactivity tests of UA STAR 197 and A STAR 197 with different types of chlorinated compounds are shown in The thick and compact oxide shield of surface-passivated nZVI particles significantly decreases their performance in the reduction of Cr(VI) compared to non-stabilized nZVI particles. The introduction of a simple activation process consisting of an aging of dense nZVI slurry in water for less than 48 At the same time, the activation process does not decrease Fe(0) content. The clear improvement in the degradation of chlorinated organic compounds after the activation process confirms that the proposed procedure is suitable for nZVI-based treatment of a wide range of contaminants. Therefore, the described activation process is an important new procedure, which can be applied before the injection of nZVI into the treated subsurface area and could represent an easy way of increasing the effectiveness of the remediation and simplifying the overall handling of nZVI. The present research work was funded by the EU-project NANOREM (Taking Nanotechnological Remediation Processes from Lab Scale to End User Applications for the Restoration of a Clean Environment, NMP.2012.1.2-1 FP7 – Grant Agreement Nr. 309517) and by the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic (projects LO1305 and CZ.1.05/2.1.00/01.0005). D. Ribas is supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competitividad, in the framework of the project (Ref. CGL2011-29975-C04-03) and FPI grant (ref. BES-2012-052327). The authors also acknowledge the assistance provided by the research infrastructure NanoEnviCz, supported by the ministry of education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic under project No. LM2015073. We would also like to thank Petr Slovak for performing the supporting laboratory experiments and Martin Petr for XPS measurement. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 