Cyanide is widely used in the mining industry to extract gold from ores. Some of the minerals processed for precious metals extraction contain copper species which may react with cyanide to form cuprocyanide complexes. The presence of these copper species affects adversely the process and causes high cyanide consumption. In order to overcome these limitations this laboratory work explores the feasibility of removing the copper–cyanide complexes by precipitation with quaternary ammonium salts, allowing the remaining solution, free of copper and containing free cyanide, to be recycled to the cyanidation process. The first part of the experimental work was performed with synthetic copper–cyanide solution simulating a high copper–cyanide solution (2700mg/L cyanide, 730mg/L copper and pH adjusted to 12 with CaO) and three quaternary ammonium salts: hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (HTA), octadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (OTA) and dioctadecyl dimethyl ammonium chloride (DDA). The results showed that it is possible to remove up to 90% of the copper in the precipitate when adding 12.32g OTA/g copper at pH 12. The free cyanide remains unreacted in the solution and could be recycled to the process. Results of tests performed at different pH values suggest that regardless the initial species distribution in the solution, the solid formed will contain mainly copper tricyanide and some of copper tetracyanide. The molar ratio CN/Cu in the solid is around 3 while the molar ratio OTA/Cu is around 2. This implies that some amount of copper tetracyanide is transformed into copper tricyanide while reacting with the amine and forming the precipitate. When zinc is also present in the cyanide solution, the ammonium salt will react first with the zinc–cyanide complexes before precipitating the copper cyanides. Tests performed with an industrial solution corroborated the results obtained with synthetic solutions: quaternary ammonium salts (e.g. OTA) react with copper and zinc cyanides (but not with free cyanide) to form a precipitated that can be separated from the solution by filtration. An analytic technique for measuring quaternary ammonium salts HTA and OTA in solution was developed.The recovery of precious metals from ores containing copper has been traditionally difficult in the conventional cyanidation process for precious metals extraction ( Several techniques have been studied attempting to overcome the negative consequences of the presence of copper in the cyanidation solution; these techniques can be categorized as: Selective leaching of copper prior to gold and silver cyanide leaching. Acid leaching of copper ( Sceresini process ( Selective leaching for gold in gold copper ores. Thiosulphate leaching ( Thiourea leaching ( Dissolved copper elimination. Natural degradation ( Biodegradation ( Alkaline chlorination ( Degussa hydrogen peroxide oxidation ( Inco SO Copper and cyanide recovery. AVR acidification–volatilization–regeneration process ( SART sulfidization–acidification-recycle-thickening process ( Solvent extraction ( Ion exchange resins ( As copper–cyanide complexes are charged negatively, a positive anion of high molecular weight can eliminate it from solution by direct precipitation. Quaternary ammonium salts are compounds that dissociate in aqueous solution generating relatively large cations. They are used as emulsifies, frothers and detergents, and in the mineral processing industry they are employed as collectors for nonmetallic minerals in flotation and as extractants in solvent extraction techniques for metals recovery. The use of quaternary ammonium salts is attractive for some specific applications of solvent extraction due to the excellent selectivity and very high loading capacity ( This work explores the feasibility of employing the same quaternary ammonium salts used in solvent extraction but in this case added directly to the copper cyanide solution. It is expected that the ammonium salt will form a precipitate with the copper–cyanide complexes, which could be separated from the solution, thus allowing the recycling of the copper free solution back to the cyanidation process. There are several forms of cyanide potentially present in solutions from the cyanidation process for precious metal extraction. The most used classification includes free, weak acid dissociable (WAD) and total cyanide. Free cyanide is the sum of cyanide ion (CN When copper is present in a cyanide (reducing) solution, the copper–cyanide complexes From this thermodynamic analysis it is possible to know the concentration of each copper–cyanide species for any pH value for this or any other copper cyanide solution of interest. These data will help in the understanding of the results obtained. The synthetic solution used in most of the work performed reproduces the composition of a cyanidation solution of relatively high copper concentration. The solution was prepared with sodium cyanide (NaCN, Fermont), copper sulfate pentahydrate (CuSO  The tests for removal copper–cyanide complexes were carried out in a 300 Copper in solution was analyzed by atomic absorption spectrometry (Perkin Elmer 2380). All the standards for atomic absorption analysis were prepared with a matrix similar to that of the samples (alkaline pH and containing cyanide). Total cyanide was analyzed by distillation as reported in Standard Methods for the Examinations of Water and Wastewater ( For the analysis of the quaternary ammonium salts in solution the method proposed by The effect of the following variables on the copper elimination were explored:      The feasibility of removing the copper present in a cyanide–copper solution by direct precipitation with quaternary ammonium salts at alkaline pH was evaluated in a synthetic solution similar to those of cyanidation plants with high copper concentration: 2700 From these results is observed that copper can be removed from the solution by precipitation with the quaternary ammonium salts. For the three ammonium compounds studied, the copper removal increases as the reagent addition increases. The best copper eliminations were obtained for the HTA and OTA. When adding 10.27 The results with HTA and OTA were more interesting than those obtained with DDA. Due to the similarity in molecular structure of HTA and OTA, similar behavior in their reaction with copper cyanides is expected. The apparent best behavior of ammonium compound HTA compared with OTA is due to the different molecular weights; since the same weight of each ammonium compound is added to the solution, the molar amount of OTA added (molecular weight In order to evaluate the effect of the pH solution on the copper removal, the quaternary ammonium salt OTA was added to the synthetic solution 2700 It is proposed in this work that the copper cyanide species react with the quaternary ammonium compounds following the next reactions: After precipitation, the total cyanide (distillation method) was analyzed and is reported in Estimations of the amount of tricyanide ( Regarding the quaternary ammonium consumption, from the data of The effect of temperature on copper elimination was evaluated for three temperatures (10, 20 and 30 Besides copper, zinc and iron are frequently present in cyanidation solutions and may also react with the quaternary ammonium salts. To evaluate the contribution of these possible reactions, different amounts of OTA were added to a synthetic solution containing 450 The results showed that the zinc cyanide complexes are also removed from the solution with the quaternary ammonium salts, apparently more efficiently than the copper cyanide complexes. These results suggest that in solutions where the zinc concentration is high the reagent consumption would increase, thus being more interesting the use of the quaternary ammonium salts in processes where the precious metals are recovered by adsorption onto activated carbon instead of zinc cementation. It is important to point out that the total amount of copper removed is larger than the amount of zinc removed (e.g. moles removed), as it can be seen in In order to evaluate the effect of the remaining ammonium salt in the cyanide leaching, two preliminary leaching tests were performed. Metallic silver was placed in two glass reactors (4 An additional test was performed to evaluate if the presence of thiocyanate ion (SCN A further test was performed in order to explore the possible redissolution of the quaternary ammonium salt OTA precipitated with the copper cyanide species. For this test, 10 The bibliographic references concerning ammonium compounds suggest that they could be separated and concentrated for further use by loading the ammonium compound onto ether (organic phase) after the dissolution of the solid with any acid solution. After the separation of the two liquid phases the copper species will remain in the aqueous phase and the quaternary ammonium compound, contained in the organic phase, could be striped into diluted hydrochloric acid solution as the chloride salt initially used, and could be reused in the precipitation process ( In order to validate the results obtained in the tests with synthetic solutions, some tests were performed with an industrial cyanidation solution from a Mexican operation. The main components of the solution were: 360 Different amounts of OTA were added to the solution at pH 11 (its natural pH), and copper and zinc where analyzed after filtration. Results are shown in In cyanidation solutions with high copper concentration it is possible to use quaternary ammonium salts (e.g., Hexadecyl trimethyl ammonium chloride, HTA; Triocthyl methyl ammonium chloride, OTA; and dioctadecyl dimethyl ammonium chloride, DDA) to remove the copper–cyanide complexes by precipitation and filtration at alkaline pH. The efficiency of this process depends on both the pH of the solution and the amount of salt added. When OTA (12.32 For the quaternary ammonium salt OTA a decrease in pH, and an increase on the amount of ammonium compound added, increase the copper removal. Results of tests performed at different pH values suggest that regardless of the initial species distribution in the solution, the solid formed will contain mainly copper tricyanide and some of copper tetracyanide. The molar CN/Cu in the solid is around 3, and the molar OTA/Cu ratio in the solid is around 2. This implies that some amount of copper tetracyanide is transformed into copper tricyanide while de solid is being formed. A change in temperature between 10 and 30 The quaternary ammonium salts used in this work do not react with free cyanide. After copper removal, the solution may be recycled to the cyanidation process without losses of free cyanide. If the solution contains zinc besides copper, the ammonium compound will first react with zinc–cyanide complexes, subsequently removing the copper complexes. Tests with industrial solution corroborated the results obtained with synthetic solutions: it is possible to remove the copper from a cyanidation solution by precipitation with a quaternary ammonium salt at alkaline pH and room temperature. The authors thank CONACYT for the financial support received through the scholarship of O. Alonso-González and C. Jiménez-Velasco, and through the project CB2005/48826. The collaboration of Ing. Margarito Zertuche-Salas and the reagents provided for Kao Chemicals are also thanked.