The precipitation is a process involving complicated crystallization and mass transfer. As a key step in the Bayer process in alumina production, it has great influences on both outputs and quality of alumina products. Thus laboratory experiments, industrial tests and numerical simulations have been carried out to study the precipitation. Based on the dynamics law and particle population balance, a combined model is developed with MATLAB/Simulink to study the process of crystal nucleation, growth and agglomeration, the model also take the variation characteristics of the particle size of the MSMPR (mixed-suspension, mixed product removal) gibbsite precipitation process into account. The particle size distribution is predicted through the method of moments at different conditions. The deviation between the model prediction and the test data is less than 9%, which is within the acceptable accuracy range for the process control.Along with the emergence of dry hydrogen peroxide purification technology as well as the exploitation and application of the large pre-baking anode reduction cell with point feeding in the 1970s, new requirements about the quality index of alumina were proposed, especially the physical properties. The production of large particle size and high strength sand alumina becomes the new trend The problem is that the boundary and initial conditions in the population balance formula change along with the crystal system, the operation methods and the process conditions, and the influencing factors are so complex that it is very difficult to solve the model directly. The taxonomy was then widely applied in the population balance model because of its simplicity, fast arithmetic speed and high precision, which also satisfy well with the requirements of engineering design For a particle group with volume At the time of    In regard to the MSMPR gibbsite, because the crystals have few chances to be broken into fragments in the crystallization process Thus the equations of population balance are as follows, which includes the processes of nucleation, growth and agglomeration: The model introduced above shows that the particle distribution may vary with time, the volume of serosity, and processes of nucleation, growth and agglomeration. Meanwhile, particles may react with each other in each section. The agglomeration has great influences on particle distribution; it also can reduce the particle numbers and growth of small particle directly. Hounslow Agglomeration of particles in ( Agglomeration of particles in ( Collision of particles in Collision of particles in The growth rate model must satisfy the following conditions The decomposer is the MSMPR gibbsite, the volume flow rates at inlet and outlet are the same, that is The agglomeration of particles is irrelevant to particle size. The agglomeration nucleuses are the same for all particle size ranges. The growth of crystals satisfies the Δ In different temperature ranges, Ref. Misra and Soi From the population balance equation we can know that in the Simulink model, there are agglomeration nucleus ( The The experiments were carried out on a lab-scale apparatus. The schematic diagram of experimental system is shown in A certain amount of sodium hydroxide and industrial aluminum hydroxide were mixed with water and heated until they were dissolved completely. The mixture was then filtrated, and the clean concentrated sodium aluminate solution was mixed with deionized water and sodium hydroxide to obtain a sodium aluminate solution with desired compositions. In the experiment, aluminum hydroxide was added as seeds into a reactor of 2.5 The gibbsite precipitation process parameters, as shown in As given in A Simulink model is then needed to solve the distribution of the decomposer's particle size. By dividing the particle size of crystals into 20 discrete intervals with taxonomy (that is The actual precipitation processes include a series of MSMPR reactors, the diagram of the Simulink model of the process is shown in The parameters of the temperature, the material flux flow at the inlet and outlet, the caustic concentration of solid content and serous are stable. The temperature is measured by thermocouples. The solid content concentration is measured after separating the solids from the liquid. The caustic concentration and caustic ratio are measured by titration. The particle sizes of the solid samples are measured by the Laser Particle Size Analyzer. Then the particle size distribution in different technical conditions in the decomposer can be obtained through running the particle size distribution model. A comparison is made between the model and the experiment (as shown in  In In order to make the prediction of the model more precise, an average particle size is used as the evaluation criteria to assess prediction of the model, which is defined as follows: A combined decomposer particle size model of crystal nucleation, growth and agglomeration was developed in this paper, the parameters in process of seeded precipitation were solved through the Method of Moments. The particle size distribution was predicted with this model. The relative error between the model prediction and the measured values is within 9%, which satisfies the production requirement. Thus the model can be used to predict the particle size distribution of aluminum hydroxide under practical conditions; it also can provide a judgment whether a desired particle size distribution of sand alumina production can be achieved at certain technical conditions. The authors are grateful for the financial support from the  concentration of alumina (g/l) balance concentration of alumina (g/l) caustic concentration (g/l) activation energy of crystal growth (J/mol) density of particle group in one volume rate of particle growth a constant ( number of crystals per unit volume of inlet flow particle length (μm) length of particle section (μm) density of particle group rate of volume flow (m nucleation speed universal gas constant ( rate of particle's production rate of particle's breakage reaction temperature (°C) residence time (s) volume of serosity (m volume of crystal particle (m generated mass of Al(OH) molecular ratio agglomeration nucleus the density of particle group agglomeration breakage crystal growth nucleation inlet (flow) particle node number residence outlet