Distal humerus fractures are uncommon injuries requiring specific clinical and radiographic analysis in order to plan the optimal therapeutic strategy. In particular, bicolumnar distal humerus fractures (Type A2, A3 and C) are complex fractures. In the last years, double plating fixation became the standard treatment: this procedure helped surgeons to obtain a stable and anatomical fixation and an early mobilization, which is the main outcome for obtaining valuable functional results. In this retrospective study, we evaluated the use of open bicolumnar 90–90 plating for fixation of acute fragility fractures of the distal humerus in elderly patients, using the olecranon osteotomy as surgical approach.Bicolumnar distal humerus fractures need a complex and accurate management. They represent approximately 2–6% of all the fractures and 30% of the fractures of the elbow The aim of this study therefore was to evaluate in elderly patients the clinical results of distal humeral fractures managed with double plating. Between 2010 and 2014,15 consecutive patients aged >60 years (no formal bone density measurement was required) requiring open reduction internal fixation (ORIF, double plating 90–90) for fractures of the distal humerus caused by low-energy trauma, were reviewed. A clinical and radiographic follow-up was performed at months 1, 3, 6, 9, 12. Only complete clinical data and radiographs were accepted for this retrospective study. The mechanism of the fractures, the site and the characteristics of the fractures were carefully analyzed. We used the Comprehensive AO Classification Many classifications have been proposed for this bone segment, such as Mehne-Mehta and Riseborough-Radin classifications for intercondylar humerus fracture. The correct classification has an impact on the timing of surgery and allows the best choice of the surgical approach and the specific instrumentation. However, AO/Muller classification is the best and the most commonly used one. According to this classification, bicolumnar distal humerus (1.3) fractures include A2, A3 and C pattern: extra-articular fracture, metaphyseal simple; extra-articular fracture, metaphyseal multifragmentary; complete articular fracture, articular simple, metaphyseal simple; complete articular fracture, articular simple, metaphyseal multifragmentary; complete articular fracture, articular multifragmentary. The pre-operative planning is based on both physical examination and a careful study of the radiographic (AP, LL and oblique) and Computed Tomography (CT) images (sagittal, frontal and 3D reconstruction, if possible). The patient is placed in prone or lateral decubitus position. The most widely used surgical approach is the osteotomy according to Chevron Fifteen patients (11 females, 4 males, mean age 74 years) were enrolled in the study. The fractures were AO-type A2 ( The correct use of the plates, in terms of placement, size and number of screws, can obtain a stable and painless elbow and prevent complications such as stiffness or nonunion. The distal humerus can be represented as a triangular structure, consisting of three columns The treatment of bicolumnar distal humerus fractures represents a threat, especially in the presence of extensive articular comminution. There is no an agreement on the most correct way to use the plates. In fact, the discussion is very lively regarding to traditional 90–90 or parallel plating techniques in the ORIF of these fragility fractures The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article. No financial support has been received by the authors for the preparation of this manuscript.