Microwave (MW) irradiation is one of the new and possible methods used for pretreating the sludge. Following its use in different fields, this MW irradiation method has proved to be more appropriate in the field of environmental research. In this paper, we focused on the effects of MW irradiation at different intensities on solubilization, biodegradation and anaerobic digestion of sludge from the dairy sludge. The changes in the soluble fractions of the organic matter, the biogas yield, the methane content in the biogas were used as control parameters for evaluating the efficiency of the MW pretreatment. Additionally, the energetic efficiency was also examined. In terms of an energetic aspect, the most economical pretreatment of sludge was at 70% intensity for 12min irradiation time. At this, COD solubilization, SS reduction and biogas production were found to be 18.6%, 14% and 35% higher than the control, respectively. Not only the increase in biogas production was investigated, excluding protein and carbohydrate hydrolysis was also performed successfully by this microwave pretreatment even at low irradiation energy input. Also, experiments were carried out in semi continuous anaerobic digesters, with 3.5L working volume. Combining microwave pretreatment with anaerobic digestion led to 67%, 64% and 57% of SS reduction, VS reduction and biogas production higher than the control, respectively.Dairy industry is one of the prime industrial sectors in India. Studies suggest that Indian dairy industries have a growth of more than 15% and are estimated to have crossed 150 million tons per annum. Water management in the dairy industry is well documented, but effluent production and disposal remains a problematic issue for the dairy industry. Management of excess sludge is a big challenge to wastewater treatment operators because sludge handling and disposal accounts for up to 60% of total treatment plant operating costs ( The waste activated sludge was obtained from an Aavin dairy effluent treatment plant at Tirunelveli in Tamil Nadu (India). Samples were collected and stored at 4 A commercial domestic microwave oven (2450 In order to see the effect of microwave pretreatment on anaerobic biodegradability, a BMP assay was performed. The BMP assay can be used as an index of the anaerobic biodegradation potential, and thus, relative residence times required for complete digestion ( The anaerobic biodegradability tests performance was evaluated by fitting the cumulative biogas production data to the modified Gompertz equation. The Gompertz equation describes cumulative biogas production assuming that, biogas production is a function of bacterial growth ( where Two identical laboratory scale semi continuous reactors with a working volume of 3.5 The aim of our work was to examine the biodegradability of sludge at different microwave power levels. Total Solids (TSs), Suspended Solids (SSs), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), and pH were determined before and after digestion according to standard methods ∗∗∗∗( Protein concentration was determined on total sludge and on the supernatant using the Lowry method ( In this study, microwave pretreatment of waste activated sludge was performed to improve the treatment efficiency. Since it is a high energy process, the operating parameters need to be optimized in order to get cost-efficient results. The control was performed using non-pretreated WAS. The treatment was performed for different microwave intensities and irradiation time. The expected effect of this microwave treatment of sludge was an increase in soluble materials, with interest focused on COD solubilization, suspended solids reduction and biogas production, consequently enhancing hydrolysis. Microwave pretreatment was done to improve the bioavailability of sludge particulate material. SCOD calculations were considered the main parameter for evaluation of sludge particulate material, and it enables an evaluation of the maximum level of sludge solubilization. Increased SCOD is determined as the substance that can be readily used to produce methane during anaerobic digestion ( SS reduction is an indication of sludge stability and it is used for assessing the effectiveness of a process in stabilizing sludge and reduction ( Increasing the degree of sludge stabilization using a disintegration process provides less sludge production, more stable sludge, and more biogas production compared with classical anaerobic digestion. BMP assay was carried out to assess the feasibility of using microwave pretreatment to improve the anaerobic degradation of dairy sludge. BMP assays, in which cumulative biogas production was monitored, were assessed for both raw and pretreated substrates under mesophilic conditions. The microwave intensities, which resulted in better COD solubilization and SS reduction, were selected as optimized parameters. Cumulative biogas production in serum bottles was maintained for 30  In the present study, the irradiated microwave energy was estimated by using Eq. Consequently from the figure it could be noted that, COD solubilization was found to be stabilized at 70% intensity for 12  It is possible that an increase in the COD solubilization that results from the pretreatments might originate from the disruption of microbial cells, causing the release of various organic compounds (e.g., carbohydrates, proteins, lipds and volatile fatty acids). Proteins are the principal constituents of organisms, and they contain carbon, which is a common organic substance as well as hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen. For this reason it was considered that as the level of soluble protein increased, the efficiency of anaerobic digestion would be improved. Due to this pretreatment, solids were solubilized, especially organic solids. During this part of the study, the dairy sludge pretreated at 70% intensity for 12 During the total period of 150 The digester performance was influenced by pH. The value and stability of the pH in an anaerobic reactor is extremely important because methanogenesis proceeds at a high rate, when the pH is maintained in the neutral range. The pH values in these experiments remained in the range of 7.3–7.1 during anaerobic digestion. It was observed that during every shift in organic loading, the pH dropped rapidly. The dropping down of pH is due to the high organic loading rate, which results in high VFA concentration during the acidogenesis phase. The results reveal that, digester could maintain their pH themselves though higher organic loading was supplied. A pH cannot be an effective measure of the stability of an anaerobic process when there is a high buffering capacity ( The SS and VS reductions can be regarded as the reductions that are expected to be achieved in total mass of sludge. The variation of SS and VS removal is graphically presented in   Microwave irradiation decreased the initial lag phase of anaerobic digestion. Inspite of the highest biogas production at 90% intensity, the best microwave pretreatment was recorded at 70% intensity for 12 Our experimental results verified that microwave pretreatment increased the COD solubilization, SS reduction and biogas production of dairy sludge and at optimized condition it was found to be 18.6%, 14% and 35% higher than the control, respectively. Among the three loadings, working at SRT of 15 The Authors are thankful to Department of Science and Technology, India for the partial financial assistant to this Project (SR/WOS-A/ET-34/2011) under their Women Scientist Scheme (WOS-A).