The kinetics of reductive leaching of manganese from a low grade manganese ore in dilute nitric acid in the presence of molasses is examined. The rate is controlled by diffusion through the “product” layer composed of the associated minerals. The leaching process follows the kinetic model 1−2/3X
                     −(1−
                     X)2/3
                     =kt with an apparent activation energy of 25.7 kJ/mole. It is concluded that the concentration of HNO3 and molasses as well as temperature are the main factors influencing the leaching rate. The results indicate a reaction order of 1.2 for HNO3 concentration and 1.9 for molasses concentration.Steelmaking accounts for most of the world's manganese consumption and there is a growing need to process low-grade manganese ores such as the Um Bogma deposit located in south west Sinai, Egypt. Many processes have been investigated for manganese ores including reduction roasting followed by acid leaching ( More recently, it has been demonstrated that carbohydrates from agriculture wastes are low-cost, renewable and non-hazardous reducing agents that can be used for manganese leaching under mildly acidic conditions ( Likewise, This paper considers the kinetic aspects of leaching manganese from the same Um Bogma low-grade ore with nitric acid using molasses as reductant. The effects of the main system variables on the leaching rate are examined and the kinetic model and the apparent activation energy are determined. Several reports have also appeared on the kinetic aspects of leaching pyrolusite or MnO The manganese ore sample was collected from the Um Bogma area located in west central Sinai, Egypt. The ore sample was first crushed to + The leaching tests were carried out with varying amounts of molasses were added using 10 g sample portions of ore and 120 ml of dilute HNO The effect of temperature on reaction rate was examined in the range of 298–368°K under the conditions of − In order to obtain the kinetic equation and apparent activation energy, the experimental data were correlated to various kinetic models for solid–liquid reactions (F. However, the following diffusion-controlled kinetic equation was found to fit the data best with a correlation coefficient > This suggests that the leaching rate of manganese oxides in presence of molasses from the ore is controlled by diffusion through the “product” layer. Since no insoluble manganese product forms, it is inferred that the insoluble oxide minerals (goethite, hematite, quartz, etc.) are intimately associated with manganese oxides and play the role of the “product” layer. The apparent activation energy was determined based on the Arrhenius equation A plot of ln The effect of HNO In order to obtain the reaction order of HNO The effect of molasses addition on the leaching rate was studied by varying the initial concentration of molasses from 10 to 25% input sample weight under the same leaching conditions. The kinetic results are plotted in The leaching kinetics of the Um Bogma manganese ore show that the rate of manganese(IV) oxide leaching using dilute HNO