Background
                  Recognition of patterns of traumatic elbow instability helps anticipate specific fracture characteristics and associated injuries. The objective of this study was to assess the association of fracture line distribution and location of displaced partial articular radial head fractures with specific patterns of traumatic elbow instability using fracture mapping techniques.
               
                  Methods
                  Fracture line distribution and location of 66 acute displaced partial articular radial head fractures were identified using quantitative 3-dimensional computed tomography reconstructions that allowed reduction of fracture fragments and a standardized method to divide the radial head into quadrants with forearm in neutral position. Based on qualitative and quantitative assessment of fracture maps, the association between fracture characteristics of displaced partial articular radial head fractures and specific elbow fracture patterns was determined.
               
                  Results
                  In partial articular radial head fractures, the highest fracture line intensity was located in the anterolateral quadrant near the center of the radial head. Fracture location corresponded with fracture line distribution; most fractures involved the anterolateral quadrant (n = 65; 98%), whereas parts of the posteromedial quadrant were involved in a minority of the fractures (n = 10; 15%). The association of fracture line distribution and location with overall fracture patterns of the elbow, as depicted on fracture maps, was not statistically significant.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fracture maps demonstrated no association between fracture line distribution and location of displaced partial articular fractures of the radial head and overall specific patterns of traumatic elbow instability, suggesting a common fracture mechanism that involves the anterolateral part of the radial head in most patients.Fracture mapping, as initially described by Cole et al, Recognition of patterns of traumatic elbow instability helps anticipate specific fracture coronoid and olecranon characteristics (eg, location and articular involvement) and associated injuries. Based on qualitative and quantitative assessment of fracture maps, we tested the null hypothesis that there is no difference in fracture line distribution (ie, fracture line entries and exits) and location of displaced partial articular radial head fractures between specific patterns of traumatic elbow instability (isolated radial head fracture, radial head fracture with posterior dislocation, terrible triad injury, and posterior olecranon fracture-dislocation). At 2 level I trauma centers, the administrative databases were searched using the According to the mapping technique as described by Cole et al The 3D polygon mesh reconstructions were imported in Rhinoceros (McNeel, Seattle, WA, USA) to determine the most prominent point of the center of the radial tuberosity, which was used as reference point. Rhinoceros is application software designed to create, edit, analyze, and translate 3D reconstructions. By making the 3D polygon mesh reconstruction semitransparent, we were able to draw an x, y, and z axis through the volume centroid (ie, geometric center of the 3D polygon mesh reconstruction); the x axis represented the axis of the proximal radius, whereas the y axis represented the width and the z axis represented the height. After the axes were drawn, the 3D reconstruction was turned around its x axis, and the most prominent point of the radial tuberosity, defined as the point of the radial tuberosity with the largest z value (ie, highest point), was determined on the z axis. After the most prominent point was determined, the fracture fragment was reduced ( The most prominent point of the radial tuberosity was then turned 132° clockwise to simulate the forearm in neural position, as described by van Leeuwen et al, The diagnosis of traumatic elbow injuries was based on anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, 2-dimensional (2D) and 3D CT scans, and surgical reports, which were evaluated by 2 authors (J.J.M. and D.R.). Elbow fracture patterns were classified into the categories as summarized by Doornberg et al Patient characteristics were summarized with frequencies and percentages for categorical variables and with means and standard deviations for continuous variables. The χ Most fracture lines entered the posterolateral quadrant and exited the radial head through the anterior quadrants (77% and 98%, respectively). The highest fracture line intensity was located in the anterolateral quadrant near the center of the radial head, indicating that most fracture lines pass through the radial head through the anterolateral quadrant slightly anterolateral to the center of the radial head. Similar patterns of fracture line distribution, as depicted on fracture maps, were found between the patterns of traumatic elbow instability ( Fracture location (ie, anatomic area of articular involvement) corresponded with fracture line distribution; most fractures involved the anterolateral quadrant (98%), whereas parts of the posteromedial quadrant were involved in a minority of the fractures (15%). Overall, the most and least involved parts of the radial head were opposite to each other. A line through these segments would result in 2 approximately symmetrical halves, indicating a symmetrical distribution. The fracture location, depicted on fracture maps, did not differ between the fracture patterns of the elbow ( Radial head fracture characteristics, including the amount of displacement and articular involvement—considered in the context of associated injuries—are used to determine fracture treatment. This study was subject to several limitations that need to be considered in interpreting our findings. First, patients without a complete radiographic assessment were not included. This might have limited the generalizability of the study results, considering that patients with a CT scan are more likely to have radial head fractures with particular associated injuries. Fractures without CT scans might be different from the fractures we studied. Second, our analysis did not account for potential variability in function and anatomy and forearm rotation at the moment of injury, which were standardized for each patient. Therefore, the relative position of the radial tuberosity with respect to the ulna and maximal supination of the selected patients might have been different than assumed on the basis of prior studies. We found that partial articular fractures of the radial head involve the anterolateral part of the radial head in all patterns of injury. This suggests a common mechanism of radial head fractures. Gordon et al Furthermore, we demonstrated that the radial head fracture location did not differ between the fracture patterns of the elbow. In contrast, Capo et al Fracture maps demonstrated no association between fracture line distribution and location of displaced partial articular fractures of the radial head and specific patterns of traumatic elbow instability, suggesting one common fracture mechanism that involves the anterolateral part of the radial head in most patients. In spite of the consistency in all prior studies, surgeons planning operative fixation should be aware that there is large variability in the fracture maps, and CT scans are recommended if further characterization is needed to plan surgery. Future studies evaluating the nature of load transmission through the proximal radius for specific injury patterns or particular anatomic variations, such as size of the radial head and shape, might enhance our understanding of the relationship between fractures of the radial head, anatomic variation, and associated injuries. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.