Beneficiation of zinc from low-grade oxidized zinc ores has become the focus of recent studies. Sulfidation is an important process to recover zinc from oxidized zinc ores in flotation. Although some studies have reported on the sulfidation-flotation of smithsonite, the effect of sulfide ions on sulfide film thickness remains unknown when the oxidized zinc ores start floating and achieve excellent flotation. In this work, the influence of sulfur ions on smithsonite flotation in a dodecylamine system were investigated by micro-flotation experiments, inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES), zeta potential measurements, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS). Micro-flotation experiment results show that smithsonite starts floating after treatment with a low S concentration of 5 × 10−5 mol/L, while excellent flotation was obtained following treatment with a high S concentration of 5 × 10−4 mol/L. Compared to the low S solution, excellent hydrophobicity of smithsonite was obtained owing to the adsorption of more sulfide ions, making the mineral surface potential more negative, and forming a thicker heterogeneous zinc-sulfide film that primary consists of zinc monosulfide and zinc polysulfide. The zinc-sulfide film thickness on the smithsonite surface was approximately 7.79 nm when the smithsonite started floating, while excellent floatation was obtained as the zinc-sulfide film thickness reached about 12.13 nm.Zinc sulfide minerals are the main resources to produce zinc metal. Zinc sulfide minerals are easily separated from gangue using conventional flotation methods. However, the supply of zinc sulfide minerals is being depleted by increasing consumption. Therefore, the beneficiation of zinc from low-grade oxidized zinc ores is an urgent need in order to produce a qualified product, and has become the focus of recent studies [ In general, the natural floatability of oxidized minerals is worse than sulfide minerals. The reason is because the greater solubility of the oxidized minerals than that of the sulfide minerals in solution [ Sulfidation is an important process in the flotation of oxidized minerals. Wu et al. [ Smithsonite (ZnCO Pure smithsonite samples were derived from Yunnan Province in China. The samples were crushed by artificial and dry ground using an agate torsion mortar after handpicking. The different particle size fraction was obtained using standard test sieves. The sieves production with the particle fraction of −74 + 38 μm was used in micro-flotation experiments and sulfur ions adsorption experiments，and the fraction finer than 5 μm was used in zeta potential measurement and XPS analysis. X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of original smithsonite is shown in AR-grade sodium hydroxide (NaOH), sodium sulfide nonahydrate (Na Micro-flotation experiments were conducted using mechanical agitation in a 40 mL flotation cell. Fresh Na The adsorption experiments on sulfur ions were conducted in a 100 mL beaker. The fresh Na The zeta potential of smithsonite was measured in 1 × 10 XPS experiments were accomplished using a PHI 5000 Versa Probe II (PHI5000, ULVAC-PHI, Japan) equipped with an Al target. Smithsonite samples (−5 μm) were treated with Na The properties of sulfide film on the smithsonite surface were analyzed by TOF-SIMS V instrument (ION-TOF, Munster, Germany); The spectrometer was equipped with bismuth and cesium liquid ion source. The bismuth or cesium liquid ion beam moves across the sample surface. The bismuth liquid ion source was used in surface analysis while the cesium liquid ion source was used in depth profiling. The negatively and positively-charged secondary ions were induced and emitted after bombarding the smithsonite surface with bismuth liquid ion beam. The secondary ions were extracted and the ion mass was analyzed using a TOF-SIMS V instrument. Secondary ion species can be identified by the length of flight time. The intensities of prominent secondary ions were normalized to the total ion yield. The surface analysis conditions: Primary ion source: Bi Bulk smithsonite samples were acquired after slicing and polishing by artificial methods. Bulk samples were added to the 100 mL beaker containing the desired concentration of Na   According to the results above, sulfur ion concentration tests were conducted with DDA concentration of 1 × 10 Sulfidation-flotation of smithsonite is a process where sulfur ions in the pulp solution interact with the smithsonite surface using Na Smithsonite is a semi-soluble salt mineral that can produce Zn The reaction product of Zn(OH) Therefore, a large amount of sulfur ions in the aqueous phase transferred onto the smithsonite surface. The effect of sulfur ions on smithsonite was determined by S concentration in the solution. Residual S concentrations in the pulp solution over time are shown in Combined with the results of the flotation experiments, the two special points of Na Smithsonite is a semi-soluble salt mineral of carbonate. The solubility product constant of smithsonite is 1.46 × 10 It can be seen from the reactions above that the smithsonite dissolution process is complex. The distribution diagram of species released by smithsonite is shown in The zeta potential of smithsonite in the absence and presence of sulfur ions is shown in XPS analysis is a technique used to analyze chemical states and element compositions on mineral surfaces. In this study, sulfide species of sulfide film on the smithsonite surface were investigated by XPS after smithsonite samples were treated with Na  C1s, O1s, S2p, and Zn2p XPS spectra of pure smithsonite sulfidized with various Na To obtain further information on the zinc-sulfide film on the smithsonite surface, such as the sulfur ion species and zinc-sulfide film thickness after sulfidation, surface analysis and depth profile analysis were conducted using TOF-SIMS.  After surface layer analysis was completed, natural smithsonite samples were used to conduct depth profile analysis with DI water and various Na As seen in As Na 3D images were obtained after secondary ions were extracted based on the depth profile data. Various negative ion species were distributed in the 3D space so that the characteristics of the zinc-sulfide film could be observed directly on the 3D images. The 3D images of primary negative ions from smithsonite samples treated under various conditions are shown in This study compared the effects of two sodium sulfide concentrations on the surface properties and flotation performance of smithsonite in the DDA system. Excellent flotation performance was achieved after smithsonite was pretreated with suitable sodium sulfide concentration in pulp pH 10. Smithsonite started floating after treatment with low S concentration of 5 × 10 Compared to the low S solution, excellent hydrophobicity of smithsonite was obtained owing to the adsorption of more sulfide ions, making the mineral surface potential more negative, and forming a thicker zinc-sulfide film primarily consisting of zinc monosulfide and zinc polysulfide. TOF-SIMS surface analysis further revealed that zinc monosulfide was the primary sulfide species of the zinc-sulfide film. The zinc-sulfide film thickness on the smithsonite surface was approximately 7.79 nm when smithsonite started floating, while excellent floatation was obtained as the zinc-sulfide film thickness reached about 12.13 nm. 3D images were constructed based on the extraction of secondary negative ion data, which showed a heterogeneous zinc-sulfide film on the smithsonite surface. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the