Biocomposites consisting of hydroxyapatite (HA) and natural polymers such as collagen, chitosan, chitin,and gelatin have been extensively investigated. However, studies on the combination of HA and titania with chitosan and gelatin have not been conducted yet. Novel biodegradable hydroxyapatite-titania/chitosan-gelatin polymeric composites were fabricated. In this work, our results are concerning with the preparation and characterization of HA powder and HA filler containing titania powder (10 and 30%) with a chitosan and gelatin copolymer matrix. The present research focuses on characterizing the structure of this novel class of biocomposites. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and Fourier Transformed Infrared Spectroscopy (FT-IR), Scanning electron microscopy (SEM-EDAX) were employed to assess the produced composites. The mechanical properties in terms of compressive strength and hardness test were also investigated. The in vitro study in simulated body fluid (SBF) was performed to assess the bioactivity of composites. The results proved that apatite resembling natural bone are formed faster and greater in the case the composite of HA containing 10% titania into chitosan-gelatin polymeric matrix when they are soaked in a simulated body fluid (SBF) than the composite containing 30% titania. The biocomposites containing HA with 10% titania are expected to be attractive for bioapplications as bone substitutes and scaffolds for tissue engineering in future.Chitosan, gelatin, alginates, and other polymers are studied as useful modifiers and binding agents with calcium phosphate Hydroxyapatite (HA; Ca Ceramic/polymer composites have attracted much attention from material scientists, because of its biocompatibility and bone bonding ability. These composites fulfill the mechanical properties required for their function as skeleton, teeth and cells of organisms. Many efforts have been made towards the development of new bone substitutes materials. Among these composites, HA/polymer composites have attracted much attention since such composites may have osteoconductivity due to the presence of HA The objective of the present study is to prepare and to characterize the effects of the incorporation of HA filler and HA containing titania (anatase form) (10 and 30%) into pHEMA grafted onto chitosan-gelatin copolymer matrix to overcome the problem of particles migration when these fillers are used as particles in bone defect or to produce a novel composite comparable to a cancellous bone. The copolymer and its composites with HA filler were characterized by different techniques such as FT-IR, TGA, XRD, mechanical testing and SEM-EDAX. The bioactivity of composites was also conducted in SBF to verify the formation of bone-like apatite layer and its enhancement. Chitosan powder (Aldrich, Inc., Milwaukee, USA), gelatin powder (BDH laboratory supplies Poole, BH15 1TD, England) and 2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate monomer (HEMA) (Aldrich) were used in this study. The chemical initiators, cerric ammonium nitrate (CAN) (BDH, UK), sodium hydrogen sulphite and ammonium per sulphate were used to graft HEMA monomer onto chitosan and gelatin polymers. Hydroxyapatite powder was prepared by our laboratory according to Ergun et al. Chitosan polymer (0.05 g) was dissolved in 4.0 ml of 3% acetic acid solution then 1.0 ml of HEMA monomer and 0.05 g of cerric ammonium nitrate (CAN) as an initiator were added to achieve the grafting of HEMA monomer onto chitosan polymer surface. The mixture was well mixed and kept in a water bath at 40 °C for 2 h to obtain a homogenous copolymer mixture denoted as solution (1) Where HA powder was precipitated through a wet chemical process Titania phase (anatase form) powder was used as provided without heating to attain its favorable biological properties and was well mixed with HA powder to prepare the HA/titania filler. HA/titania fillers were prepared via mechanical mixing of 90 and 70 wt.% of HA powder with 10 and 30 wt.% of titania powder respectively. Ethyl alcohol was used to homogenize the mixture of HA and titania powders, then drying at 100 °C for 24 h and sieving up to 100 μm. Both mixtures are denoted AK1 and AK3 fillers, respectively. The two homogenous copolymer solutions (1) and (2) from the above experiment were well mixed and incubated at 40 °C for 30 min in water bath to complete the grafting process. Fixed weight (1.5 g) from each filler (HA, AK1 and AK3 fillers) was dispersed in the copolymer mixture, then well mixed and incubated for 30 min under the above conditions. Loaded composites were left overnight at room temperature, then washed, filtered and dried at 60 °C overnight. The grafting % in the presence of filler was also calculated. The thermal properties of starting fillers and their composites were evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using a Perkin-Elmer, 7 series thermal analyzer at a heating rate of 10 °C/min over the temperature range of 50–1000 °C. The phase analysis of samples was examined by X-Ray diffractometer (Diana Corporation, USA) equipped with CoK The composites were tested to determine the effect of filler on mechanical properties. The hardness test was determined using Hardness Tester, Shore (D), Zwick 3150, Germany. Compressive strength was measured using tensile testing machine, Zwick Z010, Germany. The average value was taken for three samples to insure the results, size of the measured sample was 1 cm diameter The biodegradation study of the composites was carried out in vitro by incubating the composite in SBF at pH: 7.4 and 37 °C for different periods. At interval time, the composites were taken from the medium, washed with distilled water and dried at 60 °C overnight. The degradable ratio ( Where: Water absorption studies are of great importance for a biodegradable material. For water-uptake measurements, all the specimens were weighed before being immersed in distilled water. After immersion for different periods, the samples were carefully removed from the medium and immediately weighed for the determination of the wet weight as a function of the immersion time Where In order to study the bioactivity, samples were soaked in SBF, proposed by Kokubo et al.  The TGA results showed that the destruction of copolymer started at 235 °C, ended at 525 °C and recorded total weight loss equal 97.83% all of organic matter. The destruction of HA, AK1 and AK3 composites started at 251, 253 and 269 °C and ended at 525, 500 and 569 °C, respectively. The total weight loss of these composites was 50.52, 58.00 and 52.98 respectively as a result of the presence of attached copolymer onto the surface of particles accompanying the release of all CO      The degradation behavior of different composites (HA, AK1, AK3 composites and copolymer as control) in SBF was investigated. The % weight loss of composite as a function of degradation time is illustrated in  Total calcium (Ca   The solid composites were investigated post-immersion for 21 days after their withdrawal from SBF by FT-IR and SEM-EDAX.  The O.D. of HA groups into three composites such as phosphate (bending and stretching) and OH groups were slightly enhanced post-immersion compared to pre-immersion especially after 7 days for HA composite and highly enhanced after 21 days for AK1 and AK3 composites. This result proves that the presence of titania content (10 and 30%) into the HA composite enhanced the formation of apatite layer (  For AK1 composite, pre-immersion, For AK3 composite, pre-immersion, The grafting % and TGA analysis proved that HA filler containing 10% titania had enhanced affinity to copolymer while its increase leads to lower affinity. Also, XRD and FT-IR confirmed the occurrence of coating on the surface of particles via lower peaks intensities and reduction of O.D. of HA bands, respectively, coinciding with the grafting % and TGA data. The presence of HA filler or HA containing titania up to 30% into the copolymer resulted in a suitable compressive properties that are quite close to those of cancellous bone (2–12 MPa). The swelling properties and degradation behavior proved the stability of composite into the media. In vitro test behavior confirmed that the AK1 composite enhanced the deposition of Ca