Chemical looping combustion allows a simple separation of CO2 during the combustion of fossil fuels, thanks to the use of regenerable oxygen carriers. In this work, novel materials containing manganese and iron/manganese oxides have been developed via geopolymerization, and characterized in thermogravimetric apparatus and fixed bed reactor. The materials demonstrated suitable characteristics for chemical looping combustion (CLC). The tests conducted in the temperature range 800–900 °C revealed the good performance of the developed oxygen carriers, which also exhibited the ability to release O2 in inert conditions. Efficiencies in CO conversion up to 99% were achieved, as well as some synergies between Fe and Mn oxides gave a beneficial effect toward the oxygen yield. X-ray diffraction analyses of the samples confirmed the effective reduction/oxidation behavior of the materials, as well as the morphological characterization did not reveal dramatic changes of the internal microstructure up to 900 °C.The separation of carbon dioxide from the exhausts of power plants with conventional processes (e.g. wet absorption) may significantly impact the final price of the produced energy The CLC process is particularly promising since it enables the inherent separation of carbon dioxide from diluting species, first of all the air nitrogen. In fact, the stream exiting the fuel reactor is only composed of CO Potential OC materials have to meet a series of precise requirements to be suitable for the CLC process, such as: high oxygen transport capacity, negligible decline in the performance after repeated cycles, resistance to comminution and agglomeration, large availability and low cost. Moreover the choice of the OC has to take into account also the related environmental and safety concerns Ni and Cu based OCs boast elevated effectiveness; however they are affected by a low stability to multiple redox cycles, and are not environmental and health neutral because of their toxicity With the aim of overcoming this fundamental limitation, the authors recently reported for the first time the production of an OC based on Fe In this work, the study on geopolymer-based oxygen carriers was further put forward by considering geopolymer composites based on manganese and iron-manganese oxides. The synergistic action of the two oxides was investigated. The performances of the novel OCs were compared in thermo-gravimetric apparatus and in a CLC laboratory scale plant (fixed bed), also in relation to their morphological and structural characteristics. The performance of the produced oxygen carriers for CLC application was investigated in a thermo-gravimetric apparatus and in laboratory scale plant. The thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted in a STA 449 Jupiter (Netzsch Geratebau, Selb, Germany) thermo-balance, measuring the weight change of the samples that is directly linked to oxygen depletion and enrichment. The TGA tests were carried out in reducing and oxidizing atmospheres, at temperature of 800 and 900 °C and flowing air (oxidation) or methane diluted in argon (4%/96% CH The schematics of the CLC plant is shown in The gasification reactor is filled with coal char (10–20 g), whilst the CLC reactor is loaded with a prefixed weight of OC granules in between two layers of alumina wool. The switching of the operation in the two reactors is possible by means of control valves ( Three different operation modes are possible by switching the control valves: feeding CO the gas exiting the gasifier is fed to the CLC reactor, the analyzer monitoring the syngas conversion in the CLC reactor; CO The characterization of the materials was done as follows. Open pore size distribution in the range 0.0058–100 µm was ascertained by mercury intrusion porosimetry (MIP-Thermo/Finnigan 240), morphological and microstructural characterization was done by environmental scanning electron microscopy (E-SEM FEI Quanta 200, FEI Company, USA) and qualitative crystallographic analysis by X-ray diffraction (Bruker D8 Advance powder diffractometer with CuKα radiation, Karlsruhe, Germany). The geopolymer composite oxygen carriers were prepared according to a previously-developed formulation Two samples were obtained and labeled as GPMn and GPMnFe, in which equal amounts of Mn Sulcis lignite from Sardinia (I) was selected because of the substantially high fixed carbon content (44% by weight on dry basis). The char produced under inert atmosphere at 800 °C for one hour was crushed in a mortar and sieved in the range 1000–2000 μm. The reactivity of the Sulcis char in CO Firstly, a theoretical evaluation was carried out of the thermodynamic equilibrium for comparing the activities of the two metal oxides in the temperature range of interest for CLC. The results of TG tests with GP-Mn and GP-MnFe are displayed in  Based on the TG data GPMnFe is able to release 0.39 mmol of O The DSC signal during a single redox cycle is shown in The weight change under inert conditions is shown in   It appears that GPMnFe is more effective than GPMn in the lower temperature limit (800 °C), as well as an increase of the efficiency already occurs at increasing temperature. The decay in efficiency at 2  The reduced GPMn appears to be mainly composed of a mixture of MnO and Mn  Additional information on the microstructure of the OCs was obtained through MIP analyses. Initially both samples displayed bimodal distributions Novel synthetic oxygen carriers for CLC based on geopolymer composites can be produced with a simple and one-step fabrication protocol. In this research they were obtained by adding powder of Mn and Fe oxides to a standard geopolymeric slurry, producing monoliths with good mechanical resistance to be granulated by milling and sieving. The metal oxide content achieved values of around 40% by weight. TGA tests carried out with Mn and Mn-Fe based oxygen carriers proved that they are effective in the temperature range 800–900 for combustion of methane at 3.6% vol., whilst tests in a lab scale reactor demonstrated the ability to oxidize CO in CO GPMnFe is more effective than GPMn in the lower temperature limit thanks to a synergy between the two metal oxides. The temperature of 900 °C is effective for accomplishing the CLC of syngas, as well as the CLOU of solid carbons. XRD analyses of the samples confirmed the reduction/oxidation behavior of the Mn-based OC, as well as the morphological characterization did not reveal strong modifications of the internal microstructure up to 900 °C. Further research is required for extending the results obtained in fixed bed configuration to fluidized bed that is more realistic for application at industrial scale.