This investigation mainly focused on revealing the importance and function mechanism of intensive mixer on sintering performance with 100% fine-grained iron ore materials (the proportion of −0.074 mm exceeding 80%) through both lab-scale tests and statistic analyses. Results indicated that compared with conventional drum mixing, the intensive mixing reduced the proper moisture consumption considerably from 9.25% to 8.75%, while both the granulation effect and sinter product quality achieved a remarkable improvement. Intensive mixer realized the uniform dispersion of moisture, Ca(OH)2 and coarse nuclear particles (>0.5 mm), contributing to improving the utilization of moisture, and benefiting the granulation of fine iron ores through capillary force; the uniform dispersion of Ca(OH)2 benefited the growth of granules, and also improved the mechanical strength due to the binding effect of Ca(OH)2; the uniform dispersion of nuclear particles benefited forming granules mainly within the desirable size range of 3–8 mm. All these improvements optimized the bed permeability and mineralization process of raw materials during sintering process, which were the key factors to the improved sinter performance. The result findings are useful for guiding the application of intensive mixers in practical plants using high-proportion fine-grained iron ore materials.China has been the world's largest crude steel manufacturer since 1996, and the output even surpassed 0.9 billion tons in 2018. Huge steel output has also consumed huge amount of iron ores as raw materials. Though China has abundant iron ore reserves, mainly of them characterized low iron grade, and cannot meet the requirements of rapid development. Major part of iron ores relies on importion from Australia, Brazil, South Africa, and so on. Taking the cost and stability of supply into consideration, exploiting the advantage of domestic iron ores has won the wide concern. Due to the low-grade property, local iron ores need to improve the iron content through mineral processing technology, and the iron ore products are usually fine-grained materials after fine grinding [ To improve the performance of sintering with high-proportion fine-grained iron ore materials, many measures have been taken, including optimizing the mixing & granulation parameters [ However, currently research paid less attention on the influence of intensive mixer on sintering performance and function mechanism, even that of sintering with 100% fine-grained iron ores with the proportion of −0.074 mm more than 80%. In this study, with 100% fine-grained iron ore material, sinter pot experiment and related mixing experiment were carried out to compare conventional mixing with intensive mixing. The influence of intensive mixing on the granular mixing process and sintering properties was deeply explored, as well as the function mechanism of intensive mixing on sintering with 100% fine-grained iron ore material, thereby paving the way to improve the sintering performance with 100% fine-grained iron ores.   During mixing process, the distribution uniformity of moisture, quicklime and coarse particles (>0.5 mm) were examined for mixing effect evaluation. The mixing schemes and conditions are shown in After mixing, mixtures were divided into upper and lower layers, and then each layer was divided into 9 parts along the radial direction. For each individual case, 18 representative samples (40–50 g per sample) were serially numbered from X-1 to X-18. After moisture content, CaO content, and coarse particles analyses, the standard deviation, coefficient of variation and average uniformity coefficient were used to further evaluate the mixing effect. The calculation formulas were given as follows:  After granulation, green pellet samples were taken out for moisture content, size distribution, permeability, and strength analyses. Green pellet strength (including the wet strength and dry strength) was expressed by the powder removal index, which is characterized by the increase in the proportion of dropped fine particles (<1 mm) after treatment. The detection method was described as follows: The wet strength of green pellets referred that of detecting the drop strength of green balls, and it also simulated the drop of raw materials during transferring and charging process: sample (800 g) are dropped three times from a height of 0.5 m to the steel plate; The drying strength of green pellets: sample (800 g) completely dried at a temperature of 110 ± 10 °C in a air-drying oven for 4 h. After that, a serial of sieves with pore size of 8 mm, 5 mm, 3 mm, 1 mm, and 0.5 mm was used to screen them into different size ranges. The calculation formula of the powder removal index is as follows: An air-dry oven was used to measure the moisture of granules under the temperature of 110 ± 10 °C for 4 h. Usually typical sample of 400 g was needed for drying, and the weight loss proportion after drying was regarded as the moisture content. A serial of sieves with pore size of 8 mm, 5 mm, 3 mm, 1 mm and 0.5 mm was used to screen the granules into the size range of >8 mm, 5–8 mm, 3–5 mm, 1–3 mm, 0.5–1 mm and <0.5 mm. Usually typical sample of 800 mm was needed for size distribution testing, and the proportion of granules oversize and undersize was the size distribution of “green” agglomerates. The air permeability of mixture is measured by pressure loss of mixture (or pressure drop), which means the bigger the pressure loss, the worse the air permeability. The method of detecting the pressure drop is that: with loading the mixture into a cylinder of which the diameter is Φ 100 mm × 200  mm, the air is suctioned through the mixture by a suction fan of which the gas flow is keeping 10 m According to the pressure drop obtained, and the J.P.U. was calculated using the following formula. After granulation, charging the mixtures into the sinter pot with bed thickness of 700 mm, and then igniting the coke breeze in the surface layer at temperature of 1050 ± 50 °C, duration of 1.5min, and pressure drop of 4.5 kpa. After ignition, the suction pressure was adjusted to 9 kPa and the exhaust gas temperature was monitored continuously. The sintering time was the duration from the ignition to the exhaust gas reaching its highest temperature. Four typical factors were then selected to evaluate the quality and output of sinter product, among them sintering speed refers to the ratio of layer height and sintering time, mm·min  As for the intensive mixing case, increasing the moisture content from 8.5% to 8.75%, the content of granules >3 mm reached more than 90%, with the contents of bigger granule (>8 mm) controlled under 6%. The permeability of mixture was also obviously improved. However, when increasing the moisture content to 9.00%, more bigger granules appeared, as shown in  From section   For further clarifying the distribution of digested quicklime, SEM-Mapping was used to observe the distribution of the elements after mixing. As can be seen from The essence of the granulation can be described as fine-grained particles (<0.5 mm) adhered on the surface of nuclear particles (>0.5 mm), thereby making the fine iron ores grow up [    The uniform dispersion of solid fuels contributed to the uniform distribution of heat in the bed, which can optimize the heat supply situation. This phenomenon is beneficial to the mineral melting process. The flux (quicklime) is evenly distributed, and it can also optimize the mineralization process because iron oxides can easily contact CaO and generate calcium ferrite, which was the main binders to connect separately distributed iron ores into lumpy sinter cake [ Consequently, intensive mixer initially improved the mixing process, and then improved the size distribution and mechanical strength of granules, which therefore improved the permeability and mineralization process, and finally increasing the sintering performance with 100% fine-grained iron ore materials. The manuscript is the first to reveal the sintering performance with 100% fine-grained iron ores, and explained the function mechanism of intensive mixer on mixing-granulating process and sintering process. Compared with conventional drum granulation, utilizing intensive mixer reduced the proper moisture considerably from 9.25% to 8.75%, while the granulation effect achieved an obvious improvement, and both quality and output indicators of sinter were improved; due to efficient mixing property, intensive mixer realized the uniform dispersion of moisture, quicklime, and coarse nuclear particles, which contributed to improving the utilization of moisture, thereby reducing the required water; the sufficient dispersion of quicklime benefited the growth and mechanical strength of granules due to binding effect, and also optimized the minerals melting process due to the better contacting condition between CaO and iron oxides; the dispersion of nuclear particles benefited forming granules mainly within the desirable size range of 3–8 mm. All these improvements optimized the bed permeability and mineralization process of raw materials during sintering process, which were the key factors to the improved sintering performances. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work was financially supported by the