With the increase in the demand for energy, there is an increased interest in nuclear power sourced from a number of uranium minerals, primarily tetravalent UO2. During the leaching of uranium from its ores, a number of gangue minerals are leached which lead to a number of different ions in the leach slurry. The current work undertaken focused on the effect of anions that typically leach from gangue minerals found in uranium bearing ore bodies on the dissolution of synthetic UO2. The anions studied were F−, Cl−, Br−, SO4
                     2−, PO4
                     3− and NO3
                     −. Cl− and Br− were found to have no significant influence on UO2 dissolution over the concentration range studied (0–1.8g/L Cl−; 0–4g/L Br−), whilst F− was found to have a detrimental effect on UO2 dissolution at low–medium concentration (0–0.3g/L) and a positive effect on UO2 dissolution when present in medium–high concentrations (0.5–1g/L), when compared to the dissolution obtained in the presence of the other halides studied. Of the oxo-anions studied NO3
                     − had a positive effect on UO2 dissolution over the entire concentration range studied and PO4
                     3− had a negative effect when present at medium–high concentrations. This was due to precipitation of FePO4 at medium–high PO4
                     3− concentrations. SO4
                     2− had a negative effect when present at medium–high concentrations. This was most likely due to the formation of less effective FeIII based complexes, where the FeIII species present in solution play an important role in the UO2 oxidation/dissolution mechanism. Results obtained on the influence of all anions investigated simultaneously are also presented and discussed.The increasing amounts of electricity that will be required in future years have led to increased interest in generating some of this additional electricity using nuclear technology. The nuclear fuel required for uranium based nuclear power generators is sourced from a number of uranium minerals. To date the majority of the uranium ores that have been processed have been high grade ores, however continued mining (and the most likely lack of discovery of new high grade ores) will undoubtedly lead to the need to process low grade ores in order to meet ongoing and/or increased future demands for uranium. In addition to the likely future need to process low grade ores, processing of uranium ores more efficiently/economically and with minimal environmental impact is a continuing interest. The primary uranium mineral found in most uranium bearing ore bodies around the world is tetravalent uraninite (UO Based on previous studies that have been conducted on UO During uranium processing Fe containing minerals (typically hematite or magnetite) in the ore produce the ferric ion required, whilst in some cases a source of iron is added to the dissolution processing step. As mentioned earlier the slurries generated during tank based uranium minerals processing however also contain gangue minerals which can be attacked by acid and hence release foreign species into the slurry. This dissolution of gangue minerals can influence the dissolution of minerals such as UO Whilst there have been a number of studies published in the open literature on the influence of factors such as solution ORP, temperature and sulphuric acid concentration on UO Nesmeyanova et al. investigated the influence of NaI, NaF, NaBr and NaCl on UO Although previous studies have been conducted on the effect of anions that are commonly liberated from gangue minerals during the dissolution process used in uranium minerals processing on uraninite dissolution there have been no detailed published studies on the effects of such anions under conditions currently used in uranium minerals processing in tank based setups. In this study the influence of a number of anions on UO The following chemicals were used as received: uranyl acetate, UO The Uranium dioxide was prepared by initially heating uranyl acetate (UO Surface area measurements were conducted using a Micromeritics ASAP 2000 Micropore Analysis instrument. Samples were degassed at 250 The dissolution experiments were conducted under reflux in a six-neck, 1 Each sample was prepared for XRD analysis by placing the powdered sample into individual circular poly methyl methacrylate holders. Each powdered sample was evenly placed onto a glass flat plate within the holder and covered by Kapton film. X-ray powder diffraction patterns were obtained on a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer fitted with a copper tube (copper Kα radiation), an incident beam monochromator, and a scintillation detector. The diffractometer was operated at a voltage of 40 Uranium calibration standards from 0 to 1000 Since Fe The effect of several anions on UO The UO The first factor considered in explaining why the aforementioned differences in UO To determine if the higher UO The decreased rate observed when FeF The effect of the anions discussed in the previous section on UO The effect of F The effects of varying the concentrations of the different halides on the dissolution of UO A comparison of the extent of UO The trends observed with increasing F In aqueous solution containing Fe The other factor that may have contributed to the increased UO In order to investigate the effect of F It is widely acknowledged that solution ORP plays a vital role in enhancing the dissolution of UO The concentration ranges of the oxo-anions that were investigated were selected based on typical concentrations that have been reported in uranium ore tailings: SO From the results presented in  However Laxen et al. also reported that the barriers affecting the electron transfer in dissolution of UO To overcome the negative influence of solution ORP caused by excess SO With the addition of NO From A series of experiments were conducted in order to determine if the positive influence of F The results from  The effect of Fe- counter anion showed that that the rate of UO The UO At the highest addition of Cl It was observed that increasing F With SO With NO The positive influence of F The current study provides a thorough fundamental understanding of the effect of these anions on synthetically produced pure uraninite (UO The authors would like to thank the Australian Research Council and BHP-Billiton for supporting this project through the Australian Research Council Linkage Projects scheme.