A quartz sealed Ag/AgCl reference electrode was fabricated and studied in CaCl2 based molten salts. It performed satisfactorily in terms of reproducibility, reusability and stability in experiments that varied the temperature (700–950 °C) and service time (from hours to days). The electric resistance of the reference electrode decreased from 105 to 103 Ω when increasing the molten salt temperature from 600 to 950 °C, following well Arrhenius’ Law. The potential variation of the electrode upon changing the electrolyte composition (CaCl2, NaCl, KCl, and/or AgCl) suggested the selective conduction of Na+ ions and possibly Ca2+ ions through the thin-wall of the sealed quartz tube. Prolonged use (two to three days) of the reference electrode in the presence of both oxygen and molten chloride salt led to noticeable erosion of the quartz tube, particularly at the molten salt–quartz–gas triple phase boundary, which can be attributed to the formation of calcium and/or sodium silicates under the influence of oxygen present in the liquid and gas phases, respectively.High temperature molten salts play important roles in modern electrochemical research and industrial practices. Recently, in molten CaCl Nonetheless, in electrochemical studies, a three-electrode cell incorporating a stable reference electrode is essential to avoid uncertainty of the electrode reactions. For example, in the electrolysis of solid metal oxides in molten CaCl However, a universal reference electrode has not so far been reported in the literature for high temperature (>700 °C) molten salts. Instead, various metal pseudo-reference electrodes immersed directly in the molten salt are often used but their potentials could be unstable and vary with many factors (e.g., the O The Ag/AgCl electrode in its conventional form is a favourite reference electrode in many electrolytes with or without the Cl Quartz is commonly used in research at high temperatures up to 1200 °C. It is also satisfactorily stable in molten chloride salts in the absence of, for instance, a strong reductant such as the calcium and sodium metals. Depending on purity, quartz becomes soft at a wide range of temperatures around 1400 °C. Therefore, quartz fabrication by the glass-blowing technique is feasible using the hydrogen–oxygen flame in common laboratory practice with proper safety measures. Considering that silver has a melting temperature of about 962 °C, the combination of quartz and Ag/AgCl could allow the upward rise of the working temperature to 950 °C. This upper limit is sufficient for many high temperature processes in molten salts, particularly the electrochemical reduction of solid metal oxides In this laboratory, a method for the preparation of sodium ion conducting quartz membrane was previously developed This paper reports the fabrication of a quartz sealed Ag/AgCl electrode without separate preparation of the ion conducting membrane, and various experimental tests of such made electrodes in molten chloride salts at temperatures between 700 and 950 °C. The results demonstrate that, with a wall thickness of about 0.5 mm, the quartz sealed Ag/AgCl reference electrode can be satisfactorily applied for many times in electrochemical analysis experiments without compromising the quality of service, or can be continuously used for at least three days, as experimented so far, in constant potential electrolysis. It is anticipated that using the same fabrication technique and also the completely sealed quartz structure, many more reference electrodes can be made by employing different reversible high temperature redox couples such as metal/metal sulfide and metal/metal oxide. It should be pointed out that quartz and many other metal oxide based ceramics are unstable in molten fluoride salts and hence not suitable for the fabrication of a reference electrode to be used in these melts. The sealed quartz structure, which was to function as the ion conducting membrane of the Ag/AgCl electrode, was prepared by first sealing one end of a quartz tube (∼350 mm in length, 6.0 mm in external diameter and 1.5 mm in wall thickness) in the hydrogen–oxygen gas flame. While still in the flame, a positive air pressure was blown into the closed end which then expanded into a capsule whose size, shape and wall thickness were controlled by the blowing operation. After cooling, the quartz tube was ready to receive the Ag/AgCl electrode that consisted of a silver electrode and the internal electrolyte. The silver electrode was made as follows. After being manually polished briefly with sand paper for cleaning, a tungsten wire of 0.2 mm in diameter with a length longer than the above mentioned quartz tube was inserted rapidly into the heat-softened end of a silver rod (∼60 mm in length, 2.0 mm in diameter) at a depth of about 10 mm. The outer quartz tube prepared previously was filled with a mixture of AgCl, NaCl and KCl (molar ratio: 45% NaCl, 45% KCl and 10% AgCl) which had been dried at 400 °C in air for two days. The tube was then heated to melt the contained salt mixture, and the inner Ag electrode was inserted into the molten salt. Several minutes later, the whole electrode was cooled slowly to room temperature. After cleaning and drying, the open end of the quartz tube was connected to a rotary vacuum pump. When the internal pressure of the quartz tube could not be further decreased, the hydrogen–oxygen flame was used to seal the construction at a position around the tungsten wire, as shown in Most performance tests of the new reference electrode, including reproducibility, reusability and stability, were carried out in a graphite crucible with a relatively small volume (23 mm in inner diameter, 150 mm in height, 3.5 mm in wall thickness). The reference electrode was also checked by performing constant potential electrolysis of pressed silica powder in a larger graphite cell (100 mm in inner diameter, 230 mm in height, 10 mm in wall thickness) The performance of the quartz sealed Ag/AgCl reference electrode in the molten salt depended strongly on its resistance that was mainly affected by the thickness of the ion conducting membrane, i.e., the sealed lower end of the quartz tube (see Considering that a modern potentiostat has commonly an input impedance of 10 The resistance of the reference electrode was found to be almost independent of the composition of the molten salts used in this work, indicating an intrinsic property of the electrode. For example, the resistance of the electrode was about 10 The capability of providing a stable potential under service conditions is the most important specification of a reference electrode. Therefore, measuring the potential variation of a new reference electrode with changing the relevant experimental parameters is essential for assessment. In room temperature systems, many well-known reference electrodes can be used as the reference to investigate a new reference electrode. However, this is not the case in high temperature molten salts. An alternative approach is to use one or more known redox active compounds as the internal references that exhibit characteristic responses when measured by an electrochemical means, such as cyclic voltammetry. Conventionally, the redox active compound is added into the electrolyte, which, however, has the drawbacks of contaminating the electrolyte and possibly interfering with the system to be investigated. In this laboratory, a quartz sealed tungsten disc electrode was previously studied in molten CaCl The stability of the new reference electrode was investigated against a number of experimental parameters, including working temperature, service time, and composition of the molten salts. In all these cases, CVs of the W–SiO Once immersed in pure molten CaCl An alternative way of demonstrating the stability of the new reference electrode is to plot the characteristic potential of one of the recognized cathodic reactions, such as that indicated by “a” or “b” in The influence of the electrolyte composition on the stability of the new reference electrode was also investigated by adding different chloride salts, i.e., KCl, NaCl and AgCl, to molten CaCl There are two well-known ion conduction mechanisms in solid materials. The first type of conduction is through relatively large physical defects in the solid membrane, such as micro-pores and grain boundaries. Because this type of conduction happens unselectively to both cations and anions, no potential difference should build up on the two sides of the membrane. The second type of ion conduction is selective to certain cations or anions but not to both. It can lead to unequal amounts/activities of the selected cation or anion on the two sides of the membrane, resulting in the membrane or Donnan potential which is proportional to the logarithm of the activity ratio of the selected ions on each side of the membrane. Previous work has demonstrated that quartz could become selectively conducting to Na To further confirm the shift of the CV shown in The implied conduction of Ca A comparison was made between the quartz sealed Ag/AgCl electrodes prepared by different workers or at different times but following the same procedure as described in Section The reference electrode was also successfully used for electrochemical analyses, such as cyclic voltammetry, in CaCl In this laboratory, the quartz sealed Ag/AgCl electrode was and is still being used in constant potential electrolysis of, for example, solid silica (powder) in molten chloride salts Because the erosion did not occur in experiments that, even though continued for days, involved only small quantities of cathodic and anodic products as in the cyclic voltammetric measurements, it might be related with reactions between quartz and the electrode reaction products. In the electrolysis of solid silica, O The fabrication and investigation of a stable and long life quartz sealed Ag/AgCl reference electrode for high temperature molten chloride salts are described in this paper. The method is based on the conventional glass-blowing technique with the assistance of the hydrogen–oxygen flame. Such made reference electrodes could be continuously used in CaCl The Natural Science Foundation of China is gratefully acknowledged for financial support (Grant No. 20125308). G.Z.C. thanks the Ministry of Education of China for the award of the Cheung Kong Scholarship.