Ground (GR) or desinewed (DS) lamb trimmings were combined with a konjac flour (KF) gel (0%, 10% or 20%) to produce a low-fat (8%) cured sausage. Physiochemical, sensory and shelf-life analyses were performed to determine the efficacy of the fat mimetic. Desinewing reduced collagen content (2.3 mg/g tissue) and cook yield (0.6%) when compared to GR trimmings. Grinding increased aerobic plate counts (APCs) ∼0.4log10/cm2 more than DS, but APCs were not affected by inclusion of KF. Sausages with 20% KF lowered cook yield ∼1% and slightly reduced sensory panel and texture profile analysis texture values. KF gel incorporated at 10% had similar properties to a control low-fat desinewed lamb sausage, while KF at 20% could reduce “toughening” in low-fat sausage products. Use of konjac gel as a fat mimetic could reduce total caloric energy by replacing a portion of the meat in a sausage formulation.Low-fat products that meet the nutritional criteria, taste expectations, convenience and affordable pricing demanded by consumers may influence health conscious consumers to purchase these products more often. Several studies have addressed the problem of retaining sensory and textural attributes through replacement of fat with water ( A survey by Low-fat lamb products can be manufactured by utilizing existing ingredients and available processing equipment technologies. Hydrocolloids have been used for binding water in low-fat meat emulsions ( Comminution of lesser-valued boneless cuts of lamb (shoulder, neck and shank) by mechanical desinewing reduces connective tissue, increases the value of trimmings and enhances product texture when desinewed trim is incorporated into processed meat products. A reduction in connective tissue due to desinewing has been shown to increase the textural attributes of beef patties ( Therefore, the objective of this study was to compare the sensory, physical, chemical and shelf-life characteristics of a cured and smoked low-fat lamb sausage containing desinewed or conventionally ground lean lamb trimmings and varying levels (0%, 10% or 20%) of a konjac flour gel. It was hypothesized that the fat mimetic properties of the konjac gel would be similar to those of fat in a ground, cured sausage product. Twenty-six lamb carcasses were obtained from the Rosenthal Meat Science and Technology Center at Texas A&M University. The left side of each carcass was fabricated into boneless square cut shoulders, necks, foreshanks and hindshanks suitable for desinewing (DS). The right side of each carcass was fabricated in the same manner, but ground (GR) conventionally as a sausage formulation meat block component. All bone, fat and heavy connective tissues (tendons, Immediately after desinewing, the lean, fat and connective tissue components were vacuum-packaged, packed in insulated containers and stored overnight in a blast freezer (−23 °C). The following day the meat was transported to the Rosenthal Meat Science and Technology Center, College Station, and kept frozen (−23 °C) for approximately one month prior to processing. Meat block components (DS and GR) were tempered to −2 °C, ground through a 1.27-cm plate, and random sub-samples (∼1% of each batch) analyzed for fat content using a CEM Automatic Volatility Computer (model AVC-80) and a CEM Automatic Extraction System (CEM Corp., Indian Trail, NC). Batches (∼5.1 kg each), as shown in Appropriate amounts of lean trimmings (DS or GR), fat (8 A Nutricol A sausage sample of ∼454 g was randomly selected from each sausage treatment combination and homogenized in a Cuisinart DLC-8 Plus food processor (Cuisinart Inc., Norwich, CT). Three, 4–5-g sub-samples of raw and cooked product were randomly selected from each ground sample and analyzed for percentage of moisture (950.46B, oven air-drying method), fat (960.39, ether extractable component), protein (981.10, Kjeldahl nitrogen) and ash (920.153, muffle furnace) using standard Cook yield was calculated as follows: Cook yield=(cooked product weight/raw product weight) Hydroxyproline content was determined following the procedures of Total caloric energy estimates (kilojoules) for raw and cooked sausages were calculated on the basis of a 100-g portion. Atwater values ( A seven-member, descriptive attribute texture/flavor panel was employed for sensory analysis and trained previously according to procedures outlined by Samples were evaluated using the Spectrum Texture profile analysis (TPA), as described by Texture parameters obtained from this analysis were: At each sampling day (0, 15, 30, 45 and 60), two 10-cm Treatments consisted of two comminution methods, desinewing (DS) and conventional grinding (GR), to which three levels of konjac flour gel (0%, 10% or 20%) were added as a fat mimetic. All treatment combinations were replicated three times, utilizing batch (cooked separately in the smokehouse) as a blocking factor. Data were analyzed using the general linear models (GLM) procedure of the Statistical Analysis System ( An additional response variable (days of storage) was measured over time (0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 days) to evaluate the shelf-life of each treatment as determined by APC evaluation. Yields and temperatures for desinewed meat components are shown in Variations in total yield appeared to be affected more by the trimming source rather than the initial meat temperature. For example, neck trimmings had the greatest increase in temperature (lean=+7.7 °C; CT=+9.3 °C) from the initial trimmings through the second pass, but had the second highest lean yield (84.76%). Conversely, shank lean had less of a temperature increase (lean=+4.6 °C; CT=+5.3 °C), but had a lower lean yield (80.47%). In general, as the CT component yield increased, the lean yield decreased. Initial meat temperatures ( As anticipated, the comminution system used to produce lean trimmings for low-fat lamb sausages differed in the amount of total collagen (mg/g) found in the 0% KF treatment (data not presented). GR samples contained an average of 7.32 mg/g total collagen while DS meat samples had 5.02 mg/g of total collagen, based on paired Proximate analysis means ( As konjac gel levels increased from 0% to 20%, raw percent moisture increased due to the corresponding reduction in the meat block ( Cooked percent moisture did not differ between GR and DS comminution systems. However, when compared to the GR comminution method, the DS treatment was slightly higher ( Increasing the level of konjac gel with a corresponding decrease in the meat block increased the percent cooked moisture ( Mean caloric energy values (kilojoules/100 gram portion) for raw and cooked sausages are shown in ( In Mean total APCs for GR and DS lamb sausage treatments are given in The konjac gel did not affect total APCs, but as expected, APCs increased ( Sensory panel descriptive scores ( Significant sensory differences were only slightly perceptible among konjac gel levels for cooked lamb flavor, sour taste, cohesiveness, springiness, chewiness, denseness and hardness. However, the magnitude of difference for all attributes was one unit or less among the 0%, 10% and 20% konjac levels. Cooked lamb flavor was only slightly higher (0.24 unit) for the 20% konjac level in comparison to the 0% and 10% KF sausages. The sour taste was of such a small magnitude (0.09 unit), that it may have little impact on overall taste. Cohesiveness, springiness, denseness and hardness scores were lower by one unit or less for the 20% KF sausage when compared to the 0% sausage. In addition, the 20% KF treatment required 1.97 less chews in preparation for swallowing than did the 0% treatment. These differences likely reflect the increased moisture content of the 20% KF sausage and/or a reduction of the total meat block in the formulation. Treatment means for the Instron texture profile analysis are given in Significant differences for method of comminution ( Sausage samples with 20% added konjac required less ( Except for cohesiveness, Instron TPA characteristics were similar for the 0% and 10% KF treatments. Similar observations were made by Although not statistically different ( Correlations between sensory textural data and Instron TPA data ( The implication is that these instrumental comparisons are somewhat related to sensory textural attributes (cohesiveness, springiness, chewiness, denseness and hardness) and that these sensory attributes might be predicted by measuring TPA Lean trimming yields from desinewed lamb cuts from greatest to least were shoulder This study demonstrates that a konjac gel incorporated at 10% or 20% can be used as a fat mimetic in low-fat (8%) desinewed lamb sausage with only minor changes in product chemical composition, yield, sensory characteristics and textural attributes. The incorporation of the 20% konjac gel reduced sensory cohesiveness, springiness and chewiness indicating that it could reduce “toughening” that is sometimes observed in low-fat, all-meat sausages. Use of a konjac gel could ultimately reduce total caloric energy, in comparison to traditional sausage products, by removal of a portion of the fat from the product.