Lead free potassium sodium niobate (K0.5Na0.5NbO3) ceramic powders were synthesized by colloidal coating method. The calcined powders (800°C) were sintered conventionally at three different temperatures (1050°C, 1100°C and 1150°C) and the effect of sintering temperature on density, microstructure, composition and electrical properties was investigated. All the samples showed a single phase perovskite structure with orthorhombic symmetry similar to KNbO3 ceramics. Microstructure examined under FEG-SEM revealed an optimum microstructure, in terms of grain size, porosity and uniformity, at the sintering temperature of 1100°C, which also showed density of 92% of ρ
                     
                        Th
                     . As the sintering temperature increased the X-ray diffraction peaks shifted to lower 2θ values indicating excess volatilization of Na at higher temperature as compared to K. This was further confirmed through elemental Probe X-ray microanalysis and ICP–AES studies. Dielectric constant (ε
                     
                        r
                     ), dielectric loss (tanδ), ferroelectric (P–E loop) and piezoelectric (d
                     33) properties showed considerable improvement and leakage current decreased with increasing sintering temperature. The sample sintered at 1100°C showed marked improvement in maximum dielectric constant (573) at RT at 1kHz, minimum tangent loss (0.04) at RT at 1kHz, maximum remnant polarization (13.5μC/cm2), lower leakage current (7.6×10−7
                     A/cm2) and maximum d
                     33 value (100pC/N).Lead zirconium titanate (PZT) and modified PZT-based ceramics are widely used for many industrial applications due to their superior performance in ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and pyroelectric applications Alkaline niobate perovskites, in general, potassium sodium niobate (K, Na) NbO In this paper, we report correlation between density, microstructure, leakage current and piezoelectric properties as a function of sintering temperature for KNN ceramic powders synthesized by colloidal coating method and sintered by conventional method. Further, additional evidence for degradation of properties and deviation in MPB above 1100 The starting materials used in this study were KNO To determine the phase purity and lattice parameters of calcined powders and ceramic samples, X-ray diffraction data was recorded in the 2 The morphology of pure Nb  The room-temperature XRD patterns of KNN ceramics sintered at 1050 It is well known that density and porosity have pronounced effect on properties of most electro-ceramics. The density and porosity of the samples sintered at different temperatures are listed in The effect of sintering temperature on the microstructure was examined on polished and thermally etched surface using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FEG-SEM). The shifting of XRD peaks to lower 2 As discussed in the earlier section the EDX studies showed that with increasing sintering temperature the stoichiometry of KNN shifted towards pure KNbO  In  Polarization versus electric field hysteresis ( In order to assess the leakage current behaviour of the ceramics, The bipolar electric field-induced-strain ( The unipolar electric field-induced strain curves of the KNN ceramics sintered at 1050 Conventional sintering of KNN ceramics, synthesized by colloidal coating method, was carried out at different temperatures. Density, microstructure, leakage current and piezoelectric properties, as a function of sintering temperature, was investigated. Optimum density (about 92% of