Sodium sulfite has been utilized in the mineral industry principally as a depressant for a variety of sulfide ores. In this study, it was tested as a depressant in flotation of oxidized ore from its silicate mineral gangue. Selective flotation of rutile from almandine was investigated using sodium sulfite as a regulator and an octadecyl amine polyoxyethylene ether (AC1815) mixed with Styryl phosphonic acid (SPA) as a composite collector. The investigation was conducted through a series of micro-flotation tests of single and artificially mixed minerals. In addition to that, the measurements of contact angle, zeta potential, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were also conducted to unravel the adsorption mechanism of the depressant onto the surfaces of the two minerals. The experimental results clearly demonstrated that sodium sulfite acting in the form of SO
                     3
                     2− at pH range 6–8 was more selective adsorbed on almandine surface compared to that of rutile, leading to a high selectivity for the flotation of rutile. The XPS results revealed a strong interaction between the active ferrous sites of almandine and SO
                     3
                     2− of the sodium sulfite through reduction forming a hydrophilic metal sulphate layer and metal ox-hydroxides surfaces, which in turn reduced adsorption sites for collector and led to a decrease of surface hydrophobicity thereby strongly depressing the flotation of almandine.Rutile is one of the most economical resource for titanium minerals which has emerged as an excellent material for the production of titanium white and titanium sponge [ The cheapest methods to beneficiate rutile from its mineral gangue would be gravity and magnetic separation. However, the surface properties of rutile such as density and magnetism are similar to some of its main associated gangue minerals such as almandine, amphibole, omphacite, and apatite [ Froth flotation has established itself as the most versatile and effective technique for beneficiation and treatment of minerals oxides with appreciable concentrate grades as well as reasonable recoveries [ There exist, however, a challenge in rutile flotation separation in that, there seems to be no specific collector among the above mentioned ones which could achieve both the collectivity and selectivity at the same time without the aid of flotation regulators [ The most routinely used depressants for suppression of gangue minerals in rutile flotation are inorganic reagents such as sodium fluorosilicate, sodium hexametaphosphate, depressant aluminum sulfate, sodium silicate and acidified sodium silicate among others [ Sodium sulfite (Na The depressing action of Na In this study, sodium sulfite was tried as the depressant on separation of rutile from its silicate gangue with reference to almandine. Sodium sulfite being a strong reductant, less toxic reagent and more environmentally friendly chemical, was focused as an alternative depressant for selective separation of rutile from almandine, owing to the fact that almandine active sites are ferric and ferrous which could be reduced by Na A series of single flotation tests were first conducted to reveal the effects of collector and depressant concentrations. Effect of depressant on the selective flotation of rutile from almandine was further investigated through the flotation of artificially mixed minerals. The adsorption mechanism of sodium sulfite on the surfaces of both the rutile and almandine were determined by the zeta potential measurements and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) respectively, while contact angle measurement was conducted to determine the wettability and floatability of rutile and almandine before and after being treated with sodium sulfite as a depressor. In overall, this study will greatly contribute to the understanding of rutile floatability and its possible separation methods from its associated gangue minerals. Pure rutile sample was obtained from Hainan province, China. The sample was a tabling concentrate. The sample was ground using porcelain ball mill and screened by wet sieve to obtain final particle size of −150 + 58 μm which were later used for micro flotation tests. The sample of almandine on the on other side was a magnetic concentrate obtained from Donghai country, Jiangsu province. Its preparation entailed, a dry magnetic separation and vibration mill, then, the ground sample was screened to obtain a size fraction of −150 + 58 μm for micro flotation test as well. The purities of minerals, rutile (98%) and almandine (95%) were investigated through X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF) and a semi-quantitative x-ray diffraction technique. The results are shown in Octadecylaminepolyoxyethylene ether (AC1815) obtained from Haian Petrochemical factory in Jiangsu province, China, with a purity of 97%,was mixed with industrial grade SPA (Styryl phosphonic acid), supplied by Chengdu Reagent Factory, China to make a composite collector (AC1815-SPA) of 98% purity, with mixing ratios:1.25:1 respectively. Sodium sulfite was of analytical grade, purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Dilute solution of hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were employed as pH modifiers where necessary. Potassium nitrate (KNO The micro-flotation experiments were conducted in a XFG flotation machine with a 100 mL hitch groove flotation cell. Single mineral experiments were first conducted to evaluate flotation performance of rutile and almandine, individually, and then later mixed mineral experiments were carried out. In single mineral flotation tests, the mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 g of sample to 50 mL pure water. In artificially mixed mineral flotation tests, the total weight of feed was 3.0 g with the ratio of rutile to almandine being 1:4 (0.6 of Rutile+2.4 g of almandine).The typical flotation experiment was performed as follows: the sample of either rutile or almandine was placed into the flotation cell and deionized water added and stirred for 3mins and the pH was regulated to the required one through the use NaOH or HCl. A predetermined dose of Sodium sulfite was added to the solution pulp then agitated for 4mins. A pre-determined collector dosage was also added and the slurry was agitated for another 3mins. The froth products were collected after 3mins, dried, weighed and analyzed to calculate floatability of single minerals and recovery for artificial mixed minerals respectively. The zeta potentials were measured using a Malvern Zetasizer (Malvernstruments). 50 mg of mineral sample (−2 μm) was mixed in 1 × 10 It is clear from the micro flotation studies that sodium sulfite had noticeable depressing effect on the almandine floatability. To identify the type and exposure of the surface species that might be responsible for almandine depression, XPS analysis was further performed. XPS test is a very important surface analysis technique which is used to reveal the chemical composition of minerals [ The samples preparation procedure was as described in Contact angle has been employed in froth flotation to investigate and reveal the extent of wetting and hydrophobicity of mineral surfaces. The contact angle measurement in this study was conducted using a Kruss drop shape analysis system (DSA 10-MK2, Germany). The sessile drop method was utilized to determine the contact angle of water on the pressed mineral pellet surface with a 10 mm diameter. The samples were prepared by following the same procedure as it was in single mineral flotation. The pellets were prepared using 0.3 g of mineral sample (−2 μm), powdered mineral under a pressure of 2876 psi (196 atm) (ICL International Crystal Laboratories, USA) for 5 min. A drop of distilled water was placed onto the surface of the pressed pellet and a set of microscopic images of the drop and the pellet were taken immediately. Then one image with the momentary view was taken to determine the contact angle by fitting a tangent to the shape of the sessile drop on the microscopic image. The measurements were done in triplicate with average value being recorded as the final tally. The effect of the AC1815-SPA concentration on the recovery of rutile and almandine at pH 7 is shown in   The investigation on single mineral flotation clearly revealed that sodium sulfite offered a reasonable inhibitory effect on almandine floatability. Further flotation of artificially mixed minerals was as well performed to unravel and demonstrate further the depressing effect of sodium sulfite on almandine floatability. The TiO The flotation separation of artificially mixed minerals was carried out at various dosages of The effect of It can be inferred from the above contact angle readings that rutile had a more hydrophobic surface compared with that of almandine after the treatment with the depressant as it maintained a reasonably high values of contact angles close to untreated sample as opposed to almandine which had a remarkable deviation from the value without depressant treatment. It was therefore a clear indication that the depressant had negligible inhibitory effect on rutile mineral while depressing almandine at the same time. The zeta potentials measurements of almandine and rutile minerals as a function of pH are clearly shown in The zeta potential values of almandine treated with sodium sulfite show a sharp decrease of zeta potential within the entire pH range investigated in this study. Needless to say, this change is more remarkable around pH 6 to pH 10. The electronegativity of almandine surface shifted larger to negative side which might be attested to a strong chemisorption of sulfite anions ( The adsorption density of depressant, sulfite ions can be calculated using the Stern-Grahame Equation [ The value of △ To further elucidate the interaction mechanism between the depressant and the minerals, XPS studies were carried out. The surveys scan XPS of the two minerals with and without the pretreatment with sodium sulfite are presented in The high resolution XPS spectra of Ti and O from rutile sample are shown in The high-resolution O1s for rutile is shown in   In ilmenite flotation, compared with ferrous ion, the greater insolubility of ferric iron-collector improves the hydrophobicity of the mineral surfaces, enhancing the bubble-particle attachment time and flotation recovery. The increase of the relative content of Fe The reduction of ferric ions into ferrous ions on the surface of almandine by The formation of hydrophilic species The O1s spectrum in The results of Al2p elements are clearly presented in It can therefore be inferred from XPS analysis that the reduction of ferric ions by sodium sulfite led to depletion of ferric active sites on almandine lattice and hence there was insufficient active sites for collector to adsorb on almandine surface, therefore remaining hydrophilic [ The formation of hydrophilic species which resulted from the reactions between almandine and sodium sulfite ions might be demonstrated by the following reactions [ The XPS results of the two minerals confirmed the contact angle measurements results, indicating that the surface of rutile was slightly affected by the  Flotation tests of single minerals clearly demonstrated that depressant The zeta potential results have demonstrated that adsorption of anionic components ( Contact angle readings show that the rutile had a relatively more hydrophobic surface compared to that of almandine after depressant treatment. XPS spectroscopic studies have shown that the depression mechanism of almandine by sodium sulfite is attributed to the formation of The author declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The financial supports for this work from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (projects Nos.51974205, 51674183 and 51904208) are gratefully acknowledged. This research is also supported by the Major Scientific and Technological Innovation Project of Hubei Province (2017ACA187) and the central government guided local science and technology development projects (2019ZYYD070).