Electric Arc Furnace Dust (EAFD) is an important hazardous waste from the steel production industry, due to its heavy metals content. It is recycled through a pyrometallurgical process to generate a Zn and Pb concentrate called Waelz oxide. This concentrate can be processed hydrometallurgically in order to obtain high purity ZnO. But this hydrometallurgical process also generates as wastes different solid residues with high content of heavy metals and a liquid waste stream with significant concentrations of ammonia and heavy metals. This is why the objective of this work is to design a process that can simultaneously treat these solid and liquid wastes. In the developed process, an alkaline solution is used to leach solid residues so as to produce an inert final waste. After filtration, the leaching liquor is mixed with the liquid waste in order to increase its pH and to enhance the ammonia evaporation by air stripping. This stripped stream can be recycled to the leaching stage of the Waelz oxide treatment process. Furthermore, the ammonia stripping precipitates the dissolved heavy metals as a zinc concentrate that can be commercialized as a raw material for the metallic zinc production industry. Therefore, the developed process reduces by more than half the wastes generation, increases the Zn recycling yield >5% and recovers >75% of the needed ammonia for the fresh leaching liquor.Steel is one of the most widely used metallic materials in our modern world, because of the adaptability and durability of its products. Hence, steelmaking industry produces approximately 1.6 billion tons of steel every year to meet worldwide consumption demand. 40% of the processed steel is obtained from recycled waste in electric arc furnace ( Nowadays, Waelz process is acknowledged as the Best Available Technology (BAT) in order to treat EAFD, according to Reference Document for Non-Ferrous Metal Industries ( Waelz oxide is sold to zinc concentrator companies to produce high-purity zinc products, basically, metallic zinc and zinc compounds such as zinc oxide and zinc sulphate ( The main conclusion of these previous works is that a very promising ZnO production yield can be obtained from the hydrometallurgical treatment of Waelz oxide, but the ammonia and heavy metals discharge and solid wastes disposal make impossible its industrial application. So, further research is required to get this process closer to its industrialization. Firstly, in this study a hydrometallurgical process to high-purity zinc oxide production using ammoniacal solutions as leaching liquors was optimized. Once zinc is dissolved from Waelz oxide with other impurities (i.e. iron, lead, cadmium and copper), these are eliminated from the zinc solution through purification stage: i) via oxidation with air (iron removal) and ii) via cementation with metallic zinc powder (removal of other metallic impurities). The purified zinc solution is precipitated through CO The solid wastes generated by the ZnO hydrometallurgical production process stages (leaching, oxidation and cementation) are categorized as dangerous and hazardous industrial wastes ( The Waelz Oxide sample under study (used as raw material) originates from the BEFESA ZINC ASER S.A. plant (Spain) and it was used as received. The reactants used during the experimental works are ammonium carbonate (ACS grade, SIGMA-ALDRICH) and liquid ammonia 25% (ACS grade, SIGMA-ALDRICH) to prepare the leaching liquor, zinc powder as cementation agent (pure, SIGMA-ALDRICH), CO All experiments were carried out in a 2 Chemical analysis of the used Waelz oxide sample and the generated solid wastes and treated solid residues were carried out using a microwave acid digestion procedure and the subsequence analysis of the metal contents with an ICP - AES Perkin Elmer 2000 - DV model. The metallic ions concentrations in the liquid samples of the obtained zinc liquors were also analysed by ICP - AES (Perkin Elmer 2000 - DV model). Argentometry tritration (Crison 8661 Titromatic) was used to measure the chloride concentration and a fluoride ion selective electrode (Crison 9655) was used for fluoride analysis. Dissolved ammonia was analysed using a high-performance ammonia ion selective electrode (Orion Ammonia gas sensing electrode) and a carbon dioxide ion selective electrode (Orion Carbon dioxide electrode 952BNMP) was used in the analysis of total carbonates present in the liquid samples. Zinc concentrate obtained in the ammonia recovery stage was also analysed by X ray diffraction (using a Brucker D8 Advance Diffractometer), equipped with a primary germanium monochromator with Bragg-Brentano geometry and with a CuKα1 wave-length of 1.5406 First of all, the patented industrial process to produce high-purity zinc oxide from Waelz oxide, using aqueous solutions of ammonium carbonate and liquid ammonia as leaching liquor ( The characterization of the Waelz oxide used as raw material in this study is shown in In the studied high purity ZnO production process Waelz oxide is leached in order to dissolve as much quantity of the contained zinc as possible using ammonium carbonate as leaching liquor. The liquor concentration and the operation conditions were optimized for the leaching stage. The direct relation between ammonia liquid quantity and the zinc recovery yield could be noticed following the main chemical reaction (Eq. After leaching stage, obtained zinc solution must be purified to achieve the target quality in the final product. The goal of the purification stages is to remove the impurities from the leaching liquor, trying to reduce as little quantity of dissolved zinc as possible. Cementation is the most used purification method in zinc hydrometallurgy. In this process all metals with standard reduction potentials (volts) lower than zinc (iron, nickel and chromium in this case) will not be removed, decreasing the value of the final product. For this reason, it is necessary to analyze an oxidation stage before the cementation process. In the zinc hydrometallurgy some oxidant agents are used to remove the iron from the leaching liquors by precipitation. For example, in the electrolytic zinc production process, MnO The last purification step to reach the target quality of the hydrometallurgical liquor is the cementation stage. The goal of this process is to remove the remaining metallic impurities (after oxidation) dissolved in the liquor. The operation is used to precipitate metallic ions (Me The zinc dust addition, cementation temperature and reaction kinetics were optimized. The result of the purification stages is ammonium carbonate solution with a high concentration of zinc ions that must be recovered from the liquor. The adopted strategy in this case is to recover the zinc in solid phase as zinc carbonate and zinc hydroxide which will need a subsequent thermal treatment of these solids to obtain the target ZnO. Several options exist to recover the dissolved zinc from the liquor: evaporation, crystallization or precipitation. In this case, chemical precipitation is selected because final product characteristics make other options energetically unsustainable. This chemical precipitation was carried out with CO After the recovery of dissolved zinc through precipitation in the previous step as zinc carbonate, a thermal treatment is needed to remove water, carbon dioxide and other gases (because they are chemically bounded), in order to obtain the target product ( 88% of zinc recovery was reached in this optimized hydrometallurgical process ( This characterization is necessary to evaluate the toxicity of different residues that are generated during the production processes. In this case, the hydrometallurgical process generates different solid residues and a liquid waste (the exhausted liquor). Solid wastes are generated during the leaching stage and the following leaching liquor purification stages (oxidation and cementation processes). The solid residue from the leaching stage contains insoluble matter of the Waelz oxide in the optimized ammoniacal solution used as leaching liquor. The solid wastes from the purification stages are composed of several metallic impurities removed from the leaching solution. As can be seen in These three waste streams were blended, in the proportions which were generated, because the amount of oxidation and cementation solid residues is small in comparison with the leaching residue ( On the other hand, the exhausted liquor of the production process, after most of the dissolved zinc is recovered in the precipitation stage, cannot be directly recycled and it must be treated for economic and environmental reasons. Therefore, this liquid waste was characterized in order to study an efficient process to remove the most hazardous substances and at the same time, trying to obtain some marketable by-product. The chemical characterization of the exhausted liquor is shown on During the optimization of the hydrometallurgical stages all the ammonia losses were measured in order to identify the recoverable ammonia sources for spent liquor regeneration. The ammonia balance of the hydrometallurgical processes ( As indicated before, to produce industrially 600 In the following sections the processes of this treatment will be detailed. In the exhausted liquor the dissolved ammonia is present as ammonium ions, NH Main reactions in the liquor: Secondary reactions in the liquor: Induced precipitation reactions: When the pH is increased above 11.5, two major factors affect the transfer rate of ammonia from water to the gas phase ( The air-water surface tension The ammonia concentration gradient between gas stream and liquor. The designed processes must combine the transformation of NH The chosen alkaline liquor was a caustic soda aqueous solution. The leaching experimental conditions were carried out at 25 Under high alkaline leaching conditions, lead will form soluble complexes with OH According to the obtained results it can be concluded that the optimal NaOH concentration to extract the maximum possible metals quantity from solid residues is 6.5 A combined solution with this mixing ratio must be fed to the ammonia stripping reactor, which is going to be optimized in the next experiments. When the pH of the exhausted liquor was increased above 11.5, other operation conditions of the ammonia stripping reactor have to be defined in order to optimize the liquid waste treatment stage. The stripping ratio (S) characterizes the difficulty of removing the contaminant from the liquid phase and it was maximized, optimizing the variables which influence it: The experimental work to study the influence of these conditions was carried out in a stirred tank using 1,8 The optimal temperature of the ammonia recovery process was fixed at 60 The optimal ammonia recovery yield at the studied conditions is 98.4% and the zinc recovery yield is 86.3%, when the optimal time to complete the process is 100 The composition of the liquid waste after the developed process is shown in The precipitated by-product, characterized in Once the precipitated by-product is separated, the remaining solution must be treated through a simple Fenton Process in order to achieve environmental legislation limits (pH, ammonia concentration, chlorides concentration, and so on) before final discharge ( A solid and liquid wastes treatment process has been developed to be integrated in the hydrometallurgical production of high-grade ZnO from Waelz Oxide. The process combines the treatment of the solid residues (from the leaching, oxidation and cementation stages of the ZnO fabrication) with the liquid waste treatment. This reduces the OPEX of the integrated plant, increasing the utilization of hazardous waste through its partial recycle to the same or other processes. It also reduces the environmental impact through a decrease of the solid and liquid wastes while they are inertized. In this case, the designed and optimized process reduces the solid waste by 54.8% (from 124