Winery wastewaters are difficult to treat by conventional biological processes because they are seasonal and experience a substantial flow variations. Photocatalytic advanced oxidation is a promising technology for wastewaters containing high amounts of organic matter.
                  In this work, the photo-Fenton process in heterogeneous phase is presented as an alternative methodology for the treatment of winery wastewaters.
                  As a consequence of the great number of existing variables, an experimental design methodology has been used in order to study the influence and interaction of various variables and to obtain a reduced empirical model which describes the organic matter degradation process.
                  Applying photo-Fenton treatment in heterogeneous phase under energetic conditions for synthetic samples simulating winery wastewaters results in purification levels of up to 50% (measured as total organic carbon). Different reduced models are obtained and their utilization depends mainly on the degree of degradation of organic matter required.The wine industry annually generates large volumes of wastewaters, originating mainly from various washing operations during the crushing and pressing of grapes as well as the rinsing of fermentation tanks, barrels and other items of equipment ( Furthermore, wine and grape wastewaters are more difficult to treat than other wastewaters from food processing plants. Wineries generate industrial effluents that due to their composition, high organic strength, seasonal variability, acidity and unpleasant odours constitute both environmental and aesthetic problems in wine producing countries ( Aragón is one of the most important wine-producing regions in Spain. A typical vineyard usually produces about 17,300 tons of grapes per year. Though some medium-scale wineries are equipped with aerobic biological treatment plants, the majority of them work unsatisfactorily due to their seasonal variability, composition and high organic concentration of the effluents. A possible solution to the problem could be the application of advanced oxidation processes for the elimination of a major part of the organic matter followed by an aerobic biological treatment. Advanced oxidation processes are innovative technologies increasingly being applied in the treatment of wastewaters. They offer an alternative for the treatment of effluents with a high organic matter content. Our research group has been found that photocatalytic advanced oxidation based on hydrogen peroxide is an appropriate purification treatment for winery wastewaters ( The Fenton reagent, a mixture of Fe The main disadvantage of the Fenton reagent is that homogeneous catalysts, added as iron salt, cannot be retained in the process thus causing additional water pollution ( Several authors have studied the degradation of the characteristic compounds present in winery wastewaters (alcohols, phenols, acids and sugar) in isolation using photo-Fenton processes. The photo-Fenton process in heterogeneous phase depends on various parameters that can modify the degradation of organic matter present in aqueous samples, such as H The number of the influential variables in the selected system is high, and for this reason it is useful to apply experimental design techniques. These techniques provide a systematic way of working that allows conclusions to be drawn about the variables (or combinations of them) that are most influential in the response factor while carrying out the minimum possible number of experiments ( The final objective of the results analysis is to obtain a reduced empirical model that directly relates the response factor with the most influential factors and that describes the process appropriately. This serves to facilitate later treatment of the process and to reduce the number of factors to the lowest possible. Several authors have studied the application of experimental design not only to the determination of important variables in advanced oxidation processes but also to know their influence in the degradation process ( In this research work, photo-Fenton treatment in heterogeneous phase is used to remove organic matter present in synthetic samples, representing winery wastewaters, in order to investigate the influence of different variables and to obtain, using experimental design, a reduced model that describes the organic matter degradation process. Due to one of the main characteristics of these wastewaters, their seasonal character (winery wastewaters are not generated during nine months of the year), it is necessary to reproduce the winery effluents by means of synthetic samples. Sampling carried out in several wineries located in Aragón (Spain) has enabled the characteristics of their wastewaters to be established and consequently reproduced in the form of synthetic samples ( These synthetic samples were prepared by diluting commercial red wine (WW) or commercial grape juice (WG) in ultra pure water, obtaining approximately the same characteristics as the real ones and the same amount of organic matter ( Commercial H The amount of organic matter was quantified by means of two different parameters: total organic carbon (TOC) and chemical oxygen demand (COD). TOC was determined using a TOC-VCSH SHIMADZU analyser. COD was measured by the open reflux method (Method 5520B of Standard Methods, Photocatalytic experiments were carried out using 100 In order to consider possible interferences, a control sample without the addition of H Multivariate analysis has become an important tool for obtaining valuable and statistically significant models of a phenomenon by performing a minimum set of well chosen experiments. With a determined number of assays, information can be obtained regarding the importance of each variable and their interaction effects ( A two-level factorial design was selected, in which each variable assumes two values or levels. The variables considered for this study were: H    A Pareto graphic is used to draw conclusions about which of these variables and interactions are most significant. The MINITAB     The Pareto chart for WW samples ( On the other hand, One of the objectives of experimental design is to obtain a reduced model that directly relates the response factor with the influential variables in order to facilitate the subsequent treatment of the process under study. The reduced models are described by a first-order polynomial expression. The main tools for studying the reduced models were based on the residuals. The selection of the most suitable reduced model has been made by a comparison between the calculated values achieved by the application of the reduced models and the experimental values of each assay (     This work shows that winery effluents can be degraded by photo-Fenton technologies in heterogeneous phase. Maximum degradation of 55% is achieved for synthetic samples prepared by diluting commercial grape juice in water or by diluting commercial red wine; for intermediate experimental conditions degradation is higher for the latter samples. The influence of each variable and their interactions with respect to the response factor has been studied by means of a two-level factorial design. An empirical reduced model that describes the degradation process has been established. It is observed that the degree of organic matter removal for samples prepared from grape juice does not depend on the particle size of the clay. For samples prepared from wine, the degree of organic matter removal depends neither on the concentration of the clay nor the initial concentration of organic matter. The reduced empirical models are chosen on the basis of the influential variables and interactions obtained in Pareto charts. It is demonstrated that the models can be used to predict the behaviour of these treatments. The use of one or another depends mainly on the degree of degradation of organic matter required. The authors wish to acknowledge financial support for this work from the Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología (Project REN2000-1410-TECNO) and the Gobierno de Aragón (Project P042-2000).