The effects of the copper content on tensile properties and microstructures of modified Zircaloy-4 (Zry-4) were investigated. The modified alloys were prepared by changing the chemical composition of Zry-4; the Fe/Cr ratio of Zry-4 was reduced from 2 to 0.5 and the Cu content was varied from 0 up to 0.5 wt%. The ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and the yield stress (YS) of the modified Zry-4 increased significantly with the increase in copper content. 0.1 wt% copper could make up the decrease in strength resulting from the reduction of tin content. Three types of precipitates, Zr(Fe,Cr)2, Zr(Fe,Cr,Cu)2 and Zr2Cu, were found in the present study. The average size and the area fraction of precipitates increased as the copper content increased. The higher tensile strength is believed to be due to the higher precipitate fractions.Zircaloy (Zry-4) is used as a nuclear fuel cladding material due to its satisfactory oxidation resistance under current PWR operating conditions. However, recent trends toward extended fuel-burnup and high-pH operation have led to the need of improving oxidation resistance of the Zry-4 cladding. Considerable efforts are devoted to the development of advanced cladding materials, especially by modifying the chemical composition of Zry-4 The objective of this work is to investigate the effect of copper on the tensile properties and to find the optimum copper content to compensate the loss of strength due to the reduction of tin content that improves the oxidation resistance. Also, the effect of copper content on the microstructure has been investigated. Two classes of modified Zry-4 specimens were prepared by changing the chemical composition of Zry-4. Both types of specimens have the standard tin content (1.5 wt%). In the first class, the Fe/Cr ratio of Zry-4 was reduced to 0.5 and the copper content was varied from 0 up to 0.5 wt%. In the second class, the Fe/Cr ratio of Zry-4 was maintained at 2. In addition, the copper content was increased up to 0.5 wt%. The chemical compositions of the modified Zry-4 alloys are presented in The specimens for tensile tests were prepared by the procedures as shown in Tensile tests were performed at room temperature at a strain rate of 5.2×10 The size and the distribution of precipitates in the specimens were observed by SEM and TEM. Thin foils for TEM were prepared from the plates that were cold rolled and annealed at 700°C by mechanically thinning to 0.05 mm in thickness. Discs, 3 mm in diameter, were then punched out of the 0.05 mm foils and electropolished. Electropolishing was done in a solution of 85% methanol and 15% perchloric acid below −20°C. For optical microscopy, the sample was etched in a mixed solution of 5% HF, 45% HNO Changes of ultimate tensile strength (UTS) and yield stress (YS) as a function of copper content for the specimens are presented in Hong et al. The strengthening role of tin in Zry-4 is well known Precipitates in the present specimens were studied using transmission electron microscopy and energy dispersion spectroscopy. It was observed that many precipitates were homogeneously distributed either along α-Zr grain boundaries or within the grains. Three types of precipitates were found, namely, (i) Zr(Fe,Cr)  The average size and the area fraction of the precipitates increased as the copper content increased in the present study as shown in The grain size in the Zr–Cu binary alloys was reported to decrease by 12 μm as the copper content increased from 0 to 0.3 wt% The UTS and the YS of the modified Zr alloys strongly depended on the copper content. About 0.1 wt% copper content was sufficient to compensate for the decrease in strength due to the reduction in tin content from 1.0 to 0 wt%. Precipitates found in the present specimens were identified as hexagonal Zr(Cr,Fe) This study was supported by Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO) and Electrical Engineering and Science Research Institute (EESRI).