CoFeZr amorphous magnetic materials prepared by mechanical alloying (MA) were investigated. Microstructures of the CoFeZr alloys were analyzed by XRD and their morphology observed by SEM. The results show that the characteristics of the amorphous materials mainly depend on MA conditions and alloys composition. By a two-step MA process, micron or sub-micron flake-like CoFeZr amorphous materials with narrow size distribution range and regular morphology were obtained. Microwave permeability of these alloys was further measured by an Agilent 8722ES Vector Network Analyzer. The maximum values of μ′ and μ″ at 2GHz were 4.26 and 4.22, respectively. Thus these novel materials could be used for microwave absorbers operating in the several GHz range.Along with the wide-range application of electromagnetic wave, serious electromagnetic interference (EMI) problems have recently become apparent. As we know, using an electromagnetic wave absorber is an effective way to reduce EMI because electromagnetic wave absorbers can transform the undesired waves into heat. Soft magnetic materials such as spinel-type ferrites and ferromagnetic alloys are the usual absorbers. But in the common 1–5 Large values of real part and especially imaginary part of complex permeability are one of the key properties to prepare thinner absorbers In the present study, the main aim is to synthesize amorphous ferromagnetic materials with large complex permeability in GHz microwave range. Effects of varying preparation conditions were systematically investigated. From the experimental results, considerable enhancement of microwave permeability of CoFeZr amorphous alloy prepared by two-step MA was presented. Elemental Co, Fe and Zr powders (purity of 99.9% or more and particle size blow 50 The microstructures in as-milled powders were characterized by D/Max-3B X-ray diffractrometer (CuKα; 30  SEM morphology of two kinds of as-milled Co During the one-step MA process, cold-welding and laceration were repeated among particles, thus the neighboring particles tended to agglomerate decreasing surface energy. During the two-step MA process, adsorption could lower free energy and PCA was adsorbed first on the newly born surfaces of particles, thus preventing the particles from agglomerating. Usually, PCA was adsorbed favorably in the hollow part (pores in the particles) making the smashing of the corner part more possible. All of these contributed to the formation of powder materials with regular morphology and narrow size distribution.  Co-based soft magnetic alloy has negative and small magnetostriction, its effective anisotropy field is moderate and resonance frequency can be near 2 Complex permeability spectra of samples from two-step MA alloys with different compositions are shown in The process conditions considerably affect morphology, microstructure and microwave characteristics of CoFeZr amorphous alloys. Our results show that a PCA is necessary in the MA process and the two-step MA technology is appropriate to produce CoFeZr amorphous materials with relatively perfect morphology and large microwave permeability. These characteristics also strongly depend on the composition of CoFeZr, especially Fe content. Co