Ultrafine grained dual phase steel consisting of ferrite and martensite of ∼1 μm was processed by equal channel angular pressing and subsequent intercritical annealing. This steel exhibited the superior combination of higher strength, larger elongation and more rapid strain hardening compared to those of coarse grained dual phase steel.One of the mechanical drawbacks of ultrafine grained (UFG) ferrite–pearlite low carbon steels is the lack of strain hardening, resulting in the high yield ratio which is undesirable for the structural use, in spite of their ultrahigh strength Meanwhile, the versatility of steel is recognized by the fact that a wide range of the mechanical properties can be achieved by microstructural modification associated with the constituent phases, i.e., type, size, shape, volume faction, etc., without the compositional change. In this regard, dual phase steels consisting of ferrite and martensite exhibit the unique tensile properties. They are manifested by continuous yielding, low yield strength, moderately high uniform elongation, high ultimate tensile strength, and rapid strain hardening at the initial plastic deformation stage. It is worth noting that these characteristics are typical for dual phase steels having relatively coarse phase sizes, mostly larger than ∼10 μm A low carbon steel (Fe–0.15%C–0.25%Si–1.1%Mn (in wt%)) was austenitized at 1200 °C for 1 h and then air-cooled. In order to produce UFG dual phase steel (UFG-DP steel), the steel was subjected to ECAP and subsequent intercritical annealing. ECAP was conducted at 500 °C with a die yielding an effective strain of ∼1 by a single pass. ECAP was performed up to four passes (an accumulated strain of ∼4) with route C (180° sample rotation between the pass Tensile specimens with a gage length of 25.4 mm were machined from both UFG-DP and CG-DP steels. Room temperature tensile tests were carried out at an initial strain rate of 1 The microstructure of UFG-DP steel consisted of equiaxed ferrite grains and uniformly distributed martensite islands ( As described above, there are significant differences of the morphological characteristics of martensite, i.e., distribution, size, shape and sites, between UFG-DP and CG-DP steels. In addition, in spite of the identical intercritical annealing conditions, the martensite volume fraction of UFG-DP steel was larger than that of CG-DP steel. The microstructural characteristics of dual phase steels are primarily determined by a starting microstructure before intercritical annealing as well as intercritical annealing conditions The representative engineering and true stress–strain ( Of the analytical methods describing the strain hardening behavior of metals and alloys, the modified Crussard–Jaoul (C–J) analysis Then,  Dual phase low carbon steel consisting of ultrafine ferrite grains and isolated blocky martensite islands of ∼1 μm was obtained by equal channel angular pressing (route C at 500 °C and an effective strain of ∼4) and subsequent intercritical annealing (740 °C for 10 min) followed by water quenching. The strength of ultrafine grained dual phase steel was much higher than that of coarse grained dual phase steel prepared by the identical intercritical annealing without equal channel angular pressing. In addition, in spite of higher strength, total elongation of the former was higher than that of the latter, and the yield ratio and uniform elongation were comparable in both steels. Unlike ultrafine grained ferrite–pearlite steels, the present ultrafine grained dual phase steel exhibited continuous yielding and rapid extensive strain hardening at the initial stage of plastic deformation. At the first deformation stage, plastic deformation of ferrite in ultrafine grained dual phase steel was more restrained by uniformly distributed martensite islands having smaller interspacing compared to coarse grained dual phase steel. This resulted in more pronounced load transfer from ferrite to martensite and, consequently, the second deformation stage associated with plastic deformation of martensite started earlier in ultrafine grained dual phase steel. This work was supported by Ministry of Science and Technology of Korea through ‘National Research Laboratory Program’.