Various types of temperature-sensing devices have become essential components for wearable computing devices these days. Meanwhile, plenty of temperature-sensing devices were researched and developed. This paper firstly introduces a Ni thin film-based resistive temperature sensing device on a cylindrical PET monofilament which has excellent flexibility and a simple fabrication process in room temperature. The structure of the Ni resistive temperature-sensing device is very simple due to the Ni thin film deposition by radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering which requires no pattern. The temperature coefficient of resistance (TCR) indicates the temperature sensitivity of the Ni resistive temperature-sensing device. By calculating the resistance from I–V curves, the TCR shows a constant value of 2.44×10−3
                     °C−1. Even after a repetitive bending and washing process of the PET monofilament which we report for the first time, the TCR maintains a high value ranging from 1.52×10−3
                     °C−1 to 3.13×10−3
                     °C−1. The results demonstrate that the PET monofilament combined with the Ni thin film can be a good candidate for a resistive temperature-sensing device.The internet of things (IOT) technology refers to a multifunctional system which includes electronic devices, internet connected devices, wireless sensor networks and other computing devices Among these various sensing devices, those which respond to temperature change are called temperature-sensing devices. In this case, the resistance changes when the temperature changes. Temperature-sensing devices, such as a thermostat, thermistor, thermocouple, and resistive temperature detector, were the best-selling products. Some researches on flexible temperature-sensing devices were reported. Many reports showed temperature-sensing devices made of a conducting polymer, carbon nano tube (CNT) and a cellulose/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) composite film In this paper, a resistive-type temperature-sensing device was fabricated by depositing only Ni thin film by RF magnetron sputtering for application of a smart textile. Previously, thermally-evaporated Al thin film was deposited on a cylindrical PET monofilament by our research group To investigate the electrical properties, resistance and the current–voltage (I–V) curves were measured over a wide temperature range from 25 Over the bare cylindrical PET monofilament, the Ni thin film was deposited as a resistor to fabricate the Ni temperature-sensing device. The Ni thin film of less than 720 The cleaned PET monofilament was put in the vacuum chamber to deposit the Ni thin film by RF magnetron sputtering. For the uniform deposition of Ni thin film, the PET monofilament was fixed horizontally and was rotated using a rotation device at a speed of 0.5 times/s. The sputtering power was maintained at 250 The experimental setup for electrical properties was shown as images in Afterward, I–t curves and response time was measured. PET monofilament was inserted inside the oven at 25  An optical microscope (Optica, B-350) was used to observe the surface of the PET monofilament and FESEM (JEOL, JSM-7100F) was used to investigate the surface morphology and cross-sectional area of the PET monofilament by varying the magnification.   I–t characteristic curves and response time of Ni temperature-sensing device were depicted in The cross-sectional image of the PET monofilament with the Ni thin film by FESEM (JEOL, JSM-7100F) is presented in As shown in In the case of smart fabrics or wearable computing devices applied to sportswear or outdoor clothing, smart fabrics must not lose their electrical functionalities, such as resistance or TCR. Thus, the bending experiment was conducted by the bending device which was shown in Besides many types of temperature-sensing devices, the resistive type temperature-sensing device was fabricated for wearable computing devices, which had a good response to temperature change. Radio frequency magnetron sputtering was used for depositing the Ni thin film and the structure of the Ni resistive temperature-sensing device was very straightforward. The PET monofilament was chosen for the substrate owing to its cylindrical shape-like typical fiber used for clothes and higher glass transition temperature than other polymer fibers. The electrical properties were evaluated by the TCR and resistance change using I–V curves. Thus, the resistance as a function of temperature showed excellent linearity and the TCR was maintained as a constant (2.44 Based on the FESEM image of the PET monofilament, the thickness increased with deposition time and the grain size was smaller in the PET monofilament that had a shorter Ni deposition time. Due to the small grain size, the PET monofilament with Ni deposited for 20 The manuscript was written through contributions from all authors. This work was supported by the Technology Innovation Program (10041957, Design and Development of fiber-based flexible display) funded by the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MI, Korea) and was also partially supported by the Fast Track Fellowship program of the Dongguk University.