In order to investigate the effect of surface wettability on colloidal stability, aggregation/dispersion behaviors of fine silica and graphite in aqueous suspensions have been investigated. It was found that hydrophobic graphite particles showed a high aggregation degree in low pH suspensions, while it showed very low aggregation degree in high pH suspensions due to the strong electrostatic repulsions between graphite particles. On the other hand, silica particles showed stable dispersion behaviors even under strong Van der Waals attraction in low pH suspensions, which could not be explained by DLVO theory. Solvation factor on hydrophilic silica particles was applied to prove the strong hydration of silica, and it is the hydration repulsion forces among silica particles that determined the stable dispersion of silica particles in a wide pH range. Therefore, it was concluded that hydration layers formed on hydrophilic mineral surfaces played an important role in colloidal stability.Colloidal stability of minerals particles in aqueous suspensions plays important roles in many fields, such as food, materials, mineral processing, chemical engineering, and coatings, etc. The classical DLVO theory is conventionally used to interpret the aggregating and dispersing behaviors among colloidal particles by comparing the leading interacting forces Due to the abnormal dispersing stability of silica colloid in wide pH ranges, extended DLVO theory has been developed to describe the colloidal stability in aqueous solutions Considering such significant effect of surface wetting on multiple colloids, a comprehensive understanding of the correlation between surface wettability and colloidal stability is the prerequisite. So, in this work, two kinds of typical hydrophilic mineral and hydrophobic mineral, silica and graphite, are selected to investigate the effect of surface wettability on colloidal stability in aqueous suspensions. The silica and graphite used in this work are ∝-silica and crystalline (flake) graphite. Both of the powders were obtained from the Sigma-Aldrich Co. (St. Louis, USA). The silica and graphite were ground mineral powder. The chemical analysis results were given in The water used in this work was first distilled and then passed through resin beds and a 0.2 μm filter. The residual conductivity of the water was less than 1 μS/cm. In this work, a given weight of dry silica powder was first put into a 100 ml measuring flask. The flask was then filled to the mark with water. Next, the suspension was mildly stirred with a magnetic agitator (Digital hot plate/stirrer 04644) at 150 rev/min for 24 h. The pH of the suspension was controlled at 6.5. Then, the suspension was transferred to the rheometer for viscosity measurements. The experimental condition was chosen with a temperature of 20   and cutting speed of 1000 1/s. Each measurement was repeated 60 times. Results reported in this paper were the arithmetic average of these 60 measurements. The error estimation has been made for the 60 data. It was found that the standard error of the reported values of measured viscosity was in the range of 0.0017–0.0029 mPa·s, which depended on the value of measured viscosity (in this work, the viscosities of nanoscale silica dispersions were about 1–1.8 mPa·s). The pH values of the solutions and suspensions were tested by pH meter (Thermo ORION). Zeta potential values of each mineral colloids were measured by the Zetameter (Coulter DELSA 440) in liquid suspensions using the Laser Doppler speedometer. The spectrophotometer (Bausch Lomb, Spectronic 20) was used to measure the percentage of transmissivity (the ratio of the intensity of light passing through the sample, to the intensity of light incident on the sample, multiplied by 100%) or absorbance (logarithm of the transmittance) of the solid-liquid suspension. The particle size (d According to Einstein's dispersion viscosity theory, the relative viscosity of a diluted dispersion of solid spheres can be expressed by Eq. Here, we define The aggregation degree Contact angle measurement is one of the simplest and the most practical techniques for assessing wettability of a mineral surface The particle size of silica changed with pH value in aqueous suspension is presented in Due to the importance of hydration layers on minerals surfaces, some methods, such as AFM method, molecular dynamics method and viscosity method, have been developed to investigate hydration layers So far, a strong hydration behavior has been verified to have occurred on the silica surfaces. The classical DLVO theory for studying the stability of colloidal dispersions has been used for a long time to explain the colloidal stability behavior Graphite has also been selected to study the aggregation/dispersion behaviors of typical hydrophobic minerals in aqueous suspensions. The much more graphite particles in the aqueous suspension, the low transmissivity of the aqueous suspensions. When graphite particles aggregated into larger flocs, the decreased concentration of particles in aqueous suspensions will lead to increased transmissivity. As shown in The zeta potentials of graphite particles have also been measured to investigate the interactions among these fine particles. Zeta potential as a function of pH values of the graphite particles was shown in In summary, the colloidal stability of hydrophobic graphite particles agrees well with classical DLVO theory due to very weak hydration occurred on hydrophobic mineral surfaces. On the contrary, the colloidal stability of hydrophilic silica particles does not accord with the classical DLVO theory due to very strong hydration can take place on the hydrophilic silica particles. So that extended DLVO theory should be introduced to describe the colloidal stability of very hydrophilic minerals due to the formation of thick hydration layers.  Weak hydration behaviors can occur on hydrophobic mineral surfaces so that colloidal stability of the hydrophobic mineral particles like graphite agree well with the classical DLVO theory. Strong hydration behaviors occurred on hydrophilic mineral surfaces, and the strong hydration repulsions played the dominant role in the colloidal stability behaviors of hydrophilic minerals, which can only be explained by the extended DLVO theory. It is concluded that surface wettability of minerals affects the hydration strength and finally has significant influences on the colloidal stability behaviors of minerals particles. There are no conflicts of interest to declare.