The electrochemical incineration of diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA) with boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode had been initially performed under galvanostatic conditions. The main and interaction effects of four operating parameters (flow rate, applied current density, sulfate concentration and initial DTPA concentration) on mineralization performance were investigated. Under similar experimental conditions, Doehlert matrix (DM) and central composite rotatable design (CCRD) were used as statistical multivariate methods in the optimization of the anodic oxidation processes. A comparison between DM model and CCRD model revealed that the former was more accurate, possibly due to its higher operating level numbers employed (7 levels for two variables). Despite this, these two models resulted in quite similar optimum operating conditions. The maximum TOC removal percentages at 180 min were 76.2% and 73.8% for case of DM and CCRD, respectively. In addition, with the aid of quantum chemistry calculation and LC/MS analysis, a plausible degradation sequence of DTPA on BDD anode was also proposed.Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), a conventional chelating agent, has been extensively utilized in pulp and paper industries. This is mainly due to its strong capabilities to sequester metal cations and to form stable metal complexes which prevent the contact of transition metals and peroxygen chemicals ( Over the past decade, anodic oxidation with boron-doped diamond (BDD), providing environmental compatibility and energy efficiency, has been regarded as one of the most promising options in wastewater treatment ( The current work thus aims at the preliminary evaluation of the viability of BDD technology for the mineralization of DTPA. Two important chemometric techniques, Doehlert matrix (DM) and central composite rotatable design (CCRD), have been employed here for optimization and comparison purposes. It is to be noted that the main difference between DM and CCRD lies in the number of operating levels adopted ( DTPA (C The mineralization percentage of DTPA was monitored by the decay of TOC values, which were determined with a Shimadzu TOC-L analyzer (the TOC value of 100 mg L The initial limiting current density ( The specific energy consumption ( Accordingly, the mineralization current efficiency ( Degradation experiments were conducted at galvanostatic conditions in batch mode (see In this work, the four-variable DM and CCRD had both been employed to optimize the BDD anodic oxidation processes. Four operating parameters including flow rate (X  According the experimental methodologies, multiple regression analyses are performed to compute the polynomial equations, giving Eq. In order to check the significance of the models, regression coefficient (R The foregoing results concerning the main and interaction effects were depicted in Effect of X As is known, flow rate is directly related to the fluid dynamics and mass transport of the reaction system ( Effect of X As mentioned above, the choice of Effect of X Like flow rate, the sulfate concentration does not present significant influences on DTPA degradation over the range tested (1.0–9.0 mM). This is because this parameter also involves two opposite effects. On the one hand, an increase in [Na Effect of X As expected, the effect of [DTPA] From the series of analyses, response surface methodology (RSM) can be adopted to determine the optimum operating conditions. The contour plots shown in Based on the above, the optimum operating conditions for DTPA mineralization are determined as follows: flow rate of 375 mL min  Besides, the role and fate of nitrogen atoms in DTPA molecules are also considered. The results shown in In this section, we attempted to explore the oxidation pathway of DTPA in BDD anode cells. Firstly, to know the positions of DTPA that are most likely to be attacked by •OH, the charge densities of all atoms in DTPA molecule were calculated after minimizing the total energy (using density function theory in ChemBio3D program). As shown in The foregoing results concerning the identification of degradation intermediates were obtained with LC/MS analyses. Briefly, 17 major products had been detected, compounds with From the results obtained hereinbefore, the mineralization sequence for DTPA mineralization is shown schematically in As can be seen, under the attack of •OH, the main routes of DTPA mineralization can be explained in the following ways: (I) the decarboxylation of DTPA results in the formation of products In the current study, two chemometric techniques (DM and CCRD) were initially adopted to investigate the effects of four operating variables during the electrochemical incineration of DTPA with BDD anodes. It had been proven that both DM model and CCRD model were excellent tools in predicting the performance of BDD technology. Besides, these two models had led to quite similar optimum operating conditions, and the difference only lied in insignificant variables. Despite this, DM model could be more accurate than CCRD model in process optimizations. In addition, the mineralization process of DTPA in BDD anode cells mainly involved decarboxylation and cleavage of C–N bond. In summary, BDD technology constituted an excellent option for the mineralization of DTPA. This is an important preliminary step toward the applicability of BDD technology for the treatment of industrial effluents contaminated with chelating agents. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. This study is supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at