Generally patients who require rehabilitation of reduced dentitions desire improved esthetics and masticatory function and see the replacement of missing teeth as a way to achieve these goals. Conventional treatment involves fixed or removable dental prostheses (FDPs or RDPs), although implant-retained prostheses are more common now and expected to increase in use. For a shortened dental arch (SDA) approach, the goal is to restore the strategic parts of the dentition only. Classically an SDA has 20 occluding teeth (the upper and lower incisors, canines, and premolars) but other variations are also possible. Moderate SDAs have 3 to 5 posterior occlusal pairs. An extreme shortened dental arch (ESDA) consists of up to 2 posterior occlusal pairs. Extension of ESDA is considered effective to improve oral functions; extension of moderate SDAs is to improve chewing function and rehabilitation of posterior support. Research has not confirmed to what extent tooth replacement with RDP would reestablish masticatory function, however. Evaluation of chewing function has used several different methods. The current knowledge of the effects of distal-extension RDPs on masticatory performance for patients with moderate or extreme SDAs was gathered in a systematic review. The electronic search of the PubMed, Medline, Cochrane Library, Embase, and Science Direct databases was confined to 2003 to 2014. The studies selected had data on subjects with SDA or ESDA and on the masticatory performance of RDPs. Four studies focused on comminution (particle size distribution after a certain number of chewing strokes), three on the ability of subjects to mix and knead a food bolus, and one on both tests. The results of comminution tests of various foods and with various numbers of chewing strokes were expressed as X Chewing frequency data were reported in three studies, expressed as chewing strokes per second, chewing strokes per minute, or time needed to make 20 chewing strokes. Percentage differences in chewing frequencies between those with ESDA or SDA with RDP or without RDP were small in two studies and relatively large in one. Mixing ability was tested in three studies using two-colored paraffin wax and one using color-changeable chewing gum. One reported persons with unilateral SDA had significantly lower masticatory performance for unilateral chewing on the RDP side compared to the dentulous side. Reduction in mixing ability was not significantly associated with RDP length. One reported a positive link between mixing ability and FDP length. Those RDPs 15 and 22 mm long had significantly higher mixing ability scores than those 10 mm long. Significantly improved mixing ability was noted in occlusal platforms arranged in a buccally oriented alignment and having a larger width compared to those lingually oriented and smaller in width. For the color-changeable gum, ESDA subjects with full-arch RDPs had about 25% higher color change scores than those with artificial premolars in the RDPs. This difference was statistically significant. Two studies reported on maximum bite force. Both found significantly higher maximum occlusal force values for biting with natural teeth than for artificial teeth in a distal-extension RDP. Persons who have ESDAs or SDAs experience a reduction in masticatory performance of 30% to 40%. Distal-extension RDPs may be able to compensate for about half of this reduced performance. When more artificial teeth are included in an RDP, better performance may be achieved. Distal-extension RDPs showed some improvement in objective chewing function, but the clinical application is difficult to formulate. Extending ESDA seems to be effective in some cases, but extending arches with an RDP routinely cannot be recommended for all cases. Dentists should evaluate patient needs and determine the best course of action.