Bioleaching of coal’s pyrite is a promising option to reduce sulphur content of high sulphur coals from an economical, technical and environmental point of view. In this research, a mixed culture of acidophilic iron- and sulphur-oxidizing mesophilic microorganisms including Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans and Leptospirillum ferrooxidans was used to remove pyritic sulphur from the high sulphur coal of Mehr Azin, Tabas, Iran. The influence of various parameters, namely nutrient medium type (Norris and 9K), initial pH (1, 1.5 and 2) and the addition of ferrous sulphate on the pyritic sulphur removal and ash content of coal was investigated using an orthogonal array L-18 Taguchi design. Shake flasks experiments were carried out in pulp density of 5% (w/w), particle size of smaller than 500μm, and a stirring rate of 150rpm at 35°C for 30days. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine the effects of the variables on sulphur and ash reduction from the coal. The maximum sulphur removal (50.3% total sulphur) was obtained at the initial pH of 1, the ferrous sulphate addition of 0.02M and Norris nutrient medium. Total sulphur and ash content values were decreased from 3.87% to 1.92% and 25.72% to 11.6%, respectively. SEM/EDS and XRD analyses showed that a high level of sulphate and jarosite precipitations could be occurred at the initial pH of 2 when 0.05M ferrous iron addition and 9K nutrient medium were used.Coal is the most important nonrenewable energy source of fossil origin Pandy et al. Mehr-Azin coal mine contains the highest level of sulphur in the coal mines of Iran (∼4%). Most of the sulphur in this mine consists of fine-grained pyrite crystals within coal macerals, making it difficult to reduce by physical processes. Both fine and coarse concentrates of the related coal cleaning plant have a high level of sulphur. Biodesulphurisation using aerobic acidophilic microorganisms is considered as one of the most promising options for pyritic sulphur removal of such a material. So, in this research, the reduction of sulphur and ash was investigated by a mixed culture of mesophilic iron- and sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms. During pyrite bioleaching, ferrous iron is entered into the solution which is then bacterially converted to ferric iron. Iron content is increased in the leachate to the point that some of it needs to be removed from the system by nutrialization and filteration. The interaction of dissolved iron with nutrient medium salts at different pH levels is important for biodesulphurization process. So in this study the effect of these parameters were evaluated on the microbial sulphur removal. Experiments were designed statistically to optimise the process parameters. The statistical approach allows the development of a reliable quantitative approach to express the reduction of both suphur and ash as response variables. The coal samples were collected from Mehr Azin coal mine, Tabas, Iran. The coal was ground to below 500 A mixed culture of mesophilic iron- and sulphur-oxidizing microorganisms including All experiments were carried out in 250 The Taguchi method has been widely used in engineering analysis and is a powerful design. This method dramatically reduces the number of tests by using orthogonal arrays and provides a simple, efficient and systematic approach to find the optimum conditions. Nutrient medium type, initial pH, and ferrous iron addition were selected as control factors and their levels were determined as shown in The pH of solutions was measured using WTW-PH 3210, pH meter. Redox potential was also determined using HYLEA-PHM 2000 with an Ag/AgCl electrode. The total iron content were measured with atomic absorption spectrometer (Perkin-Elmer 700) based on ASTM D6647-01 Standard. All the biodesulphurisation residues were analyzed for total sulphur content using sulphur analyzer LECO, according to ASTM D3177-02 standard. The forms of sulphur in coal were determined based on ASTM D2492-02 standard. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and non-dispersive X-ray microanalysis (EDS) were used to study the morphological and chemical features of the feed coal, the residues and the reaction products formed during biodesulphurisation process. The samples, before being studied by SEM, were coated with gold. The experimental design for ash and sulphur removal using an L-18 orthogonal array and experimental results is shown in In this research, the results of Taguchi experimental design in 18 runs and for the three factors, nutrient medium, pH, and iron addition, were chosen for the optimisation of ash and sulphur removal by a mixed culture of mesophilic microorganisms. The variation of redox potential, pH and iron concentration over time for the experiment with the highest sulphur removal (run#6) is given in It has been reported It should be noted that jarosite acts as a physical barrier which slow down the diffusion of leaching agents to the sulphide surface and of reaction products away from the surface Microorganisms require nutrients for their metabolism and biosynthesis It was found that changing media at pH Bioleaching microorganisms are generally acidophile and grow in the pH range of 1–2.5 The growth and activity of iron-oxidizing microorganisms were affected by the concentrations of ferrous and ferric iron ions.  The morphological features of the coal samples and bioleached residues were observed with scanning electron microscope which indicates a real corrosion on pyritic surfaces of bioleached residues. The SEM graph ( The results of a semi-commercial pilot plant in Europe showed that about 90% of pyritic sulphur was removed from a coal desulphurisation pilot plant consist of 5 stirred tank bioreactors with a 40% solids suspension A mixed culture of mesophilic microorganisms was used for biodesulphurisation of a high sulphur coal of Mehr Azin. Results showed that about 50.3% of total sulphur could be removed at the initial pH of 1, the ferrous sulphate addition of 0.02 The authors are thankful to Parvadeh Processing Coal Company (Ehya Sepahan Co.), Tabas, Iran especially Mr. Hashemi, Mr. KhoshJavan and Mr. Karimdadi for the financial support of this research.