It is known that fine and ultrafine particles are difficult to float mainly due to their low collision efficiency with bubbles. In this paper, the effect of microbubble addition, on the recovery of fine quartz particles floated with conventional bubbles is discussed. Microbubbles stabilised by collectors were produced using an external air–in–water micro-dispersion generator and added to the pulp in a flotation cell before the introduction of conventional bubbles. It was found that when microbubbles were used, much less collector (about half) was needed to achieve the same or even slightly higher recovery. At the same time, the quartz flotation rate was also higher when microbubbles were used. The advantage of microbubbles may be attributed to a higher attachment efficiency of the conventional bubbles with the fine particles covered with microbubbles. The interaction between microbubble–collector–quartz and the involved mechanism will be identified.Flotation of fine particles is challenging for the mineral industry. The recovery of such particles is generally low in conventional flotation conditions ( Other solutions to the problem of low recovery of fine particles have been proposed such as increasing the apparent particle size ( Considering the problems and difficulties with the above mentioned methods, addition of microbubbles to a conventional flotation system has been suggested to increase the flotation of fine particles. This method is rather simple and can be used in the existing flotation lines without high additional costs. It has been shown ( The purpose of the present study is to understand how microbubbles interact with fine quartz particles and facilitate the flotation of these particles in a conventional flotation system. Quartz was chosen in this study since it is readily available in a pure form and its properties have been well characterized. In addition, quartz is often floated in the reverse cationic flotation of iron ores which makes it industrially attractive ( Pure quartz samples (Sibelco) were used in this study. The particle size analysis by laser diffraction (Malvern Mastersizer, Malvern, UK) showed that the quartz samples had a D Flotation experiments were performed in a 1.7 L Agitair LA-500 cell. 200 g quartz was suspended in 400 mL Nancy tap water. Prior to the addition of the reagents, the slurry was conditioned for 1 min. The collector solution (0.1% solution of Flotigam EDA, an alkyl ether amine from Clariant) was added to the slurry followed by 2 min conditioning. Then the pulp volume was raised to 1.7 L using tap water. The air was supplied at a flowrate of 1.2 or 4.3 L min Microbubbles with <50 μm in size were produced using an air-in-water micro-dispersion generator developed by Turboflotservice Company (Kiev, Ukraine) (  In order to analyse the kinetics of flotation of fine quartz particles, the recovery as a function of time is presented in The quartz sample was divided into two size fractions of <20 μm and 20–50 μm and the same flotation experiments were conducted for both size fractions ( From a practical viewpoint, the overall flotation process can be generally represented by a first order rate equation with lumped parameters, assuming the collection zone is perfectly mixed (Eq. Eq. The increase in the flotation rate constant and maximum recovery in the presence of microbubbles can be explained by an increase in bubble-particle capture efficiency (  Further, the effect of air (injected through the impeller) flow rate on the recovery of fine quartz particles was also investigated at each collector dosage (with and without microbubbles). Results in The effect of ultrafine quartz particles (i.e. fraction <20 μm) on the flotation recovery was also studied. Results in It is acknowledged that kinetics analysis of the data provided in The addition of microbubbles (<50 µm in size) was found to be beneficial to the recovery of fine quartz particles floated with conventional bubbles. Different air flow rates and collector and microbubble dosages were investigated at batch flotation scale using an external microbubbles generator. When microbubbles were used, less amount of collector was needed to achieve the same or even slightly higher quartz recovery. At the same time, the quartz flotation rate was also higher when microbubbles were used. The higher quartz flotation rate obtained in the presence of microbubbles was attributed to a higher attachment efficiency of conventional bubbles with particles coated with microbubbles In addition, it was observed that more quartz particles were able to float at higher collector concentrations and, more importantly, in the presence of microbubbles. Therefore, microbubbles may act as collectors or flocculants (binding the finer particles into coarser aggregates) enabling the non-floating quartz particles to float. The findings of this study need to be validated at the industrial scale, and particularly on the effect of microbubbles on mineral selectivity in flotation. These results can help to improve the recovery of fine particles which is still challenging for the mineral industry.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This paper is supported by