Background
                  The aim of this study was to describe for the first time the medium to long-term outcome after distal humeral hemiarthroplasty (DHH).
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-six patients (mean age, 62; range, 29-92 years) treated with DHH for intra-articular distal humeral fractures and its sequelae were studied retrospectively.
               
                  Results
                  Four patients had died and 4 had been revised to total elbow arthroplasty: 2 for periprosthetic fractures and 2 for primary component loosening (all in prostheses without an anterior flange). Six other complications had occurred: ulnar neuritis, 4; stiffness, 1; and wound necrosis, 1. Seventeen patients underwent assessment at a mean of 80 months after surgery. The mean values of the American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) elbow score (pain, 9.93; function, 25; satisfaction, 9.06); Mayo Elbow Performance Score (90); Quick Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (19), and EuroQol EQ5D (Index, 0.84; Visual Analog Scale, 80) outcome measures demonstrated good function and satisfaction with little pain. The mean flexion extension arc was 116°. There was no evidence of instability. Radiologic evidence of ulnar wear was seen in 13 patients and may be related to prosthetic design to some extent. Worse wear was associated with a higher ASES pain score, lower satisfaction score, and lower EuroQoL Visual Analog Scale of quality of life. Degree of wear correlates with time after surgery but not with age at the time of surgery.
               
                  Conclusion
                  DHH offers a treatment option for unreconstructable distal humeral fractures and is associated with a good long-term outcome.Elbow fractures represent 7% of all adult fractures, 30% of which are distal humeral fractures with an incidence of 5.7 per 100,000 per year. Between 1999 and 2009, 26 patients (3 men and 23 women) underwent DHH by the senior author (J.H.). The mean age was 63 years (range, 29-92 years). DHH was considered for chronologically or physiologically young patients with unreconstructable intra-articular distal humeral fractures or for salvage of nonunion or malunion after nonoperative or operative treatment. Further requirements were that elbow stability could be maintained by intact or repairable epicondyles, coronoid process, and radial head, and that prosthesis stability could be provided by intact or repairable condyles and columns. The indications for DHH in this series were acute trauma (21 patients) and salvage after previous failed fixation (5 patients). Our algorithm for treatment of the unreconstructable distal humeral articular surface is shown in The mechanism of injury was a fall in 24 patients and a motor vehicle accident in 2 patients. Fractures of the 21 patients treated acutely were classified according to the Arbietsgemeinshaft für Osteosynthesfragen (AO) system based on plain radiographs and computed tomography (CT). There were 1 B2.3, 1 B3.1, 1 B.3.3, and 18 C3 fractures. In this group, DHH was the initial procedure in 20 patients. One patient had sustained an open fracture dislocation with coronoid process and radial head fractures in addition to the distal humeral fracture and was treated by wound debridement, radial head ORIF, and joint-spanning external fixation. DHH was performed as a staged procedure after 3 months. The 5 patients who underwent DHH for salvage of prior failed surgery included 4 patients whose fractures had been treated elsewhere with Kirschner (K) wires and 1 by column plating, resulting in 4 malunions and 1 nonunion. In this group, DHH was performed at a mean of 11 months after the index procedure (range, 2-36 months). Three patients had previously been diagnosed with osteoporosis by bone densitometry (ages 52, 56, and 58 years), whereas 2 others had risk factors for secondary osteoporosis (1 with rheumatoid arthritis and another with renal failure who was also treated with oral corticosteroids). This has been described in detail elsewhere. All osteotomies were grafted using bone from the excised fragments. Column fractures were fixed with a plate or K wires, and condyles were fixed with K wires or a tension band (TB) suture. Epicondyle fractures with attached collaterals were repaired with TB sutures. Typically, the medial column was intact, allowing assessment of prosthetic alignment with the shaft and depth of insertion based on the medial collateral ligament origin. The lateral column was then reconstructed anatomically or in relation to the joint axis on the implant. If both columns were fractured, the medial column was reconstructed with an anatomic contoured plate with unicortical screws, then the lateral column was fixed with a lateral plate with a trial implant in situ. The definitive implant was then inserted, and in most cases, the columns were bone grafted with trochlear fragments. In this series, 17 column or condyle fractures and 17 epicondyle fractures were stabilized. A Sorbie prosthesis (Wright Medical Technology, Arlington, TN, USA) was used from 1999 to mid-2005 in 12 patients, and from mid-2005 onwards, a Latitude prosthesis (Tornier, Montbonnot-Saint-Martin, France) was used in 14 patients. With the latter prosthesis, axial sutures could to be passed through the center of the component, allowing a more accurate fixation of collaterals at the joint axis. Patients were invited to attend for clinical and radiologic assessment. Patients were excluded if they had undergone revision. Clinical review was performed by one of the authors (G.S.) not involved in the clinical care of the patient. The American Shoulder and Elbow Society elbow score (ASES), Mayo Elbow Performance Score (MEPS), Quick Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (QuickDASH), and EuroQol EQ5D were recorded. Anteroposterior (AP) and lateral radiographs were assessed for evidence of instability, ulnar wear, spur formation, loosening, bone graft union (Latitude prosthesis), osteotomy union, and loss of column or condylar fixation by one of the authors (G.S.). Linear measurements were made using the dimensions of the inserted prostheses as a scale. Instability was assessed using the radiocapitellar axis and the humeroulnar alignment on the lateral and AP radiographs respectively. Serial radiographs were analyzed for progressive medial or lateral joint space widening and change in the alignment of the elbow. The radiocapitellar axis was measured by subtending a line from the midpoint of the radial head perpendicular to its articular surface and measuring the distance from this line to the center of the capitellum. Humeroulnar alignment was assessed by measuring the horizontal distance from the tip of the coronoid process to the deepest point of the trochlea component. Measurements were classified as 0 to 2 mm, 2 to 5 mm, and >5 mm. Radiologic evidence of ulnar or radial wear was assessed primarily on the AP radiograph and classified as none (grade 0), partial-thickness cartilage loss (grade 1; AP and lateral radiographs were assessed for periprosthetic lucent lines. Five zones in each plane were assessed ( The null hypothesis was that there was a statistically significant difference in the outcome scores between patients who had grade 0 or grade 1 ulnar wear (mild wear = group A) and those with grade 2 or grade 3 ulnar wear (severe wear = group B). We further hypothesized that ulnar wear was associated with young age at time of surgery and increased time since surgery. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 10 software (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). The distribution of data was assessed with the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. This demonstrated that all the variables were normally distributed. The data were then analyzed using a Student Of the original population of 26 patients, 4 had undergone revision to TER, 2 for periprosthetic fracture and 2 for primary prosthetic loosening. There were 6 other complications in 6 patients: 4 with ulnar nerve neuritis requiring transposition, 1 wound necrosis requiring debridement that subsequently healed, and 1 stiffness requiring release. There were no infections. In addition, 10 patients underwent removal of metalwork from fixation of an olecranon osteotomy (7 TB wires, 1 cannulated screws and TB wire, 1 compression screw, and 1 precontoured plate). In addition to the 4 revisions to TEA, 4 patients had died and were excluded, and another patient declined to participate, yielding a study group of 17 patients (2 men and 15 women). The mean age of the participants at the time of surgery was 60 years (range, 29-85 years), with a mean postoperative time of 80 months (range, 25-133 months). Of these 17 patients, 14 underwent full assessment. One patient had developed severe dementia and was assessed by the ASES range of motion and stability domains and also radiologically. Two other patients were unable to attend for follow-up because they no longer lived within 1000 km of the hospital. These patients were assessed using the ASES pain, function, satisfaction, and range of motion (flexion and extension only, assessed photographically) domains in addition to completing the QuickDASH, EuroQol EQ50 scores, and undergoing radiologic assessment. The results are reported in detail in There was no humeroulnar malalignment, progressive joint widening, or progressive change in alignment. Radiocapitellar malignment was seen in 11 patients (0-2 mm in 9, 2-5 mm in 1, and ≥5 mm in 1). One patient had an inadequate cement mantle at the tip of the prosthesis (zone 3). One patient had a 2-mm lucent line in zone 2 on the AP radiograph that was associated with slight varus alignment of the stem; this was present on the initial postoperative radiograph and was nonprogressive. Seven patients had a 1-mm to 2-mm lucent line on zone 1 on the lateral radiograph between the anterior flange and the bone graft. In the study population of 17, 6 unflanged and 11 flanged components were used. Bone graft union in those patients with a flanged components was always complete at the bone graft-to-humeral shaft interface. Assessment of one patient's radiographs was not possible due to rotation (the patient with severe dementia). Wear in the remaining patients was classified as grade 0 in 3, grade 1 in 7, grade 2 in 4, and grade 3 in 2. There was some variability in the wear pattern. In 4 of 4 Sorbie prostheses with grade 2 or 3 wear, the loss of cartilage was more significant medially. Both cases of grade 3 wear occurred in Sorbie prostheses, and further analysis of prior radiographs revealed asymmetric medial wear of the ulna in one of these patients. In 3 of 7 Latitude prostheses with grade 2 wear, the loss of cartilage was more significant laterally, with 1 case being more significant medially and symmetric wear in a further 3 cases. Radial wear was grade 0 in all cases. Spur formation was noted in 13 patients and was always present on the medial aspect of the ulna. In 3 patients, there was also a spur arising from the lateral aspect of the proximal radius. The spurs in 12 patients measured 0 to 2 mm, with 1 measuring 3 to 5 mm. The demographics, mechanism of injury, fracture classification, treatment details, complications, and clinical and radiologic outcome measures for each of the included patients are presented in There was a significant difference between the 2 groups (mild wear = group A, severe wear = group B) in 3 of the 7 outcome measures (ASES pain, ASES satisfaction, EuroQol VAS). The outcome scores patients in each group are reported in Two patients sustained undisplaced periprosthetic fractures after a fall (both with an unflanged component). One patient had been treated with DHH 7 months after K wire fixation of a distal humeral fracture resulted in malunion. She sustained an undisplaced medial condyle fracture 116 months after DHH. There was no evidence of loosening before the fracture. The fracture was treated nonoperatively and appeared to unite on plain radiographs. She then fell again, and at this stage, a CT scan raised the suspicion of nonunion. After this there was progressive symptomatic loosening of the humeral component, and it was revised to TER 140 months after DHH. Nonunion was confirmed at the time of revision. The other patient sustained a periprosthetic fracture 38 months after DHH had been performed for primary treatment. The stem of the prosthesis had been implanted in slight varus but with a satisfactory cement mantle. At routine follow-up 3 years postoperatively, an asymptomatic lucent line in zone 3 was present. The patient fell 2 months later and sustained a fracture through the base of the condyles. At the time of the fracture, no progression in the lucent line had occurred. The fracture was treated nonoperatively and united. However there was progressive symptomatic loosening, and the prosthesis was revised to TEA 54 months after DHH. Two patients were revised for primary symptomatic prosthetic loosening (both with an unflanged component). One patient had been treated with DHH for an unreconstructable fracture in whom there was progressive postoperative osteolysis of the lateral column. Revision to TEA was performed 18 months after DHH. Pathologic examination at the time of revision revealed avascular necrosis. The other patient was treated with DHH 7 months after dual plating of a distal humeral fracture had resulted in nonunion. Extensive bone grafting was performed during revision to DHH, and the columns were replated. The columns did not unite, and this resulted in prosthetic loosening that was revised to TEA 66 months after DHH. None of the tissue samples in the revision cases indicated any evidence of infection. The 4 patients who died were last reviewed at 2, 8, 36, and 58 months postoperatively. None of the deaths were related to surgery. Range of motion was not documented in the patient last reviewed 58 months postoperatively. Radiographs demonstrated grade 2 ulnar wear. The patient's next of kin confirmed that the elbow had been functioning well, with no pain and a “good” range of motion. The patient last reviewed 36 months postoperatively had a range of motion of 20° to 140°, with full forearm rotation. Radiographs demonstrated grade 1 ulnar wear. The patient last reviewed 8 months postoperatively was 92 years old at the time of DHH. She has sustained a comminuted fracture that had been treated by an attempt at ORIF with k-wires, which was revised to DHH 2 months after initial treatment. Consideration was given to TEA, but the wound was necrotic and required debridement and suction dressings. DHH was performed in an effort to reduce the risk of postoperative infection. Range of motion was last recorded 2 months postoperatively (45° to 115°; supination, 80°; pronation, 60°). Radiographs taken 8 months postoperatively demonstrated grade 2 ulnar wear, with no evidence of loosening. The patient last reviewed at 2 months postoperatively had dementia at the time she sustained an unreconstructable fracture. At the last review, range of motion was 15° to 140°, with full forearm rotation. Radiographs demonstrated grade 1 ulnar wear. The patient who declined to participate was last reviewed 3 months after surgery. At this point, range of motion was 15° to 110°, with full forearm rotation. Radiographs were not available. She subsequently failed to attend numerous appointments. At the time of this investigation, she was 67 months after DHH. This patient was contacted and commented that her elbow was “good” and that “I've got more important things to worry about.” The demographics, mechanism of injury, fracture classification, treatment details, complications, and available clinical and radiologic outcomes for the excluded patients are presented in The goals of ORIF for distal humeral fracture are anatomic reduction with a stable construct allowing early range of motion. Comparison of the short-term outcome of TEA and ORIF shows equivalent or better results with TEA in elderly patients. ORIF is the optimal treatment of distal humeral fractures, and stable fixation can be achieved in the great majority of fractures; however, once adequate exposure has been attained and attempts at fixation have not been successful, conversion to DHH avoids the scenario of leaving the operating room with a suboptimal fixation that is doomed to incur a poor result. DHH should not be viewed as an easy option over advanced ORIF techniques. In fact, we believe that DHH should be undertaken in upper limb units with experience in both elbow arthroplasty and elbow trauma. The complication rate in this series was 38%, which was high and comparable to reported rates of 11% to 48% after ORIF and 18% to 42% after TEA. Four patients (15%) were revised to TEA. Periprosthetic fractures occurred in 2 patients (8%). This complication has also been reported after TEA and is estimated to occur in 5% of patients. Olecranon osteotomy gives the best access to the distal humeral articular surface and maintains the option of performing an ORIF or DHH without compromising exposure for either procedure. All osteotomies united, but all were grafted with cancellous bone from the distal humerus. Removal of hardware was performed in 10 of 23 patients (43%) in whom olecranon osteotomy was undertaken. Intraoperative conversion to TEA was not required in this series, with all revisions taking place after union of the osteotomy, allowing a standard approach for a TEA. In this series, patient-generated and physician-generated outcome measures yielded encouraging results. Pain levels were low, and patient satisfaction scores were high. Only one patient had an arc of motion of less than 100°; this was the patient who had sustained polytrauma with multilevel ipsilateral bony and neurologic injuries. One other patient had postoperative stiffness, that was managed as a normal stiff elbow with an open release and achieved a good functional outcome. Functionality of the elbow and upper limb as a whole were slightly diminished according to the ASES function and QuickDASH scores. There was no impact on the overall health of the patient as assessed by the EuroQol E5D. These results are consistent with the results of the treatment of distal humeral fractures with ORIF and TEA, although comparison is difficult because of low numbers, patient heterogeneity, variability in follow-up, and large number of different outcome measures used. The method used for assessment of wear is a potential weakness of this study because reliance was placed upon plain radiographs. The ulnohumeral articulation is predominantly affected after DHH, and the geometry of the ulna makes assessment of wear difficult; however, artifact would prohibit the accurate use of CT and magnetic resonance imaging and therefore these modalities were not used. A comparison with the contralateral side may not help as most patients have a mild flexion deformity, and therefore, the radiographic projection would not be the same as the unaffected side. Despite their disadvantages plain radiographs have been widely used for classification of elbow rheumatoid arthritis and osteoarthritis. For statistical analysis patients, were grouped into mild (none or partial-thickness cartilage wear) or severe (full-thickness cartilage wear or bone loss) wear to increase the size of the groups and also to limit any inaccuracies in classification. In this series, we saw evidence of radiocapitellar malalignment on the lateral radiograph, with the radial head appearing anteriorly displaced in 11 patients. This corresponded with radiologic evidence of ulnar wear in all cases, with more severe wear having more significant malalignment. We believe that this is sequelae of wear rather than instability and could be used as a marker of wear. Radiologic evidence of radial wear was not seen, whereas ulnar wear was seen in 13 of 16 patients assessed, with 6 patients at grade 2 or 3. The wear pattern of the ulna with the Sorbie prosthesis was more medial. That of the Latitude was mixed in location but was typically lateral on the ulna or symmetric. This difference may relate to differences in prosthesis size and design, with the Latitude prosthesis having a more anatomic shape. Radiologic ulnar wear is correlated with time after surgery. Whereas the presence of grade 2 or 3 wear results in statistically significant worse results in some outcome measures overall, the results remain good even in the presence of significant wear. Radiocapitellar wear was not seen, demonstrating that with accurate positioning and sizing, severe loading of the radius can be avoided and also confirming the lack of instability in this series. Ulnar wear correlated with time postoperatively. This was not unsuspected but does validate our method of wear classification. Severity of wear did not correlate with patient age at the time of insertion refuting our hypothesis that young patients would load their elbows more than their older counterparts and therefore result in more significant wear. Spur formation was regularly seen. It is difficult to draw any conclusions on its etiology or significance because it was seen in patients with no evidence of ulnar wear, and conversely, not seen in 1 of the 2 patients with grade 3 wear. This suggests that the spur is not an “osteophyte.” Additionally, medial ulnar spur formation was seen when ulnar wear was more significant laterally; hence, the spur does not represent normal anatomy adjacent to a trough created by prosthetic wear but may be due to varus/valgus forces. DHH should be reserved for patients with unreconstructable or unsalvageable distal humeral fractures in whom any attempt at fixation would be doomed to failure. In this setting, DHH can be a reliable treatment option in patients who are unable to comply with the restrictions associated with TEA. DHH is demanding, and complication rates are significant but can be minimized by using a component with an anterior flange and a more anatomic articular surface and having a low threshold to perform an ulna nerve transposition. In this study, the results of patient-generated and physician-generated outcome measures are satisfactory, with durable results in medium to long-term follow-up. Ulnar wear increases with time postoperatively, and therefore, it is prudent to advise some degree of activity modification because worse wear is associated with higher pain scores and lower satisfaction scores and VAS outcome scores. Among this cohort, even patients with severe wear have not required revision surgery, but longer follow-up is required. The authors acknowledge R. Amirfeyz, FRCS (T & Orth), for his work on the statistics. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.