Industrially, centrifuges are used for a variety of purposes related to separation of materials on the basis of density. This separation usually involves separation of insoluble particulates from supernatant liquids, but can also include extraction of dissolved substances from one immiscible liquid to another of different density, separating the mixed liquids centrifugally. The blending of the liquids, transfer of the solute and separation of the immiscible phases are sequentially carried out in the same machine at high speed. Generally, centrifuges are used throughout many manufacturing industries ( Much experience and information related to industrial-scale centrifugation exists within companies manufacturing the centrifugal machinery and these sources should not be overlooked when seeking information. Centrifugation is treated as a separation unit operation in chemical engineering and the article in Dahlstrom Over the past 10–15 years the growing uses for centrifuges industrially has resulted in a plethora of special centrifuges designed and adapted to particular uses. However, the machines may, in general, be characterized according to the classification of The approximate capabilities of several centrifuge types are indicated in Centrifuges in this group ( Machine performance criteria are usually dependent on the purpose of centrifugation and can be measured by the purity of the separated liquid phase or the completeness of the removal of the solid phase. Performance may also be measured by several other criteria, some of which are listed in Sedimentation velocity is particularly important for continuous centrifuges where rapid sedimentation increases separation efficiencies and machine capacities. Particle removal from sewage particularly makes use of flocculant technology. Flocculant usage in food-processing applications is severely restricted because of health and safety regulations, and the need to provide food to consumers as free of additives as possible limits the acceptable flocculants. Downstream processing of fermentation broths or biotechnologically derived natural products for removal of particulate from a liquid stream provides another application of these flocculant materials. When used prior to unit operations such as chromatography or adsorption, these materials can help provide a clean, particle-free feed which will not block the columns and adsorbent beds used for these purposes. Increasing the density difference between the liquid and solid phases is possible in certain applications by dilution prior to centrifugation if this is compatible with subsequent manufacturing steps, or by treatment with enzymes to hydrolyse viscous polymers and create denser core particles, which are more easily deposited. Apple juice manufacture by centrifugal means makes use of this latter mechanism. In this case, particle density is increased and the viscosity of the suspending liquid is reduced, both facilitating particle sedimentation. Another way of reducing the viscosity of the suspending liquid is to increase temperature. Increasing temperature decreases viscosity exponentially, improving sedimentation rates, thus sedimentation should be carried out at the highest temperatures compatible with preservation of any desirable properties of the material separated (supernatant or particulate), and the economics of the process being considered. A schematic diagram of a solid bowl decanter is shown in The depth of the liquid pool rotating against the bowl wall is determined by the positioning of the fluid discharge ports, dams or pick-up tubes. Solids settle through this pool to the bowl wall and are conveyed to the outlet ports at the distal conical end where they are ejected. The solids undergo a drying effect as they are dragged along the bowl wall and elevated to the exit ports as liquid drains back to the pool. Given the decanter configuration, there are four parameters which can be varied: scroll/bowl differential speed, pool depth, bowl rotational speed and feed rate. Fluid or supernatant is conveyed countercurrent to the solids, following the path of the scroll flights, to exit at a discharge port at the end of the cylindrical section. Centrifugal force can vary to over 4000 The decanter's particular advantage is that it provides continuous separation of a wide variety of feedstocks with a broad range of solids concentrations. It is possible to configure a decanter to process feedstocks containing an aqueous phase, on oil phase and suspended solids, separating the three phases in the same machine. These machines are sometimes termed tricanter ( Decanters capable of separating three phases have been used to refine vegetable oils from complex feedstocks such as coconut, producing fat, milk and grated coconut solid fractions, recovery or animal fat from rendering operations and recovery of waste oil in petroleum refining. Watery oil derived from tank bottoms or trapped in containment lagoons which contain suspended solids may have this oil recovered using these machines. In each case value is added through the recovery of the oil phase as a saleable product. More recently, two-phase decanters have been adapted to replace presses in the extraction and further processing of a wide variety of fruit and vegetable juices. Separation in a tricanter of commercially exotic fruits such as sea buckthorn into pulp oil, juice and seed-enriched solid ejecta provides a potential future use of centrifugal technology. New, innovative uses for this versatile machine are still emerging. The disadvantage of the machine is its inability to clarify liquid streams completely, as some suspended solids remain in the emerging stream. If complete clarity is required, another clarifying method must be used following decanter centrifugation. This may include equipment such as a disc centrifuge (clarifier) or filter system. For example, processes described for the extraction of fruit juices with a decanter replacing the press often have a clarifying disc stack centrifuge in the line following the decanter to provide the final solids removal and provide the brilliant clarity desired in many juice products. Alternatively, the clarifying centrifuge can be operated in such a way as to remove the particles larger than 0.5 Originally designed as cream separators, these machines have achieved a high degree of sophistication and today represent a versatile group of centrifuges capable of achieving very high These centrifuge types are for processing feedstocks with relatively low suspended solids in a feedstock requiring a high degree of clarification. They are also of use in situations requiring separation of two immiscible liquids – the separation of cream from milk is the most common example. However, extraction of biochemicals from aqueous substrates often makes use of water-immiscible organic solvents and rapid separation of the two phases can be achieved in these machines. Removal/isolation of culture-grown bacterial or other cell is a useful function in the biochemical industries. In any role, consideration should be given to the need to seal the centrifuge against the dispersion of aerosols which may contain dangerous biochemicals, nonaqueous vapours or bacterial cells which may be toxic, flammable or explosive. Flushing with an inert gas such as nitrogen or carbon dioxide to avoid oxidation, and the need for temperature control of the centrifuge, feedstock and products should also be considered. Disc stack centrifuges come in three basic configurations. In one configuration the sedimented solids are continuously ejected through carefully sized nozzles at the bowl periphery (nozzle discharge), allowing continuous operation of the machine with continuous discharge of solids. However, the degree of compaction of the solids is limited by the need to be free-flowing, and solids exit as a concentrate (∼50%). In the second configuration, the bowl is equipped with the means to open a port at the periphery of the rotating bowl. This opening may be closed with a slide or piston which is hydraulically opened according to a pre-set programme. The programme may be set by time or the centrifuge may be equipped with a monitoring device on the fluid exit side which monitors the light-scattering capability of the clarified output. Above set limits clarity deterioration triggers solid discharge. The centrifuge illustrated in Other batch-operated sedimenting centrifuges are the tubular centrifuge and the solid open-bowl centrifuge (without discs: This device is particularly unique as it separates solids and liquids by centrifugal principles, but contains no moving parts. The principle of the machine is illustrated in These machines are characterized by sedimenting particulate on to a screen which may consist of slots, holes, a porous membrane, or filter cloth, where the solids are retained while the liquid portion flows through the screen to be carried away ( Basket centrifuges can be made continuous by incorporating the means of removal of solids while the machine operates. Machines mounted horizontally utilizing a knife to peel the solids from within the centrifuge bowl are termed Peeler-type basket centrifuges ( The centrifuge consists of a rotating perforated basket with an open end. Feed is through a rotating hollow tube to a solid distribution device which distributes the slurry evenly on the basket during the back stroke of the hydraulically driven distributing plate. On the forward stroke the distributing plate exerts a pressure on the deposited cake, causing it to overflow the open end of the basket. If required, the deposited cake may be washed before the return stroke causes overflow of the solids. The screen/scroll centrifuge is also horizontally oriented, but the basket is conical-shaped and transport of the deposited, centrifugally dried slurry is accomplished by a scroll or scrapper blades in a manner reminiscent of the decanter scroll. The transported solids overflow the open end of the basket and are removed from the machine. The screen-bowl decanter is of similar design to the solid-bowl decanter discussed earlier except for the addition of a cylindrical screen behind the conical section of the bowl. The scroll spans the entire length of the bowl including the screen and conforms to the profile of the bowl and screen. Solids retained on the screen are scraped by the scroll to an exit beyond the screen. The purpose of the machine is to combine the solid sedimenting centrifuge with a screen centrifuge in an attempt to obtain a drier cake. Washing of retained solids may be effected in the first portion of the screen, while dewatering taking place in the second part. Decanters such as this may provide serious competition to the peeler and pusher centrifuges by facilitating continuous separations in a more compact, mechanically simpler package. A special application which is of growing importance in the food industry is the use of low speed basket centrifuges to dewater or dry fresh-cut vegetables, especially salad greens, for later use in modified atmosphere packages ( This article has provided an overview of the use of centrifuges in various industries. The ubiquitous nature of the machine throughout the industrial spectrum is apparent. It appears in heavy industrial uses such as sugar and oil refining and in light industrial separations such as dewatering of vegetables. Performance demands also vary widely, ranging from high 