Olive-oil mill waste rotary dryers play an important role in the environmental protection and sustainable development in the olive sector. Drying of these wastes is vital for three main reasons: the extraction of olive oil contained in them (olive pomace oil) by the use of solvents, the obtaining of a biomass fuel called dry de-oiled pomace and the elimination of a highly polluting by-product due to its high biological oxygen demand (BOD). However, because of the transition from three-phase system to two-phase system, their drying presents serious problems due to high moisture contents and their nature and composition. The main objective of this work is to study and analyze the research carried out on drying kinetics of olive-oil mill wastes, which is vital to understanding the drying phenomenon, and on the main models of heat and mass transfer in the olive-oil mill waste rotary dryers, based mainly on the trommel and furnace. The synergy between these two general studies will serve as a starting point for improving the design and optimization of the drying process in this type of dryers.coefficients of the mathematical models empirical constant correlation Saeman and Mitchell fuel wet fraction specific heat capacity at constant pressure (J kg trommel diameter (m) particle size (m) effective moisture diffusivity (m pre-exponential factor of the Arrhenius equation (m activation energy (J mol fuel fraction mass flow, per unit area (kg s product moisture content, kg moisture/kg wet matter kg Hydrogen/kg fuel constants of the mathematical models (s empirical constant Kelly correlation empirical constant for calculation volumetric heat transfer coefficient trommel length (m) thickness of the slab (m) log mean temperature difference mass (kg) mass flow (kg s trommel speed (rpm) net calorific value (J kg pressure (J m heat gas combustion (J) heat which raises the temperature in the gas (J) heat which raises liquid phase temperature in the product (J) heat which raises the product temperature (J) heat which evaporates a liquid portion in the product (J) universal gas constant (J kg trommel slope time (s) temperature (K) volumetric heat transfer coefficient (W m velocity (m s volume (m product moisture content, kg moisture/kg dry matter dimensionless product moisture ratio drying rate (s air moisture content, kg moisture/kg dry matter amount of ash combustion yield latent heat of vaporization of water (J kg empirical constant for calculation volumetric heat transfer coefficient density (kg m mean residence time (s) air dry air dry product equilibrium evaporated fuel gas inlet outlet product ( in each instant of time vapor vapor in the air vapor in the gas water initial Until the nineties, the extraction process of olive oil was carried out in three phases: virgin olive oil, olive pomace and olive mill wastewater (OWW) The current process of olive oil extraction, “two-phase system”, separates the virgin olive oil from two-phase olive mill waste. Two-phase system was instituted with the objective of eliminating the environmental problems caused by the three-phase system, and to improve the use of water resources more efficiently Olive-oil mill waste rotary dryers were designed to dry olive pomace (“three-phase system”), which had a moisture content of about 40%. With the current “two-phase system” the product to dry contains a moisture content of 60%. Subsequently, olive stones separation in the olive mill The performance improvement of the facilities is, currently, one of the major objectives, being necessary to achieve an optimization between energy cost, used in the olive-oil mill waste drying process, and the products obtained: olive pomace oil and dry de-oiled pomace (biomass). As discussed above, the main problem is the high moisture content of this waste. This work aims to expose and analyze the main contributions on the drying kinetics and the heat and mass transfer models. The analysis carried out on drying kinetics will help to improve and complete the mathematical models in rotary dryers by means of the obtaining of drying times and drying rates. Particular emphasis has been placed on the control of the temperatures and moisture contents in which the release of volatiles occurs. These temperatures are vital to control the quality of olive pomace oil and dry de-oiled pomace. All these considerations indicated in this review should be taken into account in future works. The rest of the paper is arranged as follows. Section The drying process of olive-oil mill wastes is usually a complex phenomenon where convection and diffusion phenomena intervene. This is due to the heterogeneity of the product such as particles formed of pits and pulp of different size, sample sizes, vegetation water, sugars and to the different conditions of drying air temperature and velocity. During its tour in the trommel, the energy exchange (heat transferred to olive-oil mill wastes from hot gases) and the mass exchange (the evaporated water from olive-oil mill wastes) occur. Thus, these wastes are heated and dried, and the drying air is moistened and cooled. The moisture content may stay inside of olive-oil mill wastes in three different ways On the surface (non-mixed with the solid), being the easiest part to evaporate. In the porous structure, the water needs to be carried to the surface to be evaporated. By capillarity, closely linked to the solid. It is the way that requires more effort to extract the moisture. Different researchers have analyzed the drying kinetics of olive pomace (three-phase system) and two-phase olive mill waste in other drying systems like fluidized beds Dimensionless moisture ratio can be expressed as: However, other research In the first stage (warming-up period), a rapid heating is produced, being the capillary suction insufficient to carry the moisture to the surface. Drying rate increases quickly (higher vapor pressures) to a maximum value in this phase. This period is characteristic because the moisture of the surface is practically eliminated. Second stage (first falling rate period) appears at low drying temperatures where a In the third stage (second falling rate period) the internal moisture is transported to the surface by diffusion when the temperature is low. Inside the mass, moisture and gas bubbles coexist. This stage is known as the The fourth phase (volatiles period) appears only at temperatures above 200 °C. This causes a loss of volatile material once the mass has been dried. As mentioned above, only in the first stage appeared an increase in the drying rate. In all other stages decreased. To date, the mathematical model in the drying of olive-oil mill wastes that has the best results of fit is an empirical model: the Two Term Gaussian ( Drying air temperature is the most decisive factor in the drying process, regardless of the particle size Another important factor that adequately explains the mass transfer process by diffusion (almost all drying process) during the drying of olive-oil mill wastes is the effective moisture diffusivity. This variable is associated with the diffusion of mass into the medium during changes of moisture content with the time. It can be experimentally calculated from Fick's second law of diffusion (Eq. This equation represents the linear dependence between ln Beginning with the experimental data, the activation energy can be obtained. The temperature dependence of the effective moisture diffusivity may be represented by an Arrhenius relationship: Experiments conducted so far showed that the drying air velocity intervenes considerably in the drying rate and the drying time. In fact, the effect of velocity becomes more decisive in the first stage of the drying process (increasing the drying rate) for both high and low temperature Another way to analyze the drying rate and drying time is from the sample thickness. Research showed that the drying rate increases as the sample thickness decreases. The results were obtained through effective moisture diffusivity calculation for different thicknesses, in particular, 6 mm, 9 mm and 12 mm with constant drying air velocity of 1.5 m s The influence of the particle size in the drying process was analyzed as well. The tests showed heterogeneity in particle size in a particular sample. The results Lastly, Models of heat and mass transfer in the trommel of a rotary dryer have been studied from overall models and sectioned models. The first ones are mainly based on variables such as resident time and volumetric heat transfer coefficient Even today, the design and modeling of an olive-oil mill waste rotary dryer is a very difficult task to perform. Although there are not many researchers in the field  The heat in the combustion gases is ( Raising the temperature of the product solid phase ( Raising the temperature of the product liquid phase ( Evaporating a part of the liquid contained in the product ( Raising the temperature of the vapor in the gas ( The volumetric heat transfer coefficient and the residence time are used as sub-models to describe the internal space of the trommel occupied by gas. These relations are mostly empirical by nature. The residence time is defined as the mass retained (kg) divided by the solid matter flow (kg s However, for this type of system, mathematical functions are used Other investigations use the Kelly correlation The research realized by Casanova-Peláez Volumetric heat transfer coefficient is a parameter to consider in the evolution of variables into the trommel. This parameter is defined as the rate of heat transfer transmitted to one unit volume of the trommel when the difference of temperature is the unit. All scholars For the steady-state, conservation equations are applied to the gaseous and solid phase mass flows, having: For the energy balances, the heat transferred can be quantified in a basic mode following a series of considerations. It is assumed that the inlet drying air is completely dry (in reality, it has a very low moisture content) and the air, water and olive-oil mill waste specific heat capacity are constant, as well as the latent heat of vaporization of water. Thus, the value of each one of them can be calculated: Heat transported by the drying gas (air) which corresponds to a decrease in the temperature: Heat received by the solid (dry product): this heat is invested in raising its temperature: Heat received by the liquid (water): this heat is invested in raising its temperature before vaporizing: Heat for evaporation: heat required to change the liquid water state which is contained in the solid to vapor: Heat for reheating: this heat is invested in raising the vapor temperature: In these equations If the heat transmission losses to the outside are neglected, the overall energy balance is: On the other hand, if the trommel is considered a heat exchanger, the amount of heat transferred per unit time can be expressed as: This model consists in applying the conservation equations of mass and energy to the trommel, for each instant of time. The balances of olive-oil mill waste mass and humid air are related by the evaporated water flow. Regarding mass balances:   The first and second term on the right side represent the difference of inlet and outlet water flow (contained in olive-oil mill wastes). The third term indicates the water flow which is evaporated in that instant of time.  The first and second term on the right side represent the difference of inlet and outlet water flow (contained into dry air) and the third term indicates the water flow which is evaporated in that instant of time. These equations can be simplified as: The conservation equations of energy are expressed as:   Because of the evaporation process is not identical along the trommel length; the study can be carried out by dividing it into small sections. Thus, the evaporation process is identical along a section and distinct between different sections. It is necessary to model it based on other parameters such as temperatures and moistures. The outlet flows and temperatures in a section are the inlet flows and temperatures in the next section. In this model, the valid equations are given above, considering that the evaporated water content in a section will become part of the gaseous stream of the following section (increasing its moisture content). The rest of sections are solved consecutively. To perform the mass and energy balances, it is necessary to know the drying rate and volumetric heat transfer coefficient. These values can be determined from experimental data and empirical expressions. It is necessary to know or estimate the residence time of olive-oil mill wastes in the dryer, for determining the material advance from one section to another. The trommel is divided by a finite number of volumetric elements. The equations of conservation are applied for each element. Each volume element is bounded longitudinally by two sections, the inlet ( Air and solid specific heat capacity are changing, since its moisture varies. The evaporated water in a section passes to the gaseous flow, intervening in the following sections. The same occurs with the heat which is associated with this process. The air velocity changes, since its temperature decreases and its moisture content increases. The drying rate varies along the process (it depends on temperature, moisture, granulometry, etc.) Applying the principle of mass conservation to dry air: In the mass of dry product: In the water contained in the product: In the vapor contained in the air: Applying the conservation equation of energy in the olive-oil mill wastes: And the In Eqs. Another important process within the olive-oil mill waste drying is produced in the combustion chamber. The inlet hot gas temperature in the trommel depends on the control of the fuel combustion. Generally, fuel used is dry de-oiled pomace which is extracted from the drying plant. Its combustion is not carried out regularly, unlike liquids and gases. Therefore, the temperatures reached present important oscillations. As it is known, dry de-oiled pomace has a heterogenous distribution in its composition, granulometry and moisture content. Furthermore, This biofuel is accumulated in grills when it enters into the furnace. This implies a complete combustion outside the mound and an incomplete combustion inside the mound. This drawback means that its control is more complicated due to the delay produced in the combustion. The mathematical models set out so far are based on the application of the principles of mass and energy conservation to the furnace. Castaño et al. The gas mass in the furnace, The process control requires the inspection of different variables. The outlet temperature in the furnace is usually the controlled variable and the fuel mass is the control variable. In the trommel, the outlet gas temperatures can be controlled varying the inlet gas temperatures, simply by regulating the dry de-oiled pomace flow. Dry de-oiled pomace feeding is usually carried out by an Archimedes screw which can supply the biofuel by discontinuous feeding. Biofuel is introduced via package, starting off the Archimedes' screw motor periodically, following a “pulse-width modulation” (PWM) strategy. Nevertheless, the dry de-oiled pomace furnace features involve a delay difficult to calculate, as well as large oscillations for outlet temperature due to solid combustion. However, Casanova-Peláez et al. In this equation The study of the olive-oil mill waste rotary dryers is mainly based on the furnace and trommel mathematical models. An exhaustive control of the different characteristic parameters of both systems implies an improvement in the performance and an optimization of resources used and products obtained. Special emphasis is placed on obtaining the drying rate and the control of the gas temperature with a view to a design strategy, optimization and process control. Controlling the gas temperatures in the furnace and drying rate in each of the different sections of the trommel means an important saving of the dry de-oiled pomace that feeds the furnace and an olive-oil mill waste optimum drying. Furthermore, the control of temperature in the drying gases and in the olive-oil mill waste is vital to prevent the occurrence of PAHs. This implies high quality oil and appropriate for human consumption. The mathematical models of the trommel and the furnace are very complicated. These models are based on principles of the mass and energy conservation. However, in these models the equations of momentum are not present. This can generate a problem even more complex to solve. For future research, Computational Fluid Dynamics techniques would need to be employed. These techniques can simulate the physical and chemical phenomena which occur in olive-oil mill waste rotary dryers. This work has been conducted with the financial support of the Spanish “