Recently, Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) have been introduced and investigated as new EOR agents for heavy oil recovery enhancement. In this study, sequential DES and steam flooding was proposed and experimentally investigated as a new scenario for heavy oil recovery enhancement and having potentials for in-situ heavy oil upgrading. DESs used in this study are Choline Chloride:Glycerol (DES1) and Choline Chloride:Urea (DES2). Primary and secondary DES flooding at different concentration followed by high-temperature steam flooding were conducted using 16.5 °API heavy oil and Berea sandstone core plugs. DES thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) performed and results verified the relatively high thermal stability of the selected DESs. Maximum decomposition temperature was found to be 320 and 370°C for DES1 and DES2, respectively. This improves their potential for use as chemical additives or pre-flooding agents in thermal EOR methods. Sequential steam flooding after undiluted and 2-fold diluted DES injection recovered an additional heavy oil of 12% IOIP compared to steam flooding alone. However, using more diluted solutions (i.e., 20-fold diluted DESs) caused the same and in some cases lower total recovery factor by secondary steam flooding. When followed by steam flooding, DES2 exhibited superior heavy oil recovery enhancement (8–12%) compared with DES1 (1.5–6%) at the same concentrations. Analysis of physicochemical properties of produced oil for different cases revealed the favorable role of DES in upgrading the in-situ heavy oil. Heavy oil upgrading were quantified through various measurements including increase in API gravity up to 3.5 °API, 16.6% reduction in sulphur content or desulphurization and increase in the yields of saturate hydrocarbons. Comparatively, DES1 exhibited better overall performance than DES2 in terms of in-situ heavy oil upgrading.While non-thermal EOR methods such as CO Although thermal recovery methods have shown promising performance, they have few drawbacks. For example, in steam injection method, large volumes of high quality steam are required which consume great sources of energy (natural gas) and cause CO Among those additives, chemicals have been very popular. Different types of Caustic soda and alkaline additives such as sodium hydroxide, sodium silicate, sodium carbonate and potassium hydroxide One of the important concerns in application of chemical additives in steam flooding is thermal decomposition of the chemicals at high temperature which significantly reduces the effectiveness of these chemicals. Chemicals used in conventional enhanced oil recovery (EOR) have been shown to have low thermal stability. Amaefule et al. (1979), tested thermal stability of different anionic and non-anionic surfactants considered as steam flood additives. Their results showed that none of the evaluated surfactants had the required stability for use in steam floods. The most stable petroleum sulfonate they investigated had a half-life of 11 In-situ upgrading of heavy oil during thermal methods improves quality of produced oil which leads to increase in well production, enhance heavy oil recovery, lower lifting and transportation costs. The upgraded heavy oil has higher API, lower viscosity, higher amounts of saturates, lower resin and asphaltene content and less amount of heteroamtoms such as sulphur, nitrogen, oxygen, iron, nickel and vanadium Recently, a new class of Ionic Liquids (ILs)-analogue called Deep Eutectic Solvents (DESs) has been introduced to industries. A DES is a fluid generally composed of two or more components that are capable of self-association, often through hydrogen bond interactions, to form a eutectic mixture with a melting point lower than that of each individual component. Generally, DESs are categories into four groups consisting: (1) metal salts DESs due to their high thermal stability, high solvability and hydrogen donating In this study, effect of steam flooding after DES flooding on heavy oil recovery enhancement and in-situ upgrading were investigated through core flooding experiments. The same DESs - Choline Chloride:Glycerol and Choline Chloride:Urea - introduced in our previous studies, were utilized for further investigations. Primary and secondary DES flooding at different concentrations at reservoir conditions followed by steam flooding experiments at high pressure and high temperature were conducted. Physicochemical properties of produced oil were analyzed to investigate the extent of oil upgrading or quality improvements during the proposed process. Homogenized consolidated Berea sandstone core plug of 1.5″ diameter and about 4″ length was utilized for the core flooding experiments. Heavy crude oil and formation brine from an Omani oilfield were used for the experimental work. The heavy oil and brine properties are shown in Results of quantitative XRD analysis of Berea sandstone rock used in this study are reported in Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted for both DESs using simultaneous thermal analyzer (SDT Q600, TA Instruments). The samples (30–40 A core flooding apparatus was designed to perform chemical and steam flooding at reservoir conditions. Schematic diagram and photo of the setup are shown in A systematic methodology was followed for conducting the flooding experiments. First, the physical dimensions and dry weight of core plug were measured using digital calliper and balance, respectively. Then, the core plug was saturated with brine by submerging in formation brine under vacuum. Pore volume and porosity of the core plug were calculated using weight difference before and after saturation knowing the brine density. The brine-saturated core was then loaded in the core holder. Confining pressure of 1200 The first test was primary steam flooding as a control test. Steam at superheated conditions of 500 In each test, the oil production was monitored during test. Also, the produced oil and condensed water by steam flooding stage were collected and separated. The separated oil was used for API gravity measurement using a digital density meter (Anton Paar, DMA 4500). The sulphur content of produced heavy oil was also analyzed by an energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence The TGA results for the undiluted DESs are shown in The experimental conditions and core flooding results are summarized in The heavy oil recovery enhancements by steam flooding were examined by conducting steam injection at different modes including (I) primary steam injection, (II) secondary steam injection after water flooding, (III) secondary steam injection after 1.5 During the steam flooding experiments, the core plug was heated up by means of injecting steam as well as thermal jacket which both were adjusted at 270  API gravity which indicates the density of petroleum fluids is of great importance in oil quality determination. Results of API measurements for produced heavy oil by steam flooding are summarized in The elemental sulphur content as well as the degree of desulphurization for different produced oil samples are presented in Previous studies have reported encouraging impacts of adding hydrogen donors like tetralin to the steam injection process for the purpose of in-situ heavy oil upgrading The distribution of saturated hydrocarbons was determined for various samples in order to quantify the degree of compositional change during DES and steam flooding processes. Saturated hydrocarbon distribution of the original heavy oil sample is depicted in Collectively, API gravity, sulphur content, and saturates fraction are useful meters for the heavy oil quality and can be used as assessment parameters to evaluate the extent of in-situ heavy oil upgrading. It was also found that these parameters were consistent in predicting heavy oil upgrading and modified in a same way when the produced heavy oil was compared with the original heavy oil. It was also revealed that DES1 in presence of steam was outperforming DES2 at the same conditions in terms of in-situ heavy oil upgrading as indicated by modifying above physicochemical properties of the heavy oil which could be contributed to the relatively higher population of hydrogen bond donor groups in DES1 ( In this study, a comprehensive coreflooding analysis was conducted in order to investigate the performance of steam flooding, DES flooding, and their combination. Effects of two different DESs, DES concentration, and different injection scenarios on heavy oil recovery enhancement and in-situ heavy oil upgrading from Berea sandstone cores were examined. Steam flooding after undiluted DES injection and 2-fold diluted DES injection resulted in higher total recovery factors with an additional recovery of 12%, compared to primary or secondary steam flooding. However, using higher dilution of DES, i.e., 20-fold diluted solution, caused the same and in some cased less total recovery factors compared to secondary steam flooding. The DES2 was more effective compared to DES1 at the same concentrations in term of recovery enhancement during the subsequence steam flooding. Analysis of physicochemical properties of produced oil by steam flooding showed that steam flooding in presence of DESs at different concentrations led to in-situ upgrading of heavy oil by increasing API gravity (up to 3.5 °API), sulphur reduction (16.6% desulphurization) and increase in the yields of saturate hydrocarbons. Also, injection of DES1 outperformed DES2 in terms of heavy oil in-situ upgrading performance when they followed by steam flooding.