Coating of valuable mineral particles by hydrophilic slimes is known to depress flotation of such particles. This is referred to as a slime-coating. Such a slime coating takes place in the flotation of molybdenite in seawater when pH of the pulp is raised to depress pyrite and Mg(OH)+ hydroxy-complexes and precipitating magnesium hydroxide accumulate on the molybdenite surface. The dispersant tested in this paper, sodium hexametaphosphate, is shown to be able to restore molybdenite flotation in the pH range in which it is depressed by magnesium species. Addition of hexametaphosphate was found not to affect floatability of pyrite.Limited resources of fresh water in many countries forces mining industries in these countries to use seawater in mineral processing operations. Over the last five years it has been demonstrated ( Since this depression by “slime coating” is caused by precipitating/coagulating hydroxides on the surface of molybdenite, it is logical to expect that the use of dispersants that remove precipitating/coagulating hydroxides from the molybdenite surface should diminish depression. In this paper sodium hexametaphosphate dispersant is utilized in the tests with molybdenite to evaluate this idea. Sample of molybdenite used in this work was obtained after several cleaning stages of collectorless flotation of a commercial molybdenum concentrate from one of the Chilean copper-molybdenum concentrators. The final sample obtained after the 3 cleaning stages was washed with sodium hydrosulfide (NaSH), and diethyl-ether in order to remove residual organic reagents (e.g. collectors present in the sample). The chemical analyses indicate that the molybdenite sample had 59% Mo. Particle size analyses were determined using a Sympatec’s HELOS-Rodos laser diffraction system. Methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was used as frother, sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) dispersant was obtained from Sigma Aldrich (97% purity), and purified potassium amyl xanthate was used in the tests with pyrite. pH was adjusted using lime in all the tests. The floatability of molybdenite over the pH range from 6 to 11 was tested using 1 In the first procedure, molybdenite was initially conditioned in seawater during 2 In the second procedure, the pH of seawater was firstly adjusted, the solution was conditioned for 2 After addition of SHMP a slight reduction of pH by 0.1–0.2 units was recorded and it was readjusted to the required level. The floatability of pyrite in seawater was also tested over the pH range from 6 to 11, with and without SHMP. These experiments were conducted using 1 All the micro-flotation tests were performed in duplicates, and some of them even in triplicates. Reproducibility of the experiments was good with an average standard deviation of 1.3 percentage points. The largest recorded standard deviation was 1.7 percent points. As seen from The results shown in The results shown in Lime is used to raise pH in the flotation of Cu-Mo sulfide ores to depress pyrite. It was thus important to test how SHMP affects pyrite flotation, and pyrite depression in particular. This is shown in As classical study on the effect of slime coating (clays) on wettability of coal surface revealed ( As it is known, because of the content of pyrite in Cu-Mo ores, the flotation of these ores is carried out in alkaline solutions adjusted with the use of lime. Over the pH range needed to depress pyrite, Mg(OH) As Comparison of Various pieces of evidence gathered over many years ( It is also to be pointed out that SHMP has the ability of forming soluble complexes with many multivalent cations, and can be used as very efficient water softener sequestering calcium and magnesium ions. According to  It was confirmed that the flotation of molybdenite in seawater is depressed over the pH range from 9.5 to 10.5, that is over the pH range over which magnesium hydroxy-complexes and magnesium hydroxide precipitate. The use of sodium hexametaphosphate dispersant restores molybdenite flotation over this alkaline pH range. This opens an additional alternative to prevent the unwanted molybdenite depression in the flotation of Cu-Mo sulfide ores in seawater. Pyrite flotation is depressed when pH is higher than 10.5 and the floatability of pyrite over this pH range is not restored by SHMP. The authors wish to thank