In this study, a long-term (up to 1000 years) geochemical modelling of subsurface CO2 storage was carried out on sandstone reservoirs of depleted gas fields in northeast Netherlands. It was found that mineral dissolution/precipitation has only a minor effect on reservoir porosity. In order to validate this, we focused specifically on the reactive surface area of minerals which we measured by Scanning Electron Microscopy. In this way we obtained distributions for the measured reactive surface areas of each individual mineral. Subsequent parameter analysis and Monte Carlo sampling of these distributions revealed that in the Rotliegend sandstones, the surface area of quartz has by far the largest effect on SMCO2 (total amount of CO2 sequestered as mineral). The proportional relation of SMCO2 and quartz reactive surface area leads to the conclusion that CO2 injection in a sandstone reservoir with fine grained quartz has a higher potential for mineral trapping of CO2.
                  In addition, using parameter analysis we also could determine the effect of surface area of each mineral on its own dissolution/precipitation mechanisms as well as on the other minerals. For example, the results showed that dawsonite precipitation is proportional to kaolinite and K-feldspar surface area.Long-term global temperature measurements have revealed a gradual increase in annual average temperature (0.76 Following CO Many researchers have evaluated the subsurface behaviour of CO Several simulation algorithms have been developed to analyse various aspects of geological storage of CO  The physical and chemical behaviour of CO The reactive surface area of minerals is an important input parameter in modelling studies since it affects the magnitude of mineral trapping in long-term CO The geochemical simulation was performed on a modelled Permian Rotliegend reservoir, which is common for the majority of (nearly depleted) gas fields in northeast Netherlands, situated at depths of around 3000 The primary mineralogy of the layers was obtained from X-ray diffraction (XRD) and SEM analysis of a selection of reservoir core samples from northeast Netherlands gas fields ( According to In this study, we used TOUGHREACT ( The kinetic rate constant can be obtained by the summing of three mechanisms as presented in Eq. Since data for mineral precipitation and nucleation rate are few for most minerals ( Following Porosity is calculated during every time step from the change in mineral volume fraction related to their dissolution/precipitation. Together with the porosity calculation, permeability is also calculated in every time step. This can be done using one of the different porosity–permeability equations which are implemented in the modelling software such as cubic law, Carman–Kozeny equation and Verma–Pruess permeability–porosity relation ( The CO Brine convection and mixing is important at a later stage when the pH drops also in the regions without supercritical CO The variation in the amount of all primary and secondary minerals present in the system is shown in In view of the uncertainties in the reactive surface area of the minerals present in the reservoir rock we decided to focus on this parameter when validating the modelling results with regard to the predicted mineralization processes and amount of total sequestered CO The experimental data showed that the surface areas are an order of magnitude larger than literature values listed in Two approaches were used: parameter sensitivity analysis and random sampling analysis. In the parameter sensitivity analysis, the surface area of each mineral was varied within the range of the experimental measurements ( Random Monte Carlo sampling was performed on the experimental surface area cumulative distribution for each mineral. Thus, the probability of each sampled data point was related to the probability distribution of each mineral obtained from experimental measurements ( The results of the analysis are presented in The strong dependency of SMCO The above leads to the conclusion that CO The distribution of SMCO In order to assess the influence of mineral surface area on the dissolution/precipitation of that mineral, we can compare its final volume in the base case with the final volume using the experimentally determined surface area value (P50) ( Using parameter analysis we also could determine the effect of surface area of each mineral on its own dissolution/precipitation mechanisms as well as on the other minerals. The mineral worth discussing here is dawsonite. Generally, dawsonite precipitation needs Na and Al. According to For completeness, we have investigated the sensitivity of the results to the grid size in the model and repeated the simulations for three different grid sizes. The results of the simulations, in this case SMCO In this study, we specifically addressed the influence of reactive surface area on the mineral trapping of CO Other physical and chemical aspects such as kinetic rate also affect the evolution of dissolution/precipitation of minerals through time ( A geochemical simulation study using TOUGHREACT software was conducted for the CO One of the purposes of our study was to evaluate the possible effect of reactive surface area on mineralization processes. In order to do so, we measured the mineral surface area of the Rotliegend reservoir core samples and carried out in total 129 simulations covering the full range of measured surface areas. The injection period was similar to the base case but with less monitoring time (250 years) due to the large number of simulations. The results indicated that the increase in surface area of quartz and feldspar minerals significantly influences the mineral trapping process. The total sequestered CO Additionally, dawsonite precipitation did reduce with increasing albite surface area. It was concluded that the aluminium source for the dawsonite precipitation was provided either by kaolinite or K-feldspar. In addition, calcite, quartz and albite final volumes showed less dependency on the mineral surface area. This research was funded by The surface area of the minerals was calculated by means of Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) imaging from different minerals of the Permian Rotliegend reservoir. The assumed mineral crystallographic structures are presented in In addition, dawsonite was not primarily present in the reservoir samples and the images were taken from previous experiments for CO The studied core sample originates from a sandstone reservoir of a gas field in northeast Netherlands at a depth of 2.9 The pressure and temperature conditions present in the depleted gas field were simulated in reaction cell. The round, disc shaped reservoir core sample with a diameter of 20 The core sample was analysed before and after experiment with Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction (XRD). Precipitation of dawsonite could be detected both by SEM and XRD ( The distribution of measured surface area of minerals, their cumulative curve, the sampling method and output distribution are shown in In this appendix we present the chemical reactions related to the dissolution/precipitation of calcite (reaction