The management of the distal humeral fracture in the adult elbow continues to be problematic. The bony anatomy of the distal humerus challenges fixation of the fracture, especially when compromised by comminution and osteoporotic bone. There is little controversy that a well-performed open reduction and internal fixation will yield a superior outcome to the historical “bag of bones” treatment. Osteoporosis in the elderly often leads to severe comminution, which may render open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) impossible. Total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) in the elderly has been shown to be a viable option, This review will present the challenges for management of the highly comminuted type C distal humeral fracture. The treatment principles to better achieve ORIF in these complex cases will be discussed, followed by suggestions regarding when to consider arthroplasty. Finally, we present an algorithm for the treatment of distal humeral fractures to assist decision making for the orthopaedic surgeon. Elbow fractures account for 7% of all adult fractures, and fractures of the distal humerus account for 30% of elbow fractures. The classification of the distal humeral fracture was traditionally descriptive, based on the columns and the location of the fracture. These fractures were broadly grouped as supracondylar (above the olecranon fossa), transcondylar (through the olecranon fossa), or intercondylar. Riseborough and Radin The incidence of distal humeral fractures in adults is 5.7 per 100,000 per year. The needs and expectations of these 2 groups are quite dissimilar and must be considered in the treatment plan. The young patient will obviously need a durable functioning elbow and should have reasonable bone mineral density despite displacement or comminution. Fragility fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly patient are expectedly quite osteoporotic and often highly comminuted. This may limit the surgeon’s ability to achieve fixation. Although motion of the elbow is important, elderly patients will still have weight-bearing demands on their arms, such as when using a walker, stabilizing transfers, or rising up out of a chair, and the potential high mechanical demands on an elbow implant with these activities should not be underestimated when deciding treatment. As the population ages, the incidence of these fragility fractures will certainly increase. The usual radiographic examination of the elbow in the emergency department will include anteroposterior and lateral radiographs but rarely will these views be orthogonal because of the elbow deformity. The fracture fragments are rotated and overlap, especially with shortening and angulation through the metaphysis, making evaluation of the fracture difficult. Computed tomography (CT) scan of the elbow has been shown to assist preoperative planning. A 2-dimensional CT scan can be helpful but must be formatted in the plane of the fracture fragments for the best information. A 3-dimensional (3D) reconstruction of the CT scan can compensate for oblique scans and will allow for subtraction of the radius and ulna to better visualize the fracture of the humerus. Whereas the 3D CT scan improved intraobserver and interobserver reliability for classification of the fractures in a blinded study, Perhaps the most useful radiographic test is an intraoperative traction view of the elbow with the patient under anesthesia in the operating room before the skin preparation. Fragments that are rotated and impacted may align, giving optimism for a potential ORIF, taking the “hopeless ORIF” to the “possible ORIF” fracture. Surgical intervention is considered the standard of care for the displaced distal humeral fracture. The most challenging group of distal humeral fractures will be the highly comminuted low transcondylar type C fracture in the elderly patient with osteoporosis. The treatment of these fractures is difficult because of (1) the complex anatomy, (2) the articular and metaphyseal comminution, and (3) the osteoporotic bone. The surgeon must be familiar with the variety of surgical exposures available, knowing the extent and limitations for each approach. He or she must be adept at a variety of internal fixation techniques for articular fragments and metaphyseal fractures and should be knowledgeable and experienced in implant arthroplasty techniques. Open treatment of the distal humeral fracture with ORIF must accomplish (1) anatomic reduction of the articular surface, (2) stable fixation of the articular fragments to the shaft (even if the shaft is shortened), and (3) early range of motion to minimize stiffness. Failure to achieve any of these tenets may lead to an unsatisfactory result. Inadequate reduction will lead to arthritis. Inadequate fixation will lead to nonunion. Failure to allow early range of motion (<3 weeks) Known adverse factors that will affect the outcome for distal humeral fractures include multiple trauma, open fracture, severely comminuted joint surface, and bone loss. Several excellent review articles on the management of distal humeral fractures have been written recently. Surgical approaches for the management of distal humeral fractures include olecranon osteotomy, triceps-reflecting approach, To minimize complications with the olecranon osteotomy, authors have advised an apex distal chevron osteotomy of the proximal olecranon through the bare area of the olecranon surface. The triceps-splitting approach does afford good exposure and is familiar to most surgeons who routinely perform TEA. The triceps-splitting approach does not compromise the bailout for salvage TEA, and it does not have risks for nonunion of the proximal olecranon or symptomatic hardware. However, even with repair of the triceps, early range of motion should be protected, and some long-term triceps weakness (25%) has been documented after surgery. The para-tricipital approaches or “triceps on” exposures allow for the experienced surgeon to work through windows medial and lateral to the mobilized triceps. The “triceps on” exposure does not weaken the triceps and will allow early range of motion. This exposure can be converted to an olecranon osteotomy if more extensive anterior comminution is found at surgery. The para-tricipital approaches are especially useful for the single-column fracture of the distal humerus. TEA can be accomplished with the “triceps on” exposure, although preparation of the ulnar canal and insertion of the ulnar component are more challenging than with the triceps-splitting approach. While considering the pros and cons of surgical exposures for the distal humerus, surgeons are obliged to identify and protect the ulnar nerve at the elbow. The ulnar nerve is at risk during fracture exposure and hardware placement. The ulnar nerve should always be identified early in the procedure and then either left in situ or transposed anteriorly according to the surgeon’s preference or clinical indications. Gofton et al Decisions regarding ORIF of the distal humeral fracture will be dictated by the fracture pattern and comminution. ORIF should be considered in all patients who are candidates for surgery and in whom stable fixation of the bone can be obtained. Despite displacement, small articular fragments of the distal humerus are often salvageable and have a surprisingly low incidence of avascular necrosis after stable fixation. Bicolumnar stabilization of the distal humerus should be achieved, either with 90°-90° orthogonal plate configuration ( Considerable controversy has existed regarding the best plate construct, whether orthogonal plates (90°-90°) or parallel plates (medial or lateral). Sanchez-Sotelo et al The functional outcomes for ORIF of type C distal humeral fractures have been reported, with the mean flexion-extension arc of the elbow measuring from 89° to 122° of total motion. McKee et al In the event of a nonunion of the distal humerus in a younger patient after ORIF, repeat ORIF, bone grafting, and aggressive contracture release have been shown to be successful. TEA has become a predictable procedure for the management of arthritis, with acceptable complication rates and survivorship. Just as hemiarthroplasty is used to treat displaced femoral neck fractures of the hip, it was only natural that TEA might be considered for unreconstructable intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus ( In 1997 Cobb and Morrey The subset of rheumatoid arthritis patients reported by Cobb and Morrey Kamineni and Morrey Although TEA can be performed successfully for a severely comminuted type C distal humeral fracture in the properly selected patient, the arthroplasty implant mandates a permanent lifetime 5-lb lifting restriction. The arthroplasty implant also carries long-term risks for component loosening, periprosthetic fracture, and limited survivorship. Cil et al Perhaps the strongest evidence for justification of TEA for a select group of type C distal humeral fractures can be found in the excellent level I multicenter, prospective, randomized controlled trial of ORIF versus TEA for displaced intra-articular distal humeral fractures in elderly patients reported by McKee et al Finally, a promising alternative to the highly comminuted low transcondylar fracture in the osteoporotic elderly patient may be distal humeral hemiarthroplasty. A treatment algorithm is proposed to guide decision making for the distal humeral fracture in the adult ( Every attempt should be made to achieve ORIF for the distal humeral fracture in the young patient, and hence this is the “must fix” group. TEA is not an option for this group. Good bone stock is expected, despite displacement, rotation, or comminution. Extra-articular high T and Y fractures are more common and should be treated with bicolumnar fixation as discussed. Intra-articular fragments are well addressed with headless screw fixation, achieving high healing rates with a low incidence of avascular necrosis. If necessary, third-plate fixation for posterior and lateral comminution should be considered. In extreme cases, application of an external fixator may be required for management of an open grade 3 fracture of the distal humerus or a severely comminuted fracture after a gunshot wound. Any hardware failure or nonunion in the young patient group after fixation should be addressed with a revision ORIF, bone grafting, and aggressive capsular releases. Fractures of the distal humerus in the elderly patient group (>65 years) present the greatest challenges. The consideration is not age Good outcomes for ORIF have been reported in the literature for distal humeral fractures in the elderly patient when well performed. Hardware failure or nonunion in the elderly patient after ORIF can still be later addressed with TEA, if needed. The outcomes for salvage TEA after nonunion or failed internal fixation can equal those for primary TEA after fracture. Even for the experienced surgeon, however, some fractures of the distal humerus in the older osteoporotic patient just “cannot be fixed.” Finally, patients with pre-existing inflammatory arthropathy, such as rheumatoid arthritis, “should not be fixed” and should be considered for primary TEA if they sustain a distal humeral fracture. Treatment decisions for type C distal humeral fractures will be affected by the surgeon’s training, surgeon’s bias, and patient’s demand. Most patients will be best served with a well-performed ORIF. Distal humeral fractures must be fixed in the young population, and ORIF should be the first choice in elderly patients as well. With the advent of precontoured periarticular locked plates and improved fixation technology, coupled with improved fixation principles, ORIF of osteoporotic and comminuted fractures has become more achievable even in “hopeless” cases. Patients with a pre-existing inflammatory arthropathy of the elbow, such as rheumatoid arthritis, should be treated with TEA after distal humeral fracture. The most challenging group of distal humeral fractures will be the highly comminuted low transcondylar type C distal humeral fracture in the elderly patient with severe osteoporosis. In this group, TEA or an off-label distal humerus hemiarthroplasty may be the only viable option. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.