One of the most important aspects of mine design is to determine the optimum cut-off grades. Material grading above and below the cut-off is directed to different destinations. Optimization of cut-off grade is now an accepted principle for open pit planning studies. The most commonly criteria used in cut-off grade optimization is to maximize net present value. Lane formulated the concept of cut-off grade optimization for single metal deposit but this method cannot be use in multiple metal deposits. Because in single metal deposits six points are possible candidates for the optimum cut-off grade, in multiple metal deposits an infinite number of points are possible candidates for the optimum cut-off grades. The objective function evaluation of these infinite points is impossible. In this paper, the equivalent grade factor is used to find optimum cut-off grade of multiple metal deposits. First, the objective function is defined for multiple metal deposits and then objective function is converted to one variable function by using equivalent factors. The optimum equivalent cut-off grade of main metal can be found by the optimization techniques such as the Lane algorithm or elimination methods. At final step, the optimum cut-off grades will be determined by interpolation of grade-tonnage distribution of deposit.One of the most critical parameters in mining operation is cut-off grade. Taylor presents one of the best definitions of cut-off grade. He defined cut-off grade as “any grade that, for any specific reason, is used to separate two courses of action, e.g. to mine or to leave, to mill or to dump …” ( Most researchers have used break-even cut-off grade criteria to define ore as a material that just will pay mining and processing costs. These methods are not optimum but the mine planner often seeks to optimize the cut-off grade of ore to maximize the net present value (NPV). The determination of the optimum cut-off grade of single metal deposit can be very complex even when price and cost are assumed constant, but it involves the costs and capacities of the several stages of the mining operations, the waste/ore ratios, average grades of different increments of the ore body and so on.  These types of deposits can be evaluated based on a value per ton of ore calculated from the net smelter return (NSR). NSR represented the total value of metals recovered from each ton of ore minus the cost of smelting ( All of these methods are associated with some flaws: none of these methods consider the grade distribution of the deposits and do not take into account time value of money. Furthermore, they completely ignore the capacities of the mining system, so the cut-off grades calculated by these methods are not optimum. This paper describes the use of equivalent grade factors to optimum the cut-off grades of multiple metal deposits. In large open pit mines, there are typically three stages of operations: (i) the mining stage, where units of various grade are mined up to some capacity, (ii) the treatment stage, where ore is milled and concentrated, again up to some capacity constraint and (ii) the refining stage, where the concentrate is smelted and refined to a final product which is shipped and sold; the latest stage is also subject to capacity constraints. Each stage has its own associated costs and a limiting capacity. By considering costs and revenues in this operation, the profit is determined by using the following equation: If The quantities of refined metals Substituting Eqs. One would now like to schedule the mining operation in such a way that the depreciation in the present value takes place sooner rather than later. This is because later profits are discounted more than those captured earlier. In examining Eq. In Eq. If the mining capacity ( If the concentrating capacity ( If the refinery output of main metal ( In Eqs. As previously mentioned, using equivalent factor, the objective function must be converted to one variable function. Then optimization techniques such as Lane algorithm or elimination methods can be use to find optimum cut-off grades. According to Lane algorithm, there are three limiting cut-off grades and three balancing cut-off grades. If only the capacity of one operation is limited factor then the break-even cut-off grade for that stage will be the optimum cut-off grade. To find the grades that maximize the NPV under different constraints, one first takes the derivative of Eqs. When mining operations are constrained by more than one capacity, the optimum cut-off grade calculated by conventional method may not necessarily be a break-even cut-off grade. In such a case, the balancing cut-off grade for each pair of stage needs to be considered as well. A balancing grade is one that which allows both stages of the pair being considered to achieve maximum capacities jointly. Therefore, the balancing cut-off grades are independent of economics and being determined by using the grade distribution and the capacities of each of the different system. Based on these considerations, now six cut-off grades are candidate for overall optimum cut off grade. The optimum cut-off grade will be one of the six cut-off grades consisting of the three limiting economic cut-off grades and the three balancing cut-off grades. The optimum cut-off grade for a particular pair of stages is the balancing grade limited by both stages. If only one of the stages in the pair is a bottleneck then the optimum cut-off grade for the pair is the breakeven cut-off grade for the limiting stage. The overall optimum cut-off grade is the middle value of the optimum cut-offs for the three stages. In this case, objective function is a unimodal function. So elimination methods such as dichotomous search method, Fibonacci search method and Golden section search method will be used to find optimum cut-off grades. These methods require only objective function evaluations and do not use the derivative of the function to find the optimum point (  Consider a hypothetical situation wherein final pit limits of Cu/Mo deposit has been superimposed on a mineral inventory. The pit outline contains 14.4 million tons of materials. The grade–tonnage distribution and average grades of ore for each metal are shown in According to Eq. Now using the equivalent factor and average grade of each metal, the equivalent copper grade of different copper grade is calculated ( Converting molybdenum grade into copper grade, the grade–tonnage distribution of two metal deposits is converted into one-dimensional grade tonnage distribution and cut-off grade optimization method of single metal deposit such as Lane method or elimination method was used to calculate the optimum cut-off grades in year by year. Then the grade–tonnage curve of deposit is adjusted for each year of mine life. To do this, tonnage of ore in first year of mine life from the grade distribution intervals above optimum cut-off grades and tonnage of waste in first year of mine life from the grade distribution intervals below optimum cut-off grades was subtracted. These calculations are repeated until the end of mine life. To justify proposed method, the NPV of break-even equivalent cut-off grade was calculated and compared with NPV calculated by proposed method. By definition, the break-even equivalent cut-off grade is grade that revenue is equal to costs. So If concentrator capacity is controlling factor, then the mine life is equal to Therefore, NPV of mining operation under break-even equivalent cut-off grade is $ 7839174.188 and NPV of mining operation under proposed method according to One of the important aspects of mining is deciding what material in a deposit is worth mining and processing, and on the contrary, what material is waste. This decision-making is summarized by the cut-off grade policy. Cut-off grades of multiple metal deposits are evaluated by several methods such as NSR method, critical level method, single grade cut-off approach, dollar value cut-off approach. None of these methods is optimum. In this paper, proposed that minable ore is ranked based on metals contribution of the mine revenue and equivalent grade of main metal is determined using equivalent factors. Objective function is expressed to one variable function. Then optimization techniques such as Lane algorithm or elimination methods must be use to find optimum equivalent cut-off grade for main metal (caused more revenue). Optimum cut-off grades are determined by interpolation of grades–tonnage distribution. A verification example is presenting for confirming the approach proposed in this study. The comparison of results are shown the NPV of mining operation under proposed method is more than twice of NPV of mining operation under break-even equivalent cut-off grade.