The classic method of open bone grafting in the treatment of un-united tibial fractures has been associated with some complications. A novel, minimally invasive, percutaneous technique of bone grafting is described. Forty-one consecutive patients with delayed union or non-union of a tibial fracture was treated with percutaneous bone grafting from 1993 to 1999. The mean age of the patients was 41 (15–86) years. Twenty-seven patients had grade I–III open fractures. The fractures had initially been treated in a cast (n=26), external fixator (n=14) or intramedullary nail (n=1). Two patients had an earlier unsuccessful Phemister–Charnley-type bone-grafting procedure for delayed union. The mean interval from injury to percutaneous bone grafting was 21 (13–66) weeks. Thirty-seven of the 41 un-united fractures healed in 13 (10–48) weeks after the percutaneous bone grafting. The mean hospital stay was 1 day. No infections, bleeding or neural complications existed. Percutaneous bone grafting appeared to be as effective as open techniques, and possessed considerable advantages. It is safe, time saving and economical, it involves minimal trauma at the fracture site and it avoids major donor site problems.The majority of the delayed unions and non-unions of long bones result from tibial fractures Forty-one consecutive patients with a delayed union or non-union of a tibial fracture were included in the study from April 1993 to August 1999. A fracture was determined to have a delayed union when it had not healed after 3 months, and a non-union when it had not healed after 9 months or more from the fracture. Six fractures were classified as non-unions (one atrophic, two isotrophic, three hypertrophic), and 35 fractures were classified as delayed unions. The average age of the patients was 41.2 years (15–86), and there were 24 men and 17 women. Twenty-seven patients had suffered from open fractures, and nine patients had multiple injuries. Two patients had an earlier unsuccessful Phemister–Charnley-type bone-grafting procedure for delayed union. The patient profile is presented in The operation was performed under spinal anaesthesia with the patient supine. A short incision was made medial to the tibia, and the guide pin was introduced perpendicular to the fracture line under fluoroscopic control. A hollow, cylindrical cutter with outer diameter of 8 mm was threaded over the guide pin and passed through the tibia ( The leg was immobilized in a long plaster cast in 27 patients until healing. An external fixator was left in its original position in 14 patients until healing. The patient was encouraged to full weight-bearing as early as possible. The patient was examined, and the affected leg was radiographed every third week postoperatively. The fracture was considered healed when the patient could bear full weight without pain at the fracture site, the leg was stable in bending, and the radiographs showed callus formation over the fracture site. Anteroposterior and lateral plain radiographs of the affected tibia were analysed by the radiologist to determine the level, type, comminution, dislocation, angulation and shortening of the fresh fracture ( Thirty-seven (90.2%) un-united fractures healed in 13 (10–48) weeks after percutaneous bone grafting. The mean operation time was 26 (15–45) min. An ipsilateral fibular osteotomy was performed in 11 patients to allow correction of angular deformity. No blood transfusion was performed in any patient postoperatively. The mean hospital stay was 1 day. There were no postoperative infections or nerve injuries at the fracture site or at the donor site in any patient. In five patients, the bacteriological culture of the piece of bone taken from the fracture site showed a positive result including Numerous surgical methods have been advocated for the treatment of delayed union and non-union fractures including plate osteosynthesis Many techniques of bone grafting for non-union have been described, and it is difficult to make a distinct comparison between clinical results. Phemister used an anterior approach and onlay autologous graft subperiosteally onto the fracture line without resection of the non-union or rigid immobilization of the fracture The reported results from open bone grafting of un-united tibial fractures indicate union rate ranging from 70 to 95% There are some earlier reports of minimally invasive bone-grafting techniques in the treatment of un-united tibial fractures in clinical studies. Bhan and Mehara used a specially devised milling cutter to obtain a bone graft from the iliac crest, and then introduced the graft into the fracture site The present study indicates that percutaneous bone grafting appears to be as effective as open bone-grafting techniques in the treatment of un-united tibial fractures. The effect of the procedure is probably based on the opening the medullary canal as in intramedullary reaming We feel this technique possesses considerable advantages. In addition to the fact that it is safe, time saving and economical, it involves minimal trauma at the fracture site and it avoids major donor site problems.