Speed is one of the important parameters in tumbling ball mills because it affects the dynamic motion of the balls within the mill. In turn the motion of the balls affects the distribution of the forces and thus the power draft of the mill. The main objective of this work is to model the dynamics of mill startup using the discrete element method (DEM). To achieve the experimental objective speed and torque as a function of time during mill startup were measured experimentally. A 0.55 m diameter mill was used to perform the experimental analysis. Load volume, J of 0% and 20% and mill speed of 70%, 100%, 120% and 150% of the critical are analyzed in detail. The DEM software, MillSoft (by Rajamani) was used to model the experimental results. During the experiments, the mill was allowed to ramp from rest until it reached the setpoint; after this it continued at constant speed. We have developed good dynamic models of mill speed. The experiments show that torque is the same for all conditions up to the point where each attains steady state, because the ramp rate is constant. The final torque for speeds greater than 100% of the critical speed (experiments and simulations) is not zero because only one layer of balls centrifuges in the time used. The experimental and the simulated torque compare well. Overall the dynamics of mill startup can be modelled with semiquantitative accuracy using DEM.angular displacement (rad/s) angular speed (rad/s) initial angular speed (rad/s) time (s) ramp rate (rad/s constant of integration constant of integration residual sum of squares regression sum of squares coefficient of determination filtered torque using central moving average (Nm) span parameter  percent critical speed at setpoint percent critical speed at steady state time at steady state (s) average angular speed (rad/s) torque (Nm) power (W) The prediction of the power draft of a grinding mill is important, because the consumption of electrical energy in tumbling mills is such that the power costs account for up to 25% of the total processing cost for many ores. To predict mill power, knowledge of the distribution of forces during the tumbling motion of the balls is required. This entails the understanding of the dynamic motion of the balls within the mill, which is affected by parameters such as speed. In this work the dynamic effect of speed on torque and ball behavior during mill startup is investigated and then modelled using the discrete element method (DEM). The first task was to measure speed and torque as a function of time experimentally. The second involved modelling the experimental results using DEM. Predictions of mill behavior by MillSoft, a program developed by Rajamani and coworkers ( The experimental apparatus consists of a 0.55 m diameter and 0.023 m length “two-dimensional” mill (2D mill). The mill has glass side panes installed so that the tumbling mill load can be observed and photographed. The mill shell has 12 mild steel square lifters of size 0.022 m attached to it. The mill is attached to a variable speed motor (0%–200% of the critical speed). Steel balls of size 22.24 mm in diameter and density of The experimental procedure involved setting the cam (see During the experimental runs, load volume, One of the requirements of this study is precise knowledge of dynamic speed of the mill. Experimentally, this entails knowledge of angular displacement as a function of time; since from a graph of marker signal versus time the number of revolutions ( The operation manual of the motor specifies that the motor accelerates linearly to the required speed setting. Because the motor starts to operate at a predetermined minimum speed, the proposed model for the unsteady-state condition (i.e., while the speed is being ramped to the setpoint) is given by Since by definition During steady state (when the mill is operating at the setpoint), speed remains constant with time and as a result the model for speed is given by Integration of There are four unknown parameters in the models ( The torque data obtained contained a lot of high frequency noise and had to be filtered. A central moving average was used The span parameter (i.e., 2 Since approximately 100 readings were made per second, this implies that a moving average of data collected in 0.71 s is obtained from this filter. Since only average torque is estimated using the DEM simulator for each second, no significant data is lost using this filter. The results of   There are three types of torque required: torque to accelerate the mill shell, torque to overcome bearing friction and torque to impart energy to the balls. Before steady state, torque is required to accelerate the mill to the speed setpoint and to overcome friction. At steady-state torque is required only to overcome friction. The data in  If at higher speeds there was complete centrifuging, torque would be zero. The figure above shows that torque is not zero even after steady state is reached. During experiments only one layer of balls centrifuged in the time during which the measurements were taken, so the remaining balls continued to draw torque. For mill speeds of 120% and 150% the load does eventually centrifuge completely, and the power drawn tends towards zero. The kinetics of the process will be investigated in future work. MillSoft can only simulate mills running at a constant speed. It was therefore used to calculate the power drawn by the mill during one second increments of time with the mill travelling at a speed equal to the average speed of the experimental mill during each of these increments. The models as represented by MillSoft provides a determination of energy loss during a given time. Power is determined: Hence torque is calculated: Parameters used in the simulations (results of which are presented in  The figures indicate that the experiments compare well with simulated results. They also indicate that the deviations between the experimental and the simulated torque decrease with an increase in speed. However the torques differ quite substantially during the first second. This is probably due to the effect of the starting position of the load during the experimental run ( The variation of torque and load orientation in the mill with time is shown in A study of load behavior in The square lifters cause balls from the outer row of balls to cataract, even when the mill speed is low (e.g., for frames when % The cataracting stream becomes more pronounced as speed increases from 39% to 80%. Complete centrifuging of some balls is evident after % Complete centrifuging of a full outer row of balls is evident at % The remaining balls shown no tendency to centrifuge at %  We have developed good dynamic models of mill speed. The experiments show that torque is the same for all conditions up to the point where each attains steady state, because the ramp rate is constant. The final torque for speeds greater than % The experimental and the simulated torques compare well. Overall, the dynamics of mill startup can be modeled with fair accuracy using DEM. Further simulation work to improve this accuracy is ongoing. By extension, one would expect DEM to be useful for modelling variable-speed milling.