Cementation is one of the simplest and low cost methods. It is widely used in industry for recovery of metal and removal of metal ions from dilute wastes, and for purification of solutions. In the present investigations, copper powder was prepared by cementation from a copper sulphate solution of 0.08M by slowly adding the activated iron powder. Activation of iron powder was done by milling it in an attrition mill. Kinetics of the cementation reaction was evaluated by measuring the rate of decrease of metal ions concentration in the solution by spectrophotometry. Studies of the results have shown significant improvement in the cementation rate. Cemented copper powder obtained was characterized for its purity, particle size, grain size and morphology by EDS, laser particle size analyser, XRD studies, TEM and SEM, respectively. The cemented copper powder was found to have particle size in the range of 180nm to 46μm having polygon shape. The average grain size in the powder particles was found to be 54nm. Few core-shell particles with entrapped iron in copper particles have also been detected.Cementation or displacement is basically the electrochemical precipitation of a metal ion from solution by another more electropositive metal. Metal displacement reactions require the transfer of electrons between the dissolving and the precipitating metals. Due to the difference between the standard electrode chemical potential of two metals, metal ions in the solution reduced to their metallic state on the reductant metal surface. The kinetics of the cementation reaction is evaluated by measuring the rate of decrease of metal ions concentration in the solution, as a result of precipitation The inherent advantage of this technology consists in its environmental compatibility due to the fact that the main reagent, the electron, is the ‘clean reagent’ The term mechanical activation, is regarded as a process involving an increase in reaction ability of a substance which remains chemically unchanged. It is achieved due to unification of four processes: accumulation of defects, amorphisation, formation of metastable polymorphs and chemical reaction. Structural relaxation plays an important role in mechanical activation, and occurs via different channels such as production of heat, formation of new surface, plastic deformation, aggregation, and adsorption; therefore its rate is quite variable The reaction between copper ions and iron metal occurs according to the reaction in the eq. below: The standard reduction potential of copper and iron are 0.34 and − Cementation occurs through a series of shorted electrochemical cells in which electrons for reduction of Cu Aim of the present investigations is to study kinetics of cementation of copper by activated iron and characterize the powder obtained. It was planned to activate iron powder by milling it in a Szegvari attrition mill. Milled iron powder particles are expected to have large surface area, finer grain size, large residual stresses and lattice defects, substructure etc. which might increase its dissolution rate generating large number of nuclei for cementation. These factors are expected to affect kinetics of the cementation and the size and morphology of the particles obtained. Copper powder was cemented from pentahydrate copper sulphate solution of 0.08 For activation of iron powder, it was milled for 2 To understand kinetics of process five samples of 10 The cemented powder obtained was tested for its purity using EDS analysis. Particle size, size distribution and specific surface area of the powder was studied using Malvern Mastersizer 2000, while the morphology was studied using ZEISS Supra-50 FESEM. XRD studies were also carried out, using Panalytical X Pert Pro X-ray diffraction unit, to know grain size in the powder particles (k Copper concentrations in the solution undergoing cementation, as measured by spectrophotometer, have been plotted as shown in During cementation, formation of copper particles takes place in two stages: Formation of copper nuclei and Growth of these nuclei. Cementation reactions are first order processes with respect to the noble metal. The reactions are found to obey the first order kinetic law, in which data fit a first order rate equation. The rate of copper cementation by Fe powder can be represented by the following first order rate equation: By integration and rearrangement of above Eq. [Cu [Cu K V A t A plot of log [Cu Particle size distribution, average particle size and specific surface area in powder prepared via activated (8 EDS spectrums of copper powder prepared by activated (8 In Also high tendency of copper and iron to get oxidize lead to impurities like O and S, and these are less in activated cemented copper due to faster kinetics of the process X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of copper powder obtained from activated and normal cementation are shown in Crystallite size in these powders as calculated using Debye–Scherrer relationship as in Eq. These results show decrease in grain size with increase in degree of mechanical activation, due to corresponding faster kinetics. A shoulder peak corresponding to iron can be seen in magnified XRD pattern view (inset), indicating the presence of iron in elemental form. However, trace amount may also present as iron oxide resulting from impurity present in the starting powder. FESEM images of copper powder obtained by normal and activated cementation are shown in SEM images clearly shows reduction in size of copper powder prepared with activated iron powder than normal one. Copper powders are of near polygon shape in all samples except 8 TEM micrograph of the copper powder prepared by activated cementation (8 TEM micrograph confirm size of powder particles in sub-micrometer range (>   Kinetics of cementation of copper powder from pentahydrate copper sulphate solution increases quite significantly when precipitant iron powder is mechanically activated. Recovery of copper was more and the level of impurities like Fe, O and S was less in case of activated cementation due to its faster kinetics. Activation of precipitant iron has resulted in cementation of finer copper powder particles (approaching to nano size) having nano grains. Morphology of copper powder obtained by activated cementation was found to be polygon tending to square shaped.