Low-density materials, such as the commercially available hydrogen silsesquioxane (HSQ) offer a low dielectric constant. Thus, HSQ with a low value of k (∼2.85) can be spin-coated if the density of Si–H bonding is maintained at a high level and the formation of –OH bonds and absorption of water in the film is minimized. O2 plasma exposure on HSQ film increases leakage current. Also the dielectric constant shows a significant increase after O2 plasma exposure. Another consequence of the O2 plasma exposure is the significant decrease in the contact angle of the HSQ surface, which is not desirable. In this paper, we demonstrate that the surface passivation by hydrogen followed by oxygen plasma treatment of HSQ film for 30 min each leads to a regain of leakage current density and dielectric constant. These results show that the H2 plasma treatment is a promising technique to prevent the damage in the commercially available and highly applicable low-k materials and it also increases the visibility of its use at the 0.1-μm technology. The more hydrophilic nature of the HSQ surface after O2 plasma exposure leads to an increased moisture absorption with a subsequent increase in the dielectric constant.The reduction in dimensions of devices to achieve faster performance has led a very large device density in today's ULSI circuits. The smaller line dimension increases the resistance ( Plasma exposure is widely used for post-etch treatment, such as resist strip or residue etch cleaning HSQ films were spin coated on to p-type silicon wafers and baked on a hot plate at 100 °C, 250 °C and 350 °C for 1 min each followed by furnace curing for 1 h in nitrogen ambient at 400 °C Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR) can help to understand the bonding configuration of the material. The film thickness and refractive index were measured by Ellipsometry (Sentech Model SE 800). The film surface hydrophobicity is studied by contact angle measurements (Rame Hart, Model 100-00-230). MIS capacitors were fabricated by evaporating Cu (copper) (1 mm dots diameter for front contact) and also as the back contact of Al (aluminum) to the silicon wafer. A Model 82 CV (Agilent) meter was used to measure the dielectric constant of HSQ. The capacitance was measured at 100 kHz. The DC current–voltage (   In this study, we have shown that HSQ films are prone to damage when exposed to oxygen plasma. As we know, such plasma exposure is unavoidable during the O This work was carried out under the project supported by DST, Government of India (SR/FTP/PS-41/2000).