Combined PIXE and PIGE analysis was applied at the new Bucharest Tandetron to investigate biomineralization in two calcified tissues, deer antlers and femur bone. By annual loss and fast re-growth, antlers are a valuable model for bone as a dynamical system. Samples characterized by optical microscopy and histology were analyzed for P, Ca, F, Na, Mg, S, Cl, K, Zn, Sr by 3MeV proton simultaneous PIXE and PIGE, using a hydroxyapatite standard and other reference materials. Good correlation between methods was found for P, and the concentrations were related to biological data. Antlers showed lower mineralization than femur, with the lowest values in the third antler beam. A power function of mineralization vs. “mineral age” of antlers was found. Thus combined PIXE and PIGE of antlers may bring highly relevant insights in biomineralization research.A new 3 Antlers are bony cranial appendages of the deer characterized by an annual cycle of loss and re-growth. They are the fastest growing bones in mammals, which make them a valuable model for studying mineralization of primary bone and the influence of hormonal, dietary and pollution factors. Antlers are typically formed in 120–150 The IBA experimental set-up at the 3 Experimental and theoretical aspects as well as general applications of these methods have been treated together in studies of techniques intercomparison and intercalibration standards The combined IBA approach was applied by other groups to bones Hard antlers were obtained from three Iberian red deer stags selected from a herd kept at an experimental farm at the University of Castilla-La Mancha (Spain). During the growing period of the antler, deer received one injection of calcein, a fluorescent indicator (5 For histological analysis, dehydrated portions of the slices were embedded in poly-methyl-methacrylate (PMMA). Mineralized ground sections (50 Sections were first examined with episcopic-fluorescence microscopy using a Nikon Optiphot 2 EFD-3 (Tokyo, Japan) microscope to identify the calcein labels in primary osteons ( Mineralized thin sections (100 The Bucharest 3 Target viewing with an optical system and XYZ/goniometric positioning of specimen allows a precise selection of the analyzed area. The size of the beam spot could be focused between 1 and 2 HPGe Ortec detectors were used for PIXE and PIGE measurements. For PIXE, an IGLET X-series detector (12.7 For RBS, two ion-implanted silicon detectors for charged particle are available, one fixed and one movable, with a 16 The targets were positioned normal on the beam direction. PIXE and PIGE detectors were placed at 45° with respect to the beam. Measurements were performed in high vacuum (10 A 3 Certified reference materials (CRMs) were used as standards and/or for analytical quality control including pelleted hydroxyapatite (bone ash) (NIST SRM-1400), fluorspar (NIST SRM-180), glass (NIST-611), soil (SS-P, Kosice, SK), and hay (IAEA-V10). In addition, pellets of high purity chemical compounds (KCl, NaCl, Fe The PIXE experiments were performed both with and without an Al filter of 20 For a quantitative analysis the PIXE spectra were processed by thick-target GUPIX program calculations The detection limits estimated with GUPIX for Zn and Sr were of about ∼50 The reactions considered for PIGE measurements are reported in Attention was paid to the PIGE interference reactions in producing For PIGE standardization, a relative analytical method was applied with standards of certified element concentration, using the following formula To assess the proton beam energy In the PIXE spectra up to 17 elements could be detected when processed with GUPIX, but of those we focused for quantitative analysis only on the major elements (P, Ca) and on a few minor and trace elements of higher biological relevance (S, Cl, K, Sr, Zn). Although Al was also evidenced by PIXE when using the Al filter and by PIGE, it was ignored in the end because probably it was not genuine (X-ray fluorescence from the filter; possible preparative contaminant of some samples where corundum powder was used for polishing). The major elements in the analyzed antler and femur samples ( Most interesting, if the mineralization degree of antlers – defined by the position-dependent relative Ca concentration in antlers with respect to pure HA or to bone ash HA standard – is represented as a function of the time moment when the antler was mineralized, the data points can be fitted with the power (Freundlich) function ( This function is the solution of the simple differential equation: The PIGE analysis detected the minor elements F, Na, P and Mg ( Comparing the concentrations in the antler’s three beams, the order (1st The following biologically important minor and trace elements – S, Cl, K, Zn, Sr – were detected by PIXE. While the concentrations of K, Zn, Sr in antlers and femur could be evaluated by comparison with the HA (bone ash) reference material, S and Cl were not present in the HA standard. Therefore we had the following options: (1) to extrapolate for these elements the yield vs. Z curve obtained for the standard ( Sulfur was assigned mainly to sulphated glycans from the organic fraction of antlers, as sustained by its lowest concentration in adult femur, and by intermediate values in 3rd antler beam and yearling femur (which may have some similarities in organic content and biochemical activity). Cl and K followed parallel trends having higher values in antlers as compared to femur. Sr, a chemical analogue of Ca, was also higher in 1st and 2nd antler beams than in the 3rd one, and in general lower in antlers than in femur, showing thus the same trends as Ca. This suggests that probably Sr substituted Ca in HA only when Ca was not in excess. Finally Zn, which plays an essential role for biomineralization as constituent of the active site of the alkaline phosphatase enzyme, but which is bound also as a passive metallic ion in other sites of normal compact bone The combined PIXE and PIGE analysis of deer antlers and femur yielded biologically relevant results. This approach allowed a precise survey of the biomineralization status of the bone and of the main three beams of antlers by time-resolved monitoring of P and Ca, as well as of compositional differences revealed by the Ca/P ratio. Significant differences between antlers from different animals were found. The 3rd antler beam appeared less mineralized as compared to 2nd and 1st antler beams, in agreement with optical microscopy results and data obtained by other methods. At the same time a general evolution power law has been found, consistent with a unique mechanism of biomineralization. A very good linear correlation between PIXE and PIGE measurements of P has been evidenced. Minor elements like F, Na, Mg, Al, S, Cl, and K detected by both methods reveal secondary interactions in the calcified tissues. The analysis of trace elements Sr and Zn was still imprecise, but further experimental improvements are the object of our future work. In brief, the simultaneous PIXE and PIGE analysis provided a relevant insight of biomineralization in antlers and bones. The main advantages of the 3 We thank Mariana Ilias, Andrei Rugina, Cezar Morarescu and Paul Ionescu (