This study investigates the effect of 10 wt% Mo alloying of NiCrBSi hardfacing on the microstructure and dry sliding wear performance at room temperature and elevated temperatures up to 700 °C. Mo additions refined the boride and carbide phases in the microstructure and formed a Mo-rich boro-carbide along with a 20% drop in its hardness. It further improved the wear resistance at all tested temperatures due to the formation of Mo oxides on the worn surfaces.Hardfacing is a popular and economically viable solution whereby materials with superior properties are deposited over cheaper bulk materials. Cobalt and Nickel based hardfacings are very popular in this regard. It was shown by Kashani et al. [ While Ni based hardfacings have been in use for quite a long time however for last few decades there have been continuous efforts by several researchers to further improve the wear and corrosion related properties of these alloys by tailoring of their microstructures, which consists of carbides and borides in Ni matrix [ Since all these studies fall short in terms of High Temperature (HT) wear testing and detailed investigations of operative wear mechanisms therein, this study aims to bridge this gap of HT wear characterization of Mo alloyed NiCrBSi hardfacings. Driven by this potential, authors have alloyed NiCrBSi hardfacing with 10 wt% Mo during Plasma Transfer Arc (PTA) deposition and have studied its HT wear characteristics up to 700 °C. Improvements in dry sliding HT wear resistance could definitely find potential applications in enhancing the service life of hardfaced components. NiCrBSi and 10 wt% Mo alloyed NiCrBSi hardfacings were fabricated on AISI 4140 steel by PTA deposition under identical parameters (i.e. current 92 A, voltage 32 V, travel speed 85 mm/min). For alloyed hardfacing, commercially available powders of NiCrBSi (Wall Colmonoy, having nominal composition as 12 wt% Cr, 4.0 wt% Fe, 4.0 wt% Si, 2.7 wt% B, 0.60 wt% C, and balance Ni) and Mo (Sulzer Amdry 313X, 99.0% purity) were mixed. After PTA deposition the hardfacings had a thickness of about 5 mm, the surfaces of the hardfacings were then ground with an industrial planer surface grinding machine, with a 52 grit aluminum oxide grinding wheel, to a thickness of 2.5 mm with flat surface. The microstructural features of the hardfacings were examined by X-ray diffractometer (XRD,GBC, Australia), optical microscope (OM, Leica CTR6000, Germany) and field emission scanning electron microscope (SFEG SEM, Philips, Holland) equipped with energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS EDAX Ametek). For microstructural examinations the surface of the hardfacings were manually ground successively using 600, 800, 1200 and 2500 grit SiC papers before polishing with 0.25 μm diamond paste to attain mirror finish surfaces. The XRD spectra were taken using Cu-Kα radiation with scan range of 30° to 90° 2ϴ, scan speed of 2°/min and step size of 0.02°. The optical microscopy was carried out following the etching of the surfaces with Murakami's reagent. The OM images were analysed with open source java based software namely ‘ImageJ’ for the estimation of the volume fraction of the microstructural constituents. The OM images were processed with the software after converting the desired image to binary mode and applying threshold limit to dark and white areas. Thus, software measures the number of relevant pixels for bright phase. This procedure is in accordance with instructions mentioned in their user guide [ A conventional microhardness tester (Shimadzu, HMV2, Japan) with an indentation load of 200 g obtained HV scale surface hardness values of the examined hardfacings. Ten successful hardness measurements were conducted with inter ident distance of at least more than 5 times the length of indent diagonal. The reported hardness values are an average of these measurements. Dry sliding wear tests were performed using tribometer (CSM High temperature tribotester, Switzerland) in a ball-on-disc configuration. For the wear tests, an alumina ball of 6 mm diameter traversed a circular path of 3.5 mm in radius with a sliding speed 6 mm/s for a total sliding distance of 500 m on the surfaces. Wear testing load of 3 N, corresponding to contact pressure of ∼1.0 GPa for initial unworn configuration, and wear testing temperatures of RT, 300, 500 and 700 °C were employed. For the tests other than RT, the heating of the specimens were done in an ambient conditions and wear tests were initiated following the attainment of the desired testing temperature. To ensure the reproducibility three tests each were done. Frictional force was continuously recorded throughout the course of each wear test. To analyse the wear tracks (WTs) developed on the surface of the samples a stylus type profilometer (Veeco Dektak 6 M, USA) was utilized and 2D profiles of the WTs was measured. At least ten 2D profiles were taken from different locations of the each WT for the estimation of the average wear loss that was quantified as the area of the WT calculated by the software provided with the profilometer. Finally, the WT surfaces and cross sections were studied by SEM (Hitachi TM1000, Japan and EDS equipped SFEG SEM, Philips, Holland). Additionally, Raman spectroscopy (Renishaw, inVia Reflex spectrometer, UK) has been used to analyse the worn surfaces with an excitation wavelength of 532 nm.  EDS mappings of Mo alloyed hardfacing ( Although SEM examinations revealed some major microstructural differences of Mo alloyed hardfacing to the unalloyed one as formation of additional blocky Mo    For testing temperatures less than 700 °C, the oxide-layer has been replaced by oxide islands whose size and extent decreased. In comparative terms, the size and numbers of oxide islands are larger in the WTs formed over the Mo alloyed hardfacings. The high magnification SEM examinations of the oxide free regions of the WTs revealed that the wear damage is taking place by the cracking and removal of carbides and borides as marked by arrows in the insets of The transverse section SEM examinations of the WTs formed over the hardfacings during wear testing at 700 °C, reveals that the oxide-layers exhibit different appearances. For the Mo alloyed version the oxide-layer appears to contain two distinct sub layers i.e. a fully sintered smooth and compact top layer followed by a layer having partially sintered grainy nature. The appearance of the sub layer under the top compacted sub layer is almost similar to that of the oxide-layer of NiCrBSi hardfacing. In addition, there is neither any evidence for plastic deformation nor of internal oxidation at the substrate just beneath the oxides in either hardfacings. However, fragmentation and minor cracking of microstructural constituents is observed under the oxide-layer as marked by dashed ellipses in  In the light of above described results it is evident that wear tests of the NiCrBSi hardfacings and its Mo alloyed version revealed beneficial effects of Mo alloying in terms of wear resistance at all testing temperatures. In general, oxide formation on the worn surfaces played crucial role in the progress of wear as testing temperature increased. At 700 °C, where the worn surfaces were completely covered by oxides as a oxide-layer, the oxidative wear tends to be a prime wear mechanism. Better wear resistance of Mo alloyed hardfacing at this temperature can be attributed to the presence of Mo oxides (specifically the Mo At testing temperatures lower than 700 °C, oxidative wear lost its prime role on the progress of wear due to the lack of complete coverage of worn surfaces with oxide-layer. Even in these conditions, Mo in the NiCrBSi hardfacing provides enhanced wear resistance due to the formation of larger and adherent oxide islands on the worn surfaces. It is recognized that the oxide formation starts at the carbide/matrix interfaces during sliding contact and grows inwards towards the matrix [ In this study, the effect of 10 wt% Mo addition on the structural features and wear behaviour of commercial NiCrBSi hardfacing deposited on 4140 steel by PTA process has been investigated. The results of the experimental work can be summarized as follows: 1.Alloying with Mo refined the microstructure of NiCrBSi hardfacing and introduced a new Mo2(B,C) type boro-carbide phase. 2.Despite microstructural refinement and formation of boro-carbide phase, Mo alloyed hardfacing exhibited ∼20% lower hardness than NiCrBSi hardfacing (757 ± 28 and 895 ± 13 HV0.2, respectively). Mo alloyed hardfacing exhibited better wear resistance than NiCrBSi, by almost twice at RT, 300 °C and 500 °C. While it has shown more than 2.5x improvement in wear resistance at the highest testing temperature of 700 °C, which led to full coverage of WTs by a oxide-layer. Oxide-layers formed at 700 °C consisted mainly of NiO for NiCrBSi hardfacing but it comprised of additional oxides of Mo (MoO Research grant of