Purpose: We evaluated the clinical efficacy of arthroscopic mobilization of the wrist for release of persistent traumatic contracture. Methods: We retrospectively reviewed 11 consecutive patients who had undergone arthroscopic mobilization after trauma. Patients included 9 men and 2 women who ranged in age from 16 to 65 years (mean, 40 years). Injuries causing contracture included 8 fractures of the distal radius, 1 Galeazzi fracture, 1 perilunate dislocation, and 1 carpal bone contusion. A single radiocarpal septum extended from the proximal fibrocartilage of the scapholunate ligament to the midradial ridge in all but 1 patient, in whom multiple fibrous bands bridged the radiocarpal joint. Results: Arthroscopy disclosed 3 types of radiocarpal septum—a single fibromembranous structure that completely divided the joint (type A) in 9 cases, a membranous structure with a fenestration that partially divided the joint (type B) in 1 case, and multiple bands that completely divided the joint (type C); the latter situation occurred in the last patient described earlier. Preoperatively, the arc of motion averaged 76° compared with an average of 98°. Postoperatively, a 22° increase was noted. Conclusions: Arthroscopic release of a radiocarpal septum was effective in improving range of wrist motion in patients with this finding. Level of Evidence: Level IV, therapeutic case series.Wrist contracture has many causes, including congenital disorders such as those seen in patients with arthrogryposis, neurogenic disorders such as those observed in patients with cerebral palsy, hemiplegia, and trauma. Among post-traumatic contractures, fracture of the distal radius is a common cause of wrist contracture involving intra-articular disease. In most patients with post-traumatic intra-articular wrist contracture, physical therapy and splinting yield satisfactory results. Thus, reports on surgical treatment of persistent intra-articular wrist contracture following fracture of the distal radius are limited. Because of the paucity of reports on surgical treatment of patients with post-traumatic wrist contracture, the condition remains a challenging problem for hand surgeons. Recent advances in knowledge of the wrist and in wrist arthroscopy have enabled detailed visualization of intra-articular lesions and have offered opportunities for arthroscopic mobilization of the wrist. Here, we describe the results of arthroscopic excision of radiocarpal septa that extended from the proximal portion of the scapholunate ligament to the midradial ridge in patients with persistent wrist contracture ( Arthroscopic mobilization was performed in selected patients. This study consisted of 11 conservatively treated patients with post-traumatic wrist contracture that had persistently interfered with use of the hand for daily activities, including sports and/or work activities, and in whom the existence of a radiocarpal septum had been confirmed by arthrography. Patients with destroyed articular surfaces as seen in intra-articular comminution and those with severe osteoarthritis or signs of systemic arthritis were excluded. Arthroscopic mobilization was performed on 11 patients, including 9 men and 2 women, whose ages ranged from 16 to 65 years (mean, 40 years). Injuries that led to contracture in these patients included 8 fractures of the distal radius (6 intra-articular and 2 extra-articular), 1 Galeazzi fracture, 1 perilunate dislocation, and 1 carpal bone contusion. Before arthroscopic mobilization was performed, internal fixation was carried out in 2 of 8 fractures of the distal radius, external fixation in 2 (internal fixation was subsequently required in 1, and ulnar shortening in 1), internal and external fixation in 1, cast immobilization in 1 (with internal and external fixation performed later), percutaneous pinning in 1 (followed by the Sauvé-Kapandji procedure), and percutaneous pinning combined with external fixation in 1 (with the Sauvé-Kapandji procedure performed later). Internal fixation was carried out for the patient with Galeazzi fracture. Proximal row carpectomy was performed in the patient with perilunate dislocation. Operations performed concurrently with arthroscopic mobilization included removal of a fixation plate in 8 cases and a Sauvé-Kapandji procedure in 1 case. The interval between initial injury and arthroscopic mobilization ranged from 6 to 19 months (average, 12 months). The follow-up period ranged from 4 to 24 months (average, 13 months). Arthrography of the wrist was performed for all patients with persistent wrist contracture for the purpose of determining whether a radiocarpal septum was present, because this cannot be detected with the use of other diagnostic tools such as radiography, magnetic resonance imaging, or computed tomography. Preoperative arthrography confirmed the presence of a radiocarpal septum in 9 cases. In these patients, 60% urografin (Nihon Schering, Osaka, Japan) that was diluted 2- to 3-fold was injected between the extensor pollicis longus tendon and the extensor digitorum communis tendons (3-4 portal); this resulted in opacification of only the scaphoid fossa. Subsequently, diluted urografin was injected between the extensor digitorum communis tendons and the extensor digiti minimi tendon (4-5 portal). This procedure resulted in opacification of the lunate fossa; however, it did not reveal any interaction with contrast medium from the 3-4 portal. Thus, the presence of a radiocarpal septum was suggested. In all cases, arthroscopic mobilization was performed with the patient under axillary block. Each operation was performed by the same surgeon, who was skilled in arthroscopy. The wrist was suspended in a traction tower, and traction was applied through the fingertraps. First, the arthroscope was inserted via the 3-4 portal or the 4-5 portal. The presence of a radiocarpal septum was confirmed in all cases. The septum is usually located very close to either of these standard portals. Therefore, the 3-4 portal had to be created slightly more radially and the 4-5 portal slightly more ulnarly than usual. The septum extended from the proximal fibrocartilage of the scapholunate ligament to the midradial ridge in all but 1 patient, who had multiple fibrous bands that bridged the radiocarpal joint. To confirm its presence, the surgeon probed the septum from the adjacent portal during direct observation from the other side. After exploration, a location was selected and the septum was punctured. The hole was enlarged gradually with use of a punch and a shaver. In 2 patients, tissue was obtained from the central portion of the septum. The specimen was stained with H&E for histologic examination. The extent of the excision was an important consideration. We excised the septum with care to avoid injury to the proximal fibrocartilage of the scapholunate ligament. A type B septum (defined below) was easier to excise than a type A septum because the septal defect in the former facilitated orientation inside the joint. In most cases, the surgeon measured wrist range of motion in an outpatient clinic preoperatively and postoperatively. Wilcoxon’s Arthroscopy revealed 3 types of radiocarpal septa. In type A septa, a single fibromembranous structure completely divides the radiocarpal joint between the lunate and the scaphoid fossae (9 cases). Type B septa are seen as membranous structures with a fenestration that partially divides the radiocarpal joint between the lunate and the scaphoid fossae (1 case; Tissues obtained from the septa were examined histologically ( Post-traumatic contractures of the wrist are classified into intra-articular contractures, which are secondary to joint incongruity, and extra-articular contractures, which arise from the soft tissue. Patients with extra-articular contractures are usually treated by conservative methods, such as physical therapy or splinting, whereas those with intra-articular contractures are generally treated with surgery. However, if wrist contracture persists and a radiocarpal septum is suspected, arthroscopic mobilization should be considered. A post-traumatic radiocarpal septum was first described by Wehbé and Karasick In the present study, we excised the septa arthroscopically, thus achieving clinically effective mobilization of the wrist. Verhellen et al., Evaluation focused on dorsiflexion and palmarflexion because preoperatively, patients frequently reported limitations in these movements. Therefore, data regarding radial and ulnar deviations in this study are incomplete. Although the increase that occurred in the arc of motion was not dramatic, improvement was sufficient to enable patients to use their hands for daily activities. Palmer et al. The mechanism underlying development of the radiocarpal septum is unclear. Previous studies have suggested that some fractures of the distal radius were accompanied by a scapholunate ligament injury. According to Berger and Landsmeer, Arthrography of the wrist is usually performed to detect interosseous carpal ligament tears, triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC) lesions, capsular tears, cartilaginous defects, and loose bodies. This study clearly showed that arthroscopic resection of the radiocarpal septum is beneficial for patients with traumatic wrist contracture. However, the study had some limitations. First, the sample size was small. Second, the follow-up period was short. Therefore, for more accurate evaluation, additional studies with longer follow-up periods and larger sample sizes are required. This study showed that post-traumatic radiocarpal septum is one of the major causes of persistent wrist contracture. In addition, arthroscopic resection of the septum can effectively improve wrist range of motion and may be the therapy of choice for patients with traumatic wrist contracture.