Wood–polymer composites (WPC) have been extensively used for building products, outdoor decking, automotive, packaging materials, and other applications. WPC is subject to fungal and termite attacks due to wood components enveloped in the thermoplastic matrix. Much effort has been made to improve decay resistance of WPC using zinc borate and other chemicals. In this study, chitosan copper complex (CCC) compounds were used as a potential preservative for wood–HDPE composites. CCC was formulated by reacting chitosan with copper salts under controlled conditions. Inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analytical results indicated that chitosan had high chelating efficiency with copper cations. CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites had a thermal behavior similar to untreated and zinc borate-treated wood–HDPE composites. Incorporation of CCC in wood–HDPE composites did not significantly influence board density of the resultant composites, but had a negative effect on tensile strength at high CCC concentration. In comparison with solid wood and the untreated wood–HDPE composites, 3% CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites significantly improved the decay resistance against white rot fungus Trametes versicolor and brown rot fungus Gloeophyllum trabeum. Especially, CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites were more effectively against the brown rot than the untreated and chitosan-treated wood–HDPE composites. Moreover, CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites performed well as zinc borate-treated wood–HDPE composites on fungal decay resistance. Accordingly, CCC can be effectively used as a preservative for WPC.WPC is one of the most dynamic growing materials in wood and plastic industry. It has been extensively used for automotive, building products, packaging materials, and other applications ( Chitin and chitosan are commonly known as natural biopolymers. Chitin is the second most abundant natural polymer in the world and mainly exists in crustacean shells ( Since there are a number of amino groups (–NH As an excellent chelator to copper, zinc, and other metal cations, CMC has a potential and important use in wood preservation. The objective of the study was to develop CCC as a potential preservative for WPC. Copper-chelating effectiveness in CCC and its performance on thermal and mechanical properties and fungal decay resistance of the resultant composites were evaluated. CCC was also compared with chitosan- and ZB-treated wood–polymer composites in performance. Thermomechanical pulp (TMP) fiber of Southern pine was obtained from a local medium density fiberboard factory. The fiber was oven-dried at 100 High-density polyethylene (HDPE) pellets (PE10462 Chitosan was obtained from Vanson HaloSource Company (Seattle, WA). Its deacetylation degree was 90%. Cupric chloride dihydrate (CuCl An amount of 60 After reaction, the flask was removed from the water bath. The solution was filtrated through a funnel with a filter paper to separate water and sediment under a vacuum condition. The filtrates were rinsed with distilled water to eliminate unreacted chitosan and copper salts. The rinsing procedure was repeated several times until unreacted chitosan was completely removed. After storing for 24 The formulated complex compounds were ground with a ball miller and then screened to pass a 40-mesh screen. Finally, the ground powder was oven-dried at 40 Before ICP analysis, 0.5 The copper-chelating efficiency ( Before the pretreatment, a CCC solution was prepared by the following procedures. A required amount of CCC was placed into a container with 4000 During compounding, wood fiber pretreated with CCC was added into the thermoplastic melts at four concentration levels (0%, 3%, 6%, and 9%). CCC was also directly added into wood and polymer melts at the same concentration levels to compare the influence of wood fiber pretreatment on the performance of CCC in wood–HDPE composites. Zinc borate and chitosan were used as references for CCC. Three concentration levels (0%, 0.75%, 1.5%, 3%, and 6% by weight) were used for zinc borate, but only a 3% concentration level was used for chitosan ( The compounding process for wood fiber-HDPE melts followed a one-step process reported by The ground wood–HDPE blends with a required weight were placed into a two-piece aluminum molding set. The mold was pressed with a miniature hot press at 170 Thermal analysis was conducted with a TA Instrument TG-DTA coupling system (New castle, DE) to characterize thermal stability of CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites. A small amount of composite sample (ca. 10 For density measurement, the nominal dimension of each sample was 50 The tensile strength of each specimen was tested according to ASTM D638 with an INSTRON (Model 1125) test machine (Canton, MA). The loading speed for each specimen was controlled to be 1 Soil-block decay tests for wood–HDPE composites samples were conducted in laboratory according to the AWPA standard AWPA E10-01 ( Each 250-ml Pyrex The test samples for the soil-block tests were measured 25 After decay resistance tests, all tested samples were removed from the test jars. Each specimen was carefully cleaned with a piece of soft paper to remove the mycelium from the sample surface. It was then stored at room temperature for 24 Tensile strength and fungal decay resistance were statistically analyzed with Duncan’s grouping tests by means of SAS software ( Copper usually acts as bivalent cations (Cu According to the aforementioned chelating models for CCC, one copper cation would be fixed by four amino groups. In a 0.5 During wood fiber pretreatment or compounding, CCC was fixed on wood through hydrogen bonding between its amino groups and hydroxyl groups of wood components (e.g., cellulose). It also penetrated into voids and cracks of wood or mechanically deposited in cell lumens. CCC is insoluble in water and has high leaching resistance, thus effectively protecting wood from the fungal attack. According to the DTA spectra, the moisture in the control (i.e., the untreated wood–HDPE composites) started vaporizing at approximately 84 The CCC concentration influenced thermal behavior of the resultant wood–HDPE composites ( All TGA spectra show that there was a 2% weight loss for the treated and untreated wood–HDPE composites at 100 The density of all wood–HDPE composites was 1084 All ZB-treated wood–HDPE composites had lower means in tensile strength than the control (i.e., the untreated wood–HDPE composites) ( The negative effect of CCC on the tensile strength of wood–HDPE composites may be due to that unchelated or free copper cations (Cu Pretreating wood fiber with 3% and 9% CCC before compounding did not significantly differ from directly adding CCC during compounding in tensile strength of the resultant composites, respectively, at the same concentration ( As shown in For the white-rot decay tests, the control and all treated wood–HDPE composites were highly resistant to the decay attack by the white rot fungus Compared to the control and other treated wood–HDPE composites, 3% chitosan-treated wood–HDPE composites had the best decay resistance against the white rot, while wood had the worst decay resistance ( As shown in Although the control was much better to resist the attack by the brown rot than wood, it was not effective in decay resistance as aforementioned ( Chitosan in CCC had high chelating efficiency with copper. For CCC, the copper content and chelating efficiency were on average 15% and 91%, respectively. Copper, mainly acting as bivalent cations, reacted with the nitrogen atoms of amino groups in chitosan and oxygen atoms in water to form a stable octahedral structure. Two hypothetical chelating structures of CCC were proposed in this study. CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites were close to the untreated and ZB-treated wood–HDPE composites in thermal behavior and stability. Incorporation of CCC in wood–HDPE composites did not significantly influence panel density of the resultant composites. However, the tensile strength significantly decreased at high CCC concentration. For all CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites, the weight loss by the white and brown rots was less than 3%. Furthermore, the interfacial bonding strength and fungal decay resistance of CCC-treated wood–HDPE composites were well balanced at 3% CCC. The financial support on this project by the National Science Foundation (Grant No. 0080248) is acknowledged. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this manuscript are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the view of the National Science Foundation. The authors wish to thank Dr. John P. Jones at the Department of Plant Pathology and Crop Physiology, Louisiana State University Agricultural Center for his helps on the decay resistance tests.