A quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) study of selectivity in flotation of chalcopyrite from pyrite for xanthates and xanthate derivatives was performed. The genetic function approximation (GFA) algorithm was applied to select the descriptors and to generate the correlation models. Three combinations of topological, structural, physicochemical, spatial and electronic descriptors were applied. Six QSAR models with acceptable R
                     2 correlation coefficients and Q
                     2 cross-validation correlation coefficients (R
                     2
                     >0.75, Q
                     2
                     >0.6) were developed. The models show that shadow area fraction YZ, LUMO density of carbonyl oxygen atom and Hirshfeld Fukui indices (+) of thiocarbonyl sulfur atom are the three most significant variables for the selectivity. The descriptor shadow area fraction YZ revealed that the planar structure is important for the selectivity. The descriptors LUMO density of carbonyl oxygen atom and Hirshfeld Fukui indices (+) of thiocarbonyl sulfur atom demonstrated LUMO distributions over carbonyl oxygen atom should be large for favorable selectivity. This study concluded that selectivity of xanthates and xanthate derivatives is determined by the strength of the dative bonding between copper atom on the chalcopyrite surface and carbonyl oxygen atom of these collectors and the stability of the six-member ring formed as a result.Flotation separation chalcopyrite from pyrite has always been a problem as it lacks effectively selective collectors. Traditionally, xanthates are used as collector though a large amount of lime is required to obtain a highly alkaline condition to achieve the separation ( All along, most of researches concerning xanthates and its derivatives have been focused on their reaction mechanism with sulfide minerals ( A quantitative structure activity relationship (QSAR) is a method that correlates an activity of a set of compounds quantitatively to chemicals descriptors (structure or property) of those compounds, which are generally obtained from experiments and quantum chemical calculations. The exact form of the relationship between structure and activity can be determined using a variety of statistical methods and computed molecular descriptors. QSAR has the objective of prediction but maintaining a relationship to mechanistic interpretation. Recent years, quantitative structure–activity relationship (QSAR) modeling has been applied extensively in pharmaceutical chemistry and predictive toxicology ( The purpose of this work was to establish QSAR models of the selectivity in flotation of chalcopyrite from pyrite for xanthates and xanthate derivatives, including xanthogen formates and thionocarbamates, and to give the models mechanistic interpretations to reveal the favorable structural characteristics that enhance their selectivity. In this study the selectivity of 16 sample molecules including xanthates, xanthogen formates and thionocarbamates was collected from Fu et al. (1989). The values are reported in the form of The names and structures of the 16 collectors were listed in Generally, the data set is divided into a training set to develop models and a test set to externally validate the constructed QSAR models. As there are no such large data sets available, the set of the 16 molecules were wholly used as the training set and as the test set flotation results of a new set of 6 collectors were obtained. The names and structures of the 6 collectors were listed in The individual-mineral flotation tests were carried out in the SFG micro flotation cell (40 Obviously, the two data sets were obtained in two different experimental conditions. And their absolute values are not comparable. So the external validation cannot be performed quantitatively in the general way. Actually, selectivity is different from many other physical and chemical properties. Flotation results that selectivity is obtained from depend largely on the artificial operations and they vary from person to person. Hence, even the values of the predicted selectivity with externally validated models are meaningless for the compounds investigated. The models of selectivity only make sense qualitatively. Therefore, it is acceptable to externally validate the models qualitatively with a data set from a different source for the training set. And in this case, it was performed through comparing the order of selectivity of the test set predicted with QSAR models constructed with the one obtained from flotation tests above. All molecules were built using the Material Studio 4.0 software. The geometry optimizations and single point calculations were both carried out with the Dmol3 module in Material Studio with Generalized Gradient Approximation (GGA) functional PBE ( In this study, QSAR models were developed using topological, structural, physicochemical, spatial and electronic descriptors. These descriptors were divided into three categories using different combinations of descriptors. The first category was a combination of topological and structural descriptors while the second category included structural, physicochemical, spatial and electronic descriptors. All these parameters were clubbed together in the third category. All descriptors were calculated using Material Studio 4.0 software and are listed categorically in The correlation coefficients for all pair of descriptor variables used in the models were evaluated to identify highly correlated descriptors in order to detect redundancy in the data set. Hence, some highly correlated (r Typically, a ratio of five or more measured values for every descriptor should be sought in order to prevent overfitting ( The genetic function approximation (GFA) algorithm is a useful technique for searching in a large parameter space when the data set is small. This method provides multiple models that are created by evolving random initial models using different descriptors. Models are improved by performing a crossover operation to recombine terms providing better scoring models. The GFA algorithm approach has a number of important advantages over other techniques such as, it builds multiple models rather than a single model, it automatically selects which features are to be used in the models, and it can build models using either a linear relation or higher order polynomial, splines, and Gaussians. ( The application of GFA to QSAR/QSPR studies has been successfully used in a wide number of QSPR/QSAR research ( The scaled smoothing parameter, The GFA algorithm was applied to the training set, using the R-squared value as a scoring function and a LOF smoothness parameter equal to 0.5. The program was run repeatedly varying the length and order of the equations. The set of equations returned were evaluated using the following parameters: (a) Friedman LOF measure, (b) R-squared, (c) cross-validated R-squared, and (d) The following equation describes a two-variable model that has the highest This equation could explain and predict 73.2% and 66.6% of the variance of the selectivity, respectively. The The following equation describes a three-variable model that has the highest Better explained variance Eq. This equation could explain and predict 72% and 63.1% of the variance of the selectivity, respectively. It shows similar Eq. This model is a little worse than Eq. Using combined set of topological, structural, physicochemical, spatial and electronic descriptors the following equation was the two-variable model with the highest The ability of Eq.  In this equation, values of A data set of selectivity collected from flotation tests specified above was considered to qualitatively validate the external predictivity of the six models obtained above. The set is comprised of five compounds including xanthates, xanthogen formates and thionocarbamates, which all appeared in the training set. So it could be implied that these compounds fall within the applicability domain of the models obtained above.  Genetic function approximation (GFA) has been applied to model xanthates, xanthogen formates and thionocarbamates as collectors of chalcopyrite using different combinations of topological, structural, physicochemical, electronic and spatial descriptors. All equations showed acceptable internally cross validated squared correlation coefficient ( Shadow area fraction Other descriptors appear in the six models including shadow ratio, E-state_dssC, molecular flexibility, Connolly surface occupied volume, Kappa-3 and Chi3 cluster valence modified. These descriptors describe the structural characteristics in favor of forming stable six-member rings and as a result enhancing the selectivity. The study on the QSAR analysis of the selectivity in flotation of chalcopyrite from pyrite for xanthates and xanthate derivatives were performed with theoretical descriptors. The QSAR analysis results obtained from the study provide significant statistical parameters and the validation studies confirm that the six models are statistically reliable and robust. The six QSAR models identified that Shadow area fraction On the other hand, the six models could be used together to assess the selectivity in flotation of chalcopyrite from pyrite for new candidate molecules in the series of compounds we studied. The authors would like to thank the Supporting Program of the “Eleventh Five-year Plan”for Sci & Tech Research of China (2006BAB02A06) for financial support.