The carbon in pulp (CIP) and carbon in leach (CIL) processes became firmly established in the gold mining industry in the 1980s, initially in South Africa and Australia, from where they spread rapidly to all the gold producing regions of the world. The percentage of annual global gold production by activated carbon-based processes grew from zero in the 1970s to almost 70% by the turn of the century, which represented a phenomenal rate of acceptance of a new technology by a traditionally conservative industry. The main reason for this rapid acceptance of the new technology was the fact that the first few large industrial plants in South Africa convincingly demonstrated better gold recoveries than the traditional filtration/Merrill Crowe process, with lower capital and operating costs. And as the plants developed an operating track record over their first few years of life, they proved to be remarkably robust mechanically, and highly tolerant of plant upsets, changes in feed composition and solution phase contaminants that had caused great problems in Merrill Crowe plants.
                  These stellar attributes of the carbon-based gold plants have led to complacency and laziness in the industry, both at the new plant design stage, and with on-going optimization of existing plants. In many cases, basic “rules of thumb” that were developed as design criteria for the early CIP plants are still used today, with no appreciation of the factors that may cause one plant to perform quite differently from another. There seems to be little incentive to improve performance when it is well known that most CIP and CIL plants operate quite well with minimal optimization and, in many cases, minimal understanding of the factors that influence performance. Consequently, almost all CIP and CIL plants are overdesigned at the construction stage and are then operated sub-optimally. This can lead to higher gold losses and/or higher capital and operating costs than necessary.
                  This paper examines the factors that influence CIP and CIL plant design and performance, and demonstrates a very simple methodology that can be used to arrive at something close to an optimum plant design. It can also be used as an on-going tool by plant metallurgists to transform a fairly well run plant into an exceptionally well run plant.The rate of adsorption of gold cyanide onto activated carbon is very slow by normal industrial standards, and it can take weeks or even months to attain true equilibrium loading. Because of this, all CIP and CIL plants are operated under conditions in which the amount of gold loaded on the carbon in each stage is always far from equilibrium loading. Thus, the gold extraction efficiency in CIP and CIL plants is always based on the kinetics of adsorption and is not limited by equilibrium constraints. Improving the kinetics of adsorption means more gold will load on the carbon in a given time period, and this in turn translates to lower capital and operating costs, either by virtue of a decrease in the size or number of adsorption stages, or by an increase in the loading of gold on the carbon and a consequent decrease in the amount of carbon transferred to elution and regeneration. With CIP and CIL plants operating far from equilibrium, there is always plenty of capacity on the carbon to absorb sudden changes in the amount of gold that has to be extracted, with no significant change in overall extraction efficiency. This can occur (and often does) either as a result of surges in the flowrate of feed pulp, or rapid changes in the concentration of gold in solution. The CIP and CIL processes have proven to be both metallurgically and mechanically robust, and high gold recoveries are generally achieved with minimal plant downtime. Consequently, little attention is paid to circuit optimization at the feasibility and plant design stages, and many plants are designed with the bare minimum of test work, by following a few “rules of thumb” that were established in early plant designs. For example, although there is absolutely no theoretical basis for doing it this way, many CIP plants are still designed today with a pulp residence time of one hour per stage, and a carbon concentration of 25 Another “rule of thumb” that plant operators live by is to aim for an up-grading ratio (gold on loaded carbon/gold leached) of about 1000, although very much higher ratios can be achieved in practice because of the enormous capacity of activated carbon for gold cyanide. Increasing this ratio lowers the advance rate of carbon to elution and regeneration, which in turn lowers both capital and operating costs in these cost-intensive unit operations. But increasing the loading on the carbon slows the rate of gold adsorption, which will result in increased soluble gold losses to the tailings unless other remedial steps are taken, such as increasing the amount of carbon in each stage or increasing the number of stages. The impact of slurry rheology on mass transfer is also generally overlooked in designing CIP and CIL plants, and the common operating philosophy is to thicken the leach feed after milling to the maximum practical density that can be achieved in a thickener underflow. This is done in the belief that maximizing pulp densities will maximize ore throughput, thereby minimizing the size of the leach and adsorption plants and generating the lowest capital cost. But the kinetic gains that can be made by operating both the leach and adsorption sections at lower solids densities with more fluid slurries will shorten the residence time required for the leach and adsorption sections, and this will often outweigh the losses suffered from increased volumetric flows, resulting in smaller tank sizes and improved operating performance. It should be apparent from these comments that optimizing CIP or CIL plant design with optimized operating parameters can have a significant impact on both capital and operating costs. But it would be a complex and very expensive process to examine all the alternatives in pilot plants, and hence the use of historic “rules of thumb” plus a dash of conservatism has evolved as the prevailing design philosophy in many cases. A better alternative is to use models that adequately describe the rate of leaching of gold from a particular feed and the rate at which that gold loads onto activated carbon, and to derive optimum design criteria via an iterative process in which the impact of varying the plant design on metallurgical performance is examined. The SGS approach to designing CIP and CIL circuits is presented below, with specific examples from projects that have been carried out in recent years. The rheology of a pulp influences its fluidity and flow behavior, which in turn has a direct bearing on the efficiency of all energy and mass transfer-based unit operations in mineral processing plants, such as grinding, mixing, pumping, screening and physical separation of liquids from solids (settling, thickening, screening and cycloning) ( Unlike water, which displays linear Newtonian behavior ( A very useful feature of rheological studies is the fact that the data produced with a single representative sample of slurry can be used to generate design criteria for several unit operations involving the underlying process stream. This is done by plotting the yield stress as a function of the solids density of the slurry, as illustrated in The CSD can be used to predict the underflow solids density that will be achievable in a commercial thickener at compression, and it also indicates the maximum solids density for pumping the slurry, given reasonable friction pressure loss. There are negative consequences of operating outside the CSD range, both on the low and the high pulp density side. Operating at low pulp densities reduces plant throughput for a given required residence time and can result in sanding out of carbon particles and coarse sands at the bottom of tanks. Operating at high pulp densities may causes a rapid decrease in the flowability of the pulp, which will reduce throughput in certain critical unit operations and retard the kinetics of gold leaching and adsorption. The effects of pulp rheology and flowability on the rates of gold leaching and carbon adsorption are well known ( Despite those findings, data generated in the SGS Lakefield laboratory over the past ten years has shown that many CIP and CIL plant operators choose to run their plants at pulp densities above the CSD, where the yield stress is usually well in excess of 20 As depicted in The reason plant operators constantly strive to maximize solids density in all parts of their plant is the belief that by so doing they are either maximizing ore throughput or minimizing the size of the plant. But this rather facile approach can lead to a sub-optimal plant design, since the gains that might be realized by lowering the pulp density, improving mass transfer kinetics and shortening the optimum pulp residence time will, in many cases, exceed those realizable by maximizing solids density. In the example in There are risks associated with lowering the pulp density too much as mentioned above, the main one being the tendency of carbon particles and coarse particles of ore to “sand-out” at the bottom of the leach and adsorption tanks. This lowers gold extraction efficiency in the plant, and can result in significant downtime to remedy the problem. The wet density of most types of activated carbon is around 1.4 Modeling of the adsorption of gold cyanide onto activated carbon is important for the optimal design of commercial CIP and CIL plants. Several approaches have been proposed over the years, notably from the mid-eighties to the late nineties by several groups in South Africa ( For simplicity, the Nicol–Fleming model assumes that the rate of adsorption of gold cyanide from the bulk liquid phase, across the quiescent liquid film at the boundary between the carbon and solution phases, and into the pores of the carbon particles can be described by a single pseudo mass transfer coefficient. Laboratory test work has shown that the rate of loading is initially first order with respect to the concentration of gold in solution, and is controlled by film diffusion in the liquid phase. This condition is valid in the early stages of the adsorption process, which typically persist for at least the first 12 The model also assumes that an equilibrium relationship exists between gold in solution and gold on the carbon at the solution-carbon boundary, and that the equilibrium can be described by the simple linear equation; [Au Finally the model assumes that each of the adsorption stages is a perfectly mixed reactor providing constant residence times for the two counter-current streams (pulp and carbon), and that the flows of pulp and carbon are continuous and constant. This is generally true of the pulp phase, but not the carbon phase, which is normally transferred periodically in batch or semi batch fashion. Continuous flow of both phases creates a steady state condition in which the concentrations of gold in solution and on the carbon in each stage are constant. The equation that was developed by  [Au] [Au] [Au] [Au]     For CIP modeling in the laboratory, the ore that is under investigation is first leached to completion, and the leached pulp is then treated in a batch reactor with activated carbon to extract the gold cyanide. The rate of extraction is determined by taking samples at timed intervals and analyzing them for gold. As shown in the original Fleming–Nicol papers ( The values of Carbon in leach (CIL) is slightly more difficult to simulate and model, since gold is leaching from the ore into solution at the same time as it is adsorbing onto the carbon, and the concentration of gold in solution in each stage (which is still assumed to be at a constant steady state) is a function of the relative rates of leaching and adsorption. The expression that has been derived to describe the rate of gold leaching is shown in Eq. The semi-empirical Nicol–Fleming models ( fairly accurate predictions of steady state as well as transient carbon adsorption behavior from simple and inexpensive laboratory batch tests, economic sensitivity analyses of the effect on plant performance of changes in parameters such as the number of stages, the carbon concentration in each stage, the relative flowrates of pulp and carbon, an evaluation of CIP versus CIL, an assessment of the consequences of plant upset conditions such as poor elution/regeneration, carbon poisoning, carbon loss through breakage or screen rupturing, etc. All of the models ( The most important factors influencing pulp-phase mass transfer (film diffusion) kinetics are mixing efficiency and pulp rheology. These two parameters are in turn a function of several other physical characteristics of the system, such as the type of mixer and the energy input into the mixer, the dimensions of the adsorption tank, the carbon particle size distribution, the pulp density of the slurry, the presence or absence of ore slimes or precipitates in the slurry and the temperature. The rheological properties of a pulp can be measured accurately in very small scale tests as discussed above, and scale up perfectly, but mixing efficiency is far more difficult to quantify and scale up. Consequently, it is the greatest source of uncertainty and error when using models to predict behavior in full scale plants…far greater in fact than the errors that might arise from assumptions, simplifications and limitations in the model itself. The approach that has evolved over the years at SGS Minerals to recognize and quantify the impact of these diverse factors on the performance of gold plants, and optimize CIP or CIL plant design, is to conduct inexpensive bench scale metallurgical tests to examine the rheological properties of a leach pulp early in the life of a project. This information is used to select the optimum solids density of the slurry feeding the gold plant, and the rates of gold leaching and carbon adsorption are then determined at the selected pulp density. The process involves the following steps, preferably carried out in the sequence shown: Conduct bottle roll leach tests to determine the effect of grind size and solution chemistry on the recovery of gold. This matrix of tests can be conducted on one or more samples/composites, depending on the expected variability of the deposit. Conduct solid/liquid separation testing (settling, thickening) and rheology testing on one or more samples of pulp that have been leached under the optimum conditions identified in the leach test work. Optimize the grind size and the solids density from the perspectives of both gold recovery and the rheological properties of the slurry. Generate a yield stress curve(s) as shown in Conduct bench scale testing to determine the rate of gold leaching (under the previously established optimum conditions) and the rate of gold cyanide adsorption onto activated carbon at the three selected pulp densities. Fit the kinetic data to the rate expressions shown in Eqs. Follow the iterative procedure described by The kinetic tests are conducted in simple, small scale, laboratory batch tests, with representative samples of ore or concentrate in contact with commercial activated carbon. These normally involve a traditional bottle roll experiment, and leach rates are determined by taking timed samples of slurry from the bottle and analyzing the solution phase for gold. Once leaching is complete (typically 24–48 The leaching and carbon adsorption kinetic data are fitted to Eqs. The greatest uncertainty in predicting the performance of a full scale CIP or CIL plant from results that are generated in small scale batch tests (typically 1–10 The following operating parameters are typically varied (although some can be fixed, if the optimization is based on a retrofit to an existing plant, for example): The percentage gold leaching that occurs prior to the first carbon adsorption tank (100% assumed for CIP designs). The number of carbon adsorption tanks. The amount of carbon in the adsorption tanks. The rate of advancement of carbon through the CIP or CIL plant (which gives the target gold loading on the carbon going to elution). The target gold concentration in the solution exiting the last carbon adsorption tank. The amount of gold remaining on the eluted carbon that is recycled to the last adsorption tank. And the following parameters are typically fixed, usually based on information received from the client, or on supplemental test work. Ore throughput to the plant. Pulp density of the slurry feeding the plant. Gold in the feed and leach residue. The model is based on a multi-stage, counter-current configuration; it is built using one or more leaching stages before the first carbon adsorption stage, and it can have from 4 to 10 adsorption stages. It can simulate both CIP and CIL circuits. The CIP model is based on the assumption that the leaching is complete before the first adsorption stage, whereas the CIL model is based on the assumption that leaching continues in all stages. Once established, the model can be used in trade off studies to establish the likely metallurgical and economic impact of varying parameters such as the number of adsorption stages, the amount of gold leached before the first carbon adsorption stage (CIL vs. CIP), the concentration of carbon in each stage and the rate of advancing carbon through the circuit, leading to an optimum plant design. Any uncertainty in the adsorption kinetics scale up factor, on going from small scale batch tests to full scale CIP or CIL tanks, becomes irrelevant in these trade off studies, because the scale up factor will generally be the same for the different scenarios. A CIP study was recently conducted on a composite sample of gold ore that had been collected from the mill discharge of a major Canadian gold mining operation. Gold is currently being recovered at this site in a CCD/Merrill Crowe process, because the ore historically contained high silver values. But the future mill feed will be lower in silver, and the mine management is contemplating a flowsheet change to CIP to lower operating costs and improve metallurgical efficiency. A large batch of the ore was leached under the conditions prevailing in the plant, and the leached pulp was then filtered and washed to produce leach liquor and washed solids. The washed solids were dried, weighed and recombined with leach liquor in appropriate ratios to produce pulps containing exactly 40%, 50% or 60% solids for rheology and adsorption kinetic test work under different mixing conditions. In each test, a standard amount of activated carbon was added to the pulp, which was then mixed for 72 The batch kinetic data were then modeled following the Nicol–Fleming methodology ( The rheology profiling of the slurry returned a well-defined Critical Solids Density value of about 62% ( Considering the divergent requirements that need to be met when selecting the solids density for the leaching and adsorption sections (high solids throughput, good mass transfer kinetics, good suspension of carbon particles in the pulp), the optimum pulp density for this project will probably be around 55%, based on the To convert the Constants generated in the batch adsorption test. Slurry flowrate and solids density. Number of adsorption tanks. Adsorption tank volume. Gold on the stripped carbon. Carbon flowrate (reported as percentage of carbon inventory advanced/24 One of two strategies was then followed to achieve profiles of gold in solution and on the carbon across all the CIP stages: either the carbon concentration was set and the gold tenor in the barren solution was varied, or the gold tenor in the barren solution was fixed and the carbon concentration was varied. The model outputs include the following, some of which were calculated from the kinetic model parameters, whilst others are based on a simple mass balance across the circuit: Profiles of gold in solution, on the carbon and in the ore across all the stages. Carbon residence time/stage. Pulp residence time/stage. Carbon concentration. Carbon flowrate. Circuit filling time – slurry. Circuit filling time – carbon. Plant ramp-up time to steady state. Carbon inventory (per stage and total). Gold lockup in the plant (on the carbon). Individual and cumulative CIP or CIL tank volumes. Inter-stage and overall gold leaching efficiency. Inter-stage and overall gold adsorption efficiency. Overall gold recovery. When the kinetic data in The first three Tests (1, 2 and 3) showed the effect of increasing the pulp density from 40% to 50% to 60% solids. The flowrate of pulp decreased with increasing pulp density, and the size of the CIP tanks was reduced proportionately so that the pulp residence time per stage remained constant at 2 The effect of the rotational speed of the bottle roller on mass transfer was considered in Tests 2 and 4, by doubling the speed in Test 4 relative to Test 2 (which was the normal operating mode for the test). The kinetic constants and profiles were almost identical in the two scenarios, which indicated that the rate of loading of gold cyanide onto carbon in a rolling bottle test is rather insensitive to the rate at which the bottle is rolled. The inside of the bottle was smooth in both cases, and the results would probably have been different had the bottles been baffled. Mixing was more efficient in a stirred tank (Test 5, It was possible to achieve higher predicted loading of gold on the carbon in Test 3 because of the higher gold concentration in solution, which in turn resulted from operating at a high pulp density. The elution and regeneration plants would be less than half the size for a CIP plant based on the loading achieved in Test 3 versus that in achieved in Test 1. One of the negative consequences of operating a plant with high gold loading, however, is the increased amount of gold that is permanently locked up in the CIP plant, which is also well illustrated by the data in The results generated in Section What happens when the size of the tanks is decreased and the pulp residence time in CIP is lowered, as happens when Pumpcells are used as against conventional CIP tanks? What happens if the amount of carbon in each stage is decreased while keeping the carbon advance rate the same? How sensitive is the plant performance to the target loading of gold on the carbon in CIP Stage 1? How sensitive is the plant performance to the amount of gold on the eluted/regenerated carbon that is recycled to the last stage of CIP? In order to compensate for the slow mass transfer at 60% pulp density (Test 5), how many extra CIP stages must be built to achieve the same gold extraction efficiency as achieved at 40 and 50% solids … or how much faster would the carbon need to be advanced through the plant? Tests 2 and 3 in The size of the CIP tanks was halved for Run 6 compared to the tank size for Run 2, yet the predicted profiles for Runs 2 and 6 were identical. This demonstrates that the size of the CIP tanks and the residence time of pulp in the CIP circuit have no influence on metallurgical performance. This is the principle that is applied in the design of the Pumpcell contactors to reduce plant footprint and lower capital costs. The variable that has the greatest impact on plant performance is the amount of carbon in each stage (not its concentration). This is illustrated in Run 7, where the amount of carbon in each stage was halved relative to Run 2, whilst keeping the carbon concentration the same at 25 The other plant operating variable that has a significant impact on plant performance is the up-grading ratio. Increasing the up-grading ratio and lowering the carbon advance rate is beneficial on the one hand as it reduces the size of the elution and regeneration plants and lowers both capital and operating costs. But operating the plant at higher gold loadings slows the rate of adsorption of gold cyanide onto carbon and increases the gold losses in the barrens solution. This can be seen by comparing the profiles in Runs 2, 8 and 9, where the up-grading ratio was varied from 610 to 1000 to 1420, resulting in an increase in soluble gold losses from 0.001 to 0.003 to 0.007 The loading of gold cyanide onto activated carbon is a reversible reaction, and therefore the amount of gold on the carbon in any CIP tank affects the rate of adsorption of gold onto that carbon. This effect is most critical in the last CIP adsorption stage, because any gold that is not extracted there is lost to the tailings. Therefore, in order to consistently achieve low barren losses, it is important to maintain a low concentration of gold on the carbon in the last stage, which means the carbon must always be eluted efficiently. This is illustrated in Run 11, where it can be seen that increasing the amount of gold on the eluted carbon that is recycled to CIP 6 from 0 to 50 The metallurgical “cost” of operating the CIP adsorption section at too high a pulp density is illustrated in the profiles for Test 3 in A major laboratory and pilot pant campaign was conducted by Gold Fields of South Africa in 2009, to examine the feasibility of re-treating the tailings from their historic Johannesburg-area gold mining activities, for the recovery of gold and uranium ( Prior to running the CIP pilot plant, the optimum pulp density for the gold circuit was determined by rheological studies, and the data were used to generate the yield stress plot that was shown earlier in To ensure the mass transfer coefficient for gold cyanide loading was directly transferable to the pilot plant with no scale up concerns, the rate of loading was measured in the exact same contactors, with the same mixers, as would be used in the pilot plant. The modeling procedure described in Sections Mass transfer in the full scale plant may not be as efficient as in the small pilot plant CIP tanks, and actual plant performance may not quite match that of the pilot plant. As pointed out earlier, this can be compensated by increasing the amount of carbon in the full scale adsorption tanks, which can always be done sometime after start up. The real value of the modeling exercise for this project stemmed from the fact that there was only sufficient pulp to feed a small CIP pilot plant for about three weeks, at a flowrate of ∼8 Because of the low gold grade of the feed to this CIP plant, it is going to be important for Gold Fields to minimize operating costs. And since eluting and regenerating carbon is traditionally one of the highest operating cost items in CIP and CIL plants, it was desirable to demonstrate in the pilot plant that high gold loading on the carbon was achievable. The model was invaluable in this regard too, as it showed that the CIP plant would be able to achieve good gold extraction efficiency with a gold loading of >1500 The question of whether a new carbon adsorption plant should be CIP or CIL is frequently raised for greenfield projects. In a CIP plant, leaching is complete before the first adsorption tank, and gold is then recovered from the leached pulp in a series of (typically) 4–10 dedicated carbon adsorption tanks. In a CIL plant, the carbon is added directly into the leach tanks, with the claimed advantage of lowering capital costs by eliminating the CIP adsorption tanks. But there are disadvantages to operating in CIL mode that need to be taken into consideration when selecting the best process (CIP or CIL) for a particular application. As pointed out earlier, the rate of adsorption of gold cyanide onto activated carbon is slow under all conditions, and is proportional to the concentration of gold in solution. In a CIL plant, a proportion of the leachable gold has not yet leached when the slurry first encounters activated carbon, and the kinetic driving force for adsorption is diminished relative to a CIP plant where all the leachable gold is in solution before the first carbon adsorption tank. This causes a further retardation of the already slow rate of gold adsorption on carbon in a CIL plant compared to CIP. A second disadvantage of the CIL process is the fact that the carbon adsorption tanks are typically at least five times larger than CIP adsorption tanks (because they are designed for leach residence time, rather than adsorption residence time). Consequently, the carbon concentration in the pulp can be five times less in CIL than in CIP for an equivalent carbon inventory in the plant, and this translates into increased pumping costs when carbon is advanced through the circuit, and increased back mixing of pulp, when pulp with a low concentration of gold is pumped up the circuit into a tank with a higher gold content. These disadvantages of CIL are turned to advantage when treating preg robbing ores. In this case, it is beneficial to keep the concentration of gold in solution as low as possible by rapidly adsorbing the leached gold onto activated carbon, before it has a chance to adsorb onto the naturally occurring preg robbing constituents of the ore. Overall gold recovery from preg robbing ores is higher with the CIL process than with CIP. The slower gold cyanide adsorption kinetics in CIL can be compensated by increasing the amount of activated carbon in the plant. The SGS model predicts that significantly more carbon is needed for a CIL plant than for a CIP plant, for the same metallurgical performance. In SGS experience, CIL is only competitive with CIP when the ore is preg robbing or when the rate of leaching is very fast. In this regard, a useful “rule of thumb” is that at least 80–90% of the leachable gold should be in solution before the first CIL adsorption tank, and this amount of pure leaching capacity should always be designed into the circuit. If the leaching rate is too slow to meet this requirement, CIP will almost certainly produce lower operating and capital costs than CIL, for an equivalent gold extraction performance. This stems from lower carbon inventories, less gold lockup in the adsorption circuit, plus the potential for higher gold loading on the carbon and smaller elution and regeneration facilities in a CIP plant. The gold that is loaded on the carbon remains “locked up” in the plant for the life of the mine, reducing the net present value of this asset to essentially zero for a long-life mine. The example presented in The profiles of gold in solution for “CIL 1” and “CIP” show that the CIL plant performed poorly compared to the CIP plant, under the same operating regime, with predicted gold barren solution losses of 0.09 Activated carbon-based processes are pervasive in the gold mining industry, and about 70% of all the new gold that is mined each year is processed via adsorption of gold cyanide onto activated carbon. These processes are very efficient metallurgically and robust mechanically, and their implementation generally results in improved gold recovery compared to competing processes, at lower overall capital and operating costs. These inherent strengths of carbon-based processes have led to a casual approach to the design of new plants, as well as the on-going operational optimization of existing plants. In many cases, capital and operating costs are higher than they should be, and gold recovery is not as efficient as it could be in a well run plant. The metallurgical performance of carbon-based plants depends primarily on the rate of mass transfer of gold cyanide from the leach solution onto the carbon granules in the adsorption tanks, which in turn is a sensitive function of parameters such as the rheology of the pulp, the intensity of agitation of the pulp and the concentration of gold in solution. It is possible to measure the mass transfer rate in simple, small scale batch tests in the laboratory, and then, by use of unsophisticated mathematical models, to translate this data to simulate the operational performance of a multi-stage, continuous counter-current carbon plant. This methodology allows cost/benefit and sensitivity analyses to be conducted on various plant configurations, which in turn allows the optimum design and plant operating conditions to be established…rapidly and inexpensively, with a minimum amount of sample.