Particle technology is an important field heavily utiltized in chemical, mechanical and pharmaceutical industries involving fine chemicals, paints and pigments, detergents, fertilizers, mineral processing and metal extraction, powder metallurgy, cement processing, drugs and pharmaceuticals to name a few. Considering the importance of this field, a group of particle technology experts from Japan and other Asian countries started the triennial Asian Particle Technology (APT) Series of symposia in 2000. The hosting countries of the symposia rotates among a number asian countries starting from the first APT symposium in Thailand, followed by Malaysia, China and India. The 5th Asian Particle Technology Symposium (APT2012) was scheduled over the period 2–5 July, 2012 and was held at the National University of Singapore. It comprised 201 plenary, keynote, oral and poster presentations by authors from 23 countries and regions, covering not only the Asia Pacific regions but also around the world. The topics of presentations had a wide coverage ranging from classical to various emerging areas of particle technology. The topics, according to the scale of the target object studied, may be classified into at least three categories: ‘individual particles’, ‘particle clusters’ and ‘devices involving particles’. Works on individual particles include synthesis, modification and characterization of particles with specific properties. When particles form clusters, mixing, separation, flow, reaction and other collective behaviors involving particle–particle interactions are of significant importance. Since every process in practice occurs in a device, device development as well as particle/flow behaviors in such devices have also gained increasing attention. With the successful conclusion of APT2012, 8 papers from the above categories have been selected for publication in this special issue of Advanced Powder Technology with a view towards pushing the frontiers of particle technology. Synthesis and characterization of particles with special features are fundamental to industrial applications of particle technology. For example, magnetic nanoparticles provide large adsorption capacity and can be conveniently recycled using a permanent magnet. Zhu et al. reviewed the current research activities on synthesis and applications of magnetic nanocomposites especially in environmental remediation such as heavy metal (Cr, As, Pd, Hg) removal Collective behaviors of particles are a commonly observed phenomenon, but the underlying mechanisms arising fundamentally from particle–particle interactions are not easily determined from experiments. It is therefore not surprising that much modeling efforts have been applied in this field. Fullard et al. developed a model based on conservation of volume of powder and a semi-empirical expression for velocity profile, and used this model to predict the composition of a discharged volume and hence quantify the mixing which occurs within a conical hopper One important area in particle technology is the study and development of suitable devices for applications involving particles. For example, Oshitani et al. used a continuous separator based on float-sink density separation to continuously separate lump iron ore As observed from APT2012, particle technology is making rapid progress in all the three categories mentioned above. For example, synthesis and characterization of different types of nanoparticles is currently a hot topic in material science. DEM and other derivative models have been widely used to investigate particle collective behaviors. Supercomputers with GPU capabilities are being employed to simulate real time flow and mass/heat transfer in fluidized beds. This is really exciting as it provides a good opportunity to advance current understanding of particle technology and integrate it into a subject that spans across several length scales – from fundamental mechanisms at microscopic length scales to collective behaviors at macroscopic length scales. Particle technology is a subject that is and will continue to be closely relevant to industrial applications. And we believe that successful applications can only come with better understanding of the subject.