Theoretical investigations predict that TaON is likely to possess a relatively high hardness, thus making it a candidate for application as an abrasive or cutting tool material [J.E. Lowther, Theoretical study of potential high pressure phases of TaON and quaternary ZrTaO3N, in press]. TaON powder was produced by nitridation of amorphousTa2O5 powder in flowing ammonia in the 700–900°C temperature range and an ammonia flow rate range of 40–50cm3/min. The resulting powders were characterised in oxidation resistance by thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA), phase purity by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and surface area by the BET method. The materials were densified under pressure using a belt type high pressure apparatus at 3–5.5GPa in the temperature range of 920–1200°C. The sintered samples were characterised in phase purity, Vickers macro-hardness and fracture toughness.In recent years there has been increased research in transition metal oxynitrides. Tantalum oxynitride is no exception in this regard. This has emanated from the possibility of attaining attractive properties such as high thermal, chemical stability and good mechanical properties Attempts have been made to produce TaON thin films by magnetron sputtering and pulsed laser deposition on various substrates by several authors A sol–gel method was used to obtain active oxide precursors. Twenty-five grams of 99.999% TaCl The oxide gel was characterised in thermal decomposition in air by thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) at a heating rate of 10 In order to obtain the oxynitride phase, oxide precursors were thermally nitrided in flowing ammonia (99.99%) with an ammonia flow rate range of 20–50 The TaON powder was analysed for nitrogen and oxygen using an ONH Eltra 2000 analyser on at least three different samples. Phase purity determination was carried out using X-ray diffraction with a Philips PW1830 diffractometer operating with Cu Kα radiation using a step scan of 0.020° recorded in a 2 TaON powders were compacted to green pellets and capsulated in 17 The oxide powder exhibits a large surface area with granule formation ( The samples which were nitrided at 700 A nitridation temperature of 900 Particle morphology by SEM reveals a submicron range of TaON particles ( TGA under flowing air at 10 The powders were densified by two different methods, i.e. hot pressing and ultra high pressure sintering. Hot pressing in BN crucibles at temperatures up to 1400 The densification of TaON materials in the hot press under the same conditions as ZrO An X-ray pure TaON was obtained in the presence of water vapour pressure of ∼3.1 This work was financially supported by the South African Department of Science and Technology (DST)/National Research Foundation (NRF) Centre of Excellence (CoE) in Strong Materials, University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South Africa.