In this work, we proposed an analytical approach based on asymmetrical flow field-flow fractionation combined to an inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (AsFlFFF–ICP-MS) for rutile titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO2NPs) characterization and quantification in cosmetic and food products. AsFlFFF–ICP-MS separation of TiO2NPs was performed using 0.2% (w/v) SDS, 6% (v/v) methanol at pH 8.7 as the carrier solution. Two problems were addressed during TiO2NPs analysis by AsFlFFF–ICP-MS: size distribution determination and element quantification of the NPs. Two approaches were used for size determination: size calibration using polystyrene latex standards of known sizes and transmission electron microscopy (TEM). A method based on focused sonication for preparing NPs dispersions followed by an on-line external calibration strategy based on AsFlFFF–ICP-MS, using rutile TiO2NPs as standards is presented here for the first time. The developed method suppressed non-specific interactions between NPs and membrane, and overcame possible erroneous results obtained when quantification is performed by using ionic Ti solutions. The applicability of the quantification method was tested on cosmetic products (moisturizing cream). Regarding validation, at the 95% confidence level, no significant differences were detected between titanium concentrations in the moisturizing cream prior sample mineralization (3865±139mg Ti/kg sample), by FIA–ICP-MS analysis prior NPs extraction (3770±24mg Ti/kg sample), and after using the optimized on-line calibration approach (3699±145mg Ti/kg sample). Besides the high Ti content found in the studied food products (sugar glass and coffee cream), TiO2NPs were not detected.The presence of nanomaterials (NMs) is becoming common in a wide range of products and sectors including medicine, cosmetics, clothing, engineering, electronics, and food. Titanium dioxide nanoparticles (TiO Knowledge on size, shape, surface area, aggregation state, charge, chemistry, and reactivity of NPs is essential when evaluating their potential toxicity and behavior. To obtain correct information on the physical and chemical properties of NPs, reliable quantitative methods of analysis are needed. A wide range of analytical techniques such as microscopy, chromatography, centrifugation and filtration, spectroscopic, and other related methods have been used for various purposes: characterization of particle size, morphology and aggregation state Although AsFlFFF–ICP-MS is considered a promising approach, it has some poorly understood instrumental limitations; the need to re-equilibrate the membrane in order to avoid the accumulation of NPs The aim of this work is to assess the possibilities and difficulties of AsFlFFF–ICP-MS in the characterization and elemental quantification of TiO Standard TiO The foodstuffs (sugar glass and coffee cream) and SPF 10 moisturizing cream were purchased in the market. A standard dispersion of TiO An AF2000 AsFlFFF system (Postnova Analytik, Landsberg, Germany), equipped with a regenerated cellulose membrane of 10 For FIA–ICP-MS measurements, a PU-2089 LC pump (JASCO, Tokyo, Japan), fitted with a six-port injection valve (Model 7725i, Rheodyne, Rohner Park, CA, USA) with a 100 A 1000 For stabilizing NPs dispersions, a Vibra cell VCx130 ultrasonic processor (Connecticut, USA) equipped with a titanium 2-mm-diameter microtip and fitted with a high-frequency generator of 130 An Eppendorf Centrifuge 5804 R (Hamburg, Germany) was used to separate the hexane fraction from the solid residue after the extraction procedure. An Eppendorf Vacufuge plus concentrator (Eppendorf AG, Hamburg) was used to evaporate the liquid solvent after collecting the fraction from the AsFlFFF system in order to concentrate TiO Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analyses were performed using a JEM 2000FX microscope (JEOL, Tokyo, Japan) at 200 For accurate characterization of TiO Approximately 0.1 Two different quantification methods were applied to the TiO In the case of foodstuff, samples were weighed and directly sonicated under same conditions. External calibration curve was prepared by using rutile TiO Sample extracts were injected into the AsFlFFF system and the fractions corresponding to UV signal of NPs were collected from the AsFlFFF channel. Ti content in each fraction was quantified by FIA–ICP-MS using a standard addition method following two different approaches: (a) by spiking several aliquots of each fraction with increasing concentrations of Ti elemental standard solution, and (b) by spiking several aliquots of each fraction with increasing concentrations of rutile NPs TiO In both approaches a 50 The separation of NPs by AsFlFFF is directly affected by experimental and instrumental parameters. Concerning this latter, the type of membrane and spacer dimensions play an important role in NPs separations. Out of the available membranes, regenerated cellulose (RC) is frequently used in analyses of inorganic NPs. This type of membrane is less hydrophobic than polyethersulfone (PES) and polyvinylidenedifluoride (PVDF) which could enhance NPs recovery. Based on previous studies reported by other authors, in this work RC membrane and a 350 Regarding carrier composition, parameters such as ionic strength, surfactant agent, and the pH of the carrier solution can affect NP–NP interactions or NPs-membrane interactions Cross flow is one of the main parameters controlling the distribution of particles near the membrane and consequently their separation Finally, the influence of injection/focusing time on the separation of TiO Low recovery values could be attributed to undesirable membrane–particle interactions. Adsorbed NPs can modify the membrane surface charge, preventing further adsorption The ratio of peak areas of the fractograms and the amount of sample injected was used as a first assessment of recovery. Initially, we had serious problems in terms of reproducibility and recovery ( Using the previously optimized conditions, two peaks were obtained in the fractograms after the injection of the rutile TiO We constructed a size calibration using polystyrene latex standards of three known sizes (22, 54, and 100 Due to the NPs-membrane and latex standards-membrane interactions may be different, the use of an independent method such as electron microscopy is key to determine the primary particle size and morphology of dry NPs. Fractions corresponding to Peak 1 and Peak 2 were collected and evaporated prior TEM analysis. Comparison of both methods, particle size obtained by TEM with the average size calculated using latex standards, showed the following: TEM images corresponding to the narrow Peak 1 revealed the presence of TiO As we have commented before, in FFF analysis a combination of parameters has to be optimized in order to achieve good reproducibility and recovery. Separation of NPs is not only affected by instrumental parameters such as carrier composition or cross flow rate. Preparation of NPs dispersions for AsFlFFF analysis is a critical step, since solvent changes, pH, or even dilutions may affect their agglomeration and behavior. Although TiO In this study, the effect of the type of ultrasound (ultrasonic bath vs. ultrasonic probe) on aggregation and the sonication time were optimized. The fractogram profiles obtained with both sonication techniques were quite similar but recovery using the ultrasonic probe (at 40% ultrasound amplitude for 2 There are different quantification approaches and the most commonly used are: off-line quantification of fractions collected from the AsFlFFF system followed by ICP-MS, detection after acid digestion, and on-line AsFlFFF–ICP-MS analysis using ionic standards added to the flow coming from AsFlFFF system using a mixing-T Here, we have developed an external calibration approach using the rutile TiO The fractograms did not reveal a proportional increase of Total titanium content in moisturizing cream and food products were determined by ICP-MS following the procedures specified in Next, TiO Finally, food samples were treated under similar conditions, but a negligible Ti signal was detected. In addition, TEM analysis did not reveal presence of TiO  Development of calibration methods based on the use of standards with similar properties to that of the NPs present in the samples is of great importance for AsFlFFF–ICP-MS analysis. NPs content in the moisturizing cream was calculated using the linear regression equation generated from the calibration method using the rutile TiO For off-line quantifications, NPs fractions were collected from the AsFlFFF system. Several aliquots were then spiked with increasing amounts of Ti standards (in form of rutile TiO TiO The authors would like to thank the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 