Organic polyelectrolytes such as polyacrylamide (PAM) are commonly used in the water industry to improve flocculation. However, potential adverse health effects may arise from the use of PAM owing to the presence of trace acrylamide monomers in commercial products. Hence, there is growing interest in replacing synthetic polyelectrolytes with natural and sustainable alternatives, which would eliminate risks related to the presence of toxic monomers/impurities and oxidation by-products from the interaction of polymers and common disinfectants such chlorine and ozone. Starch-based flocculants are recognized to offer fairly good flocculation performance, but require higher polymer dosages than conventional high-molecular-weight PAM. To reduce exposure to acrylamide monomers, this study examined the combination of an activated starch-based polymer with PAM to determine whether synergistic effects can be achieved using a dual polymer system. Flocculation performance (floc size, density and rate of aggregation) was monitored using jar tests. Turbidity removal was also assessed to confirm settling performance. Single PAM/starch mixture injection and sequential dual polymer injection were compared in order to simplify practical industrial applications. For the tested samples of surface water and wastewater, jar tests showed that the PAM dosage can be significantly reduced (50–70% for surface water) for both conventional and ballasted flocculation if a dual starch–PAM polymer system is used.Organic polyelectrolytes are commonly used in the water industry to improve the performance of gravitational separation processes ( Considering the numerous limitations listed above, there is growing interest in replacing synthetic polyelectrolytes with natural and sustainable alternatives, which would eliminate the risks related to the presence of toxic monomers/impurities (e.g. acrylamide, acrylic acid, hydroxypropionitrile and isobutyronitrile, To reduce exposure to acrylamide monomers, it is possible to use high-purity PAM products with lower acrylamide monomer contents. Another option is to replace PAM using an alternative flocculant. A third option, which has received minimal attention, is to use lower PAM dosages in combination with an alternative flocculant. For example, some utilities have successfully used activated silica in combination with PAM. However, to the best of our knowledge, no studies have tested the combination of PAM with activated starch. This study examines the combination of an activated starch-based polymer with PAM to determine whether a synergistic effect can be achieved using a dual polymer system. It is hypothesized that activated starch can be first injected to initiate aggregation, leading to small flocs. In a second step, floc maturation could be completed with very low PAM dosages to form large aggregates. This strategy would limit acrylamide monomer concentrations in treated water. In addition, the option of injecting both polymers simultaneously was investigated. This scenario is of interest, as it would simplify full-scale process operations (only one injection point would be needed) as well as polymer preparation (only one polymer preparation system could be used). To investigate flocculation performance, jar tests were used to monitor floc size, density and rate of aggregation. Turbidity removal was also examined to confirm settling performance. All experiments were conducted at the lab-scale using either (i) surface water (SW) from the Pont-Viau water treatment plant (21 NTU, pH 7.0), which is fed by the Des Prairies River (Quebec, Canada) or (ii) municipal wastewater (WW) from the Repentigny (Quebec, Canada) water resource recovery facility (81 NTU, pH 8.4; collected after the 6 mm influent bar screens). Floc size and density were characterized during flocculation by direct microscopic observation (Olympus DP70 camera connected to an Olympus BX51 optical microscope for measurements of a counting cell with a depth of 2 mm) as described by Water samples were flash mixed (velocity gradient ( Settling was performed for only 1 min, which is sufficient to remove ballasted flocs. Optimal polymer dosages were established based on the targeted residual turbidity in settled water: <1 NTU for drinking water and <3 NTU for WW. If these objectives were not achieved, the optimal dosage was established by identifying the point of diminishing return in the turbidity vs dosage curves. The individual performances of PAM and starch are compared in The performance of split injection of PAM/starch is presented in The floc size distribution was measured during preflocculation with starch. As a reference, the floc size distribution obtained with alum used alone is presented. Under these conditions of high shear (G = 165 s The aggregation kinetics for various polymer dosages are presented in  To quantify floc resistance under higher shear conditions, turbidity removal in settled water was evaluated under optimal coagulant/polymer dosages for Settling rates were compared by measuring turbidity vs time profiles under various polymer injection strategies for ballasted flocculation ( The dual polymer split injection strategy was useful for identifying the role of both flocculants in the overall process performance. For practical industrial applications, a single injection point to inject a mixture of PAM/starch would be the simplest option to implement. To ensure complete reaction between polymers and particles and to limit competition between starch and PAM chains during flocculation, the polymers were sequentially injected, i.e., starch before PAM. This injection method allowed independent evaluation of the contribution of each polymer during aggregation. However, the settled water turbidities were similar for both split and simultaneous polymer injection: 1) PAM injected before starch (0.71 ± 0.08 NTU), 2) PAM and starch injected simultaneously (0.74 ± 0.09 NTU), and 3) starch injected before PAM (0.62 ± 0.06 NTU). The MW and polymer charge density are known to be factors that control the performance of flocculation ( The synergy between starch and PAM allowed starch to partially replace PAM. However, a minimal PAM dosage significantly improved the overall process performance. In this study, maximal PAM dosage fractions of 69% and 45% were substituted by starch for the tested SW and WW samples, respectively. This substitution did not affect the turbidity removal and floc size. To reduce the PAM dosage further, the MW of the starch polymer used during preflocculation could be increased, as proposed by The starch/PAM ratio and minimal PAM dosage were more important factors for obtaining proper flocculation than the timing of polymer injection, as no significant difference was observed between polymer coaddition and sequential addition. Others studies have also noted the marginal role of the polymer injection sequence ( The floc resistance to shear is of concern for full-scale applications where nonhomogeneous shearing is observable in the flocculation tank. However, under a wide range of The tested starch polymer was less efficient than PAM for turbidity removal while operating under aggressive flocculation (4 min)/settling (1 min) conditions. However, dual injection of PAM and starch permitted important reductions in PAM dosage without impacting flocculation kinetics, floc size and specific gravity, settling rate, turbidity removal or floc resistance to shearing. More specifically: The PAM dosage was reduced by 53% (SW) or 22% (WW) when 0.2 mg starch/L was injected. The PAM dosage was reduced by 69% (WW) or 45% (WW) when 0.4 mg starch/L was injected. The floc resistance was not impacted by the use of the dual polymer system for the typical PAM usage can be significantly reduced for both conventional and ballasted flocculation if a dual polymer system is used owing to synergy between PAM and starch. The injection sequence is not a critical parameter. Therefore, a starch–PAM blend solution could be used for polymer coaddition to simplify the preparation and injection of the polymers. Further work on the influence of pH on aluminum hydroxide–starch complexes should be carried out in order to achieve further reductions or complete replacement of PAM, as it has been shown that starch can also replace PAM, albeit at higher dosages. Additionally, the impact of using a starch–PAM blend on membrane fouling and granular filter head loss should be investigated. A dual polymer system could also be used to reduce PAM usage in sludge thickening/dewatering processes. These experiments were conducted as part of the Industrial NSERC Chair in Drinking Water (Polytechnique Montreal) research program, which benefits from the financial support of