Fossil fuels such as coal and natural gas produce approximately 40% of the world-wide electrical power; this causes serious environmental problems because of greenhouse gas emissions generation. For that reason, the implementation of new ways to produce energy with low environmental impact is needed. In this context, solar energy provides great opportunities to meet energy demand through diverse technologies. However, the evaluation of the real effects of these technologies is important in order to use this energy source. Thus, the present work aims to propose a mathematical approach for the optimal planning of a solar panels production system from mineral silicon; which considers the complete stages of the manufacturing process, such as the mineral extraction, ingots, wafers, cells and panels production, as well as selling of final products. The model assesses economic aspects for the involved entities in this supply chain given by transportation costs and minimum sustainable price. Also, it considers environmental issues through the calculation of emissions during the extraction, transportation and production stages. It is worth noting that the mathematical model is able to select between the products exportation and raw material importation to satisfy the need of production system. In addition, the methodology takes into account the dependence over the time for the variables and parameters through a multi-period programming model. The mathematical approach is capable of obtaining the values of inventory levels, production capacity and the satisfied demand in all periods of time. The formulation also determines the period of time in which different facilities are installed. The mathematical approach is applied to a nationwide case study for Mexico. Results show the potential configuration of the solar power supply chain and the levels of potential contribution to the markets of the local production considering different values of taxes for the external producers. Finally, the model is useful to take decisions about the design of solar panels production system and the adequate values for tariffs to external markets. Therefore, this work presents a mathematical model for determining the routes and steps that render the optimal overall supply chain, considering local MSP, transportation costs, and import/export tariffs prior to shipping to end destinations. To demonstrate the applicability of this methodology, it was applied to a case study for Mexico. The country of Mexico is selected based on its ample manufacturing base, vast numerous amount of international treaties, economic competitiveness, and geographic proximity to North, Central, and South American markets.   Prior to explain the mathematical model it is needed to define the indexes used. In this respect, the internal nodes are denoted by the letter ( The availability of silicon is a limited amount because it is limited by the capacity of the extraction technologies, as well as the characteristics of the land. For that reason, the model should be include a constraint to limit the available amount of raw material, which states that the amount of raw material to be used is lower than the maximum amount of raw material to be extracted. The extracted silicon in suppliers can be used for the internal consumption or sold to external markets. In this respect, the amount of extracted silicon is equal to the sum of the silicon used in the internal consumption and the sold mineral in the external markets.  Furthermore, it is necessary to contemplate the inventory levels (amount of stored material) in nodes for ingots production for each period of time. In addition, the ingots production is modelled via an equation type “black box′”, in which the amount of produced ingots is equal to a conversion factor multiplied by the amount of silicon to be processed. On the other hand, the inventory level for ingots is equal to the previous one, plus the obtained ingots, minus the total sent ingots to the local wafer producers, minus the total ingots to be sold in external markets. Prior to detail the economic objective function is needed to explain the minimum sustainable price (MSP). The minimum sustainable price is an economic metric; which is defined as the value of the product price, when the net present value is equal to zero. In this respect, the net present value involves the operating and investment costs to perform the production of any product. This metric is useful to compare production technologies; where, the alternative with the lowest MSP is the best option for the economic point of view. Furthermore, the MSP considers several aspects such as the operating cost, investment cost, inflation, depreciation, etc. It is important to mention that is possible to obtain the behavior of the MSP value respect to these aspects. In this respect, a function of the MSP with respect to the production capacity is obtained in order to take into account the economies of scale. However, the MSP function is nonlinear and nonconvex; for that reason the MSP function is divided in several linear segments. The next disjunction shows as the MSP function for the mineral extraction is segmented. The other MSP functions are stated in similar ways.  The importation cost is associated to the external production cost of raw material and products. The importation cost contemplates the price of the product to be imported, plus the importation taxes, plus the transportation cost for importations. It should be noted that product price is fixed by the external producer and depends on their own production system; while, the importation taxes can be a percentage of the product price. Although, the product price and the importation taxes are known, the total importation cost depends on the amount of imported product or raw material. Also, it is needed to quote that exportations represent an economic income for the internal system and it is related with the transportation cost for exportations since this cost affects directly the price of the exported product. This way, if the transportation cost for exportations is minimized, the price offered would be more competitive. Besides, transportation costs depend of distances between the initial and final nodes as well as the amount of transported material; where a determining factor is the distance. In this regard, a low value for the internal transportation costs including the transportation cost to the final consumption regions promote a more profitable solution for the local proposed system. Finally, the production system’s emissions are obtained by the sum of individuals emissions; which are computed by an emission factor multiplied by the material amount in activities. It is important to mention that for transportation cost cases, the factor would be multiplied by the distance too.  This work has presented a model formulation for the planning of a solar modules manufacturing system applying economic and environmental criteria simultaneously. The solution scheme is focused to optimize three economic objective functions and one environmental objective function. This model is able to decide the material quantity to be exported or imported depending of the system’s need. The approach was applied to a case study for Mexico. The proposed methodology can also be implemented to support data-driven, strategic decision making for determining the viability of developing manufacturing clusters in particular regions, and as well as the specific drivers that would have the highest impact if modified.