Background
                  High energy tibial plafond (pilon) fractures are known to have a high rate of complication, particularly wound dehiscence and infection. Wound infection, requiring debridement of both soft tissue and bone can be especially challenging to reconstruct due to the combination of high load-bearing requirements within a thin soft tissue envelope.
               
                  Method
                  We present a case of a pilon fracture with a post-operative complication of wound dehiscence and infection necessitating bone debridement, ultimately resulting in chronic osteomyelitis. We used a medial femoral osteocutaneous free flap to provide vascularised structure to the defect. Included is a comprehensive literature review for the use of the MFC osteocutaneous free flaps in lower extremities.
               
                  Results
                  This flap provided restoration of the medial column of the ankle. The use of vascularised bone resulted in rapid post-operative bony union. The vascularised bone flap was press fit into the defect ruling out the potential for further hardware related infections. We report follow up of over one year.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The MFC free osteocutaneous flap is a good option for small bone and soft tissue defects of lower extremities, especially in setting of chronic osteomyelitis. It can be custom fabricated and either fixated or press fit into a chronic pilon fracture cavity to obliterate dead space with vascularised bone.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV, retrospective case study.Pilon fractures are high energy intra-articular fractures of the tibial plafond Given the variable patterns of displacement and fracture comminution, the management of pilon fracture varies from casting for non-displaced fractures to open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) to achieve limb alignment or articular reduction The medial femoral condyle (MFC) flap has been described in the literature as a useful option for vascularised bone grafts. It was first described as a pedicled periosteal flap based on the descending genicular artery in 1989 by Hertel and Masquelet The patient is a 52-year-old male who sustained injury to his right ankle secondary to a fall which resulted in a Gustilo type IIIA, comminuted and displaced intra-articular fracture of the right distal tibia and fibula, with a medial wound at the level of the fracture ( Once his fracture was healed, he was brought back for removal of the hardware and debridement. An area of necrotic bone was discovered after removal of the medial plate which was then debrided to healthy tissue. This resulted in a soft tissue/bone defect in distal tibia and plastic surgery was consulted to help with closure of his defect ( The surgical technique has been well described in the literature The patient had an unremarkable post-operative recovery and was discharged from the hospital without complication on post-operative day 11. He was given an additional 6-week course of antibiotics. He continued to have excellent radiologic bone healing and was able to start complete weight bearing 10 weeks post-operatively. After 10 months the saphenous portion of the chimeric free flap was thinned for contour. He is currently being followed up in our clinic and has excellent contour and function of his flap on 14-month follow-up without recurrent signs of infection ( MFC osteocutaneous free flaps have been very well described for usage in upper extremities but there have been few papers describing their use in lower extremities ( Given the history of prolonged osteomyelitis and surrounding soft tissue infection in our patient, the chances of an optimal outcome with non-vascularised iliac bone graft would have been poor. The vascularised iliac bone graft requires a complicated dissection and has an unreliable skin paddle Even with significant advances, treatment of pilon fractures is associated with multiple complications involving non-union, osteomyelitis, and wound dehiscence resulting in soft tissue and bone defect. The treatment options become very limited and challenging in setting of wound bed infection and compromised blood flow. Use of traditional non-vascularised bone grafts would generally be associated with poor outcome in such scenario. MFC osteocutaneous free flaps provide a good alternative for coverage of such defects, can be successfully used in such hostile conditions, and is associated with minimal donor site morbidity. None declared. None declared.