The microdefects in a material responsible for fracture initiation in particle breakage may not always have a uniform spatial distribution. This work applies the power-law spatial flaw distribution based weakest link formulation of cumulative failure probability for statistical size scaling of breakage strength of irregularly-shaped particles. Four sets of published breakage strength data of different sized grains made of different materials including rock, basalt, sugar, and potash are adopted to validate the power-law spatial flaw distribution based weakest link model. Since the power-law spatial flaw distribution based weakest link model encompasses the uniform spatial flaw distribution based weakest link model as its subordinate member, while the Weibull statistical strength theory is a special case of the uniform spatial flaw distribution based weakest link model, this work extends the capability to investigate size scaling of particle breakage strength.probability density function of microscopic cleavage strength (S) shape parameter total number of samples in each group number of microcraks in a volume fracture probability of V cumulative probability of failure at probability density function fracture strength of V specimen volume differential volume element a reference volume local stress at any point inside V threshold of breakage strength nominal particle breakage strength first, second, third principal stress scale parameter scale parameter mean stress value constants Gamma function, mean value and standard deviation Particle size reduction via breakage and fragmentation is an elementary physical event in particle comminution and powder granulation processes. The resistance to particle size reduction via breakage and fragmentation is usually measured by particle breakage strength. For brittle and quasi-brittle breakage of particles, the particle breakage strength features both random variation and particle size effect. The random variation of breakage strength is observed in a same compression experiment of particles with nominally the same geometrical shape and dimension. The size effect of particle strength refers to the inverse dependence of (average) particle strength on particle size. Both characteristics result from the random distribution of microdefects in particles with respect to their spatial location, orientation, size and shape. The effect of particle size lies in a change in the number of these microdefects in different sized particles. The random variation of strength calls for statistical assessment of the breakage strength of particles, especially irregularly-shaped particles. The statistical evaluation of particle strength falls into two methods, namely the empirical data fitting and the weakest link statistics, as summarized in  Usually, the distribution parameters (m, The empirical data fitting approach works well for strength data collected from a group of nominally same sized particles. All the CDFs in Eqs.  According to Eq. Note that Weibull statistics of strength obeys the weakest-link assumption. In other words, Weibull statistics is only a subordinate member of the weakest-link statistics, as shown in When the probability density function (PDF) with respect to the fracture strength (S) of elemental volume V Substitution of Eq. Basically, depending on the specific material, The expected “master curve” for the However, it was found that for some quasi-brittle materials, Eq. The reader is referred to Next, for a bulk solid subjected to heterogeneous multiaxial stresses designated by Σ Eq. Eq. Substitution of Eq. Eq. Regardless of the complexity associated with the specific formulation of Accordingly, both the nominal strength variation and the size effect are now synchronized by the correlation between the compound parameter When the PDF with respect to the fracture strength (S) of elemental volume V It is noted that the model is limited to brittle fracture and does not include ductile fracture. Many advanced technological materials, such as metallic alloys, are usually ductile under normal conditions, but under extreme circumstances, including low temperature and dynamic loading conditions, can exhibit macroscopically brittle fracture behavior (with localized/microscopic plastic deformation). Ferritic steels commonly used to manufacture nuclear reactor pressure vessels and other engineering structures, can fail by cleavage fracture as a random event. In this case, statistical models have also been developed. For these technological materials, thanks to the significant progress in metallurgical industry, defects initiating brittle fracture, such as carbides and other nonmetallic inclusions in ferritic steels and cast irons, can be controlled to distribute uniformly in materials. Our studies have validated the uniform defect distribution based statistical models for cleavage fracture of ferritic steels. We believe and have also found that brittle and quasi-brittle materials, particularly those naturally grown materials, are more likely to have nonuniform spatial distribution of defects. Specifically, in Lei In the next section, Eq. In this section, we’ll evaluate the particle breakage strength of several different materials. The first example is about the strength of rock aggregates. Ovalle et al.  This supports that the spatial distribution of microdefects in the rock aggregates is non-uniform and can be approximately described by a power law function Rozenblat et al. The nominal breakage strength  This supports that the spatial distribution of microdefects in basalt grains is non-uniform and can be approximately described by a power law function  This supports that the spatial distribution of microdefects in sugar grains is non-uniform and can be approximately described by a power law function  This supports that the spatial distribution of microdefects in potash grains is non-uniform and can be approximately described by a power law function The effect of particle size on particle breakage strength is of interest to many industrial processes. For regularly shaped spherical particles, analytical solutions to the elastic stress field inside a spherical body are available, which greatly help to understand their mechanistic breakage processes. However, for various irregularly shaped particles commonly encountered in different industries, analytical solutions to the elastic stress field inside them are unavailable. Empirical data accumulation and analysis becomes the major avenue to characterize their breakage strength. In this regard, the Discrete Element Method (DEM) enables to simulate the evolution process of defects in a granular object with strictly predefined geometry in terms of shape and size in a deterministic way. When the size and shape of a particle changes, a dedicated round of DEM simulation is needed. Therefore, statistical approaches are very attractive to characterize the size effect on breakage strength of irregularly shaped particles with various complexity of sphericity and roundness It is noted that for the 4 case studies presented in this work, the size dependence and the random variation of the breakage strength of a single particle are collectively represented by the following expression, which can be called as the generalized 2-parameter Weibull statistics: However, at this point, we would not claim that Eq.  The weakest link statistics based on the assumption of a power-law spatial distribution of flaws is validated for the size effect on breakage strength of rock aggregates, basalt, sugar and potash grains in diametrical compression. For each material, all the strength data of different sized particles fall onto the “master curve” for the For the four materials evaluated in this study, the value of β ranges from 0.165 to 0.6 for the spatial flaw distribution function This work was funded by the