Objectives
                  Primary isolated dental follicle stem cells (DFSCs) possess a strong osteogenesis capability, and such capability is reduced during in vitro culture. Because dentin matrix protein 1 (DMP1) is essential in the maturation of osteoblasts, our objectives were to determine (1) the expression of DMP1 in the DFSCs, (2) the correlation between DMP1 expression and osteogenic capability of DFSCs, and (3) the ability of DMP1 to promote osteogenic differentiation of DFSCs.
               
                  Methods
                  DFSCs and their non-stem cell counterpart dental follicle cells (DFC) were established from postnatal rat pups. Expression of DMP1 in the DFSCs and DFC was determined using real-time RT-PCR and western blotting. Different passages of DFSCs were subjected to osteogenic induction. The correlation between osteogenesis and DMP1 expression was analyzed. Then, expression of DMP1 in the DFSCs was knocked-down using siRNA, followed by osteogenic induction to evaluate the effect of DMP1-knockdown. Finally, the late passage DFSCs with reduced DMP1 expression and osteogenic capability were cultured in osteogenic induction medium containing mouse recombinant DMP1 (mrDMP1) to determine if DMP1 can restore osteogenesis of DFSCs.
               
                  Results
                  DFSCs expressed much higher levels of DMP1 than did DFC. DMP1 expression was correlated with the osteogenic capability of DFSCs. Knockdown of DMP1 expression markedly decreased the osteogenesis and osteogenic gene expression in the DFSCs whereas adding mrDMP1 protein to the osteogenic induction medium enhanced osteogenesis.
               
                  Conclusions
                  DMP1 is highly expressed in the DFSCs, but minimally expressed in non-stem cell DFC. DMP1 appears to play an important role for osteogenic differentiation of the DFSCs.In previous studies, we reported obtaining two distinct populations of cells from the dental follicle (DF) using different cell culture systems. The cells derived from α-MEM Dentin matrix protein 1(DMP1) is present in mineralized tissues A recent study showed the expression of DMP1 in all non-mineralized structures surrounding developing teeth. Dental follicles (DFs) were surgically isolated from the first mandibular molars of rat pups at postnatal days 5 or 6 from different litters. Use of the animals was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Louisiana State University (IACUC protocol # 11-011). In each litter, primary cells were obtained by trypsinization of the DFs collected from 3 littermates. DFSCs and homogeneous non-stem cells DFC were established by growing the primary cells in either a stem cell growth medium (α-MEM To assess the differential expression of stem cell-marker genes in the DF derived cells, established DFSCs and DFC were seeded in T-75 flasks and cultured for 7 days. Cells were then collected into RLT buffer (Qiagen, Velenica, CA, USA) for total RNA extraction. Expression of stem cell marker genes [NT5E (CD73), THY1 (CD90), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), BCRP and NOTCH1] was assessed using real-time RT-PCR with gene specific primers ( The established DFSCs and DFC were seeded in 6-well plates at a cell density of 10 For assessment of DMP1 expression in the DF-derived cells under different growth conditions, we conducted two experiments. In the first experiment, DFSCs and DFC were collected from their original culture medium for gene expression analysis; i.e., DFSCs in α-MEM For real-time RT-PCR, total RNA was extracted with RNeasy In western blotting analysis, cells were lysed with CytoBuster™ protein extraction buffer (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA) supplemented with 1/50 Protease Inhibitor cocktail (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. Dallas, TX, USA). After centrifugation of the cell lysate, supernatants containing total protein were transferred to new tubes, and protein concentration was determined with the BCA protein assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA). Total protein (15 DFSCs of passages 3, 5, 7 and 9 were collected into RLT buffer (Qiagen, Velenica, CA, USA) for total RNA extraction and real-time RT-PCR was conducted to determine the RGE as described earlier. Different passages of DFSCs were also seeded in 6-well plates at a cell density of 10 A Dicer substrate siRNA was obtained from Integrated DNA Technologies (IDT, Coralville, IA, USA) by annealing two single stranded RNA: sense strand 5′-rCrGrArCrCrArCrArGrUrGrArUrGrArGrGrCrArGrArCrAGC-3′ and anti-sense strand 5′-rGrCrUrGrUrCrUrGrCrCrUrCrArUrCrArCrUrGrUrGrGrUrGrGrUrC-3′. The siRNA was designed to target the rat DMP1 mRNA. To knock down gene expression, the DFSCs at passages 3 and 5 were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 10 To assess the effect of DMP1 knockdown on expression of osteogenic related genes, transfected DFSCs were collected after 7 and 14 days of induction for analysis of the expression of selected osteogenic genes (BMP2, BMP5, BMP6, FLT1, MMP13, RUNX2 and BGN) using real-time RT-PCR with the primers listed in The recombinant mouse DMP1 (rmDMP1) was purchased from R & D Systems (Minneapolis, MN, USA). DFSCs at passage 9 that had reduced endogenous DMP1 expression and reduced differentiation capability were incubated with osteogenic medium plus different concentrations of rmDMP1 (0–250 All experiments were repeated a minimum of 3 times with the cells established from different litters. Analysis of variance and Tukey's test were used for multiple comparisons of more than two means. A Student Using real-time RT-PCR, we evaluated the expression of some stem cell marker genes [NT5E (CD73), THY1 (CD90), ALP, BCRP and NOTCH1] in the DFSCs and DFC. The results revealed that DFSCs express significantly higher levels of these genes than do the DFC ( When DFSCs and DFC were cultured in the medium containing osteogenic induction reagents for 14 days, DFSCs showed strong calcium deposits as determined by Alizarin Red staining, indicating that DFSCs had differentiated into calcium-depositing cells ( To evaluate the differentiation of DFSCs at the molecular level, expression of differentiation markers (BSP, OCN and DSPP) was determined before and after osteogenic induction ( Expression of DMP1 in the DFSCs and DFC was also examined with real-time RT-PCR in two culture conditions. When the cells at passage 3 were cultured in their original growth medium (i.e., DFSCs in α-MEM Gene expression of DMP1 in different passages of DFSCs also was determined using real-time RT-PCR. The results revealed an overall decreased gene expression of DMP1 with progression of cell passaging ( To determine the correlation between DMP1 expression and osteogenic capability of DFSCs, different passages of DFSCs were induced for osteogenesis for 2 weeks before being stained by Alizarin Red. Osteogenesis of different passage DFSCs was quantitatively measured as shown in Since expression of DMP1 appeared to correlate to osteogenic potential of DFSCs, it was important to determine if there was a cause and effect relationship between DMP1 expression and osteogenesis. In this regard, early passages (P3 and P5) of DFSCs that expressed high levels of DMP1 were transfected with DMP1-siRNA. The knockdown efficiency was about 90% at day 3, 85% at day 5, and then dropped to about 70% at day 7 as determined by real-time RT-PCR. By day 14, the knockdown efficiency was down to about 60% ( The DF is a loose connective tissue sac consisting of a majority of fibroblast-like cells. We established two distinct cell populations from the DF, the DFSCs and fibroblast-like DFC. DFSCs were established by culturing the primary DF cells in α-MEM According to International Society for Cellular Therapy (ISCT), the minimal criteria to define mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are: (a) MSCs must be plastic-adherent when maintained in standard culture conditions, (b) MSCs must express CD105, CD73 and CD90, and (c) MSCs must differentiate to osteoblasts, adipocytes and chondroblasts in vitro. In this study, we showed that DMP1 was highly expressed in the DFSCs. Gopinathan et al. also reported the presence of DMP1 in progenitor cells/stem cells derived from the DF, It has been reported that DMP1 is expressed in differentiated calcium-depositing cells, including osteoblasts, osteocytes and odontoblasts. It is well known that DMP1 plays important roles for osteogenesis. DMP1 is essential in the maturation of odontoblasts and osteoblasts. In a recent study, DMP1 has been showed to bind to the promoter of dentin sialophosphoprotein (DSPP) to regulate the expression of that gene. Exogenous DMP1 can exert its effect by entering the cells via endocytosis or by binding to membrane receptors to activate an internal signalling pathway leading to osteogenesis. ALP is a well-known marker of various stem cells including embryonic stem cells and tissue derived stem cells and. In summary, this study has shown that DMP1 is highly expressed in the DFSCs derived from the DF, but not in the non-stem cell fibroblast-like DFC of the same origin. This high level expression of DMP1 is likely necessary to maintain the osteogenic differentiation capability of DFSCs. Moreover, our results indicate that DMP1 participates in regulating expression of osteogenic genes in the DFSCs. This research was supported by a NIDCR grant 5R01DE008911-21 to GEW and SY. None declared. Use of the animals was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of Louisiana State University. This research was supported by a