A continuous separator based on float–sink density separation using a gas–solid fluidized bed dense medium was used to upgrade iron ore. The separator has three devices for (A) conveying floaters, (B) recovering floaters, and (C) conveying and recovering sinkers. The optimum speeds of these devices were investigated using density adjusted spheres of the diameter=30mm in the range of 2400–3300kg/m3 in density increments of 100kg/m3. A mixture of zircon sand and iron powder was used as the fluidized medium to adjust the fluidized bed density to produce a separation density=2850kg/m3, a typical separation density for lump iron ore wet separation. The recovery of the spheres as floaters or sinkers depended on the speed of the devices, because the recovery was affected by the number density of spheres directly under the feeder, the local fluidized bed density, and flow currents in the medium derived from the movement of the devices. The optimum speeds were determined to be 3.5cm/s for (A), 2.0rpm for (B) and 1.0cm/s for (C), respectively. Continuous separation experiments were conducted on lump iron ore particles in the size range of +11.1–31.5mm in the fluidized bed with medium density of 2850kg/m3 and feed rate of 200kg/h. Comparison of the feed rate and the recovery rate indicated that the feed and the recovery were in equilibrium after 10min of operation. The experiments resulted in nearly perfect separation; 98.4% of the ore with density greater than 2850kg/m3 was recovered. The Fe, Al and Si content of the feed ore particles (before the separation) and the floaters and sinkers (after the separation) was measured using inductively coupled plasma spectrometry. The separator produced an upgrade in iron content of 3.3wt% and reduced the Al and Si content by 44%.Run-of-mine ores are normally separated into valuable minerals and waste gangue; the separation is called mineral processing One possibility for dry separation is to use a gas–solid fluidized bed. It is well known that fluidized beds have liquid-like properties, such as density and viscosity Generally, lump iron ore particles are treated by wet float–sink separation using fine ferrosilicon suspensions as the dense medium. Iron ore particles of +6–100 Zircon sand and iron powder were used as the particles to be fluidized. The iron powder size was approximately 100 Typical Western Australian run-of-mine lump iron ore was used in this study. A sample of 7  Density adjusted spheres of the diameter Once the optimum speeds of A, B and C were determined, (see results below), the ore particles of +11.1–31.5       Dry continuous separation of lump iron ore based on float–sink density separation using a gas–solid fluidized bed dense medium was investigated. The optimum speed of devices in the continuous separator for conveying and recovering floaters and sinkers was determined using density adjusted spheres. The separation of lump iron ore of +11.1–31.5 This study was supported by an Industrial Technology Research Grant Program in 2008 from the New Energy and Industrial Technology Development Organization (NEDO) of Japan, the Core-to-Core Program promoted by the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (Project No. 18004) and the Australian Research Council, AMIRA International, BHP Billiton, Rio Tinto, Orica, Anglo Platinum, Xstrata, Freeport McMoran and AREVA NC through the Australian Minerals Science Research Institute (AMSRI) (LP0667828). Thanks to the Australian Academy of Science and the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science for the Bilateral Exchange Fellowship for GVF to visit Okayama in September 2012. Thanks to Eric Phuak for his helpful comments in interpreting the separation results.