A systematic voltammetric study developed in this work allows the determination of the potential range at which the selective deposition of gold and silver is carried out in the presence of a high content of copper. As a first approach, laboratory solutions prepared with a high content of cyanide and copper and low values of gold and silver are used; later, the methodology is applied to leaching solutions of industrial origin.
                  The chemical speciation and microelectrolysis studies showed that copper deposition occurs at more negative potentials than deposition of gold and silver. Also, the voltammetric study of a cyanide solution containing low concentrations of Au(I) and Ag(I), free of and with high concentration of Cu(I) was carried out. The study shows the potential range at which Au(I) and Ag(I) are reduced despite the high concentration of the Cu(I) ions. The deposition of gold and silver was not interfered with by the high concentration of Cu(I) ions when the leaching solution was electrolyzed in a laboratory electrochemical reactor FM01-LC with a reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) cathode.Cyanide leaching processes have been used by the mining industry for over 100 years in the extraction of noble metals Since the metal with the highest concentration would be expected to be the first deposited, the presence of large amounts of Cu(I) is likely to influence the selective recovery of gold or silver. Preliminary studies performed on stainless steel 304, vitreous carbon and Ti showed that vitreous carbon is the most adequate material for performing Ag(I) deposition from a diluted silver solution (11 ppm) with a high content of copper The solution used in this preliminary study (0.1 M Cu(I), 0.5 M CN Firstly, speciation and voltammetric studies of a cyanide solution with a high concentration of Cu(I) and low concentrations of Au(I) (laboratory solution) were carried out. The purpose of this study was to find out whether the high concentration of copper interferes with the selective deposition of gold. After this experiment, a voltammetric study of the cyanide solution containing the three metallic ions (high Cu(I) concentration and low concentrations of Au(I) and Ag(I), laboratory solutions), was carried out in order to determine if the interaction between the three metal ions changes the potential range at which the selective reduction of Au(I) and Ag(I) occurs. Afterwards, the same methodology was applied to the industrial leaching solution. Once the potential range of the Au(I) and Ag(I) reduction was established, an electrolysis of the cyanide leaching solution containing the three metallic ions was carried out in an electrochemical FM01-LC laboratory reactor. A 100-ml Pyrex cell with a three-electrode system and nitrogen inlet was used in the voltammetric study. The working electrode was a vitreous carbon rod with geometric area of 0.07 cm All solutions except the industrial leaching solution were prepared with deionised water 18 MΩ The electrolysis of the selective reduction of Au(I) and Ag(I) in the presence of high concentrations of Cu(I) was carried out using an industrial leaching solution on a filter press electrochemical reactor, FM01-LC. A full description of this reactor has been outlined in the literature The industrial solution was re-circulated through the anolyte and catholyte compartments using two centrifugal pumps obtained from Cole Palmer. A potentiostat EG and G model PARC 273A with a Booster KEPCO (0–20 A and 0–20 V) and the M270 software were used in the voltammetric and macro-electrolysis experiments. The determination of total Au(I), Ag(I) and Cu(I) concentrations was carried out by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) (Varian model Spectr AA-20). A chemical speciation study was performed in order to establish the nature of the electroactive species of gold, silver and copper in cyanide solutions. A Pourbaix type diagram The full lines in  The calculated potentials associated with the electrochemical reactions Au′(I)/Au(0), Ag′(I)/Ag(0) and Cu′(I)/Cu(0) at pH=10, It is important to note that under experimental conditions of the laboratory solution, the difference in A voltammetric study of cyanide solutions with and without metal ions was carried out on a plane vitreous carbon electrode within the range of 100 to −1800 mV vs. SCE. In this study, the influence of Cu(I) and cyanide on the electrochemical deposition of gold was determined.  In The presence of Au(I) ions in the cyanide solution shifts the current density associated with the reduction of water towards more negative potentials with respect to the cyanide solution free of metallic ions ( The influence of the Cu(I) ion in the cyanide solution From From the above study, it was considered necessary to identify the potential range at which the selective deposition of gold occurs in the presence of high concentration of Cu(I). This was done by a voltammetric study, shifting the switching potential  The dissolution of both the codeposit Cu/Au and the metallic Au occurs at very similar potentials and therefore, the identification of each dissolution process is complex. It was not possible to identify the exact potential range of gold deposition free of copper, so it was decided to quantitatively analyze the voltammetric curves. The associated charge of the oxidation processes, Qa, was determined from the area under the voltammetric curves of solutions containing Au(I) and Cu(I), In Since the concentration of Au(I) is very low, the faradaic current associated with its reduction process is lower than or similar to the capacitive current, so it is not possible to determine the potential range at which the deposition of gold takes place; besides, it is not possible to distinguish the gold deposit through its process of electrochemical dissolution since when there are some, the reduction of water becomes more important modifying the interfacial pH. However, the presence of Cu(I) in cyanide solution allows the observation of the dissolution peak of gold through the analysis of the area under oxidation peaks at different  The metallic ions Au(I) and Ag(I) shift the current density associated with the reduction of water towards less negative potentials ( In the inset of On the other hand, the reduction of gold and silver is masked by the capacitive current densities (see inset of In order to establish the potential at which the deposition of gold and silver without copper takes place, a voltammetric study was carried out changing the switching potential  In  The voltammogram of cyanide solution containing the three metallic ions In order to identify the potential range at which the gold and silver deposition is free of copper, a quantitative study of the voltammetric curves was carried out. The associated charge, Qa, of the solutions with and without copper, was calculated and plotted as a function of the switching potential In From the comparative study of cyanide solutions containing Au(I) and Ag(I) ions with and without Cu(I), it is possible to determine the potential of the codeposit Ag/Au free of copper. However, the potential deposition of silver and gold cannot be found independently. The methodology developed till now allows us to establish the The chemical speciation study of electroactive species of Au, Ag and Cu present in the industrial leaching solution ( In Potentials and thermodynamic reactions associated with the Au(I)/Au(0), Ag(I)/Ag(0) and Cu(I)/Cu(0) couples in an industrial leaching solution at pH=11, It is important to stress that, in principle, the above-predicted potentials should be more negative than those previously obtained in In this case, the potential difference  On the other hand, in With the purpose of determining the potential range at which the deposition of Au(I) and Ag(I) free of copper from the industrial leaching solution takes place, the quantitative study of the voltammetric curves was carried out through the charge associated with In  From the comparative study of the charges (Qa) of industrial leaching solution in relation to the more concentrated cyanide solution of Au(I) ions with Ag(I), Cu(I) and CN The potential at which Cu(I) does not interfere with the electrochemical deposition of gold and silver has been established from the experiments above. Taking this into account, an electrochemical deposition of the species Au(I) and Ag(I) in a batch re-circulation reactor using the industrial leaching solution (solution f) was carried out. The electrolysis was at constant potential on a reticulated vitreous carbon electrode (RVC) for 25 min at a linear flow velocity of 19 cm s  In order to analyze the morphology and composition of gold, silver and copper deposits on the RVC, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray diffraction studies on the electrode surface were carried out. It is important to stress that when the concentrations of Au(I) and Ag(I) diminish in the solution, the deposition of Cu(I) becomes energetically favorable. Under these conditions, the electrolysis should be stopped before the deposition of copper begins if a quantitative separation of gold and silver is wanted. The above analysis allows us to propose the recovery of gold and silver at an applied potential of −1400 mV for the first 10 min of electrolysis in the electrochemical batch reactor with an RVC electrode. The reduction of gold and silver in the electrochemical reactor FM01-LC is a preliminary study that proves that gold and silver can be selectively removed. However, further studies, such as current efficiency, mass transport and space–time yield are necessary to design an efficient electrochemical reactor for the recovery of gold and silver from leaching process solutions.  The deposition of the three metallic ions follows the sequence: Au, Ag and Cu, this agrees with the results found in the speciation study. There is a potential range at which only Au(I) was reduced even at high concentrations of Cu(I). The Cu(I) ion contributes to modify the capacitive current densities of the cyanide media and helps to enhance the oxidation process of gold since the water reduction diminishes considerably. This work shows the influence of different gold, silver and copper cyanide species on the simultaneous process of water reduction occurring during the deposition of these metals. While the silver ions seem to favor this process, the copper ions seem to diminish it considerably. The voltammetric study shows that the simultaneous reduction of Au(I) and Ag(I) in a medium with a high concentration of Cu(I) ions occurs within the potential range of −1500 to −1900 mV vs. SCE without Cu(I) deposition for laboratory solution and −1200 to −1500 mV vs. SCE for industrial leaching solution. The recovery of gold and silver was proposed at an applied potential of −1400 mV vs. SCE for the first 10 min of the electrolysis in a batch reactor with re-circulation on a RVC electrode. The reduction of gold and silver in the electrochemical reactor FM01-LC confirms the selective deposition of both metals. However, these are preliminary studies and further work is necessary in order to optimize the reactor performance. The authors express their acknowledgment to Conacyt (project number 32539-T) and Servicios Industriales Peñoles (Monterrey, México) for funding this work. V. Reyes Cruz thanks Conacyt and Servicios Industriales Peñoles (Monterrey México) for his PhD scholarship.