Different physico-mechanical parameters (density, uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, Cerchar abrasivity index, Schmidt hammer hardness, Shore scleroscope hardness, and mean grain size) were used to find out the sawability of large diameter circular saws in the metamorphic and sedimentary natural stones. The simple, multiple linear and non-linear regression models were developed for estimation of the areal slab production rate of the large diameter circular saws. First, simple regression analyses were performed to find out the best relationships between the dependent variable (areal slab production rate) and each independent variable (physico-mechanical properties) in three different groups of natural stones as metamorphic, sedimentary, and metamorphic/sedimentary (combined). Second, multiple linear and non-linear regression analyses were carried out using selected independent variables. Then, the significances of these models were statistically validated. The models developed in this study could be used by planners and natural stone producing companies for cost prognosis and sawing operation schedule in the metamorphic and sedimentary stones.Natural stones have been used worldwide as construction and decorative materials. The classification of the natural stones is the first step towards proper selection of the saw tools and equipment. Two different methods might be used to classify the natural stones. The first one is based on the implementation fundamentals such as strength properties, hardness, porosity, color, and durability. The second one is based on the geological origin which are igneous rocks, sedimentary rocks, and metamorphic rocks. In recent years, the demand for natural stones has highly increased due to consistently developing technologies and rapidly spreading innovative design ideas. The large diameter circular saws (LDCS) are one of the most common types of machines used in the stone processing plants to cut slabs into different sizes. LDCS offer the most effective way to produce slabs with smooth surfaces which do not need any extra work for shaping. In addition, a single person can operate the machinery. All of these features make the LDCS very cost effective compared to other sawing machines commonly used in natural stone processing plants. However, these machines have their limitations and disadvantages in some cases which are generally related to the geotechnical properties of the natural stones. These machines are used for production of large blocks and slabs in nonabrasive to extremely abrasive and soft to hard strength natural stones. Proper selection and accurate performance estimation of LDCS are two main parameters that affect the cost estimation and planning of the plants. These two parameters generally depend on the physico-mechanical properties of the stones, specifications and design of the machine, and the operational conditions. Sawability and areal slab production rate (ASPR) are the most investigated parameters in the literature. Norling However, to the knowledge of the present authors, in the existing literature, there are few models for performance estimation of LDCS that included the metamorphic and sedimentary natural stones together. Generally, the suggested models were obtained for specific types of natural stones such as carbonate rocks or marbles. In addition, only Guney Considering these facts, in this study, it was attempted to develop simple linear, multiple linear and nonlinear regression based models to estimate the ASPR of the LDCS in metamorphic, sedimentary, and metamorphic/sedimentary (combined data of metamorphic and sedimentary stones) rocks. The input parameters of these empirical equations are uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, Schmidt hammer hardness, Shore scleroscope hardness, Cerchar abrasivity index, density, and mean grain size. In the statistical analysis, as a first step, the simple regression analysis was performed to find the best relationship between one physical or mechanical property and ASPR. In the second step, the stepwise regression procedure is applied to the physico-mechanical properties of the natural stones and ASPR of LDCS. The analysis of variance table is investigated for testing the significance of regression in the multiple regressions. Finally, the alternative models were suggested to estimate the areal slab production rate of the large diameter circular saws for the metamorphic, sedimentary, and combined metamorphic/sedimentary natural stones. As briefly stated in the previous section, there are many performance estimation models used to estimate sawability of the large diameter circular saws (LDCS). These models are based on the physico-mechanical properties of natural stones, field and machine parameters. As seen in Data for LDCS performance investigation have been obtained from different natural stone plants. The field performance of the machines and the geological/geotechnical parameters were compiled in two different databases. In the last database, main physico-mechanical properties of the natural stones were separated in two categories based on their geological origin as metamorphic and sedimentary stones. Following twenty-five different natural stone samples (metamorphic and sedimentary) were collected from different natural stone processing plants in Turkey: Afyon tiger skin marble (ATSM), Afyon white marble (AWM), Manyas white marble (MNWM), Marmara white marble (MRWM), Milas white marble (MLWM), Karahalli white marble (KRWM), Karahalli grey marble (KRGM), Mustafa Kemal Pasa white marble (MKPWM), Sivasli purple marble (SPM), Mugla Milas white marble (MMWM), Afyon sugar marble (ASM), Milas light white marble (MLLWM), Marmara dark grey marble (MDGM), Denizli pink marble (DPM), Kavaklidere white marble (KVWM), Usak white marble (UWM), Karacabey black limestone (KBL), Eskisehir supreme limestone (ESL), Antalya limestone (AL), Burdur beige (BB), Sogut beige (SB), Korkuteli beige (KB), Bucak white travertine (BWT), Kaklik travertine (KT), and Denizli yellow travertine (DYT). Physico-mechanical property tests including density, uniaxial compressive strength; Brazilian tensile strength, Schmidt hammer hardness, and Shore scleroscope hardness were performed according to the ISRM Summary of the physico-mechanical properties of the natural stone samples are listed in the The areal slab production rate (ASPR) of large diameter circular saws (LDCS) were measured in different natural stone processing plants in Turkey. The stone blocks were cut by circular saws in a given depth of cut (30 The results of the performance of LDCS for metamorphic and sedimentary rocks are summarized in In this study, statistical analysis is performed with simple regression, multiple linear and non-linear regression models for sedimentary, metamorphic, and sedimentary/metamorphic (combined data) natural stones. This analysis mathematically presents the causal relation between the outcome and predictor variables and is called “regression analysis”. In addition, the method that determines the degree and strength of the relationship between variables is called “correlation analysis”. Before starting the statistical analysis, it is important to know whether probability distributions of the variables are normal or not. Normal distribution has an advantage that different statistical tests can be derived for normal distributions. In statistics, simple regression has been used to find a linear or non-linear function between dependent variable (response or outcome) and independent variable (predictor or explanatory). This method is the simplest way to find best-fitting line between variables. The best fitting line is called as regression line. In this paper, simple regression analysis is performed to find relationships between   However, when the analysis is carried out in all natural stone samples (combined data of metamorphic and sedimentary stones); However, as stated in Multiple linear regression is one of the most used form of statistical analysis in the all research fields. This analysis is used to find relationship between one dependent variable (endogenous, prognostic or regressand) from two or more independent variables (exogenous, predictor or regressors). The following equation shows a typical multiple linear regression model with three predictor variables, The multiple linear regression analysis is carried out using Statgraphics Centurion XVII software. After these two steps, the coefficients of determination ( Multiple non-linear regression is another form of statistical analysis that is used to find non-linear relationship between dependent and set of independent variables. A typical multiple non-linear regression model is: As seen in As seen in It is believed that the range of input parameters is one of the unique aspect of this study which can give more reliable models for sawability estimation of Proper selection and performance estimation of the large diameter circular saws are important factors to improve the efficiency of cutting and decrease the costs in natural stone plants. Some design and performance parameters of the large diameter circular saws are saw diameter, power of machine, peripheral speed, cutting depth, tool consumption, and machines’ characteristics. The physico-mechanical properties of natural stones and the geological conditions are the other important parameters in the selection of these saws. Furthermore, the experience of the operator is another operational parameter in the performance estimation of these saws. However, sawability of large diameter circular saws is an essential parameter that affects the cost and schedule in the natural stone processing plants. In addition, by knowing this parameter, factories will be able to respond to the demand of the market by selecting the proper circular saws. It is possible to find many proposed models for estimation of areal slab production rate of large diameter circular saws in natural stones. However, the most proposed models are valid in specific natural stones including carbonate rocks or/and marbles. This study aimed to fill a gap in the literature by suggesting new sawability estimation models that include metamorphic and sedimentary natural stones together. Sixteen different metamorphic natural stones and nine various sedimentary natural stones were selected from different natural stone processing plants in Turkey to find out the main physico-mechanical parameters. These parameters are density, uniaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, Cerchar abrasivity index, Schmidt hammer hardness, Shore hardness, and mean grain size. It is important to note that one of the unique aspects of this study is the range of these parameters, which assists planner and project owner to use a reliable and extensive performance estimation model for large diameter circular saws. The second unique aspect of this study is the use of mean grain size parameter for developing performance estimation models. This parameter is important in the determination of material strength. Despite this, there are few studies in the literature investigating the effect of grain size on the performance of large diameter circular saws. At the same time, the performance of large diameter circular saws were recorded in the field to find the correlation of areal slab production rate with the physico-mechanical properties of the natural stones. However, there could be a general approach towards the sawing performance, which is a combination of a number of controllable and uncontrollable factors. In this respect, the diamond particle and the matrix structure are ignored as secondary factors; thus, only the physico-mechanical properties of natural stones are selected as independent variables to find out the relationship between areal slab production rates as the dependent variables. The data obtained in this study are evaluated with simple, multiple linear and non-linear regression analysis that are the most commonly used statistical methods. The obtained results from simple regression analysis are summarized as follows: in the metamorphic natural stones, the areal slab production rate shows moderately good relationship with the uniaxial compressive strength and the mean grain size with Thirteen models are suggested based on multiple linear and non-linear regression analyses. The density parameter is considered for selecting the best models from the developed models in this study. The main reason for this precaution is the wide range of this parameter, although it has a narrow range in the metamorphic natural stones. Among these models, three linear and three non-linear models are selected as the best models for estimation of the areal slab production rate of large diameter circular saws in metamorphic and sedimentary natural stones. In addition, in all of these models, the confidence level is 95%. Results from multiple regression analysis to estimate the areal slab production rate of the large diameter circular saws are summarized as follows: The best multiple linear model is a function of the uniaxial compressive strength and the mean grain size in the metamorphic natural stones ( Finally, it is important to note that the proposed models in this study are empirical models and need to be validated by other researchers in other types of metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. The models could be improved by adding the some important machine parameters such as peripheral speed, cutting depth, tool consumption, diamond particle size and matrix structure. However, it is believed that the suggested models cover twenty-five samples (sixteen metamorphic samples and nine sedimentary samples) having a comprehensive range. Due to this advantage, the proposed models may be used for estimation of the areal slab production rate of the large diameter circular saws. This paper is a part of the MSc thesis of Kamil Cegiz Cevim and BSc thesis of Gencay Kiymaz, which these two thesis supervised by the first author. The authors would like to thank to natural stone processing companies for their contributions and help in this study.