Metals and metalloids produce dramatic effects on health, and most conventional treatments for metals and metalloids present restrictions or are economically prohibitive. TiO2-heterogeneous photocatalysis is a convenient technology for the transformation of metals or metalloids in water, converting the pollutant into a less toxic soluble species. In this article, last advances on TiO2-photocatalytic removal of toxic metal and metalloid ionic species from water, particularly chromium, uranium and arsenic, are briefly reviewed. Emphasis on the mechanisms is done, considering three types, all of them taking place through successive thermodynamically allowed monoelectronic electron transfer steps: (a) direct reduction by photogenerated electrons; (b) indirect reduction by intermediates generated by hole or hydroxyl radical oxidation of electron donors (reducing radicals); (c) oxidative removal by holes or hydroxyl radicals. The fundamental studies point out advantages for a successful application of the technology, indicating that more research should be done towards the transfer to industrial applications.Metals and metalloids are ubiquitous on earth, present in soils and natural waters. Many tons of these chemical species originate yearly from anthropic activities (hydrometallurgy, metallization of surfaces, photography, washing and rising). Their presence in water produces dramatic effects on health, very significant economic losses, and perturbation of ecological and geological equilibrium because they are not easily transformed and have infinite lifetimes. Nowadays, the annual total toxicity of metals and metalloids overcomes the total toxicity of anthropogenically generated organic and radioactive wastes Chromium is amply used in metallurgy, pigments, catalysts, textile and leather tanning industries, electroplating processes and wood preservation, among other applications Uranium consists mainly of three isotopes, Groundwater arsenic contamination is a global problem with high impact in poor regions of Latin America, Southeast Asia, USA, and Europe Conventional treatments for Cr, U and As removal from waters rely generally on adsorption, reverse osmosis, ion exchange, electrodialysis, ultrafiltration; other technologies are based on a change of the oxidation state, e.g., Cr(VI) to Cr(III), U(VI) to U(IV), or As(III) to As(V) The use of heterogeneous photocatalysis with TiO In this process, the semiconductor is excited by absorption of photons of energy equal or higher than the bandgap ( Although TiO A An An Relevant and last reports on chromium, uranium, and arsenic will be shortly reviewed in this article. The reader can find the earlier information in Refs.  Cr(V), Cr(IV) and Cr(III) are produced by successive one-electron reactions either directly by e The role of dissolved oxygen is a peculiar feature of the photocatalytic reduction of Cr(VI), as no influence was found  Direct reduction to U(V) by e The presence of O Photocatalytic treatment of both As(V) and of As(III) with TiO Reductive As photocatalysis has been less reported. The direct reduction of As(V) to As(IV) by e Heterogeneous photocatalysis is a valuable technology for removal of toxic metals and metalloids, which does not require expensive reagents or equipment and can transform the pollutants into less toxic soluble species or deposited solids over the semiconductor. Three types of mechanisms involving successive monoelectronic transfer steps can be postulated: (a) direct reduction by photogenerated electrons; (b) indirect reduction by reducing radicals coming from oxidation of electron donors; (c) oxidative removal by h The Cr(VI) photocatalytic system has been extensively studied at laboratory scale. Cr(V) and Cr(IV) are formed as intermediates, with Cr(III) as the final product. The Cr(VI) photocatalytic reduction is unique because it is not inhibited by O The reductive photocatalytic treatment of uranyl has been scarcely explored, but the mechanism is rather well understood, requiring the presence of donors and the absence of O Plenty of successful scientific work support heterogeneous photocatalysis as a technology with great potential for As removal. The removal mechanism can be tuned to achieve solid phases as As(0) (reductive route) or As(V) species (oxidative route). Although the fundamental studies indicate advantages for a successful application of the technology, reports regarding the scale-up of the process are still scarce and merit to be improved towards the transfer to industrial applications. This work was supported by Agencia Nacional de Promoción Científica y Tecnológica from Argentina (ANPCyT) PICT-2011-0463 and 2015-0208 grants.