REE slag was obtained from reduction smelting of magnetite ore containing monazite. Using the REE slag, the leaching kinetics of lanthanum from the slag was studied under the conditions of slurry density of 1.5g slag per L of 0.3M H2SO4, agitation of 750rpm and temperature ranging from 30 to 80°C. After five hours of leaching, the lanthanum was completely leached from the slag. Leaching kinetics can be described by the shrinking core model for spherical particles of unchanging size and leaching was found to occur in two stages. The initial leaching rate was controlled by chemical reaction. Using the Arrhenius equation, the apparent activation energy of the chemical reaction rate controlling step was determined to be 10.0kJmol−1. As leaching of the lanthanum increased, the reaction rate was controlled by diffusion through an ash layer. The apparent activation energy of the second stage was determined to be 24.8kJmol−1. The leaching rate and extent of leaching of lanthanum from the slag increased with an increase in leaching temperature.Lanthanides from lanthanum to lutetium, yttrium and scandium are called rare earth elements (REEs) due to their low concentration in the earth's crust. Lanthanides have similar chemical properties, such as 4f orbital outer-shell electrons, and high chemical activity. On the basis of these chemical properties, they are mainly used as magnetic, catalytic, electronic and optical materials ( Demand for REE has been rapidly increasing recently due to the sharp growth in information technology, such as smart phones, PCs, tablet PCs and other electronic applications. Furthermore, the lanthanides are being used not only in the electronics industry but also in medical applications. The luminescent properties of lanthanides have been utilized in medical diagnosis. A variety of luminescent bioassays and sensors have been developed to take advantage of the unique luminescent properties and relatively long-lived emission of these REE elements. Thus, new applications of lanthanide will continually be enlarged in the near future ( The demand for REEs has been rapidly increasing and China, the leader of the world market, has been tightening restrictions on exports of REE concentrates. Therefore, countries without REEs have to develop the new raw material resources such as urban mines and low-grade REE sources. Generally, pyrometallurgy has been widely used in the treatment process of conventional high-grade ores to date, but the method is gradually losing its competitiveness in the treatment of low-grade ores due to the difficulty of treating small amounts, high energy consumption, many environmental pollutants and additional burdens on environmental treatment expense. Meanwhile, hydrometallurgy is an effective technology for the leaching of rare earths from low-grade metal resources due to selective leaching by appropriate solvents, low process cost and relatively low pollutant generation ( The purpose of this work is to combine pyrometallurgy and hydrometallurgy to recover REE component from slag ( The REE slag was first treated by pyrometallurgy for the concentration of REE components with further hydrometallurgical processing to recover REEs. The raw material was magnetite ore containing monazite and collected from Hongcheongun in Korea. The ore contained 3% REEs, which was concentrated to 9% REEs in the slag after recovery of iron by smelting as follows: 20 The leaching experiment was carried out under the following conditions: the low slurry density of 1.5 If metals exist in forms of metal oxides, the stoichiometric concentration of sulfuric acid (Merck, 98%) required to be converted into sulfate forms is about 0.018 La The REE slag was digested and the digested liquor was analyzed by ICP-MS and the result was presented in The metal composition of REE slag was analyzed using ICP-MS (Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer, X-series(X5), Thermo Elemental, UK) under the condition of 1300 The lanthanum ion concentration was analyzed by ICP-AES (Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometer Leaching of the slag was analyzed using the shrinking core model for spherical particles of constant size ( During the chemical reaction, the lanthanum oxide on the surface of the REE slag is first leached out. Then the unreacted ash layer remaining after the initial chemical reaction becomes thicker and acts as a resistance for the H  As shown in the SEM photographs of On the basis of the amount of lanthanum oxide contained in the REE slag, the concentration of H The rate equation can be summarized as in Eq. To examine the effect of reaction temperatures, the apparent activation energy was calculated from the rate constants as shown in After the rapid chemical reaction amount of La oxide on the slag surface becomes insignificant, finally, only the ash layers remain on the surface after the leaching. The unreacted ash layers act as resistances for H The rate equation can be summarized as in Eq. To examine the effect of reaction temperatures, the apparent activation energy was calculated from rate constants according to the temperatures as shown in It was found that the leaching of lanthanum oxide from REE slag in the sulfuric acid proceeded in two stages according to the shrinking core model: chemical reaction and diffusion through ash layer were determined as the leaching rate determining stage. Lanthanum oxide was easily converted into the La In the initial chemical reaction control stage, leaching kinetics follows a shrinking sphere model with chemical reaction as the first rate-controlling step. The initial chemical reaction was rapidly completed in 20 Irrespective of the initial rapid chemical reaction, the diffusion reaction rate slowly proceeded because the ash layer acted as a resistance to block the penetration of sulfuric acid. In the second diffusion stage, the apparent activation energy was determined by 24.8  apparent activation energy for chemical reaction stage (kJ apparent activation energy for diffusion stage (kJ apparent rate constant for chemical reaction stage (s apparent rate constant for diffusion stage (s fraction of converted lanthanum in REE slag The research was supported by the Basic Research Project of