A laboratory test following a field experiment was conducted to investigate the performance of stress wavelets as a tool for soil structure quantification. Based on the test, comprehensive calculations of indices were performed, including per fragment surface contacting energy, fragment fractal dimensions and specific fragmentation energies. Fragment fractal dimensions were 2.46 for autumn-tilled soil and 1.86 for spring-tilled, showing the improvement of soil structure from winter process, mainly from statistical point. Specific fragmentation energy ranged from 78.72 to 1135.44J/kg, depending both on the way of field treatment and initial size ranges of soil been fragmented. Compared with these, stress wavelets analysis was capable of distinguishing, specifically from mechanical points, differences between autumn-tilled and spring-tilled soils.
                  Results shown that fractal dimensions provided information on soil fragment size distributions, bearing no significance on soil mechanical properties. Stress wavelets, on the other hand, permitted calculations of specific fragmentation energy and per fragment surface contacting energy, which had a uniquely straight-forward connection with soil mechanical properties. The low per fragment contacting energies possessed by autumn-tilled soil, as compared with spring-tilled soil, indicated that winter process reduced soil contacting energies significantly. But a negative value of per fragment contacting energy for autumn-tilled soil was un-interpretable. The combination of stress wavelets and fractals may serve as a fundamental quantitative index for modeling soil structures in its thorough dimensions. The difference between autumn-tilled and spring-tilled soils also indicated that tillage alone should not be taken as a sole way for the improvement of soil qualities.A desirable soil structural state should possess two properties: statistically well distributed aggregates in size (particle-size distribution or PSD) and a favorable physical state of individual aggregates. Modeling of soil PSDs has been extensively carried out in the last few decades, as it was regarded as one key indices of soil structure, which was closely related to soil functional properties. The objective of modeling PSD was both for fundamental pedological characterization of soil and an estimation of bulk soil properties, such as water retention and hydraulic conductivity ( The benefits for investigating the relationship between soil PSD and soil physical properties were enormous: it saved researchers from the expensive and time-consuming laboratory or field measurements ( Fractal analysis has been proved to be a powerful tool for this purpose, as reviewed by Compared with soil PSDs, modeling of the physical state of individual soil aggregates has been investigated less systematically, mainly due to the lack of proper experimental procedures and theories. A simple field experiment was conducted in Pancheng, Nanjing (31°14′32″N, 118°22′119″E), Jiangsu Province, China. It was a typical monsoon climate in the inferior torrid zone, with average annual precipitation of 1100 The experiment was focused on the rice/fallow farming rotations. Considering the varied farming practices from family to family, with some farmers performing soil tillage right after the rice harvest in autumn, while others preferring spring-till before rice planting, a controlled experiment was thus designed to compare whether the two tillage practices result into varied soil structures. The field was split into 2 On May 22, 2005, the tilled-layer soils were randomly sampled with a sampling spade. A total of 9569 In July 11, 2005, laboratory tests were conducted, including the calculation of soil fragment fractal dimensions and soil multi-scale multi-resolution analysis by stress wavelets method. As the aim was focused on soil physical properties, soil chemical analysis (such as organic matter) was ignored. Before fragmentation of soil for stress wavelets analysis, soil fragment fractal dimensions were calculated. The calculation began with dry sieving, by passing soil samples through a series of sieves with openings of 32, 16, 8, 4, 2, 1, 0.5 and 0.25 Soil fragment fractal dimensions were calculated from Eq. Multi-scale and multi-resolution assessment was performed following the procedure as described by The sieving procedure of the two whole samples from the respective autumn-tilled and spring-tilled fields resulted into mass and number distributions of fragments, which were listed in A higher Each of the four individual sub-samples went through the same fragmentation process as mentioned above. As for sample aut1, it took 57 times of impact with a mean displacement of 10.6 The total energy, Specific fragmentation energy was a generally used index to quantify soil and rock pulverization. It was not specifically related to stress wavelets, but as it borne basic information for soils under fragmentation, and also straightforward to be derived, calculation of specific fragmentation energy was performed before stress wavelets analysis. Specific fragmentation energy in each pulverization stage was calculated by dividing the total energy consumed with total mass of soil been fragmented. Results shown that, in each size classes, spring-tilled soil had a higher specific fragmentation energy than autumn-tilled. Specific fragmentation energies varied from the lowest 94.57 and 78.72 Specific fragmentation energies increased as pulverization proceeded, but not linearly. The spring-tilled soil consumed more energy for pulverization as compared with autumn-tilled soil, indicating that winter process significantly reduced soil surface contacting energy, or soil strength. Also, the data peers of specific fragmentation energies on all levels of autumn-tilled soil were more approximated than that of the spring-tilled soil, tending to indicate that soil homogenization has taken place during winter period. One important aspect of specific fragmentation energy was its use in assessing tillage tool performances. Operational efficiency of a tillage tool was expressed in a ratio of the increased surface area to the energy supplied to the soil ( A key characteristic of specific fragmentation energy is that it is both related to the initial size class of soil from which it is to be fragmented and to the finer size classes by which pulverization of soil stops. With a known number of initial soil clods and total energy consumed by a fragmentation process, energy demand by a single soil clod is deducible. But, how this energy demand is distributed to the resultant finer soil fragments, which generally fall into a spectrum of size distribution, is hard to be clarified and still remains as an interest for soil scientists. Therefore, a more significant effort is to quantitatively relate pulverized soil fragment-size distribution to fragmentation energy consumption.  Solving the equation gives: Gs for aut2, spr1 and spr2 are: The As a comparison, fragmentation fractal dimensions were also calculated from the first stage fragmentation of the four sub-samples. Similar with soil fragment fractal dimensions, fragmentation fractal dimensions were also derived from Eq. Again, the fragmentation fractal dimensions were calculated from the slope of the log–log plot between specific cumulative numbers and size classes. The relations between specific cumulative numbers and size classes were shown in Fragmentation fractal dimensions of aut1, aut2, spr1 and spr2 were 1.98, 1.79, 1.55 and 1.63, respectively, indicating that dimensions of autumn-tilled soil were larger than that of spring-tilled soil. Whereas, when compared, this difference was not so significant as fragment fractal dimensions between the two soils. Therefore, fragment fractal dimension was still a preferred index for quantifying soil's PSDs than fragmentation fractal dimension. Specific surface contacting energy was another index which was useful in soil physics. It was a division of specific fragmentation energy by the external surface area of soil fragments. The external surface area generated by crushing was approximated as follows ( From a general assumption, for homogeneous soils, specific fragment surface contacting energy in each size class should possess the same value. But this did not hold true for the experiment. Specific fragment surface contacting energy, Most of the fragment and fragmentation-related indices possibly used for soil physical state modeling were evaluated. These indices under consideration fall into two broad categories: soil statistical indices and soil mechanical indices. Soil fragment fractal dimension and fragmentation fractal dimension were related to soil statistical properties, while the rest were related to soil mechanical properties. Among these, fragment fractal dimension and per fragment fragmentation energy were primary indices which were directly derived from raw data, while the others were secondary indices further derived from primary ones. A complete description of soil structural state may be quantified by two primary indices: fragment fractal dimension and per fragment energy consumption. The two primary indices were not necessarily related to each other due to the fact that they focus on different properties of soil structure: one is statistical and the other is mechanical. Compared with secondary indices, primary indices were more sensitive and straightforward to be derived, which led to a suggestion that the combinative use of the two indices may provide a thorough picture for soil structural properties. Both stress wavelets and fractals revealed an improvement on soil structure from winter process: the former indicated an upgrading of soil clods’ mechanical behaviors, and the later showed an improvement on soil particle distributions. The two indices worked as two lens with different properties: stress wavelets for individual soil clod and focus on mechanical properties, while the fractals for the collective of soil clods and focus on statistical properties. The improving aspects confirmed by these two lens indicated that soil tillage alone should not be considered as a sole effective way for the improvement of seed bed conditions, and hence, where it is possible, integrating weather factors into soil management is to be considered. The authors were grateful for the financial aid from Nanjing Agricultural University Research Foundation, contract no. KJ04023. The laborious laboratory works by Ying, W., Cuicui, Y., Fangjun, Z., Qingyu, L., Lian, Z., Daojuan, Y. and Xiaoxian, J., team members of SRT Program of Nanjing Agricultural University, were also acknowledged, with contract no. 0515A18.