Separation efficiency reaches a maximum dependent upon the level of flocculant solution–substrate mixing for a fixed flocculant dose. At low levels of mixing poor separation is due to poor distribution of the flocculant molecules. At high levels of mixing floc attrition occurs which reduces the separation efficiency. On either side of this maximum conditions leading to similar sedimentation rates can be identified. At these similar sedimentation rates lower sediment volume and supernatant turbidity are obtained with flocs which have undergone a degree of breakage.
                  The unique molecular architecture (UMA®) type of flocculant was found to be superior to a standard flocculant at several levels of mixing. This superior performance was explained by relative ease of distribution of flocculant molecules in the suspension and by greater floc strength. However, differences in floc density did not explain performance differences.
                  Evidence for the concept of “undermixing” is presented, which can explain poor solid–liquid separation performance which otherwise could appear to be explained by flocculant overdosing.The use of water soluble high molecular weight polymeric flocculants to aid solid–liquid separation for mineral processing separations is well known. The widely accepted theory for the beneficial effect of such polymers is one of inter-particle bridging which leads to an increase in the effective particle diameter, which in turn leads to an increase in the rate of solid–liquid separation. The following reaction scheme for polymer flocculation has been proposed by The onset of flocculation is not instantaneous after the addition of flocculant solution. Solutions of high molecular weight flocculants are viscous at typical operational concentrations and this can lead to a distinct period of time for thorough distribution through the suspension ( A new flocculant type (referred to as having unique molecular architecture, UMA Flocculants (Ciba Specialty Chemicals, UK) are supplied as powders. Representative 0.5 g portions of the powder were placed in a glass jar, 5 cm SPS china clay (Imerys Minerals Ltd, UK) was mixed with tap water such that a suspension of 4% (w/v) was formed. Sodium chloride was added to the suspension at a level of 2 g/dm Flocculation tests were conducted by taking 500 cm The sedimentation rate of the flocculated suspension was determined by recording the time taken for the ‘mud line’ (solid–liquid interface) in the 500 cm The flocculated suspension was allowed to stand, quiescently, for a period of 10 min and the sediment volume was recorded. Also after 10 min a sample of the supernatant liquid was removed and its turbidity measured, using a HACH 2010 (at 860 nm). Image analysis was conducted using a method described previously (  A comparison of the relative flocculation performance of standard flocculant and UMA From  Flocs generated at other flocculation conditions which result in similar sedimentation rates to each other were studied by image analysis.  From For the standard flocculant (see Alternatively, because we know that at greater levels of mixing at 5 mg/l the sedimentation rate increases (see Solid–liquid separation efficiency, aided by polymeric flocculants, is dependent upon the level of flocculant solution–substrate mixing. If the mixing is insufficient poor separation is seen due to poor flocculant distribution. At higher levels of mixing a maximum in separation efficiency is obtained deteriorating upon further mixing, due to floc break up. For equal sedimentation rates the most desirable sediment volumes and supernatant clarity are obtained with flocs which have undergone attrition. The UMA At operational dosing levels evidence for the concept of undermixing to explain apparent flocculant overdosing is presented.