The effect of additions of 0.5–1wt% Al on grain refinement, heat treatment and mechanical properties of Mg–10Gd–3Y (wt%) alloy has been investigated. The additions of 0.6–1wt% Al showed a dramatic grain refinement effect, which is associated with the formation of the Al2(Gd0.5Y0.5) particles that act as nucleants for α-Mg grains. Compared to the Zr refined counterpart, the Al refined alloy needed to be solution treated at a higher temperature to dissolve the majority of the intermetallic particles. Subsequent ageing at low temperatures led to pronounced precipitation hardening and consequently a large improvement in strength. In the peak-aged condition, the strength of the Al refined alloy is comparable to that of the Zr refined counterpart.Magnesium alloys are attractive for structural application due to their low density, high specific strength and good machinability. Among various Mg alloys is a family in which rare earths (RE) are the main alloying elements. The benefits of alloying with REs in improving the mechanical properties of Mg alloys are well known Grain refinement generally leads to a uniform distribution of second phases, improves the castability Recent research In the present work, the effect of Al addition on grain refinement of a Mg–10Gd–3Y alloy was investigated. The orientation relationships (ORs) between nucleant particles and α-Mg were identified. The solution treatment, ageing characteristics and mechanical properties of the grain-refined alloy were also studied. The Mg–10Gd–3Y alloy was made from pure Mg, Mg–90% Gd and Mg–30% Y master alloys in an electric furnace under the protection of mixed protective gas consisting of CO Samples cut from the cast ingots were solution treated at 500–550 Samples for optical microscopy (OM) observation were polished and then etched in an acetic-picric solution (10 Samples for transmission electron microscopy (TEM) were sliced into sheets 0.4-mm thick. Discs 3   In order to identify the crystal structure of the polygonal particles and the ORs between these particles and α-Mg to reveal whether these particles are active nucleants The pole figures (  For comparison, optical micrographs of the Mg–10Gd–3Y–0.4Zr alloy refined by Zr are shown in  The remarkable improvement in hardness of Mg–Gd–Y based alloys after ageing treatment has been reported to be associated with a uniform, high density distribution of precipitates  To investigate whether the Al addition is as effective as Zr addition in improving the mechanical properties of Mg–10Gd–3Y alloy, tensile properties of the Mg–10Gd–3Y–0.8Al and Mg–10Gd–3Y–0.4Zr alloys in different conditions are shown in In the Mg–Gd–Y(–Zr) alloys After peak-ageing at 200 The YS of the Mg–10Gd–3Y–0.8Al alloy solution treated in the T4a condition (520 Based on the microstructural analysis and previous report After solution treatment in a modified condition, i.e. T4A (520 After solution treatment in the same condition (T4A), both the hardness and YS decrease with the increase in ageing temperature (  The Mg–10Gd–3Y alloy is dramatically refined by 0.6–1% Al additions. The Al additions lead to the formation of Al The Al refined alloy needs to be solution treated at higher temperatures (520 Fine β′ particles precipitate in the peak-aged Mg–10Gd–3Y–0.8Al alloy, leading to strong age hardening and a large increase in strength. The strength of the 200 The work is sponsored by the