The vitrification of an hazardous iron-rich waste (W), arising from slag flotation of copper production, was studied. Two glasses, containing 30wt% W were melted for 30min at 1400°C. The first batch, labeled WSZ, was obtained by mixing W, blast furnace slag (S) and zeolite tuff (Z), whereas the second, labeled WG, was prepared by mixing W, glass cullet (G), sand and limestone. The glass frits showed high chemical durability, measured by the TCLP test.
                  The crystallization of the glasses was evaluated by DTA. The crystal phases formed were identified by XRD resulting to be pyroxene and wollastonite solid solutions, magnetite and hematite. The morphology of the glass–ceramics was observed by optical and scanning electron microscopy. WSZ composition showed a high rate of bulk crystallization and resulted to be suitable for producing glass–ceramics by a short crystallization heat-treatment. WG composition showed a low crystallization rate and good sinterability; glass–ceramics were obtained by sinter-crystallization of the glass frit.Iron-rich glass compositions are industrially produced by re-fused rocks (petrurgy). The development of these materials started after the First World War and today they are considered as a precursor of glass–ceramics Due to the high chemical durability of the natural basalts, iron-rich glass and glass–ceramic materials with basalt-like compositions were developed for nuclear waste disposal The iron in the glass structure is present in both Fe The iron-rich glass–ceramics can also be obtained by the sinter-crystallization technology, which gives the possibility to obtain materials with complicated shapes and good mechanical properties In this work, the vitrification of an hazardous waste arising from the flotation of copper ores and containing about 70 Copper is produced by concentrating low-grade ores containing copper sulfide minerals, followed by smelting and electrolytic refining to produce pure copper cathode. The slag, after grinding and flotation, is returned to reverberatory furnaces to recover the remaining copper. In the present work, the flotation waste from the Samsun Flash Smelting Plant (Turkey) was used. The plant produces about 40,000 metric tonnes of blister copper and about 150,000 metric tonnes of flotation waste per year. The blast furnace slag is an inert waste, widely used as raw material in different silicates industries (cement, glass and glass–ceramics production). Depending on the cooling techniques, foamed, pelletized or granulated blast furnace slag are obtained. In the last case, the molten slag is quenched in water, leading to the formation of frit-like particles with 1–5 Zeolite tuff is widely present in the tertiary sediments of the Çnkırı-Çorum Basin in Turkey. The material is widely used as aggregates and ornamental stone in the building industry. The zeolite tuff deposit is located at 80 The glass cullet is a typical additive for the synthesis of glass and glass–ceramics from industrial wastes. Its addition decreases the melting temperature and reduces the melting time. In present study non-colored clean container glass, crushed bellow 2 The chemical and the mineralogical compositions of the waste and raw materials were evaluated by XRF (Spectro-Xepos) and XRD (Philips PW1830 and Cu Kα radiation) analyses, respectively. The thermal behavior was studied by DTA–TG analysis (Netzsch STA 409). Two different batches of 200 The chemical durability of the flotation waste and obtained glasses were estimated by the toxicity characterization leaching procedure (TCLP). The dried waste and glass frit (with 0.1–5 The crystallization behavior of the glasses was evaluated by DTA using 100–110 The crystalline morphology of the glass–ceramic samples was studied by optical and scanning electron microscopes, after polishing the surface followed by 8 The chemical compositions are presented in The chemical composition of the flotation waste, W, contains iron oxide and silica, together with ZnO, CuO and PbO. The XRD spectrum shows mainly magnetite (FeO·Fe The chemical composition of the slag, S, is mainly constituted by SiO The composition of the zeolite tuff, Z, is mainly constituted by SiO The glass–ceramics obtained by mixing flotation waste with blast furnace slag would be characterized by a low SiO The batches were heated at 10 The results of the TCLP test, carried out on the flotation waste, WSZ and WG glass frits are summarized in In previous studies with other iron-rich compositions it was demonstrated that the vitrification significantly reduces the leachability of the waste and that the transformation of the glasses in glass–ceramics additionally improves the chemical durability  In previous works it was shown that the surface oxidation reduces the magnetite (FeO·F The predominance of bulk nucleation can be evaluated by the shift of the crystallization peak temperature, Bulk WZS samples (2 The morphology of the parent glass and the final glass–ceramic were observed by SEM. The DTA results of WG glass, shown in Since iron-rich compositions with low crystallization rate are suitable to form sintered glass–ceramics The crystal phases, formed in F and C samples after 30 An aesthetically appealing glass–ceramic was obtained by mixing 60  The mechanical properties of sintered iron-rich glass–ceramics by other hazardous industrial wastes were reported in previous works. Bending strength of 80–120 Two iron-rich glass compositions showing a high chemical durability were obtained by mixing a flotation waste from copper production with blast furnace slag and raw materials. The first glass was characterized by a spontaneous liquid–liquid separation and a high crystallization rate. It was transformed into a glass–ceramic material with 60% crystal phase by 1 The second glass showed a low crystallization rate and good sinterability. By mixing fine and coarse grain fractions followed by sinter-crystallization at 1020 The authors express thanks to Dr. Semra Çoruh for the waste samples and the information about their origin and to Dr. Giuliana Taglieri for the XRD analysis.