The successful operation of a hybrid photocatalysis–membrane separation process (in a laboratory-scale pilot system) is demonstrated for degradation of Humic Acids (HAs), which are typical refractory components of Natural Organic Matter (NOM). The Photocatalytic Membrane Reactor (PMR) employing an Ultrafiltration (UF) submerged module was operated in continuous mode with TiO2 catalyst concentration 0.75g/L and UV-A radiant flux 15.1J/s, treating feed water with HA concentrations 5.0 and 10.0mg/L. Experiments carried out within a sufficiently broad pH range (approx. 3.5–7.0) exhibited satisfactory HA mineralization rates and rather high HA mineralization efficiencies; a near optimum pH at approx. 5.5 was identified. The overall process removal efficiency (comprising both HA oxidation and UF membrane rejection) was even higher, as a result of the synergistic effects of photocatalytic oxidation and membrane filtration. The degradation of HA aromatic rings, that diminishes the Disinfection By-Products (DBPs) formation potential, was also very high; the specific UV-A254 removal efficiency was greater than 95% in almost all cases studied. Concerning membrane filtration performance, the periodic backwashing employed, combined with the moderate membrane flux, effectively controlled membrane fouling thus permitting stable continuous operation with no wastewater stream.Humic substances, a major fraction of Natural Organic Matter (NOM) present in freshwater sources, are a primary target of water treatment processes even though themselves are not considered pollutants Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs) have emerged as an attractive alternative for simultaneous removal and destruction of NOM A promising approach for separation and reuse of suspended TiO The use of a PMR concept for NOM (i.e. Humic Acids – HA) removal from drinking water was apparently first described by Lee et al. An interesting PMR system configuration involves a membrane module submerged in a photoreactor vessel. Fu et al. Taking a step forward, Choo et al. The preceding short review suggests that there is a lack of systematic studies of HA/NOM photocatalytic oxidation in a PMR continuous system. The reported studies refer mainly to PMR operating in batch mode, whereas the continuous mode experiments are not carried out for a sufficiently long time period to allow evaluation of long-term performance of both the filtration and photocatalysis processes. The usually reported overall TOC removal efficiency is a lamp parameter that incorporates three different removal or degradation mechanisms: (a) the photocatalytic oxidation, (b) the adsorption on catalyst particles, and (c) the rejection of the membranes, thus offering little to the basic understanding of reactions, mechanisms, and interacting phenomena that take place in these inherently complicated systems. Furthermore, the lack of broadly accepted experimental protocols and the failure of some researchers to provide detailed information on their experimental and analytical procedures render incomparable the results from different studies, thus impairing progress in this field. Additionally, the frequently used filtration of samples containing TiO In a previous paper In this study, the effectiveness of the aforementioned PMR system is evaluated for degradation of HA at concentration levels commonly encountered in Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) effluents and freshwater sources. The effect of pH on HA mineralization rate and removal efficiency is examined for two HA concentrations. Additionally, the overall PMR removal efficiency is assessed in terms of both TOC concentration and UV Titanium dioxide, (Aeroxide® P25, Degussa-Evonik, Germany) was used as photocatalyst. The TiO In The experimental conditions employed are summarized in The PMR tank was first filled with distilled water and TiO TOC concentration of the feed, the PMR TiO UV For the long time experiments reported here, to cope with the temporal fluctuations of the TOC sample measurements, which are common in continuous mode systems, a novel data processing protocol was developed, based on the total organic carbon mass balance Considering that the organic carbon loss through the aeration process is insignificant, given that HA are characterized as a non-purgeable organic matter, the cumulative rate of loss can be assumed equal to the rate of HA mineralization. Thus, the slope of the Δ The aromatic content of HA has been shown The main experimental results concerning HA mineralization and overall removal are presented in The overall HA removal efficiency, comprising both HA oxidation and UF membrane rejection, is even higher, i.e. between 52.5% and 83.1%; its difference from the HA mineralization efficiency varies between 2.7% (Exp. No. 3) and 24.1% (Exp. No. 4). It should be noted that this difference reaches a minimum near pH 7.0 (Exp. No. 3) and tends to maximum values at acidic conditions (data at pH The backwashing mode employed does not seem to affect the effectiveness of the photocatalytic mineralization process. Indeed, although experiments No. 2 and 7 were carried out under two different backwashing modes (1/9 and 1/15), with otherwise identical operating conditions, the HA estimated mineralization rates were quite close, (i.e. 9.56 and 9.47 The mean feed and permeate SUVA The TMP performance has been continuously monitored to assess the membrane filtration performance. Two typical TMP vs. time diagrams are presented in In order to compare the two different backwashing schemes employed in this study, the same TMP temporal profiles are plotted in In general, inspecting the long term filtration performance of all the 48 To better assess the significance of UV-A irradiation on the overall operation of a PMR system, two different experiments were performed with and without UV-A irradiation (Exp. No. 2 and 8, respectively), but otherwise identical operating conditions. The respective temporal profiles of the suspension and of the permeate TOC concentrations of these experiments are presented in Two conclusions may be drawn from the aforementioned data. First, it is obvious that in the absence of UV-A irradiation and photocatalytic oxidation, HA tend to accumulate in the PMR and the suspension TOC concentration constantly increases; the achievement of a pseudo-steady state condition and therefore the successful long-term operation of the PMR seems impossible. On the contrary, by applying UV-A irradiation, (i.e. Exp. No. 1–7) the system always reaches an apparent steady state, with the TOC concentration in the exhibiting a tendency to stabilize after approx. 6–8 This difference in the fouling behavior, under no UV-A irradiation, can be attributed to the different characteristics of the two organic substances used (HA and sodium alginate) and the prevailing different fouling mechanisms, which are documented in previous publications The new data demonstrate that a hybrid system, combining heterogeneous photocatalysis with suspended TiO The TMP was practically constant over a period of 48 The presented data suggest that the novel hybrid photocatalysis–membrane separation process is capable of efficiently degrading HA in a stable continuous operation mode with no wastewater stream. In view of the promising results obtained in this as well as in a previous study The authors wish to thank Prof. I. Poulios, Dept. of Chemistry, Aristotle Univ. of Thessaloniki, for lending the radiometer employed to measure the UV-A light intensity, as well as Zenon Environmental Inc. and Dr. D.A. Delis SA for donating the hollow fibre membranes and the TiO