In this paper, N-propyl-N-ethoxycarbonyl thiourea (PECTU) collector was investigated to concentrate copper minerals from a refractory copper porphyry ore through bench-scale and industrial flotation tests. The flotation results indicated that PECTU had strongly collecting power for copper sulfide minerals and excellent selectivity against iron sulfide minerals under moderately alkaline conditions. Compared with sodium butyl xanthate (SBX), PECTU increased the grades and recoveries of Cu, Au and Mo in the copper concentrates, and performed the flotation separation of Cu/Fe sulfide minerals at cleaner pH ∼10.5 as well as decreased 2/3 lime consumption. The results of UV–visible measurements further demonstrated that PECTU could be used as a high selective collector for copper minerals. The experimentally obtained results have been explained from the structure–reactivity relationship of collector by density functional calculation.Xanthates are powerful collectors that are commonly used for separating sulfide minerals. However, their selectivity is low without the use of additional reagents. For example, in flotation separation of Cu/Fe sulfide minerals, lime is used to maintain a pH value >10.5. Usually, the pH value is greater than 11.0 and this value can often reach as high as 12.0 or 12.5 ( In order to separate copper sulfide minerals from Cu/Fe bulk concentrates which are commonly obtained by bulk flotation using sodium butyl xanthate (SBX) as a single collector, lime was used to maintain a pH >13 in the Dexing Copper Mine. Compared with xanthates, ethoxycarbonyl thiourea (ECTU) collectors were powerful for chalcopyrite and very selective against pyrite in alkaline and neutral pH conditions ( The test material was a refractory copper porphyry ore from the Dexing Copper Mine of Jiangxi Province in China, and the copper bearing minerals were chalcopyrite, chalcocite, digenite, covellite, tetrahedrite, tennantite, bornite, as well as some oxide copper minerals such as malachite and cuprite. The main iron bearing minerals were pyrite and marcasite. The molybdenum form was molybdenite and the gold forms were native gold and electrum. The significant amounts of non-sulfide gangue minerals were quartz, sericite, chlorite, illite and biotite. The ore was taken from the Xiyuanling deposit of Tongchang ore body at the Dexing Copper Mine, where this deposit is an oxide belt with high oxide and secondary copper minerals. The copper mineral distribution for the bench-scale test samples was presented in Sodium butyl xanthate (SBX) and ammonium dibutyl dithiophosphate (ABDTP) were supplied by the Zhuzhuo Flotation Reagents Limited Company, and The ore (1 After wet grinding, the pH of the pulp slurry was pre-adjusted to any desired value by the addition of 50 For the determination of CuO, secondary CuS or primary CuS content in a sample, a sequential separation program was adopted. A determined sample was leached by the mixture solution of Na The industrial flotation was performed in the Mineral Processing Plant at the Dexing Copper Mine. The experimental system M1 processed 8000 Ultraviolet (UV) spectra were measured with a 756MC spectrometer made by Shanghai Precision and Scientific Instrument Co. Ltd. CuCl All calculations were made using the Gaussian03 ( Under the flotation condition of particle size distribution (65% – 74 Under the flotation condition of rougher pH 8.5 and Na Under the flotation condition of rougher pH 8.5, particle size distribution (65% – 74 Based on the optimized flotation conditions mentioned above, the locked cycle tests of Cu/Fe bulk flotation were carried out. The flotation flowsheet (dash circled) was listed in The effects of cleaner times and cleaner pH values on the copper recoveries and grades in the Cu concentrates were shown in Based on the flotation results mentioned above, the locked cycle tests from Cu/Fe bulk flotation to Cu/Fe flotation separation were performed. The flotation flowsheet and some flotation conditions were listed in Because of the good flotation performance for copper minerals, PECTU was selected as the copper collector in the industrial tests performed in the Mineral Processing Plant at the Dexing Copper Mine. The flotation flowsheet and some flotation conditions were listed in  To investigate the selective interaction of PECTU with cuprous, cupric, ferrous or ferric ions in 0.01  Lime is commonly used as a pH regulator and depressant against iron minerals during the flotation recovery of copper minerals from copper porphyry sulfide ore. It can also depress copper oxide, secondary copper sulfide or gold minerals ( Compared with 60 To investigate the intrinsic characteristics of PECTU as a high specific collector for copper sulfide minerals, the general perturbation theory and density functional theory (DFT) method were selected to study the structure–reactivity relationship of PECTU. The chalcopyrite band gap was 0.6 Under alkaline conditions, the surface oxidation layer of pyrite consisted only of iron(III) oxyhydroxide (probably goethite), and there was no detectable FeS   The chemical reaction between flotation reagents and minerals could be approximated by generalized perturbation theory ( The energy of electrostatic effect is proportional to the net charge at the reactive center of flotation reagent or mineral and contributes a minor part in the total energy value ΔE between sulfide mineral and its collector. For the value of the negative charge of sulfur atom followed as PECTU The energy of normal covalent bond depends on the electron-donating power of reagent and electron-accepting power of mineral. The HOMO eigenvalue of SBX is higher than that of PECTU, which meant the electron-donating power of SBX was stronger than that of PECTU, i.e. SBX could more easily donate its frontier electron to the metal cation on the mineral surfaces to form a normal covalent bond. Therefore, xanthates are generally powerful collectors for copper and iron sulfide minerals, however the selectivity is low without the use of lime to maintain a high alkaline conditions. PECTU had mildly electron-donating power, the energy of normal covalent bond between PECTU and iron sulfide mineral was low enough for improving its selectivity against iron sulfide mineral. The energy of back donation covalent bond is related to electron-back-donating power of mineral and electron-accepting power of reagent. The LUMO eigenvalue of PECTU is lower than that of SBX, which meant the electron-accepting power of PECTU was stronger than that of SBX. The LUMO of SBX is composed by p-orbits of every atom in  The industrial flotation results obtained in the Mineral Processing Plant at the Dexing Copper Mine indicated that PECTU had the strongly collecting power for copper minerals and excellent selectivity against iron sulfide minerals under moderately alkaline conditions. Compared with the 60 The results of structure–reactivity relationship showed that PECTU had moderately electron-donating power, and the energy of normal covalent bond between PECTU and iron sulfide mineral was low enough for improving its selectivity against iron sulfide mineral. However, PECTU had strongly electron-accepting power, was satisfied with accepting the richly paired d-orbital electrons (feedback electrons) from the (t The authors would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 51074183 and 50604016), the Foundation for the Author of National Excellent Doctoral Dissertation of China (Grant No. 2007B52), the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in Chinese University, the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant No. 2007CB613602), the National High-Tech Research and Development Plan of China (Grant No. 2007AA06Z122), and the National Science and Technology Support Project of China (Grant No. 2007BAB22B01) for the financial support of this research.