A wide variety of herbs, rich in specific flavoring compounds, mostly from their aromatic essential oils, are used in industries producing alcoholic drinks. The herbs impart to an alcoholic beverage the characteristic recognized flavor (taste and aroma) and bouquet. These flavoring attributes have traditionally been one of the most significant qualitative factors in the use of alcoholic drinks. In addition, the essential oils from many aromatic herbs, so-called medicinal herbs, have many beneficial effects on metabolism, which are experienced after the controlled use of alcoholic drinks based on such herbs; for example, medicinal wines ( The commercially important alcoholic drinks based on herbs are as follows: beers, aromatized wines (vermouths and medicinal wines), liqueurs (bitter, fruit), and hard liquors (bitters, brandies, flavored distilled spirits, etc.). In the alcoholic drink industry, both wild and cultivated herbs are used; a summary of the herbs used for this purpose, and known all over the world to a greater or lesser degree is presented in Herbs are used in alcoholic drink production either as flavorings, or as both fermentation substrate and flavoring agent. The flavor of a herb is dependent on its volatile and nonvolatile constituents; the former gives to the herb its distinctive odor, and the latter can affect some gustatory reaction sometimes coupled with a physiological effect. Most herbs are used only for flavoring purposes. A base alcohol (beer, spirit, and wine) is combined with one or more herbs, known as the herbal formula, to obtain a special flavor. Herbal formulae usually contain more than one herb. One herb may be a major definitive constituent, while the others are added to develop the overall flavor of an alcoholic drink. For example, juniper berries are always used in gin production, but others, such as coriander seed, angelica root, or caraway seed, play a very important role, also as flavour ingredients, in some gin formulae. In a herbal formula, the selection of ingredients with respect to the major constituent is generally limited, and the proportions of constituents are normally constant and commonly not disclosed by manufacturers. The ‘right’ proportions are achieved through experimentation. The herbs of appropriate quality are used for alcoholic drink production. The selection is largely based on organoleptic assessment. Color, overall appearance, odor, moisture content, quality, and content of essential oil or other specific characteristics are assessed for the purpose of selection and approval of quality of herbs or their parts. Although the specific flavor profile is within acceptable limits, quantitative variations in the flavor characteristics are often observed among different batches of the same herb material or even between different parts of the herb. Because of these variations, the herb material should contain the useful part of the herb, with a minimum content of the other parts of that or other herbs, and be of natural odor, color, and proper overall appearance, without any trace of decay or spoilage. The distinctive odor of the herb should be typical and ‘clean,’ with no trace of mustiness. The acceptable moisture content is usually in the range of 10–20%, mostly 12–14% on a dry-weight basis; it should not be too high, in order to reduce the risk of burning during storage, but too low a moisture content means that the herb material is old. The composition, color, and odor of the essential oil are important factors for the quality of an alcoholic drink, while its content is important for the economic production of the drink. For the flavoring of alcoholic drinks, herbs are commonly used in the following basic ways: By maceration of the herb materials in a base alcohol (spirit, wine, etc.). By codistillation of the herb materials or their essential oils with a suitable high-quality spirit (usually grain or other neutral spirit). By mixing the essences of the herb materials with a spirit or wine. Details of these processes differ among the various manufacturers, who usually do not disclose them. The maceration process is applied in the production of fruit brandies with aromatic herbs (usually with medicinal properties), bitters made with bittering herbs, and aromatized wines. Herbs rich in essential oils are macerated with a spirit containing 70% ethanol by volume, while the herbs rich in tannins are treated with a 50% spirit. The herb material is immersed in the chosen alcoholic base in a tank for a certain period of time and occasionally agitated. The liquid is drawn off, and the exhausted herb material is pressed to recover the residual liquid. The codistillation process is used in the production of hard liquors, such as gin. The herbs are placed in a still and covered with the base spirit of approved quality and alcoholic strength. The materials are charged loosely or held in porous bags in the spirit, or placed in trays above the free surface of the spirit; the latter two methods have the advantage that the exhausted herbs can be easily removed from the still. The third method is commonly used in production of liqueurs and flavored spirits. In a few cases, herbs contain not only specific flavoring compounds, but also a significant content of fermentable sugars (juniper berries, about 15–30%; gentian roots, about 25% on a dry-weight basis) which can be converted by strains of yeast into ethanol in an alcoholic fermentation process. For example, juniper berries can be used for flavoring grain spirits (gin, geneva), fruit spirits (fruit brandies; klekovača, from Yugoslavia), but also in the production of special alcoholic drinks which involves the alcoholic fermentation process, for example, Wacholderlüter (the base for Steinhäger), borovička, or brinjevac. The special flavor of the alcoholic drinks obtained in this way is mainly attributable to the flavoring compounds of the herb. Commonly, the herb materials are first comminuted and mixed with water in a specified ratio; sometimes, mineral salts (ammonium salts, phosphates) are also added. Then a certain amount of bakery or brewer's yeast is added. The fermentation conditions are usually regulated; in the fermentation of juniper berries, the temperature is about 25–30 It is clear that not only the herb materials but also every stage in herb processing and drink preparation affects, at least to some extent, the overall flavor of alcoholic drinks. A delicate balance between what is added and what is lost, transformed, or formed during herb processing and drink preparation is established. In order to retain their specific valuable properties, herbs have to be harvested at the correct time, which is characteristic for every herb. Fresh herbs are perishable to varying degrees and can be stored for only a limited period of time without spoiling. Spoilage and deterioration in quality of herbs are recognized by changes in color, flavor, and overall appearance. With proper handling procedures, spoilage can be prevented, and shelf-life can be significantly extended. Drying is a simple and most common method of preserving herbs; dried herbs can be used all year round. Herbs or their parts should be dried immediately after harvesting to decrease the risk of spoilage and the loss of volatile oils. Dried herbs are also relatively immune to microbial spoilage. Drying a herb or its parts involves removing an amount of water from the herb material by evaporation in the open or in a heated air flow. The principle of drying is the same for all herbs, although specific drying conditions may be required, as can be seen in The oldest method of drying herbs, usually used in the case of wild aromatic herbs, is drying in the open. The herb materials are spread thinly in suitable shady or dark and well-aired places (on the floor, on shelves, in the attic, or in trays). The herb materials should not be turned over too often, to avoid their disintegration. If the herbs are spread too thickly, the danger of burning increases. The duration and efficiency of drying depend on weather conditions. Drying can require a couple of weeks and, if the weather is rainy, the herbs can be spoiled by decay. Dehydration in a heated air stream offers obvious advantages over drying in the open, notably regulated drying conditions, shorter duration of the process (several hours or even minutes), fewer flavor and color changes as well as a decreased danger of spoilage. When cultivated, herbs are normally dried in heated air driers, such as tray, screen-conveyor, or rotary dryers, to insure efficient drying of large quantities of the herb materials at economic capacity. The drying conditions are regulated by the air temperature, relative humidity, and flow rate. With warm air (40–80 Dried herb materials can be ground, crumbled, rubbed, or treated by any other suitable method for further processing, packaging, or storing. There is always a risk of spoiling and the loss of volatile compounds during long-term storage, especially under unfavorable conditions. Generally, herbs, leaves, and flowers are sensitive, while roots and seeds endure prolonged storage quite well. Deterioration in quality is accelerated by moisture, light, oxygen, and elevated temperature. Dried herb materials are best kept in a dark, dry and well-aired room at a low temperature. In many cases, the dried herb materials can be stored satisfactorily in paper, linen, or cotton bags placed in well-closed containers or bins. Properly dried and packed herb materials ( The processing of herb materials is usually carried out using traditional methods, notably hydrodistillation and solvent extraction, the main goal being to recover their essences: essential oils and extracts. These essences are very suitable for direct application in alcoholic drink preparation as they insure higher consistency in quality of the alcoholic drink. In addition, they are more easily stored, with less danger of spoiling during long-term storage, although their flavor properties seldom compare favorably with those of the herb materials from which they were recovered. In the case of essential oils, this distortion is caused by chemical interchanges resulting in artifacts, the evaporation of the low-boiling components, the dissolution of certain water-soluble components in the still liquors, and the degradation of nonvolatile cellular matter during hydrodistillation. For complete isolation of valuable essences, the herb material must be properly prepared by comminution to some extent, which depends on the nature of the herb material. Flowers are usually distilled uncomminuted, leaves are ground, seeds must be thoroughly crushed, while roots and arid stalks should be cut into smaller pieces. For this purpose, standard equipment can be used, e.g., roller mills for crushing seeds, cutters for chopping roots, and similar comminuting machines. When comminuted, the herb materials should be immediately processed to hinder the loss of volatile flavorings. The essential oils are mainly recovered from the herb materials by hydrodistillation. The herb material is put into a still and heated with direct steam (steam distillation); it can also be immersed in warm water (water distillation) or placed on the perforated plate above the bottom of the still partially filled with water (steam and water distillation), and then heated by any of the usual methods. Water distillation is well suited for finely powdered materials and flowers; water and steam distillation is favorable for herb and leaves; and steam distillation is most successful for seeds and roots. The resulting vapor mixture passes through a condenser, and the condensate is collected in a Florentine flask where the essential oil is separated from the water; this water can be returned to the still or, in some cases, used as fragrant water ( Traditional extraction processes involve the use of high-proof alcohols, and these are widely employed for dried herbs, leaves, and roots. The extracts obtained have the ‘true,’ natural odor of the herbal materials. The methods commonly applied are maceration, percolation, and digestion. The extracts obtained are sometimes concentrated by distilling off the alcohol under vacuum. The products, so-called resinoids, are usually dark, viscous, almost solid, and can be used in the flavoring of alcoholic drinks. Extraction with dense carbon diooxide (CO 