Six full-scale unreinforced masonry (URM) walls were built and tested to studythe post-cracking out-of-plane behavior of walls in the upper two or three stories of URM buildings. The one-way spanning two-leaf (230mm nominal thickness) or three-leaf (350mm nominal thickness) walls had variable heights from 2000mm to 4100mm and were subjected to one-way out-of-plane bending using a system of airbags. Initial testing was performed on each wall with zero overburden load applied, resulting in wall cracking and the development of post-cracking displacements of up to approximately 70% of the wall thickness. Four walls were re-tested in the cracked conditions but with overburden loads applied. It was found that analytical predictions underestimated the wall crack height by 16%, on average, and that the initial uncracked wall strength predictions were within 24% of the experimental measurements. It was also found that the maximum cracked wall resistance was, on average, 83% of the predicted value based upon the mechanics of rigid body rocking. An empirical relationship was proposed to account for the increase in the initial stiffness of the cracked walls due to the applied overburden.crack height ratio wall displacement and wall instability dispalcement (mm) wall displacement and wall instability dispalcement (mm) wall displacement and wall instability dispalcement (mm) masonry modulus of elasticity (MPa) brick compressive strength (MPa) mortar compressive strength (MPa) masonry compressive strength (MPa) masonry bond strength (MPa) predicted (bilinear) maximum wall resistance (kN) cracking force (kN) idealized maximum cracked wall resistance (kN) predicted curvilinear maximum wall resistance (kN) experimental maximum wall resistance (kN) wall clear height (mm) wall gross moment of inertia (mm uncracked and cracked wall initial stiffness (kN/mm) wall length (mm) wall unit mass per area (kg/mm overburden load per mm length of wall (N/mm) theoretical and experimental percentage of maximum wall rigid resistance ratio of measured initial cracked wall stiffness to uncracked analytical stiffness effective thickness (mm); wall nominal thickness (mm) predicted curvilinear maximum wall resistance (N/mm cracking force (N/mm wall weight per mm length (N/mm) theoretical crack height from the wall base (mm) and ratio of applied overburden to the wall weight Experimental research by ABK Laboratory tests on one-way spanning out-of-plane walls have previously been conducted by many researchers, with the most recent studies being those conducted by Blaikie Doherty The trilinear force–displacement model developed by Doherty Meisl et al. To extend the range of the available experimental data set and to verify an analytical model The quasi-static tests of one-way spanning walls were performed by employing a system of airbags to apply uniform forces, which Priestley Derakhshan et al. A uniformly distributed lateral load was assumed and wall crack height was obtained by equating the wall maximum tensile stress to masonry flexural bond strength. Considering axial compressive stresses that increase down the wall height due to the cumulative effect of the wall self-weight and invoking the aforementioned equality, one can obtain: Using the cracked wall free body diagram ( As detailed in Derakhshan et al. The predicted wall lateral resistance, Similarly, an analytical equation was proposed in Derakhshan et al. Eqs. Six full-scale walls were built with either two-leaf (designated D) or three-leaf (designated T) thickness, as described in The range of the applied overburden ratios is valid for URM walls of single-storey and two-storey buildings. In a typical two-storey building, a 3-leaf non-load-bearing wall that is situated in the ground floor and that reduces to a 2-leaf wall in the top-storey has an overburden ratio of approximately 0.7 (represented in tests T1-B and T2-B). As another example, a two-storey non-load-bearing wall with a constant thickness of two leaves will have an overburden ratio of 1 (represented in tests D1-B) and 0 (represented in tests without overburden load applied), respectively in the lower storey and top-storey. Similarly, assuming a seismic weight of 1.4 A sensitivity study by Derakhshan et al. Recycled vintage (circa 1880–1930) solid clay bricks collected from two Auckland demolition sites of URM buildings were used to construct the test walls, with each wall being built exclusively using bricks collected from a single demolition site. Although masonry prisms and mortar cubes were specifically constructed and tested for each wall, brick compressive strength tests were limited to 8 tests for each of the two demolition sites. The listed values of Lumantarna  As the wall behavior was considered to be nonlinear elastic based on previous research Out-of-plane reaction forces were transferred through four load cells from the backing frame to a supporting frame connected to the strong wall, and special smooth steel plates covered with a film of grease ( When a wall was retested with the overburden load applied, no modification was made to the wall after completion of the first test. The cracked wall segments returned back to their original position once the airbag pressure had been released, indicative of mostly elastic response. The overburden loads were next applied by suspending sufficient weights ( The first course of bricks was laid on a layer of mortar and the last course was supported by a timber block placed between the wall and the aforementioned pre-compression rig. A schematic of the wall supports is shown in Details are shown in A crack typically occurred at the wall base, with the exceptions being walls T2 and T3 where the crack occurred 3 courses above the wall base. In addition, all walls developed a horizontal crack at an intermediate height ( A smooth wall out-of-plane displacement ( In Prior to testing, theoretical calculations had shown that walls could sustain out-of-plane displacements approximately equal to the wall thickness if no overburden was applied and to a reduced lateral displacement when overburden was applied. In order to study wall post-cracking behavior, the maximum lateral displacement at crack height was limited for safety to approximately 0.7 The peak force in the first half-cycle, excluding the cracking force, was obtained from the test data and regarded as the post-cracking maximum resistance, The The measured initial stiffness,  It is conventional to use energy principles and define an idealized plateau force,  The wall response shown in The observed behavior of full-scale walls subject to large lateral displacements confirmed that the cracked URM walls remain stable well beyond the cracking displacement. Quantification of the available lateral displacement capacity when subjected to dynamic loading was outside the project scope and merits separate investigation. The trilinear characteristic behavior calibrated using the experimental data presented here has potential to represent out-of-plane walls in nonlinear dynamic analysis of URM buildings. Prior research often ignored out-of-plane wall stiffness, and the simplified numerical models assumed out-of-plane walls to be tributary masses associated with the diaphragms or in-plane walls. Although such simplifications predict the behavior of in-plane walls and diaphragms with reasonable accuracy, more comprehensive numerical models that include out-of-plane walls as secondary systems are necessary to predict the behavior of out-of-plane walls including the filtering effects of URM building components. Results of quasi-static testing of six full-scale URM walls constructed using vintage clay bricks and subjected to one-way bending was presented, including a discussion of the large-scale test setup. The test walls were built with a variety of mortar mixes, wall thicknesses and heights, and overburden loads, resulting in a wide range of data. The results from this study are considered to be applicable to existing single-storey and two-storey URM walls built with clay brick masonry units and subject to overburden ratios of up to 1. The main purpose of the tests was to experimentally evaluate the uncracked resistance of one-way spanning URM walls, the post-cracking maximum lateral resistance of the URM walls, the ratio of this resistance to that calculated assuming rigid-body rotation of wall segments, and finally the sensitivity of this ratio to the applied overburden. In most cases, the wall response was found to be close to nonlinear elastic, with only modest plastic deformations occurring after several loading half-cycles. The proposed equation for prediction of the uncracked wall resistance produced an absolute average error of 24% when the results were compared to the experimental measurements, and wall crack height was on average underestimated by 16% when using the analytical equation. The same equations resulted in, respectively 19% and 43% error, when used to re-produce cracking height and uncracked wall resistance for two walls tested by other researchers. The larger errors in cracking strength and crack height prediction were attributed to the larger C.O.V. in masonry bond strength. The measured ratio of the post-cracking wall maximum lateral resistance to the equivalent value when assuming rigid-body rotations was found to vary from approximately 71 to 93%. The average reduction factor was 83% of the analytically estimated value and was calculated to be 10% greater than that obtained in the study by Doherty The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support provided by the New Zealand Government via the Foundation for Research Science and Technology (FRST).