This article examines the degree of market and firm competitiveness that developed in Brazil in the 15 years since the introduction of neo-liberal policies. In particular, it evaluates the extent to which trade liberalization and the freeing-up of domestic markets has resulted in more competitive firm performance and market structures. It shows that although the aim of opening Brazil's economy and of privatizing its publicly owned firms was to expose the country to domestic and international market forces, it has paradoxically increased ownership concentration of its industries.Three of the major neo-liberal policy prescriptions of the late 20th Century In this article we shall examine the degree of market and firm competitiveness that developed in Brazil in the 15 years since the introduction of neo-liberal policies. In particular, we seek to evaluate the extent to which trade liberalization and the freeing-up of domestic markets has resulted in more competitive firm performance and market structures. Theoretically, our analysis is motivated by debates stemming from the industrial organization literature. Within this literature, there has long been a preoccupation with the need to generate policy conditions in which firm efficiency and the welfare of society as a whole is maximized. Traditionally, this question was addressed through the optic of structure–conduct–performance (SCP) analysis. According to this, the conduct and performance of firms was ultimately determined by the market structures in which they were embedded ( In the absence of a natural monopoly and/or countervailing interventions, the SCP analysis seems to suggest that the more concentrated the market structure, the less socially optimal the outcome. From the policy perspective, the conclusion implicit in this analysis is that measures need to be taken to tackle concentrated market structures. This could involve such interventions as anti-trust legislation or, where natural monopolies were held to exist, direct regulation. In the case of Brazil, it is certainly possible to argue that the liberalization drive has been partly aimed at breaking down the monopolistic market structures synonymous with import substitution industrialization. Therefore, one question that this article examines is whether this drive succeeded and to what extent it might have impacted favorably on firm performance and international competitiveness. Over the past two decades or so, the SCP paradigm has come under intense fire from the proponents of alternative schools, in particular the contestable markets hypothesis (CMH). The CMH, in stark contrast to the SCP paradigm, disputes any rigid link between market structure and firm performance. Instead, a variety of firm performance patterns may be consistent with a given market structure. The reason for this is that the contestable markets hypothesis disputes that the structural conditions highlighted by the SCP paradigm are, in fact, exogenous. Under these circumstances the behavioral characteristics of firms are less likely to be affected by existing market structure The structure of this article is as follows. In first place we review the policy measures associated with the dismantling of ISI, in particular domestic market de-regulation, privatization and trade liberalization. Second, the impacts of these policies on domestic market concentration and import penetration are analyzed. Next, the competitive performance of Brazilian enterprises is evaluated and linked to underlying changes in market structure and contestability. The objective here is to assess the relative validity of the SCP and CMH approaches in the Brazilian context. We shall also examine the impact of market concentration on Brazil's distribution of income. Finally, by way of a conclusion, some policy recommendations are advanced. Until the last decade of the 20th century Brazil's economy was highly protected through both import tariffs and non-tariff barriers. In the mid-1960s the average protection was estimated at 85%. Beginning in the 1990s, and continuing throughout the decade, Brazil's policy stance increasingly conformed to the so-called “Washington Consensus”. In 1989 the average tariff was 41%. After the accession of President Collor the following year, the tariff began to decline continuously, reaching 13.5% in 2002 (see The opening of Brazil's economy can be viewed in a more disaggregated way in The opening of the economy was not only restricted to trade. It also extended to investment liberalization, especially from 1995 on, after an amendment to the constitution eliminated any differentiation in the legal status of domestic and foreign firms. Foreign capital was allowed to enter sectors from which it had been previously excluded, such as oil exploration and public utilities. In addition to opening the economy, the Collor government also initiated a process of privatization. This was first limited to steel and petrochemicals. However, after President Cardoso came to power in 1995, the privatization process expanded rapidly into such sectors as public utilities and transportation infrastructure. To what extent did the opening of the economy affect its structural characteristics? To answer this question, let us first examine the changes in the degree of market concentration in various sectors. In What are the possible connections between the opening of the economy and rising market concentration? In theoretical terms, in the spirit of the challenge-response mechanism, it might be expected that greater exposure to international competition would force firms to make substantial efforts to increase their efficiency. One way of accomplishing this could be through merging into larger units. These would permit the realization of greater economies of scale. The evidence provided by As already suggested, implicit in the pursuit of rising concentration was the achievement of greater industrial efficiency. However, it is obvious that measures of industrial concentration, however confected, cannot in themselves serve as satisfactory proxies for industrial efficiency. To gain greater insight in this regard, we examine two key variables: productivity change and investment in technology. The data once again appear to provide some reasonably strong conclusions. In overall terms there is a clear association between the opening up of particular sectors (as measured by rises in the import change coefficient) and positive alterations in productivity (see Aside from driving up productivity, another response to any new wave of import competition could be through industrial innovation, whether in terms of investment in new product or process technologies. The data presented in While there appears to be a tentative relationship between the degree of concentration and investment in technology, could there be a link between openness (as measured by import penetration) and such investments? In tandem with the opening of the economy and the privatization process, Brazil also experienced a wave of mergers and acquisitions, which contributed to the observed increased concentration trend in many sectors. The consistent increase in the number of mergers and acquisitions and the resulting trend towards economic concentration in most sectors has taken place despite the efforts of the Brazilian government to strengthen its anti-trust institutions. Although anti-trust legislation dates back to 1962, enforcement was feeble or almost non-existent for the next three decades. Although merger cases examined by CADE have grown substantially since 1994 (when such examination became compulsory), the degree of intervention has been small and declining. It seems that market share has not been considered to be a necessary or sufficient condition to intervene. Rather, there has been an emphasis on behavior instead. The emergence of a supposedly more rigorous and better-defined competition policy on the one hand and the emergence of a substantially more concentrated industrial economy on the other present something of a paradox. Just at a time when the authorities appeared to have committed themselves to the creating a more competitive domestic market there has, in fact, been an unprecedented and largely unchecked move on behalf of private enterprises to combine and apparently reduce the scale of the domestic competitive threat. How might this paradox be explained and, indeed, might it find some theoretical justification? It is certainly possible to argue that the competition authorities may have been quite justified in countenancing an increase in domestic concentration ratios if one adopts a contestable markets perspective and discards supposedly outmoded notions of structure, conduct and performance. Given Brazil's rapid adoption of trade and, indeed, investment liberalization, it could be claimed that, despite observed increases in concentration, the domestic market has, in fact, become more contestable. Trade liberalization implies that the Brazilian market – at least in the tradables sector – is now more open to foreign competition while investment liberalization has raised the threat of domestic incumbent enterprises being subject to takeover bids. In this sense, the market has become more contestable, if substantially more concentrated. From a policy perspective, however, what really counts is whether the apparently more contestable market conditions over the past few years have, in reality, been associated with improvements in competitive performance whether measured by productivity, unit cost or innovation. The evidence presented in this paper suggests that such competitive gains have, in fact been registered. However, there is no clear link between the degree of contestability (at least as measured by import penetration) and the extent of competitive gains realized. It has been argued that the exact nature of such links is likely to be fairly complex and certainly deserving of further investigation. Moving away from notions of contestability, could the increasingly concentrated industrial landscape be otherwise justified? Drawing on concepts embedded in New Trade Theory it is certainly possible to argue that combining domestic enterprises into larger, scale-efficient units might be an effective way of pursuing international competitiveness ( A final and perhaps more conventional justification for the toleration of higher degrees of concentration is related to the public utilities sector. In this sector, as has been noted, the period following privatization has witnessed a process of mergers and acquisitions. These have been most accentuated in the telecommunications sector, though the energy sector has also been affected. In the case of these industries one does not necessarily have to embrace a Chicago-style approach to competition policy to justify what has happened, provided that the increasingly concentrated sectors have been subject to effective regulation. The evidence in this regard is patchy. While it is generally conceded that telecommunications regulation has been extremely effective in combining rising post-privatized market concentration with consumer welfare gains (in terms of price, availability and quality of service) such benefits are far harder to observe when it comes to the energy sector, in particular electricity generation and transmission ( As we have noted, the opening of the economy and the privatization process have contributed not only to the growth in the number of mergers and acquisitions, but have also stimulated a substantial amount of investment in newer technology. This technological upgrading has both increased worker productivity and increased profitability in many industrial sectors, as can be seen in It seems that Brazil's income distribution problem cannot be solved by a search for more labor-intensive technology. Any developing economy in the 21st century which wants to participate in an open world economy will have to adopt up-to-date technology in order to effectively hold its own in the industrial sectors of the world. And this will inevitably mean that labor absorption capacity of industry will be severely limited. Simultaneously, the trend in agriculture is similar, as that sector's modernization results in the growth of the type of agribusiness which is also labor-saving. Considering that in advanced industrial countries most of the economically active population is employed in the service sector (over 75% in the United States), the need to create employment will probably have to be found in that sector. To provide high income types of employment in services calls for huge investments in education, that is, in the formation of human capital, which in many fields is scarce in most Latin American countries, especially in Brazil. We have shown in this paper that although the aim of opening Brazil's economy and of privatizing its publicly owned firms was to expose the country to domestic and international market forces, it has paradoxically increased ownership concentration of its industries. Thus, whereas the formerly protected markets produced substantial rents for relatively inefficient firms, the open market has resulted in mergers and the adoption of modern, generally labor-saving technologies, which have increased profits relative to wages. The question is whether this increase in the degree of concentration proved consistent with an increase in economic efficiency, itself presumably the key objective of economic liberalization. In the course of this paper it has been argued that there was, in fact, an association between increasing concentration and the pursuit of strategies which involved driving up productivity, investing in technology and even exporting more intensively. Such behavior, while difficult to reconcile within a structure–conduct–performance framework, is quite readily accommodated within the contestable markets paradigm. From a policy perspective, an adherence to this paradigm would not lead one to become overly concerned at increasing concentration within the Brazilian economy provided that freedom of entry and exit remained guaranteed. We have argued that the pursuit of trade and investment liberalization has increasingly anchored these freedoms in place. This, in turn, has placed unprecedented pressure on market participants to become more competitive. Nevertheless, there appears little room for complacency. By comparison with the past, Brazil's competitive performance has markedly improved during the era of liberalization. Still, it is equally true that the economies of East and South East Asia have, by and large, performed even better. In order to address this competitive challenge, an emphasis on open markets needs to be supplemented with measures aimed at improving enterprise efficiency still further. This is likely to involve the pursuit of structural reforms aimed at improving the quality and availability of key inputs. Among the areas of particular significance here, educational and infrastructural provision stand out as the most prominent.