The low-temperature calcination of nickel sulphide concentrates with sodium chloride and subsequent hydrometallurgical processing is a promising alternative methods. This study aims to identify the interaction products of sulphide nickel concentrate components with sodium chloride at temperatures of 400–450 °C. Thermodynamic studies have demonstrated that nickel sulphates, chlorides, and oxides are the probable nickel-containing products of the interaction between nickel sulphide and sodium chloride in the presence of oxygen. At 350–450 °C, the formation of nickel sulphate is preferred; as the temperature increases, the probability of oxide formation also increases. We experimentally confirmed that nickel sulphate is the main nickel-containing product of the reaction between nickel sulphide concentrate and sodium chloride at 400 °C, and the reduced nickel oxide and chloride content was identified in the calcine. The other main products included iron oxide (III) and sodium sulphate. During calcination at 400 °C, up to 75% of the sulphur contained in the concentrate was bound to sodium sulphate.Currently, pyrometallurgical processes are widely used, including electro-melting and levitation matte smelting. The matte can be milled and subjected either to flotation to separate nickel and copper or alkali etching to extract the metals in the solution, with subsequent treatment by the solvent extraction and electrowinning (SX-EW) technology. The electro-melting of the sulphide copper-nickel concentrates replaced blast smelting and reverberatory melting beginning in the 1950 s ( Since 1874, a number of patents have been published in the USA, Germany, and Russia regarding the levitation melting of non-ferrous metals. Rich matte, rich slag, and gases with high SO Main advantages of levitation melting include the utilization of the exothermic effect of sulphide oxidation and its relatively high productivity. Disadvantages include the necessity of drying and milling of the mixtures as well as the high dust formation and formation of rich slag. A number of studies related to the opening of sulphide ore of nonferrous metals using sulphatizing or chlorinating calcination 350–500 °C for the transition of metals to an easily-solvable form for further hydrometallurgical treatment have been published. Investigations of sulphate-chlorinating calcination have been conducted for sulphides of copper ( In all the previously mentioned, high extraction rates of nonferrous metals to the solution during the alkali treatment of calcines was observed. In addition, the complexity of the reaction mechanisms of oxidation, sulphidation, and chlorination were noted. Formation of water-soluble compounds during the calcination of copper-nickel concentrates with NaCl occurred, generally corresponding to the following reaction: It was further clarified that these reactions are accompanied by the formation of eutectic melts of Cu, Fe, and Na chlorides at 300 °C. The mechanism of formation of water-soluble copper compounds during chalcopyrite calcination with KCl was investigated ( A prospective approach for nickel sulphide concentrate processing is proposed herein based on low-temperature calcination with sodium chloride (at 400–450 °C) with subsequent hydrometallurgical processing of calcine. An advantage provided by this processing approach for sulphide concentrates of non-ferrous and rare metals arises from Na The main disadvantages of the suggested approach include the need for NaCl application and the release of gaseous Cl To date, no analytical corroboration has been provided ( In this context, this study was performed to identify the interaction products between the nickel sulphide concentrate and sodium chloride components at 400–450 °C. To identify the interaction products of the concentrate and sodium chloride in the presence of oxygen, thermodynamic analysis of the theoretical reactions in the NiS–O In terms of thermodynamics, the formation of both sulphate and nickel oxide was expected at 700–900 °C as shown in Eq. The only interaction product at 700–900 °C is nickel oxide according to Eqs. The most probable oxide formation mechanism involved nickel sulphate decomposition with increasing temperature. To determine the influence of NaCl on the calcination process thermodynamics in the NiS–NaCl–O Nickel sulphate was the only product obtained during nickel sulphide calcination without sodium chloride at temperatures up to 600 °C ( Nickel oxide forms according to Eqs. and considering Eqs. Within the temperature ranges that facilitate the formation of both nickel sulphate and oxide, Eqs. In terms of thermodynamics, within the temperature range of 300 to 600 °C nickel oxide chlorination by gaseous chlorine occurs according to Eq. Our study indicated that the supposed nickel-containing products of the interaction between nickel sulphide and sodium chloride in the presence of oxygen include nickel sulphates, chlorides, and oxides. The generation of nickel sulphate is most thermodynamically favourable at low temperatures. Phase composition analysis of the calcine obtained by copper-zinc concentrate calcination with sodium chloride showed similar results to those observed in this study ( The Gibbs free energy was also calculated for the reactions supposedly associated with the low-temperature calcination of nickel sulphide concentrate with sodium chloride at 300–500 °C. The calculations were performed using data based on the standard values of chemical compound enthalpy and entropy ( Nickel sulphide concentrate was used as a precursor in this study and its composition was determined by induction coupled plasma spark mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) using a double focusing mass spectrometer JMS-BM-2 (Japan). Based on this method, the elemental weight content (%) was determined to be as follows: nickel – 5.78; copper – 2.79, cobalt – 0.28, iron – 42.49, and sulphur – 23.19. Qualitative phase analysis was performed using an ARL 9900 WS wave X-ray fluorescence spectrometer with the ICDD PDF-2 database and Crystallographica Search-Match application software. According to the analytical results, the major contents were magnetic pyrite, pentlandite, and chalcopyrite ore with trace amounts of cobalt pentlandite. The concentrate (sample weight of 5–10 g) was mixed with sodium chloride in specified ratios, evenly distributed in a ceramic cup (layer thickness of 4–5 mm), and calcinated in a muffle furnace at specified temperatures and durations. The obtained calcines were analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and SEM Quanta 650 electronic scanning microscope with microscopic analysis performed using EDS energy-dispersion detectors (SEM-EDS). Afterward, the calcines were leached using water and the Ni recovery in the water was determined by ICP-MS. Initially, the solid calcination product phase composition was analysed by XRD. A description of the analysed calcines is provided in In the first test, iron and nickel were present in their respective oxide forms. The sodium chloride content by weight was 63.1%, equivalent to the initial amount contained in the mix prior to calcination. Nickel in the calcine could not be present as an oxide because only 53% of the nickel was leached by water. Therefore, a water-soluble nickel compound (chloride or sulphate) was present but was not identified. The probable cause of this failure was that nickel in the calcine was present as X-ray amorphous compounds or distributed between unreacted sulphide and products of the reaction (including oxides, chlorides, and sulphates) in such a manner that each phase was present in quantities below the sensitivity limit (the minimum phase quantity in the mix resulting in measured intensity lines sufficient for reliable determination varied within a wide range, from 0.1 to several wt.%). During calcination of the second sample, less sodium chloride was added to increase the nickel content of the tested sample. As expected, the content of copper and nickel oxides in the calcine increased while the content of unreacted sodium chloride decreased. The sodium sulphate containing phase, 10Na In the third test, sodium chloride was replaced with silica powder to examine the role of sodium chloride in the calcination process. Without addition of NaCl, a significant amount of nickel sulphide remained unreacted in the calcine and unreacted iron sulphide was identified. It should be noted that iron was mostly present in the calcine as a sulphate, whereas adding sodium chloride resulted in the complete oxidation of iron to its oxides (test samples 1 and 2). According to the literature ( The calcine from sample 4, obtained at a calcination temperature of 400 °C, provided the maximum nickel recovery in solution using water leaching ( The calcine from sample 5 is shown as a reference. It should be noted that nickel chloride was identified in the calcination product, which supported the possibility of nickel oxide or sulphide chlorination reactions occurring at 400 °C. It is well-known that sodium sulphate can be obtained as a result of NaCl interacting with iron pyrite ore ( Because of the failure to identify the water-soluble nickel containing phases using XRD methods, the phase composition of the calcines was further analysed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) Quanta 650 with an EDS detector. The samples were prepared by spreading the ground calcines over a carbon adhesive tape and the microstructure was observed using backscattered electrons. Photomicrographs of the calcine fragments obtained at 400 °C, calcinated for 90 min, and with a 50% NaCl ratio of the concentrate weight are shown in From the calcine investigations, an additional phase was detected, representing a mixture of nickel chloride and oxide ( Qualitative testing of the gaseous products of the interaction between nickel sulphide concentrate and sodium chloride was performed using a thermogravimeter installation synchronized with a NETZSCH QMS 403C Aëolos quadrupole mass spectrometer. A total of 80 mg of the concentrate was mixed with sodium chloride and heated in an alumina crucible to 400 °C under helium flow. Subsequently, a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen similar to the composition of air was injected into the system. According to the mass spectrometry data shown in The influence of calcination duration on the degree of concentrate desulphurization was investigated at 400 °C with a 50% NaCl content ( According to the mass spectrometry data, gaseous chlorine emission was detected during the calcination of sulphide concentrate with sodium chloride. Additional tests were performed to determine the quantity of the emitted gases. A schematic of the laboratory unit used for these tests is shown in The relationship between the chlorine emission rate and duration of nickel sulphide concentrate calcination with sodium chloride at 400 °C and 50% NaCl content is shown in  Thermodynamic studies demonstrated that the nickel-containing interaction products of nickel sulphide and sodium chloride in the presence of oxygen included nickel sulphates, chlorides, and oxides. Nickel sulphate formation is most favourable at 350–450 °C, whereas at higher temperatures, oxide formation is preferred. Nickel sulphate was experimentally proven to be the main nickel containing interaction product of nickel sulphide concentrate and sodium chloride at 400 °C. In addition, reduced nickel oxide and chloride were identified in the calcine and other products included iron (III) oxide and sodium sulphate. The most probable pathway for nickel chloride formation in the calcine involved oxide chlorination by gaseous chlorine. The most probable pathway of chlorine formation during the calcination of nickel sulphide concentrate is the decomposition of sodium chloride in the presence of sulphur dioxide. Approximately 75% of the sulphur contained in the concentrate existed as sodium sulphate during calcination at 400 °C. Approximately 16–18% of the chlorine contained in the mixture with 50% NaCl content was transformed into a gaseous phase during calcination at 400 °C. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the See See