Waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) is currently one of the fastest growing waste streams in the world. Typical for WEEE is the high content of valuable and precious metals, as well as harmful contaminants like halogens, flame retardant chemicals and plastics. Currently, WEEE treatment and metal recovery methods are imperfect, polluting and energy intensive. In this paper, novel treatment possibilities are outlined for printed circuit boards (PCB) utilizing both the flotation separation technique and acid bioleaching. Flotation, conducted after crushing and sieving of PCB, produced two fractions: metal-rich concentrate, which is more suitable for pyrometallurgical treatment than untreated PCB, and metal-poor froth suitable for acid bioleaching. It was seen that especially low pH (1.6), high initial Fe2+ concentration (7.8g/l) and low PCB froth concentration in the bioleaching solution (50g/l) were beneficial for the rapid and selective dissolution of copper. With these parameters, 99% of copper was solubilized from PCB froth in bioreactor treatment, with Cu (6.8g/l) and Fe (7.0g/l) being the only major metallic elements in bioleaching solution.The growing standard of living, the rapid development of information and communication technologies and lowered product prices have shortened the lifespan of consumer electronics ( Currently the main industrial-scale treatment and metal recovery method for PCBs is the pyrometallurgical process where PCBs are mixed with metal concentrates and smelted to recover copper and precious metals ( Bioleaching, which is stated to be a low-cost and “low-tech” method with low hazardous emissions, may offer also new possibilities for recovering metals from WEEE and PCBs ( Froth flotation, which is a separation technology widely applied, e.g. in the mining industry, is a very interesting method also for PCB treatment in order to separate valuable metals from plastics and other non-metallic substances. In the flotation process, the solid material to be treated must be crushed to liberate its compounds. Then, the crushed material is mixed with liquid to produce slurry which is agitated and gas is introduced to the system. Gas bubbles attach on the surfaces of hydrophobic particles and lift them up to form a froth layer which is collected. Material that is not floated remains in solution during agitation and can be collected later from the bottom of the floatation apparatus ( This paper presents an experimental study conducted to determine whether froth flotation and autotrophic acid bioleaching could be utilized in the treatment and metal recovery process for PCBs. The role of flotation was to separate plastics and some harmful elements from metals, to produce improved quality metal concentrate for pyrometallurgical processes. It was estimated that improved quality feed for pyrometallurgical plants would increase their WEEE treatment capacity, but also decrease emissions and maintenance costs ( Used mobile phones from 2000 to 2010 were collected and dismantled manually to obtain PCBs. As flotation typically requires feed material with a particle size of 10–300 The mixed acidophilic culture used, enriched from a sulphide ore mine site, as described earlier ( It was decided that the acidophilic culture used should be adapted to tolerate the presence of PCBs. The adaptation experiments were conducted in 100 After adaptation, both <250 The PCB froth was further studied to clarify how the initial Fe A scaled-up reactor experiment was conducted in three-step batch mode with a 3-l continuous stirred-tank reactor (CSTR) equipped with a top-entered agitator (propeller diameter 10 The first cultivation step was run for 10 The samples were taken and filtered (0.45 The main elements found from crushed mobile phone PCBs were copper (33 From the results it is seen that froth flotation, without any collectors, is capable of producing improved quality metal concentrate from crushed PCBs for pyrometallurgical processes: the metallic species concentrated into the metal concentrate and their concentration was higher in metal concentrate than in crushed PCB feed. On the other hand, pyrometallurgical processes are more or less sensitive to corrosive chloride and harmful antimony ( The fate of PCB froth is an extremely important question in this context. Due to a high residual copper content and moderate levels of chromium, nickel, lead and antimony, it may be possible that PCB froth cannot be utilized or even disposed of at regular waste disposal sites according to legislation. On the other hand, a high copper content also signals that this valuable metal is lost in the process and flotation must be optimized or an extremely economic additional copper recovery and “waste” treatment method be established for PCB froth. Bioleaching was seen to be a possible option for copper separation and waste treatment. After adaptation, mixed acidophilic culture was used to bioleach both crushed PCBs and PCB froth. It was seen that both of these fractions tend to increase pH to the near neutral zone. In the abiotic chemical leaching experiments, the redox potential remained rather constant, below the level +400 Also copper levels were monitored from solutions during the preliminary bioleaching tests. However, the results were rather irrational as the copper concentrations rose to approximately 3 Finding that pulp density of 10 The other possible reason for inhibition stressed by The effect of bioleaching parameters, mainly initial Fe Complete oxidation of ferrous iron was observed in 8 and 15 However, as can be seen from the abiotic chemical leaching experiment, and the iron-free bioleaching experiment, also the pH has a role in copper dissolution, as shown by Eq. From the above, it is seen that seeking an optimum for initial Fe When the role of initial concentration of Fe Copper dissolution was seen to be extremely rapid, reaching the maximal concentration of 6.8 Printed circuit boards were crushed and sieved to a particle size below 250 Despite promising results, this study also reveals a number of factors that must be taken into account before proceeding into the industrial scale. Firstly, biological sulphuric acid production was seen to be smaller than required to clearly exceed the buffer capacity of PCB froth. Secondly, both sulphuric acid and Fe Funding and waste mobile phones for this project were provided by