NIA-Steel High carbon steel  All the dry screening (sieving, sifting) operations are covered by the media in this chapter, as are almost all of the straining and coarse filtration applications. The prime feature of media made from meshes or screens is that of aperture shape – the size and shape of the apertures in the medium is critical for the intended application. The material of construction is less critical, although its high tensile strength may be vital as well. There are three broad classes of media covered under this heading: woven meshes, sheets perforated with a variety of holes, and elements made up from preformed materials. Some overlap exists between the woven meshes of this chapter and the woven monofilament materials of The weaving of wire is no different, in principle, from the weaving of any other yarn – as described in A wide variety of wire meshes is produced by weaving monofilaments of either ferrous or non-ferrous metals in widths of about 1 m up to 2 m. Two main Information on the metals used in wire mesh is given in Listed in Crimping of the wires happens automatically as part of the weaving process, provided that the wires are sufficiently fine and ductile. With heavier and more rigid wires, however, such as those of high tensile steel for heavy-duty screens, a separate pre-crimping operation is necessary, both to form the desired apertures and to ensure appropriate stability during extended use. Various types of crimp are used, as outlined in The square mesh materials have a definite open area between successive warp or weft wires, however fine. The other main category of mesh has the wires as close For filtration purposes, the most widely used forms of woven wire are the dutch or hollander weaves, wherein the warp and weft are of different diameter, generally with a corresponding difference in the relative numbers of warp and weft wires. If the warp wires (i.e. those along the length of the loom) are thicker, the result is the ‘plain dutch weave’ of ‘Plain dutch weave’ is also known as single plain dutch weave, basket weave, reps and corduroy. It forms a filter cloth that is easy to clean and has a low resistance to flow, but is of limited strength. ‘Reverse plain dutch weave’ is substantially stronger, and is in fact the strongest filter weave in commercial production; as a result, coupled with its good flow characteristics and high dirt-holding capacity, it is widely used industrially. By a similar combination of warp and weft wires of different diameters, two basic forms of twilled dutch weave are produced. The use of heavy warp wires results in ‘dutch twilled weave’ ( Numerous variations exist around these basic weaves. Thus the Haver and Boecker range of wire cloths includes not only the four dutch weaves described above, but also ‘broad mesh twilled dutch weave’ in which the weft wires are not arranged to give a ‘light-tight’ cloth but have a preset spacing between them; because of this, the weft mesh count and the retention vary somewhat at intervals. Their patented Zig-Zag weave uses the same weave but involves a special sequence, which guarantees the highest possible accuracy and regularity of spacing. Another variation is to use twisted bundles of fine wires in place of a single wire. This is particularly favoured in the manufacture of the wire belts that form the heart of papermaking machines. One version is ‘twisted plain weave’, with The differences in weave affect the surface and depth structure of the resultant cloths and consequently also their performance characteristics in filtration, including their resistance to flow. For example, certain weaves favour surface filtration and facilitate cleaning by back washing, whilst others achieve higher particle retention efficiencies by utilizing depth filtration. Some of these factors are summarized in   When used in combination with other wire meshes and sintered, a very good filter medium is produced – discussed later in this chapter – while meshes are also used to support metal membrane media – discussed further in An interesting composite medium, recently developed by GKD, is the ‘Ymax’ mesh–fibre composite. This has the basic strength of a wire mesh surface filter combined with the depth filtration characteristics of bundles of fibres. The basic mesh is woven from single wires. 0.1–7.0 mm in diameter, and this is interwoven by bundles of non-twisted finer wires. These, in hundreds per bundle, are 5–30 μm in diameter.  Sintered wire mesh refers here to any material, made basically from woven wire mesh, that has been sintered at a temperature sufficient to cause localized melting at the contact points between warp and weft wires. The applied heat and pressure during the sintering process allows some localized molecular diffusion between the wires such that, when cooled, the structure has become much more rigid. This adds considerably to the value of the material as a filtration medium, and overcomes one of the main problems of wire mesh as a filter medium, its inability to withstand fatigue in operation. Unsintered woven wire meshes suffer from instability, with relative movement or deformation of the wires, resulting from the stresses imposed by vibration, pulsating flow or high differential pressure. This can result in the deterioration of the rated filtration efficiency; abrasion of the wires and the consequent generation of metal particles that contaminate the material being filtered; the unloading of previously trapped particles into the filtrate; and structural failure. These problems can be avoided by sintering the mesh, so greatly increasing the rigidity of the mesh, producing an extremely strong structure that is resistant to deformation. Sintering also enables the use of finer wires, leading to a higher open area, with a consequential decrease in resistance to flow, and an increase in dirt-holding capacity. Sintered media also have the great advantage that they can be cut and shaped without risk of local disintegration, in a way not possible with unsintered meshes. The key feature of sintered wire mesh is that it involves one layer of woven mesh (and occasionally two) to act as the filtration medium, with others, where necessary, to give the whole medium adequate stiffness and mechanical support.  In its simplest form, a single layer of wirecloth, intended probably to be pleated for inclusion in a filter cartridge, will be sintered in order to guarantee that the spacings between the wires will not change during the pleating process. This is a very common use of sintering for wire mesh, with the pleated construction A single-layer sintered mesh is essentially a surface filtration medium. However, depending on the gauge of the wires, and the weave, relatively high dirt-holding capacities may be achieved. Typical of these materials are Pall's range of Rigimesh media, the characteristics of which are summarized in The best-known format for sintered wire mesh is the laminated form, which permits the construction of fine-pore surface filtration media of very high mechanical strength. A five-layer version is supplied by several companies, typically under a ‘… plate’ brand name (indicative of its stiffness). However, laminated sintered wirecloth is available with any number of layers of material that the end-user cares to specify, from 2 to as many as 20, depending on whether the objective is give mechanical strength and rigidity to a very fine mesh, or to increase the dirt-holding capacity in depth filtration applications. The standard five-layer format consists of a coarse top layer to protect the second layer, which is the actual filter medium. This will normally be a fine mesh, with apertures as small as a few micrometres. Below the filtering mesh will be a layer of coarser mesh to act as a flow distribution device, and below this will be two layers of much coarser mesh to act as support for the whole medium, as exemplified by Bopp's Poremet material, illustrated in cross-section in Poremet is available in a range of nominal filtration ratings from 2 to 60 μm, which correspond to absolute (i.e. glass bead challenge ratings) of 5–75 μm. Technical data for these media are given in Sintered wire mesh is normally produced from stainless steels (304L and 316L being the most popular forms), but other metals are also available, such as phosphor bronze, while more exotic alloys, such as Hastelloy, can be supplied. The five-layer format is quite stiff, and capable of supporting itself in quite large dimensions. It can also be machined and shaped like solid metal plate, and is available as tubes and as cylindrical cartridges. A different form of composite combines sintered woven mesh with a layer of powder or fibre sinter-bonded to the upstream surface. An example of this is Pall's Supramesh Z, data for which are included in A sophisticated variant of this last type of composite provides the basis of Pall's PMM range of metal membranes, which are discussed further in By contrast with the structural forms produced by the weaving of filaments, knitting results in a mesh structure of asymmetrical interlocking loops as illustrated schematically in Meshes are knitted from one of, or a combination of, a wide variety of materials, including metals such as galvanized steel, stainless steels, aluminium, copper, nickel and its alloys, as well as polypropylene and fluorocarbon polymers. Filaments are generally circular in section, with diameters in the range 0.1–0.3 mm; a flattened section is possible with synthetic filaments, which increases the surface area.  Knitted mesh is generally specified by the number of stitches per centimetre in the two directions, along and across the machine (A and B in Filter elements are formed from multiple layers of crimped or uncrimped mesh by laying, folding, rolling and (where appropriate), compressing the layers. Exploitation of the variables outlined above permits the manufacture of a very wide range of different grades, with surface areas per m The particular use of knitted mesh in filtration is the removal of suspended liquid droplets in either a gas or a liquid stream. The structure of the mesh enables the captured droplets to coalesce into larger drops and then to drain out of the filter mass. The process is called demisting when done in the gas phase.  Pads of mesh knitted from a single material are effective in removing dispersed droplets of an insoluble or immiscible liquid from a second liquid (e.g. oil droplets The efficient functioning of a conventional coalescer of this type is dependent on the mesh filaments being preferentially wetted by the dispersed phase. This interaction between the liquid and the filament is related to the respective surface free energies, which vary considerably for different solids and liquids. Therefore, the material of the filaments must be selected to be compatible with the dispersed liquid; for example, aqueous liquids preferentially wet metals, which have high surface free energies, whereas organic liquids require filaments of low surface free energy, such as plastics. By contrast, the KnitMesh DC coalescer combines both metal and plastic filaments in the one pad, to exploit the greatly enhanced coalescence observed to occur at ‘junction points’ where the two materials are in contact and produce a discontinuity of surface free energy. Variations of the filament type, filament diameter and stitch size provide a structure containing many such ‘junction points’. Advantages claimed for the KnitMesh DC coalescer include a higher separating efficiency due to the ‘junction effect’, as well as higher flow rates and lower pressure drops. Moreover, the coalescer can be used with either phase dispersed, so that there is no loss of performance even if phase inversion occurs. Examples of Everything that has been written above about metal wire meshes can apply in principle to the use of plastic monofilament as warp and weft – whether as square mesh or ‘zero aperture’ weaves. The use of multifilament yarns is more common in plastic materials than for wire mesh. Even sintering is possible, although much less commonly used, despite the less rigid nature of the meshes, and hence the lower degree of accuracy of aperture, especially after use. Data on monofilament plastic meshes are to be found in Interesting alternatives to conventional metal or plastic meshes are the ‘Metalester’ products of Saati, a manufacturer of an extensive range of precision woven monofilament meshes and fabrics. The Saatifil Metalester materials are hybrid materials, for which electrolytic techniques are used to deposit a coating of metal all over a polyester mesh substrate. The standard coating metal is nickel, but copper, silver, gold and platinum are also used. The metal coating is stated to cover the plastic completely, and to result in a totally stable structure in which the individual filaments are bonded to each other at every intersection. Advantages claimed are freedom from the static problems common with plastic meshes, the ability to cut, bend and weld, as well as freedom from migration. Perforated sheets are produced by high-pressure presses that punch groups of holes through a metal sheet as it is indexed through the press. This process may leave very slight burrs around the edges of the holes on the underside of the sheets; when applied as a support for a filter cloth, it may therefore be advisable to orientate a perforated sheet accordingly. Despite the extreme simplicity of this structure, the multiplicity of variations in the geometrical parameters associated with holes in sheets, combined with the different metals available, potentially permit the production of an immense variety of perforated metal sheets. In addition to the thickness and type of metal, the variable parameters include the shape of the holes, their size, the pattern in which they are arranged, the number of holes per unit area, and the distance Perforated sheets are used for some of the coarsest separation duties in industry – the grading of pebbles, for example – with hole diameters measured in centimetres, not millimetres, let alone micrometres. At one time it was customary for suppliers to include literally hundreds or even thousands of items in their nominal list of standard products. By contrast, modern rationalization of manufacturing and stock control procedures has tended to result in a much shorter standard product range, tailored to careful analysis of the market, but to supplement this with producing special grades as required. For example, Plastic sheets can be perforated by the same pressing techniques as used to perforate metal, and more easily. Although limited ranges of plastic sheets were formerly available, they appear now only to be produced to special order partly because most perforated sheet applications are for dry screening of abrasive materials, to which plastic materials are not very resistant. Expanded metal is made from metal sheets by a repetitive process that involves first cutting it to form a series of short slits, and then stretching the sheet to open up these slits into the characteristic diamond apertures of Measurement of the dimensions of the apertures and the strands is defined in Plastic sheets can be expanded by the same slitting and stretching techniques as used to expand metal. Although limited ranges of plastic sheets are available, The processes of photo-etching and electroforming are used by Stork Veco to produce a substantial range of finely perforated metal sheets, 15–1500 μm in thickness, and a smaller range of screens for continuous basket centrifuges. Photo-etching involves the removal of metal from a continuous sheet, while electroforming creates the perforated sheet by building up a layer of metal by depositing it upon a substrate. These two processes (plus laser cutting) provide a wide range of delicately structured items for industrial use, covering electric shaver foils to ink-jet orifice plates. Photo-etching is applicable to almost all metals and their alloys. It begins with the production of a photo-mask in the precise shape of the required product, which is superimposed on a metal sheet. This sheet, already coated with a photo-emulsion, will become the perforated plate. After exposure through the mask to suitable UV light, and subsequent development and washing of the coating, the unexposed parts of the photo-emulsion protect the metal during etching: if both Electroforming employs the same masking process, but now the unexposed parts of the photo-resist lacquer protect the surface of the substrate from deposition of the metal layer that will form the screen medium. The sheet of metal and unexposed resin form a matrix that serves as the cathode in an electrolytic bath, where metal from a pure metal anode deposits on the areas where the photo-resist was removed. A thick layer of photo-resist allows the deposition of a thick-film product, while a thin layer leads to the deposition of metal firstly within the spaces between the photo-resist, and then over its edges, to create an overgrow product. As with photo-etching, various post-deposition operations are possible, most commonly adding a hard protective layer of chromium. The Stork range of screens for continuous centrifuges (as used mainly in the sugar industry) are deformable structures, and as such are supported in use on a coarse wire mesh backing screen. They are made in electroformed nickel, and are usually chrome plated. They range in thickness from 280 to 420 μm, and have slots, rather than round holes, with slot widths between 40 and 130 μm. as shown in The VecoStandard type of screen is for normal applications, with a mirror-smooth working surface. Its conical holes reduce binding and clogging, while the slots can be oriented in the screen to suit the travel direction of the sugar crystals ( The other filtration media are rigid homogeneous structures, made mainly by electroforming. They have sharp separation characteristics, with perforations down to 10 μm, having a high throughput and being easily cleaned. The standard  The Veronic range is made in the same way as the Veconic screens, but thicker, and hence stronger. It too is available in 1 m A small range of Vecopore screens, made from pure nickel by the same special electroforming process as Veconic plus, has fine holes (20–50 μm) with high mesh numbers, and consequently large open areas. These are available in sheets 500 mm by 600 mm. The final member of the Stork Veco perforated sheet range is the Veconox range, made by photo-etching from AISI 316 stainless steel. These have quite large perforations – the slotted sheets having slot widths from 0.13 to 0.4 mm. A very specialised case of etched pores in a sheet of material relates to the formation of minute pores by the bombardment of the material by rays of subatomic particles, followed by the chemical etching of the material, to form pores at the sites where it was bombarded. This is a technique used for making specialized membranes, exemplified by Whatman's Nuclepore range, and is further discussed in The application of laser techniques provides the unique benefit of forming precision-cut micro-slots in hard, wear-resisting metals such as stainless steel. In this way holes can be formed in the sheet with widths narrower than the thickness of the metal. Laser-cut screens are intended for applications needing a high proportion of open area, and a resistance to clogging of the medium. The holes are usually slots, but circular holes can also be formed in this way. The slots A typical format is available in the patented process developed in Australia by the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Organization, in cooperation with the Sugar Experimental Station Board. Commercialization of the resultant SSL (stainless steel laser-cut) screens and sieve products, and those of other metals such as titanium, is in the hands of LaserAction Pty: the products are available in the UK from Croft Engineering Services.  Extensive full-scale side-by-side comparative trials are reported to have demonstrated the benefits of using SSL screens in centrifuges separating sugar crystals from molasses. Although they cost some four times more than conventional centrifuge screens, this is claimed to be more than offset by process savings accruing from higher yields of sugar because of a much greater resistance to wear by the tough SSL screens. This is illustrated in The remaining metal media in this chapter are fabricated from individual bars, or from rod or wire that has been processed to change its shape. The filter elements Looped wedge wire ( The width of the resultant slit apertures between adjacent wedge wires is determined by the extent to which the width across the spacing shoulders is greater than the width of the top face of the wedge profile. The strength of the assembled panels depends on the dimensions of the wedge sections, and on the diameter and pitching of the cross rods. All of these dimensional factors can be varied to suit the application. Another important variable is the profile of the top surface of the wedge wires, the typical options being listed in Looped wedge wire screens are available in a variety of different metals, as indicated by   A distinction is made between two versions of the spirally wound tubular configuration, depending on whether flow is intended to be out-to-in (   A screen surface can be formed by assembling a number of separated flat bars. The huge flat or sloping screens used for separating crushed ores in mineral processing works are often made in this way. A more delicate example of this structure is incorporated in the high-pressure screw press for dewatering rubber crumb shown in  Extensive ranges of mesh and sheet products are manufactured in plastics by the Netlon extrusion process, and by the embossing and stretching process similar to that described in Meshes can be made by stretching an extruded film of polymer that has been weakened in a regular pattern. The process involves embossing the pattern into the film by passing it over rollers, on whose surfaces the pattern has been photo-etched, as in gravure printing. The embossed film is then heated and stretched in one or more directions, thus causing the film to rupture in a structured way at Examples of stretched film netting are provided by the Delnet products of Applied Extrusion Technologies Inc. Two different styles are available, respectively identified as the filament type and the boss type, illustrated in Stretched film membranes made in the same way are typified by the Goretex products described in Fully bonded plastic mesh and other netting can also be produced by the Netlon extrusion process. Although akin to melt spinning, this is a unique method for the production of a wide variety of integral meshes. It uses two concentric, Simple methods of orientation stretch the mesh strands but leave the intersections unorientated. However, it is possible to make the intersections with a cross-section that ensures that they also orientate under suitable stress. Although polyolefins are the most common materials used, the Netlon process is applicable to numerous other polymers, including nylon, vinyls, polystyrene and elastomers. An indication of the diversity of products possible is given in The Netlon process was invented in 1955 by the British textile technologist Brian Mercer and is now exploited in various forms by manufacturers in more than 40 countries throughout the world. The resultant diversity of products The crucial component of the Netlon extrusion machine is the die head that, in the simplest version shown schematically in If the slots are regular and both dies are counter-rotated at the same speed, the mesh is of regular diamond pattern. Many variations are possible on this basic form, some of which are indicated in A flat square mesh sheet is made as follows. One die is kept stationary, initially producing a diamond mesh with right-angled intersections. The tension of the sheet, as it is hauled off the extruder and passed under a roller set at 45° to the material path, causes the mesh to rotate as it is drawn down the mandrel. A cutter is set against this mandrel in such a position that it slits the material helically between a pair of adjacent strands, to form the desired flat square-meshed sheet. The strands forming the mesh need not be of equal cross-section. Further variations, such as oscillation of one or both dies, permit a very wide range of figured pattern effects to be obtained. It is also possible to make a three-strand mesh by inserting a stationary die between the usual two rotating dies. A highly important method of improving the strength, flexibility and lightness of Netlon mesh is by stretching the material, using rollers of varying speed and hot water as necessary: the stretching may be either longitudinally, transversely or both (i.e. biaxially), at production speeds up to 100 linear metres per minute.  Other examples of this process are the polypropylene and polyethylene Plastinet products from AET ( The prime characteristics of screens and meshes from the point of view of filtration lie in their accuracy of separation, and in their operating features of resistance to high temperatures, corrosion and abrasion – these latter features referring essentially to metal media, although polymeric media can now operate at quite high temperatures. Thus they should be chosen where accuracy of size separation is an important requirement – the most obvious example being their use in sets of test sieves, used for analysing the particle size composition of a mixture of solids. The presence in the feed slurry of chemically corrosive liquids or abrasive solids indicates that the first place to look for a suitable medium is among the materials covered in this chapter. A high proportion of coarse filtration is done by woven mesh screens – in such devices as in-line strainers and inlet screens. There is a strong element of unattended operation in many of these applications, especially where the screens are automatically cleaned. By virtue of the fact that these media largely operate by surface filtration, they are prone to the risk of plugging, where a particle lodges in a pore, thereby blocking it. This means that prolonged operation requires some form of backflushing to clear the plugged holes. However, the nature of these materials means that this cleaning operation is relatively easy – by shaking or rapping, by brushing, by pressurized water or by chemical cleaning. The heaviest duties in separation in terms of abrasion, such as mineral dressing operations, are satisfied with bar screens and punched or milled perforated sheets, while, at the other extreme, in, say, the sifting of flour, fine wire or plastic meshes are required. Apart from the finest levels of separation, which might require membranes, and situations where very high degrees of solid removal are required, then woven meshes and screens now offer a good choice to the filter designer. They include some of the strongest constructions, such as bar screens or laminated sintered wire mesh, and are. of course, widely used also as supports for other media.