This study evaluated the use of planetary and attrition milling as pretreatment processes for lignocellulosic biomass using rice straw. Planetary milling reduced the rice straw crystallinity from 0.48 to 0.11. Since the samples could be milled and enzymatically treated using the same media, loss of the biomass due to washing was effectively eliminated. In contrast, conventional sodium hydroxide and soaking in aqueous ammonia (SAA) processes showed a loss of 34.2% and 14.8%, respectively. Furthermore, milling produced significantly lower concentrations of soluble phenolics than the alkali treatments. Using a bioluminescent bioreporter strain that is sensitive to these phenolics, neither of the milled samples elicited a response while the sodium hydroxide and SAA samples led to a 25.8 and 4.7 -fold induction, respectively. Although planetary milling produced more reducing sugars than attrition milling before saccharification, both had similar monosaccharide yields, i.e., 0.38 and 0.34g/g-biomass, respectively, when 40g/l rice straw was treated.Producing fuels, such as ethanol and butanol, from renewable biomass is of strategic importance to developing alternative energy sources. Biomass-based fuels offer many advantages over petroleum-based fuels, such as their renewability, sustainability, and common availability, as well as their reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and biodegradability ( Lignocellulosic biomass is composed of three major components – cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin. According to its dry weight, this biomass contains 50–80% carbohydrates, primarily in the form of cellulose and hemicellulose, which serve as structural components of the plant cell wall. Due to its highly crystalline structure, cellulose is recalcitrant to enzymatic saccharification. Furthermore, lignin, a polymer of phenylpropane units, forms a three-dimensional network inside the cell wall and adheres to the polysaccharides. These complex structures found within lignocellulosic biomasses contribute to lower biofuel production efficiencies by blocking enzymatic binding, hydrolysis and release of the sugar monomers. Hence, pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass is one of the key steps required in biofuel production. Pretreatment processes usually aim to increase the biomass’ internal surface area by decreasing the degree of polymerization and crystallinity, separating the structural linkages between lignin and carbohydrates and disrupting the lignin structure. To date several methods have been utilized for pre-treating lignocellulosic biomasses and include both chemical and physical methodologies. It is well known that pretreatment of the plant biomass with an acid solubilizes the hemicelluloses and makes the cellulose better accessible ( Alkaline pretreatment is one of the more popular methods for lignocellulosic biomass and causes the degradation of ester and glycosidic side chains, resulting in structural changes in the lignin as well as swelling and decrystallization of the cellulose ( One simple process that was used on occasion is the physical pretreatment of the biomass, which involves size reduction by chipping, grinding or milling of the biomass materials. These methods make the sugars more accessible to cellulase enzymes for saccharification. However, due to the low efficiency in the past when performed solely, physical pretreatment has often been done in conjunction with chemical pretreatments, such as with dilute H Here, we propose the use of planetary and attrition mill-based pretreatments as efficient and environmentally-friendly methods as they neither use chemicals nor lead to the production of the saccharification and fermentation inhibitors seen in other studies. As such, this method could be subsequently followed by saccharification and fermentation processes without changing the buffer or washing of the biomass, which prevents its loss. Planetary mill uses artificial gravity to apply to the grinding medium by using a centrifugal force field while conventional ball mill utilizes solely gravity as applying force. In planetary mill, the grinding jar rotates around its own axis in a direction opposite to the direction of support plate rotation, which causes a non-uniform field of centripetal acceleration. Therefore, the balls in planetary mill have notably higher impact energies. Attrition milling, on the other hand, consists of a chamber holding a rotating stirrer. Attrition milling leads to the abrasion of particles by intensive, shear and friction stresses between the agitated grinding balls. The biomass inside the chamber is comminuted in the media solution by abrasion through the action of the stirrer and the chamber wall. Both mills offer a fast and efficient fine grinding alongside a simple operational protocol ( Rice straw was selected as a model biomass to verify the capabilities of the proposed method as it is the largest single feedstock among the current lignocellulosic biomasses being used ( Rice straw grown and harvested in Gyeongbuk, Rep. Korea in 2011 was used in this study. The rice straw was roughly cut using a home blender and air-dried at 60 Planetary milling was performed using a Pulverisette 5 (Fritsch, Germany). Various amounts of air dried rice straw were added to a zirconium jar containing 90 For comparison, two chemical pretreatments, sodium hydroxide and soaking in aqueous ammonia (SAA) treatments, were also performed according to previous reports ( Enzymatic hydrolysis of the cellulose was performed according to a modified method based on that recommended by the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA ( The untreated rice straw was coated with Pt on a Cressington Scientific Instruments 108 Auto Sputter Coater (Cranberry Tep., PA, USA). For the pretreated rice straw, the sample was first dried in a freeze-dryer (Ilshin Lab Co. Ltd, Rep. Korea) and then coated. The morphology of each of the coated samples was investigated using a Scanning Electron Microscope (JSM-6700F, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). The accelerating voltage for the SEM images was 15 The crystallinity of the rice straw was determined using X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/max-RB powder diffractometer, Tokyo, Japan) with Cu κα radiation ( The samples were analyzed for monosaccharides following the NREL Chemical Analysis and Testing Standard Procedures ( The amount of reducing sugar within the samples was determined with a dinitrosalicylic acid reagent. After pretreatment, 200 A recombinant bioluminescent bacterium, DMA3 was used to sense for the presence of fermentative inhibitors within the hydrolysate samples. This bioreporter strain is sensitive to plant hydrolysate-related phenolics, such as ferulic and vanillic acids ( Prior to addition of the bacterial cultures, the hydrolysate samples were serially diluted inside 96-well microplates (white, Greiner Co, USA) using sterile water. The bioluminescence was measured every 20 All samples were performed in triplicate for error analysis. The standard deviations for the results are shown as error bars within the graphs. Initially, the characteristics of the rice straw after planetary and attrition milling were investigated using SEM. Rice straw without neither planetary nor attrition mill treatments was prepared as the control sample by coarsely cutting it with a home blender (Supplementary Fig. S1). Rigid surface and intact phytoliths were found on the surface of the rice straw simply treated with home blender. After the planetary mill pretreatment, the rice straw particles were reduced to small fragments with a planar morphology (Supplementary Fig. S2(a–c)). In contrast, the rice straw after the attrition mill pretreatment were generally larger and displayed a fibrous morphology (Supplementary Fig. S2(d–f)). Although the sizes of the particles varied somewhat, they were clearly reduced by the mill pretreatments when compared with the unmilled rice straw samples. Before mill pretreatments, the sizes of the rice straw particles were generally millimeter size but were drastically reduced by the milling processes (Supplementary Fig. S2). A previous study reported that the size of lignocellulosic materials are typically reduced to 0.2–2 Supplementary Fig. S3 shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns for the rice straw samples with and without pretreatment. The peak at 22.5° corresponds to both crystalline and amorphous cellulose while that at 18.7° is only for the amorphous cellulose. Crystalline cellulose has a network of strong intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonds, which limit the hydrolysis reactivity. In contrast, the amorphous regions have a low level of order in its structure, allowing most reagents to penetrate these regions. Interestingly, the intensities of the 22.5° peaks decreased after planetary milling, which suggests that the amount of crystalline cellulose decreased. To illustrate this another way, the percent crystalline material in the total biomass was expressed by the ‘crystallinity index’, which was suggested by In addition, we found that the concentration of biomass used during the planetary milling pretreatment had a significant effect on the crystallinity, but had no effect was apparent when attrition milling was performed. When the rice straw was planetary milled at a concentration of 20 Reducing sugars have an open-chain form with an aldehyde group or a free hemiacetal group and include glucose, glyceraldehydes and galactose as well as many disaccharides, such as lactose and maltose. Therefore, we can indirectly assess the degree of rice straw decomposition by measuring the amount of reducing sugar formed. As expected, the presence of higher rice straw concentrations during pretreatment led to higher quantities of reducing sugars ( The size reductions seen after planetary or attrition milling were greater than those seen with conventional grinding methods. In addition, the grinding process used in this study was performed under wet and slightly acidic conditions with a relatively low concentration of biomass, which allowed the rice straw to swell. Under these conditions, an extended planetary mill pretreatment when performed alone, i.e., without enzymatic hydrolysis, was capable of producing 0.25 It appears, however, that there is a lower limit for the use of planetary milling as samples containing 5 and 10 After the mill pretreatments, enzymatic saccharification was performed and the resulting monosaccharide concentration and composition determined. When 20  Rice straw contains 36.8% cellulose and 25.8% hemicelluloses ( Chemical pretreatments currently used, such as soaking in aqueous ammonia or sodium hydroxide, demonstrate a high lignin removal and monosaccharide yield ( Two chemical pretreatments, soaking in aqueous ammonia (SAA) and sodium hydroxide treatment, were performed according to previously reported protocols ( When performed in the presence of the balls, however, the planetary and attrition mill pretreatments produced slightly more soluble phenolic compounds, i.e., 0.293 and 0.056 To further investigate the potential toxicity of each pretreatment sample, a recombinant bacterium As A previous study reported that dry ball milling (DBM) process required 108 Milling offers other obvious advantages with regards to cost and energy consumption, including the need for no additional chemicals or water to rinse the biomass. For chemical pretreatments, such as an acid treatment, the costs will be incurred not only by the catalysts being used, but also by the equipment requirements and the higher formation of degradation products ( This study evaluated the use of planetary and attrition milling for the pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass. Both were found to be effective at minimizing waste production and loss of the biomass. However, planetary milling was generally the better treatment with regards to the resulting biomass crystallinity and reducing sugar concentrations, as well as slightly better monosaccharide yields after enzymatic treatment. Planetary milling also produced more soluble phenolics but the concentration was still five and twelve-fold lower than seen after conventional SAA and sodium hydroxide pretreatments, respectively. These results demonstrate the potential of using milling to pretreat biomass for downstream fermentations. This work was supported by a grant from the