Ore feed to western U.S. phosphate processing plants has variable composition that is reflected in different flocculating behavior. The objective was to model different behaviors so that flocculent consumption could be reduced in a control system. The procedure was first to use molecular dynamics to calculate the influence of ore surface chemistry on flocculent adsorption. These molecular dynamics calculations were then used to modify a baseline transfer function extracted from the thickener of an operating phosphate concentrator. We assumed that calculated adsorption activation energy was related to the experimentally observed thickener transfer function gain. The transfer function was then used to simulate cumulative flocculent use for different flocculent adsorption rates. The results were that with adaptive optimal control approximately half the flocculent could be saved. We concluded that molecular dynamics calculations gave useful insights for adaptive control and thickener efficiency.Process control is an evolving technology that has become more adaptable with new mathematical models, sensors and computers. The objective was to reduce flocculent consumption caused by disturbances in ore and surface chemistry. Time series data were obtained from a large rake thickener at a western U.S. phosphate concentrator. The thickened solids are transported through a kilometers-long slurry pipeline at a specific percent solids. Operating below this point uselessly transports dilution water and reduces capacity, but operating above this point increases viscosity and possibly sticks the rake or plugs the pipeline The objective was to minimize flocculent consumption during ore and surface chemistry disturbances while maintaining the percent solids set point in the underflow. The surface chemistry disturbances caused changes from fast to slow flocculent adsorption rates. The procedure was first, to develop an empirical transfer function relating how fast flocculent manipulates underflow percent solids; second, use molecular dynamics to find flocculent adsorption rates; and third, embed these adsorption rates into the plant transfer function gain for comparative calculations on slow and fast flocculent adsorbing ores. The plant transfer function for the phosphate thickener related flocculent dosage to underflow percent solids, and was derived using a procedure described by Although our present objective was to focus on flocculent, other measured parameters included feed rate, pump speed, underflow rate, pulp level, overflow clarity, and rake torque for which a multiple-input multiple-output state space model was developed. The transfer function predictive ability was also explored and found to need periodic updating due to ore disturbances Molecular dynamics calculations were made using the computer program Hyperchem to find adsorption activation energies as a flocculent molecule approached an apatite mineral surface. The following simplifications were made Cumulative flocculent use was calculated for ore and surface chemistry disturbances in closed circuit control The objective was to show that as the surface chemistry of the ore changes from fast to slow flocculent adsorption rates, an adapted and updated control system would prevent flocculent waste. The results were the plant transfer function gain for the phosphate thickener; the molecular dynamics based flocculent adsorption rates; and the calculated influence of these rates on cumulative flocculent use. The baseline plant transfer function in zero-pole-gain (zpk) format had gain, Molecular dynamics confirmed the existence of activation energy as the flocculent approached the surface of the apatite. In a baseline simulation without hydroxyl or chlorine surface chemistry disturbances the polymer reached an equilibrium adsorption point by falling into a potential energy well that was 13.16 kcal/mol deep  Each new plant transfer function gain was then used to calculate a controller gain and simulate the relative flocculent use In this work, we focused on the importance of flocculent adsorption activation energy to underflow percent solids. Molecular dynamics suggested that changes in activation energy were due to hydroxyl, chlorine, and surface chemistry disturbances in the apatite, and our plant and laboratory experience as well as other investigators corroborated this observation We acknowledge the support and input of Roger Humberger and Wayne Perkins at Simplot, Pocatello, ID, Lynn Hales at Eimco, SLC, UT, Cathy Summers at DOE Albany, OR, and the ONR for related support under Grant No. N00014-001-07435.