The hammer shredder is the key equipment for cyclic utilization of retired car bodies. The axes' pin is the main component of the shredder, but it is damaged easily. To improve the shredding efficiency and lengthen the changing life of the shredder pin, it is significant to study its stress characteristic and the fatigue life. In this article, the complex force conditions of the shredder pin at the normal working condition were studied briefly by mechanics analysis method. The stress characteristics and fatigue life of the pin were analyzed by the finite element transient analysis method. The maximum stress distribution law of the shredder pin was found and the fracture mechanism of the retired car bodies was revealed. Furthermore, the reliability of the simulation results was verified by the experiment. It was found that when the pin rotates around the main shaft counterclockwise, the maximum stress of the pin at 0° of the main shaft is higher than other positions. Additionally, along the axial direction, the maximum stress occurs at the cross section at a distance of 2/9 of the pin length from the pin head and at 0° of this section, which orientation is made when the pin is at 270° of the main shaft. Comparing four working modes, it was found that the working life of the shredder pin could be doubled by changing the sides of the pin and rotate it along its axes by 180°.Nowadays, the demand for the steel is urgent globally and the steel scrap is an important resource for steelmaking. Yet steel recycling in some countries is relatively weak. One main reason for it is the inadequate steelmaking capacities, which can be enhanced by improving the recycling efficiency and decreasing the recycling cost The hammer shredder is the main equipment in the scrap shredder production line, whose properties affect the shredding efficiency, shredding energy consumption and shredding quality greatly. In order to enhance the shredding efficiency, a great deal of research was made on the shredding characteristics of the hammer shredder for retired car bodies. Much attention was paid to the influence of the structures and materials of the shredder components and also the morphologies and the materials of shredding materials on the shredding characteristics. The comminution of sheet-like plate metal was generally divided into four phases and it was proved that the comminution degree mainly depends from the hammers' momentum The shredder pin is damaged easily and exchanged frequently in comparison with the other components on the shredder, which affects the shredding efficiency and cut down economic benefits greatly. To find the reason for its fracture failure and improve its fatigue resistance, massive information is available to improve its material properties and modifying its structure parameters. The stress–strain distribution conditions of some typical pins were analyzed by the finite element statics method and the weakest position was found out Three failure reasons of the aluminum vehicle wheels were investigated by the numerical modeling methods, that is, macroporosity, microporosity and oxide films As to the problems above, the stress characteristics and the fatigue life of the shredder pin were investigated in this paper. An effective way to lengthen the life of the shredder pin was proposed. The study in this paper is of great value to improve the shredding efficiency of the retired car body and lengthen the life of shredder pin, laying a foundation for the deeper investigation on the shredder pin.  To find effective ways to lengthen the working life of the shredder pin, some investigations were conducted in this paper. The mechanical analysis was performed to describe the complex forces of the pin during the shredding process. Then, the process of the pin during the normal working condition is simulated by finite element transient analysis method. The pin is driven by the rotating system and forced by the hammers, who are impacted by a constant force from the shredding material. The stress characteristics on the pin at axial and circumferential direction as well as the different moments were investigated by the finite element method and the maximum stress distribution law was found out and verified by the experiment. After finding the stress states of the shredder pin, its fatigue life was investigated through the software ANSYS/LS-DYNA. The working life under four different working modes was compared, namely, the current working mode, exchanging the head and end side of the pin at regular intervals, rotating the pin by 180° at regular intervals, combining the last two working modes. Finally, the most effective way was found out. During the shredding process of the retired car body, the impacts between the hammer and the shredding materials occur frequently. The direction and amount of the shredding material's velocity and the collision position are unknown, which makes the accurate calculation of the stress states impossible. However, from the worn hammers as shown in The shredding materials filled in the shredding cavity are hammered and extruded repeatedly by the rotating system. It is impossible to predict the path of the shredded material. Therefore, the shredding materials may impact the rotating system at any directions and any points. The impact between the shredding material and hammer is the highest when the impact is direct. All the impacts in the following study were replaced by this greatest impulse. Suppose the velocity directions of the hammer and the shredding materials are opposite and their values are the same before the collision as shown in The influence factors of the impact forces are massive, such as the sizes, the velocity and the material attributes of the shredding material, the rotational speed of the main shaft, and the rotational speed of the hammer around the pin. The impact forces are various at different cases. It is impossible to investigate every case, but a main force can be chosen to replace all the impact forces. During the shredding process, a great many impacts occur at any moments. In practice the rotational speed of the main shaft is high and the impacts occur frequently, so the impact forces can be treated as a constant force As the rotation of the hammer around the pin is quite slow in comparison with the rotation around the main shaft, the velocity of the hammer around the pin can be neglected. Suppose every shredding material in the cavity is taking part in the collisions at the moment, then the maximum Then Take the PSX-88104 shredder for example. Based on the data form the technicists in Hubei Lidi Machine Tool, there are 16 hammers equipped on the shredder, the normal rotational speed of main shaft is 594 The pin is the jointing component of hammers, backplates and scaleboards. During the shredding process, its forces are various, including its own gravity, the centrifugal force and the forces from hammers, backplates and scaleboards. Along the axial or circumferential direction, the contact points and the contact forces between the pin and the other parts vary with the time. When the pin rotates with the main shaft, the direction of its centrifugal force varies with the rotational angle. There are so many unknown factors that it's hard to find the stress distribution by the theoretical method. However, it can be solved by the finite element analysis method. According to the structure of the shredder and the forces of the pin, the finite element geometric model of the shredding system was established to simulate the shredding process as shown in As the main shaft and the scaleboards are linked by a key in the hammer shredder, they can be treated as a whole in the finite element model, called as rotating system, as shown in  During the simulation of the pin's motion process at the normal condition, the pin rotated around with the main shaft at a constant speed. All the parts had the same initial rotational speed 594 The different positions of the pin rotating around the main shaft at different intervals were shown in The von mises stress of the pin at different intervals and positions is shown in The fitted curve in As shown in The fatigue analysis in the postprocessor of ANSYS is based on the cumulative Damage hypothesis-miner rule The von mises stress of four nodes on the pin is shown in Actually, the pin in shredder will be changed after shredding 5000–8000 The rotational speed of the hammer shredder is 594 The fatigue life of the pin under four working modes is shown in   The pins as shown in As shown in The stress characteristic and the fatigue characteristic were investigated in this paper by numerical modeling and the experiment. The maximum stress distribution law of the shredder pin under the normal condition was revealed. Along the axial direction, the maximum stress occurs at the position of 2/9 of the pin length apart from pin's head side. When the pin rotates counterclockwise, the maximum stress occurs at 0° of the pin which is made at 270° of the main shaft. Moreover, the stress on the pin is higher at 0° of the main shaft than other positions. Four working modes(the actual working mode, changing the head and end side of the pin at a regular time, rotating the pin by 180°at a regular time; combining the 2nd and 3rd modes) were compared to investigate the fatigue characteristic of the pin. It was found that the working life of the shredder pin can be doubled by changing its head and end sides rotating the pin by 180° around its axle at a regular time. This work has been conducted with a partial financial support of the