Cold rolling can significantly increase hydrogen storage properties of Mg and its alloys. Therefore in this paper, two important cold rolling processing parameters were investigated: the amount of passes and the roll rotation frequency, which directly influence particle and crystallite sizes and thus the interfaces for hydrogenation/dehydrogenation. Extensive cold rolling was conducted with MgH2 powder as starting material under an argon atmosphere to avoid contamination. The results indicate that the cold rolled MgH2 was free from oxides even after 50 cold rolling passes. Additionally, considerable improvements in the hydrogen storage properties were achieved with higher amounts of cold rolling passes. A similar effect could also be found for higher roll rotating frequency. This beneficial outcome originated from three important aspects: the decrease of the crystallite size reaching 88% reduction after 50 passes and 82% after 35 passes with rotating frequency of 50 rpm, the refinement of particle size, and a change in the morphology of the initial MgH2 powder from granules to flakes, and ultimately to small particles.Magnesium hydrides are prominent candidates for hydrogen storage systems As an alternative to ball milling, cold rolling has been extensively investigated The number of cold rolling passes has been mostly studied in a short range As starting material, a commercial MgH Two sets of specimens were prepared. Firstly, in order to investigate the variations in the amount of rolling passes, samples with 10, 20, 35 and 50 passes at a fixed roll rotation frequency of 50 rpm were prepared. Secondly, the effect of the roll rotation frequency was evaluated with variations of 10, 30 and 50 rpm at a fixed amount of 35 passes. Microstructural characterization was carried out by X-Ray diffraction (XRD) and Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM). The XRD patterns were recorded using monochromatic Cu Kα radiation with an angular step of 0.02° in a Siemens diffractometer (model D5005). SEM images were obtained in a Philips XL30-FEG microscope. The crystallite size was estimated trough the Williamson–Hall method In order to study the kinetics of hydrogen absorption/desorption, a homemade Sievert's type apparatus with calibrated volumes was used. Samples with a mass of around 150 mg were employed and a heating rate of 10 K/min was used. Before absorption/desorption experiments, the cold rolled MgH The XRD diffraction patterns of MgH The crystallite size of β-MgH    The effect of the amount of cold rolling passes was basically to improve the hydrogen storage properties, as shown in The amount of cold rolling passes represents a crucial factor for comminution of MgH The sudden change in desorption between 35 and 50 passes could be explained by the refinement in particle size. As demonstrated by Varin et al. The roll rotation frequency effect in the H It seems that achieving small particles and crystallite sizes in extensive cold rolling is mandatory to obtain adequate hydrogen storage properties. Small particles are more interesting than flakes in regard to particle morphology because of the amount of interfaces for absorption/desorption reactions. This desired small particles could only be achieved for more than 35 passes and 50 rpm of roll rotation frequency. If high capacity and fast absorption/desorption kinetics are necessary, it is crucial to increase the amount of passes to achieve the smallest crystallite size and especially particle size possible. Moreover, the refinement of crystallite size that can be achieved by extensive cold rolling is in the same order of magnitude as ball milling as can be observed in Finally, as previously observed in Ref. In this study, experimental evidence was provided that extensive cold rolling conducted under inert atmosphere can effectively reduce crystallite and particle size without contaminating the powders. The following main conclusions could be drawn from this investigation: The amount of cold rolling passes and the roll rotation frequency significantly enhanced the hydrogen storage properties in absorption. The improvements resulted from the reduction in crystallite and particle sizes, as well as a change in the morphology of the starting MgH Desorption behaviour was limited due to the particle sizes achieved. At least 50 passes at 50 rpm of roll rotating frequency were necessary to achieve fast desorption. Extensive cold rolling under inert atmosphere seems to be an excellent alternative for ball milling to process MgH Even though the high reactivity of magnesium requires the use of an extremely controlled atmosphere for processing, it was clear that cold rolling is capable of producing nanostructured compounds in much less time compared to ball milling and yet with similar hydrogen storage properties. The authors would like to thank the