Drilling and blasting is the most widely used excavation method in mining and tunnelling especially in hard rock conditions. But in recent years, the application of roadheaders and impact hammers in hard rock, especially in fractured geological formations has increased considerably. However, it is strongly emphasized that the prediction of the machine performance plays an important role in the time scheduling and in the economy of tunnelling projects and accumulated data will serve a sound basis for performance prediction models.
                  This paper presents information on Istanbul Kadikoy–Kartal metro tunnels which are planned to be constructed in two stages, the first one which is in Kozyatagi–Kadikoy direction and the second in Kozyatagi–Kartal direction. The construction method of the Kozyatagi–Kadikoy station tunnels is first summarized and later, the performance of a roadheader, impact hammer and the results of drilling and blasting methods are compared.
                  The results of this study show that machine utilization time is 28.2% for roadheader and 14.2% for impact hammers. Average net cutting rates (NCR) are 32.26m3/h for roadheader (218.3m3/day), net breaking rate (NBR) 13.1m3/h (45m3/day) for impact hammers and production rate with drill and blast method (D&B) is found to be 187m3/day.The use of TBMs is found unfavourable in short tunnels and in these cases drilling and blasting method is preferred, however, this method is restricted in urban areas. In favourable conditions, roadheader and impact hammer are preferred due to many advantages over conventional methods. These include improved safety, minimal ground disturbances, elimination of blast vibration, reduced ventilation requirements and cost. Therefore, hydraulic impact hammers have been used widely in metro tunnelling projects in Istanbul since 1992. However, roadheaders have been also used in Taksim–Levent and Kadikoy–Kartal metro tunnels in some extend ( Although many researchers investigated the factors affecting the performance of roadheaders and impact hammers it is believed that new published data will improve existing performance prediction models. ( The performances of a roadheader (Westfalia WAV 178) and impact hammer (MB 1700) mounted on the carriers, Volvo EC210B, Sumitomo SH200LC, and Caterpillar 3066T, are investigated. The main rock formations of study areas were Trakya and Kartal formations. The first stage of the project is commissioned to Yapi Merkezi–Yuksel–Dogus–Yenigun–Belen consortium. The metro tunnels are being currently excavated by two Herenknecht TBMs of 6.5 The population of Istanbul is approximately 14 million and one third of this population lives in Anatolian side. The project of Kartal metro system is planned to meet the enormous transportation demand between East and West of Istanbul. The project will be integrated with Marmaray Project, which is under construction and which will connect European and Anatolian sides at Ibrahimaga station ( The project of Kadikoy–Kartal metro system starts from Kadikoy square, joins the station of Marmaray Project at Ibrahimaga and extends up to Kartal. The metro project includes 16 stations in total. The project is composed of twin tunnels and the distance between the two tunnels is nearly 32 Tunnels between Kozyatagi–Kadikoy are excavated generally in Trakya and Kartal formations ( The overburden varies between 20 and 45 The tunnel excavation of the first stage (Kozyatagi–Kadikoy) started in May 2005 with two TBMs and still continues. Impact hammers is used in the excavation of the station tunnels having length of 180 MB 1700 type hydraulic hammers are used throughout the excavation of station tunnels. All the hammers are the same and have the following characteristics: weight 1.7 Determining the net cutting or breaking rate of mechanical excavators play an important role in tunnelling projects. The relationship between these parameters and rock strength is given in  Machine utilization time is as important as net cutting/breaking rate in determining the excavation efficiency and economy, since daily advance rates are directly related to these factors for a given tunnel section. The performances of mechanical excavators and drilling and blasting method are summarized in Field values of NCR for roadheader and NBR for impact hammer are compared with predicted values using some prediction models. Bilgin developed a model based on data collected from different tunnelling projects carried out in Istanbul. Eqs. One important discrepancy in  Balance of moment forces between excavator and hammer weights are given in following equation ( The Paleozoic rocks in Istanbul are cut by numerous dykes, consisting of andesite and basaltic andesite, and from massif to fractured pale yellow, beige, and grey rocks. Their thicknesses range from 10–20 Eq. In this equation, K is a reduction factor when predicting net braking rates of impact hammers used in rock formations intruded by different thickness of dykes.   This observation is clearly supported by the works done early in 1960s on coal cutting by ( Cleats are called main joints in coal seams along which breaks easily and in order to see how the cleats affect the propagation of cracks in coal a rectangular block of coal was mounted against a plate glass window and a simple wedge was used to cut adjacent to the glass different coal blocks were aligned with the cleats in the four cutting directions (0°, 45°, and 135°) as shown in Although the cutting mechanism of pick and disc cutters are different than each other, similar observation was made when using NTNU model to predict the performance of hard rock TBMs. In NTNU model a fracturing factor Although it is a difficult task, This study gives a unique opportunity to compare impact hammers and roadheaders with conventional drilling and blasting method. It is emphasized that drilling and blasting method is most efficient method in high strength rocks. Although blasting in urban area is restricted due to vibrations and difficulties in transport of blasting agents, in extreme conditions its use becomes a necessity. Roadheader is proved to be more efficient than impact hammer in terms of machine utilization time and production rate. However, high pick consumption and difficulty of relocation the roadheader from one tunnel to the other for short tunnel lengths makes a necessity to use impact hammers in similar conditions to Istanbul metro station tunnels. The other point emerging from this paper is that already published models for predicting the performance of roadheaders and impact hammers should be modified according to dip and strikes of joints. An attempt is made to modify the equation used in the past to predict net breaking rate of impact hammers and it is proved that a reduction factor in the breaking rate taking account the thickness of the dykes improves the validity of the proposed model in the past. The other important emerging point from this paper is that the dip and strike of the joints having an angle of 45° in favour of the cutting direction improves the net cutting rate of roadheaders tremendously, this is supported by the works done on coal cutting by Pomeroy in the earlier of 1960s (