Recently, there has been interest in the effects of ionic species on the flotation performance of minerals in liquid phase. Metal ions that are commonly present in flotation pulp can cause non-selective activation of target minerals and gangue particles during flotation. We have investigated the influence of Fe(III) adsorption on smithsonite surfaces using X-ray diffraction, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), zeta potential measurements, scanning electron microscopy, and micro-flotation tests. The results indicate that Fe(III) can adsorb onto the smithsonite surface, resulting in a series of changes to the surface properties. XPS results show that Fe(III) adsorption can change the atomic composition of the smithsonite surface, along with its chemical state. The zeta potential of the smithsonite became more positive and its pH shifted from 7.6 to 9.2 in the presence of 1×10−4
                     mol/L Fe(III). Micro-flotation tests revealed that iron ions have a strong inhibitory effect on smithsonite. The recovery of smithsonite decreased sharply as the Fe(III) concentration increased. When the concentration reached 5×10−4
                     mol/L, the recovery was only 21.35%. The Fe(III)-driven smithsonite inhibition mechanism may be attributed to strong oxidation and hydrolysis.As natural sulfide ore resource exploitation has continued, sphalerite supplies have gradually become depleted. In order to meet future zinc market demand, several studies have been devoted to the mineral processing of smithsonite, which is a typical zinc oxide mineral Because of its importance to environmental and mineral engineering, the study of metal ion adsorption on mineral surfaces has garnered extensive continuing interest Despite these studies on the effects of ions on smithsonite flotation, there are still some knowledge limitations with respect to interaction mechanisms that involve metal ions, reagents, and the smithsonite surface. It is generally known that adsorption of ions onto the mineral surface occurs before flotation. Thus, when the effect of ions on mineral flotation is investigated, it is necessary to consider that surface properties, such as the surface potential, atomic concentrations, and contact angle may have changed before reagent addition. In this study, smithsonite was selected as a model adsorbent, and iron ions were chosen as the metal-ion adsorbates because of their presence in practical flotation pulps. X-ray diffraction (XRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), zeta potential measurements, micro-flotation tests, and surface adsorption measurements were performed to investigate interactions between the iron ions and smithsonite. A detailed study of the changes in surface properties after ion adsorption and the resulting influence on smithsonite flotation was performed. Hand-picked, high-purity smithsonite was obtained from the Lan-ping mine in China. The samples were washed with distilled water and dried. The ore samples were then manually processed using an agate mortar, sieved, and classified to obtain the desired particle size fractions. Particles 45–75 Analytical grade dodecylamine (DDA), hydrochloric acid, sodium hydroxide, and sodium sulfide were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd., Shanghai, China. Finely powdered, analytical grade iron chloride hexahydrate (FeCl Metal ions were adsorbed onto the smithsonite surface in a vial containing 100 Before and after the treatment with iron ions (1 XPS measurements were conducted for three types of smithsonite samples. Two of these samples were smithsonite samples treated with or without iron ions (1 The zeta potential of smithsonite was measured using a Brookhaven Zetaplus zeta potential analyser (USA). Fifty mg of the mineral sample was added to 30 Micro-flotation experiments were conducted in a mechanical agitation flotation machine. In each test, 2  XPS was used to identify both the chemical compositions and chemical states of the elements on the surfaces of the treated and untreated smithsonite samples, based on the distinctive binding energies of the inner electrons of each element. XPS is a surface sensitive technique and can characterize the surface to a depth of less than 10   As shown in As shown in The XPS spectra ( In order to investigate the adsorption mechanism of Fe(III) on the smithsonite surface, smithsonite zeta potentials were measured as a function of pH before and after adding Fe(III) ions. According to Fe(III) ion species distribution diagrams were calculated using Visual MINTEQ 3.1, as a function of pH at a concentration of 1 There are two types of surface active sites present on the smithsonite surface: As shown in  The most common and commercial flotation technique used to treat smithsonite is sulfidation with sodium sulfide, followed by concentration using conventional cationic collectors such as DDA. Sulfidation converts the oxide mineral surface entities into sulfides, leaving the smithsonite covered with a sulfide film. The sulfidization reaction of smithsonite is shown experimentally as follows   To further investigate the mechanism of the action of the Fe(III) depressant on the surface of the smithsonite, XPS measurements were performed. These measurements were used to explain the direct effects of ion adsorption on the sulfidization of smithsonite. The results are shown in After treatment with Fe(III) and S Based on above results, four probable mechanisms are proposed for the inhibiting effect of Fe(III): (i) precipitated Fe(OH) Adsorption of Fe(III) ions onto carbonate minerals is a complicated process that requires a combination of different techniques to understand. The current investigation introduced a new discussion of changes in the smithsonite/water interface and the mineral surface after the adsorption of Fe(III), and their implications for smithsonite flotation. Based on the results and discussion, the following conclusions can be drawn: Fe(III) can be adsorbed onto the smithsonite surface in solution. At low Fe(III) concentrations, the colour of the smithsonite changes from white to yellow. And the SEM and XRD results indicate that the crystal structure and surface morphology of smithsonite remain unchanged after the adsorption of Fe(III). XPS results indicate that the adsorption of Fe(III) not only changes the atomic concentrations of C, Zn, and O on the smithsonite surface, but also shifts their binding energies to different extents. Moreover, the Fe(III) largely decreases the adsorption of S Zeta potential measurements suggest that Fe(III) ions can change the surface charge of smithsonite. Fe(III) species can adsorb to the mineral surface via both chemical and electrostatic interactions. Fe(III) ions play a major role in reducing the floatability of smithsonite even at low concentrations. Increasing the Fe(III) concentration increases the inhibiting effect sharply. This work was financially supported by the key program of the