One of the world́s most abundant of all the rare earth elements (REE) is cerium. It represents about 50 wt% of total REE content in the main rare earth minerals used industrially (monazite and bastnaesite). However, cerium is not a valuable product if compared with the other REE. In the most current pyro-hydrometallurgical processes routes, a high amount of cerium goes to the rare earth liquor, incurring in high operational and capital costs in the solvent extraction step used in the separation of each individual rare earth element. In this context, this study evaluates the use of thermal treatment for rare earth oxalates and carbonates and also hydrochloric acid leaching of calcination products for selective separation of cerium from other REE. This investigation also sheds light on the mechanisms involved in the processes proposed. For this purpose, mixed rare earth and cerium oxalates, also mixed rare earth and cerium carbonates were used as precursors. The mixed rare earth salts used in the experiments were generated from a non-purified rare earth sulphate liquor. The results indicated that the minimum required temperature to fully decompose the mixed rare earth oxalates, cerium oxalate, mixed rare earth carbonates and cerium carbonate to their respective rare earth oxides (REE2O3) or CeO2, was 1100 °C, with 1 h of residence time. In the experiments carried out with mixed rare earth oxalates, Ce3+ was not fully oxidized to Ce4+, it formed a mixture of Ce2O3 and CeO2 represented by Ce4O7, which was completely dissolved in the hydrochloric acid solution (37 wt%). Therefore, in such case, cerium was not selectively removed from the mixed rare earth oxalates by thermal treatment and hydrochloric acid leaching. On the other hand, the Ce3+ presented in the composition of the pure cerium oxalate or carbonate was fully oxidized to Ce4+ (CeO2) under the same condition of calcination. As expected, CeO2 was not dissolved by the hydrochloric acid solution (37 wt%). It was concluded that mixed rare earth carbonates generated Ce0.60Nd0.40O1.80 (Ce1-xNdxO2-x/2, x = 0.40) when calcined under the same condition. This crystalline structure was not also dissolved by hydrochloric acid solution (37 wt%). As a result, a process flowsheet was proposed to remove cerium selectively from a rare earth ore.Rare earth elements (REE) include the 15 elements of the lanthanide group from lanthanum to lutetium, coupled with chemically similar yttrium and infrequently scandium. These elements are split into three sub-groups: light rare earth elements (LREE (La, Ce, Pr and Nd)), SEG elements (Sm, Eu, Gd) and then the heavy rare earth elements (HREE (Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu, Sc and Y)) ( Rare earth elements are relatively more abundant in the earth́s crust than other commonly exploited elements but they are not concentrated enough to make them easily exploitable ( REE and their alloys are used in many ways, such as in memory storage devices, rechargeable batteries, mobile phones, catalytic converters, magnets, fluorescent bulbs and so on ( LREE minerals are classified as ‘cerium group’ minerals because they contain approximately 50 wt% of cerium oxide. Bastnasite and monazite are included in the ‘cerium group’, leading to an overproduction of cerium ( The standard redox potential of Ce  Additionally, The oxidation of cerium by blowing air onto a slurry of rare earth hydroxides attained has the lowest cost ( In the same way, cerium is separated from bastnasite (REECO Considering the pure precursors, the oxidation of Ce In terms of processing, three precipitating agents, namely, oxalic acid, ammonium/sodium hydroxide or ammonium/sodium bicarbonate/carbonate, are typically applied in the production of rare earth concentrates ( Nevertheless, purity and quality are factors that impact the final price of the rare earth products ( There are few studies in the literature aiming at elucidating the mechanism involving in the thermal oxidation of the cerium present in the composition of a mixed rare earth oxalates. In this context, this study addresses the use of thermal treatment, XRD patterns and hydrochloric acid leaching to selectively separate Ce from other rare earth elements and then shed light on the mechanisms involving in the thermal processes. Finally, a process flow sheet with a mass balance was proposed to remove cerium selectively from any other rare earth element present in a rare earth ore. HCl 37 wt% analytical reagent (A. R.), CeO Mixed rare earth oxalates and carbonates were obtained from a purified rare earth sulphate liquor generated in the processing of a rare earth ore with monazite as the main REE carrier ( The concentrations of aluminium, iron, phosphorus, sulfur, lanthanum, praseodymium, neodymium and samarium in the liquid samples were determined by a Varian VISTA-PRO ICP-OES (Inductively Coupled Plasma – Optical Emission Spectrometry). Other rare earth elements and impurities were determined by a PerkinElmer NexION 300D ICP-MS (Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry). ICP-MS was used to measure low concentration with higher accuracy. The content of the elements in the solid samples were determined according to the analytical methods described in The pH and redox potential measurements were performed with a Mettler Toledo M400, using a reference electrode InPro3250SG/325/Pt10. Dried samples for X-ray diffraction were ground to <74 µm and analyzed in a PANalytical X'PERT PRO MPD with θ/θ geometry and Cu anode under 2000 W and 60 kV. The thermogravimetric and differential thermogravimetric analysis (TG/DTA) were carried out in a Netzsch STA 449F3 in the temperature range of 20–1200 °C under a 10 °C/min rate and static air, using alumina crucible. The procedure used in calcination experiments comprised the following steps: Weighing of approximately 100 g of precursor. A container made of zirconite was used, its height was approximately 10 cm, to prevent any mass losses during thermal decomposition; Calcination in different temperatures (450 °C, 700 °C and 1100 °C) and residence times (1 h and 4 h); Cooling of the calcination products to room temperature (20 °C); Weighing of the final mass and assaying the calcination products. The procedure used in hydrochloric acid leaching experiments of calcination products comprised the following steps: Weighing of approximately 50 g of the calcination product in a beaker; Adding about 65 wt% of distilled water (about 33 g) and dispersing the calcination product in order to form a paste. Transferring the paste to a round-bottom flask connected to a heating mantle attached to a top condenser; Adding a HCl solution 37 wt% slowly until the pulp reached 25 wt% of the calcination product and 75 wt% of HCl solution (37 wt%); Maintaining the heating at 90 °C ( Addition of about 200 mL of distilled water in order to dilute the pulp; Stirring for about 30 min at a speed fast enough to maintain the solids in suspension. Heating is not necessary in this step; Filtering the pulp, in order to generate the filtrate I and the wet cake (not washed); Washing the cake preparing a pulp containing 25 wt% of not washed wet cake and 75 wt% of distilled water. Stirring for about 30 min at a speed fast enough to maintain the solids in suspension; Filtering the pulp in order to generate the filtrate II and the washed wet cake. Mixing filtrate I with filtrate II. The rare earth hydrochloric liquor was generated. A sample of the liquor was assayed; Drying the washed wet cake at 75 °C until it reaches a constant weight. A sample of the dry cake was assayed. Considering a mean molecular weight of 141 g/mol for REE, the stoichiometric ratio HCl/REE  According to The first step, which occurred at temperatures from 65 °C to 125 °C owed to the dehydration of both products. The weight losses in both products were about 8 wt%. No free water occurred in the mixed rare earth oxalates, since this sample was dried at 60 °C before the thermal analysis. According to this weight loss, the precursors can be classified as REE The second step took place from 125 °C to 200 °C, due to the partial decomposition of both products. It was assumed that mixed rare earth oxalates/carbonates or cerium oxalate/carbonate were formed in this phase, according to the reactions shown in Eq. The third step occurred from 300 °C to 455 °C in the pure cerium oxalate and from 400 °C to 580 °C in the case of the mixed rare earth oxalates, due to the formation of crystalline structures, likely CeO Different to what was observed, another exothermic event occurred with the mixed rare earth oxalates, starting at 400 °C and finishing at 775 °C. This could mean that there was a formation of a different crystalline structure in the range 400–775 °C when the mixed rare earth oxalates were thermally decomposed. The XRD patterns of the calcination products and the results of the hydrochloric leaching experiments are expected to complement these behaviours, and also elucidate the difference in the results of cerium removals from both calcination products.  According to the curves shown in The first step, from 70 °C to 160 °C it can be attributed to dehydration of each product and also the formation of the anhydrous mixed rare earth carbonates or anhydrous cerium carbonate. The weight loss in the mixed rare earth carbonates was about 5 wt% and in the case of pure cerium carbonate it assigned 16 wt%. From the total weight loss of 16 wt% with pure cerium carbonate, 5 wt% was attributed to free water loss and 11 wt% happened due to the crystallization water loss. Free water was not observed as these samples were also dried prior to the thermal analysis similar to the oxalates in The second step occurred from 160 °C to 600 °C due to the decomposition of the anhydrous mixed rare earth carbonates or anhydrous cerium carbonate and the formation of a crystalline structure, probably CeO Not considering the weight loss attributed to dehydration, which ones was 16 wt% when the precursor was the pure cerium oxalate, the total weight loss of anhydrous pure cerium carbonate was about 24 wt%. This value was similar to what was expected for the thermal decomposition of the anhydrous pure cerium carbonate (approximately 25 wt%). According to the TG analysis, the composition of the mixed rare earth carbonates was 71 wt% of a crystalline structure to be defined in this study, 24 wt% of CO The It is possible to see that the mixed rare earth oxalates contain lower REE The total amount of impurities was about 0.20 wt% in the mixed rare earth oxalates and 2.25 wt% in the mixed rare earth carbonates. The main impurity presented in the mixed rare earth oxalates is sulphate (0.19 wt%), perhaps due to the coprecipitation of some sulphate salts, where the main impurities in the mixed rare earth carbonates are sulphates (1.45 wt%), iron oxide (0.13 wt%), aluminium oxide (0.12 wt%), manganese oxide (0.46 wt%) and sodium oxide (0.08 wt%). A low purity mixed rare earth carbonate occured due to the coprecipitation of some sulphate salts or hydroxides containing Mn, Fe and Al, and the formation of sodium and rare earth double sulphate or NaREE(SO The reaction that represents the precipitation of REE with oxalic acid and the formation of mixed rare earth oxalates is shown in Eq.  It can be observed that there was a complete thermal decomposition of the mixed rare earth oxalates in the muffle at 1100 °C and 1 h of residence time. An incomplete calcination is also observed given the carbon content existing in the product after thermal treatment. Under these conditions, the weight losses stabilized at 52 wt%, value very close to figures observed in the thermogravimetric analysis (51 wt%). As expected, the REE  The  It can be observed that there was a complete thermal decomposition of the pure cerium oxalate in the muffle only at 1100 °C and 1 h of residence time. Under this condition, the weight losses were 48 wt%, value close to figures found in the thermogravimetric analysis (51 wt%). Again, an incomplete calcination was also observed by the carbon content in the product obtained after thermal treatment at temperatures of 450 °C and 700 °C. As expected, the CeO It can be seen that the crystallinity increases as calcination temperature rises, with peaks becoming stronger and sharper gradually. Additionally, the peaks of calcination the products are likely to correspond to the peaks of CeO  The complete thermal decomposition of the mixed rare earth carbonates was not observed due to the presence of carbon in their composition. Considering the initial carbon content (see From  It can be observed that there was a complete thermal decomposition of the pure cerium carbonate in a muffle at 1100 °C and 1 h of residence time. Under such condition, the weight losses were 43 wt%, value close to what was found in the thermogravimetric analysis (40 wt%). Again, an incomplete calcination was also observed given the presence of residual carbon in the calcination products obtained at 450 °C and 700 °C. As expected, the CeO  From  According to The present study unveils the identification of the crystalline structure Ce  The only experiment in which the calcination product was not totally solubilized by a hydrochloric acid solution was the one having a high carbon content (6.75 wt%). This occurred due to the incomplete calcination at a temperature of 450 °C and residence time of 1 h. Residual rare earth oxalates do not react with mineral acids such as nitric, sulfuric and hydrochloric acid ( Due to the formation of Ce  The first experiment could not be completed as it foamed heavily due to the presence of rare earth oxy/carbonate in the composition of the respective calcination product. The foam resulted from an incomplete calcination of the pure cerium oxalate in a muffle at 450 °C and residence time of 1 h. A low cerium and chloride concentration in the cerium hydrochloric liquors can be observed, indicating that the cerium was not extracted from the respective calcination products. Apart from the results observed in the first experiment, the difference in the REE concentration of rare earth hydrochloric liquors (4.67 g/L of Ce at 700 °C/1h and 0.44 g/L of Ce at 1100 °C/1h) occured due to the different cerium extractions of the respective calcination products. Only 4.27% and 0.41% of total mass of cerium fed in the respective calcination products were extracted by the HCl solution. Additionally, the mean cerium and chloride concentrations in the cerium hydrochloric liquor were (2.55 ± 2.99) g/L and (11.1 ± 3.9) g/L. The mean HCl loss by vaporization was about 92%. As expected, the loss of HCl in these experiments was higher than ones verified in the experiments carried out with calcination products from the mixed rare earth oxalates. This took place because the only rare earth element in pure cerium oxalate is cerium, which oxidizes easily to Ce  In both experiments, the calcination products were not fully solubilized by the hydrochloric acid solution and only 9% and 4% of cerium fed in the calcination products, respectively in the first and in the second experiments, were extracted. A very low mass ratio of Ce/REE can be observed in the liquor (mean value of 6.4 kg/kg) in comparison with the same mass ratio observed in the calcination products (Ce/REE ∼ 48 wt/wt) (see The mean REE and chloride concentrations in the rare earth hydrochloric liquor were respectively (58.5 ± 5.9) g/L and (48.1 ± 10.0) g/L. The mean HCl loss during the experiment was about 64%. As expected, less HCl was lost in these experiments if compared to HCl losses checked in the experiments carried out with calcination products from mixed rare earth oxalates (40% of HCl losses) and pure cerium oxalate (92% of HCl losses). This occurred because these calcination products contain lower amounts of cerium oxidized (Ce  A decrease in the cerium and chloride concentrations in the cerium hydrochloric liquors is noticeable when there was an increase in temperature in the calcination experiments. The difference in the cerium concentration in the cerium hydrochloric liquors (from 57.3 g/L of Ce at 450 °C/1h to 0.91 g/L of Ce at 1100 °C/1 h) occured due to the different cerium extractions presented by the respective calcination products. The extraction was respectively 45.7%, 18.1%, and 0.92% of cerium in the first (450 °C/1 h), second (700 °C/1 h) and third (1100 °C/1 h) experiments. These results show that a temperature of 1100 °C and a residence time of 1 h in a muffle was capable of transfering 99% of the cerium fed into the calcination product. Additionally, the HCl losses were 43 wt% in first, 77 wt% in the second and 98 wt% in the third experiment, which is feasible since the HCl did not react with cerium is lost by vaporization. The same amount of HCl was expected to be lost in these experiments, in comparison with the results of experiments carried out with calcination products having the pure cerium oxalate a precursor (92% of HCl losses), however more HCl was expected to be lost if compared with the results of experiments carried out with calcination products having the mixed rare earth oxalates (40% of HCl losses) or carbonates (64% of HCl losses) as precursors.  The highest cerium extractions and cerium and chloride concentrations in the hydrochloric liquors and also the lowest HCl losses were observed in the experiments carried out with calcination products obtained when mixed rare earth oxalates were used as precursor. On the other hand, the lowest cerium extractions and cerium and chloride concentration in the hydrochloric liquors were noticed in the experiments done with calcination products generated with pure cerium oxalate, mixed rare earth carbonates and pure cerium carbonate. The highest HCl losses occurred in the experiments using pure cerium oxalate and pure cerium carbonate as precursors, whereas intermediate HCl losses were observed in the experiments with mixed rare earth carbonates.  The process route proposed comprises the following steps: (I) rare earth ore beneficiation ( All the REE A REE The mass ratio CeO The remaining REE In order to recover chlorine in the gas generated in the hydrochloric leaching of mixed rare earth oxides, having as precursor the mixed hydrated rare earth oxalates, the gas should be washed with a sodium hydroxide solution as to form a sodium hypochlorite solution. The mixed rare earth oxalates (REE The XRD patterns presented by the calcination products depicted the formation of a crystalline structure between Ce Cerium was not selectively removed when the precursor was the mixed rare earth oxalates. On the other hand, the cerium was selectively removed from remaining rare earth elements when the precursor was the mixed rare earth carbonates. As expected, the CeO Based on the experimental study, a novel process route was proposed for the selective removal of cerium from rare earth ores, also regarded to a production of a high purity cerium oxide (CeO The authors would like to thank Vale S.A. especially Patrice Mazzoni, Cássia Souza and Keila Gonçalves for authorizing the publication of this work. The authors are also thankful to technicians at Vale Mineral Development Centre, especially to Wagner Soares, Daiene Santos, Márcio Jacob and Kelly Fonseca, who were dutifully engaged in this study. We would also like to thank Ricardo Terra and Julius Martins for proofreading the paper. Éder Oliveira and Carlos Morais acknowledge the support from