The influence of the membrane diluent on cadmium transport from mixed a hydrochloric-phosphoric acid solution through a flat-sheet supported liquid membrane has been studied using the phosphine oxides Cyanex 921 and Cyanex 923 as carriers and Durapore GVHP4700 as the solid support. Various experimental conditions were investigated (e.g. metal and carrier concentrations) and, though the best metal fluxes were obtained with Exxsol D100 (aliphatic), experiments indicated that the long-term stability of the membrane was greater when using Solvesso 100 (aromatic).A supported liquid membrane consists of an organic phase adsorbed onto a microporous support, separating two aqueous phases, the first contains the solute to be permeated and the second or stripping solution releases the solute from the organic phase. This technique allows the use of a small amount of the organic phase, and hence the use of small amounts of the very selective and somewhat expensive extractants used for solute separation. The lack of membrane stability is the major drawback associated with the use of supported liquid membranes; this instability may be due to the characteristics of the membrane phase (support, organic phase) and the aqueous solutions involved in the transport process. On the other hand, several approaches to resolve membrane instability had been suggested in the literature It had been long recognized the importance of the correct diluent choice in extraction processes low mutual solubility between organic and aqueous phases, low volatility, surface tension lower than the critical surface tension of the solid support, high diluent/water interface tension. It is described in the literature Furthermore, the diluent must ensure that it: be mutually soluble with an extractant or modifier, minimized both the problem of third phase formation and low loading capacity of an extractant. A process stream contained nearly 100 g/l HCl and 149 g/l H The transport of Cd(II) from different aqueous solutions using different carriers is reported in previous investigations In the present work, some experimental aspects about the influence of the membrane diluent in the supported liquid membrane performance are described. The work reports about the separation of Cd(II) from HCl/H The extractants used in the present work were Cyanex 921 and Cyanex 923 (CYTEC Ind., Canada) and were used as received. Though their particular composition have been described elsewhere The flat-sheet microporous membrane used was Millipore Durapore GVHP4700, a 125 μm thick PVDF film with nominal porosity 75% and effective pore size 0.22 μm. The membrane was impregnated with carrier solution containing the corresponding extractant dissolved in the corresponding diluent by immersion for 24 h, and then leaving it to drip for 10 s before being placed in the transport cell. The batch transport experiments were carried out in a permeation cell of two compartments made of methacrylate and separated by the membrane. The effective geometrical membrane area was 11.3 cm The metal flux was evaluated by using the equation: Chemical conditions, similar to those of the industrial solution Though aromatic diluents are reported in the literature to have lower interfacial tension than aliphatic diluents, this could not only explain the behaviour of the liquid membrane made by using Solvesso 100 as the membrane diluent.   The probability of treating solutions with various cadmium concentrations was also investigated by varying the metal concentration in the HCl/H From this figure, at 0.005 g/l Cd(II) concentration in the feed phase, it can be seen that by using Exxsol D100 the cadmium flux is near 2.5 times greater than when Solvesso 100 is used. In both cases, the observed behaviour can be attributable to two effects, firstly, membrane saturation and thus a lower effective membrane area of the supported liquid membrane, and secondly, maximization due to saturation of the membrane pores with metal-carrier species and in addition, the build-up of a carrier layer on the membrane interface which assists the retention of the separating constituent on the entry side and leads to a decrease in the metal flux These results indicate that with changes in the characteristics of the membrane diluent, membranes with either good fluxes and stabilities can be obtained, as shown in  The effect of carrier concentration on the metal flux was also studied and the results obtained are shown in The values of this coefficient for the various systems are given in The effective transport of cadmium from HCl/H In the present investigation, comparison of the transport rates of metal in membranes containing Cyanex 921 or Cyanex 923 extractants has shown that Exxsol D100 is better than Solvesso 100, but the latter diluent is more effective (larger separation factors) under long-term operation. Decontamination of the acidic feed solution below the tolerated limit was only achieved using a 20% v/v Cyanex 923/Solvesso 100 mixture. The performance and efficiency of the separation process may be improved by using hollow fiber modules. Furthermore, the limited solubility of Cyanex 921 in aliphatic (and in a lesser extent in aromatic) diluents precludes its use at high extractant concentrations and makes the membrane phase handling difficult, this would also contribute to the overall lesser membrane performance when compared to Cyanex 923. Authors thank Mr. Bascones and Mr. Lopez for technical assistance. Also to CSIC (Spain) for support.