Despite the advancement in the technology, and the introduction of many synthetic materials, hard rock still keeps its vital importance in daily constructive and decorative consumption. The hard rock processing sector has shown a rapid development since 1930. Turkey has also been affected by this development and many numbers of hard rock processing factories have been established in the last 15 years. The import of basic machines, equipment and consumables in these factories constitutes a major economic problem in this sector. Disc consumption is the most important economic expenditure during the processing of hard rocks. Unsuitable manufacturing of discs and inappropriate adjustment of machine parameters to the rocks to be cut, causes the discs to deteriorate rapidly, leading to eventual economic loss The circular diamond saw blade contains a steel core which has diamond impregnated segments brazed on the periphery ( In general, many factors affect the stone cutting by a circular saw blade. These factors can be written in three groups (as shown in The first important factor is the engineering properties of the material. The clue of the suitable values of parameters to reach the effective result is constant parameters. The physico-mechanical, mineralogical and petrographical properties must be analyzed before the sawing test and these results must be used in the producing part of the segment and saw blade. The performance of the sawing with a disc cutter is affected by diamond type, the size of diamond, the concentration of diamond and the properties of the metal bond (matrix). In general, the diamond crystals must have sufficent strength to withstand the repeated cutting forces during the granite sawing process. If the diamond is too weak in strength, it will easily produce macro-cracks and crushed particles. It will also cause the blade to act hard so that possibly glazing will occur. Conservely, if the diamond has very high strength and toughness, it will be difficult to fracture it to produce new cutting points and edges. In addition, it will be polished to give the blade a glazed appearance. The choice of the optimum diamond type for a given application depends on many factors, such as the stone type, the cutting conditions, the type and the quality of the machine, etc. Luo and Liao In analyzing the cutting process and the diamond wear, Buttner Tonshoff and Warnecke Brook As seen so far, the wear on the segments produce the biggest production expenses in this sector. Determination of the wear quantity and adjustment of the process conditions by using this prediction is a vital necessity for the hard rock processing sector. After several investigations and experiments, Unver Two main objectives of this study are: (1) to analyze the effect of stone properties on blade wear and determine the wear by using the multivariate statistical analysis before the cutting of a stone and (2) to derive a regression equation. The other objective is to examine the worn surfaces by microscopic determinations and observation to determine the wear characteristics and structure of segments, and also the suitability of segments for this application. This is the first experimental work in andesitic rocks to observe the sawability and blade wear conditions. The flowchart followed in this study is given in The blade wear investigations in andesite cuttings have been performed in the Ayma Stone Processing Factory in Ankara-Cubuk, Turkey on an industrial scale. Sawing tests were performed using (X-Firms, 242 The same depth of cut is controlled throughout the cutting operation. The 1200 The sawing tests were carried out using 24 andesite blocks, taken from the same quarry, and having different physical and mechanical properties. The physical and mechanical properties of these andesite blocks were determined in the laboratory with respect to ISRM The relative wear of the saw blade was measured at fixed locations on all segments equilaterally spaced around the circumference by using a specially designed micrometer ( The individual effects of the physico-mechanical properties of the Ankara Cubuk andesites on the wear of the segments were examined graphically and are shown in As can be seen from the In order to facilitate the analysis and interpretation of the results, it was decided to categorize the data into dependent ( For the statistical evaluation, each parameter used in the research has been taken as a variable. The effect of these variables on the unit wear of segments was examined by using regression analysis. The Pearson correlation coefficient was selected as a correlation coefficient due to the fact that the variables were obtained by measurements and denoted the continual structure The interrelations among the variables with respect to Pearson coefficients are shown in In this study, suitable statistical models have been used for the investigation of the effects of variables relevant to the purpose of the study of the wear rate. Models for regression analysis have been established because these models determine the individual effects of variables by evaluating them individually. The effects of the other variables on the dependent variable are determined by two different methods. The individual effects of independent variables are modelled by simple linear regression in the first method. Their overall effects on wear rate are modelled by multiple linear regressions in the second method. The effect of the variables on wear rate has been analyzed by simple linear regression analysis. The results are given in The complexity of most scientific mechanisms is such that in order to predict a specific response, a well-known multiple regression model is needed. The quality of the estimated regression model is often tested through the very well-known method of ANOVA (analysis-of-variance). The ANOVA approach is used to partition the total sum of squares into a portion due to regression and a portion due to errors. However, it describes a technique whereby the total variation is analyzed or divided into meaningful components. Multiple regression analysis of the model and ANOVA are given in the The model based on the regression coefficients given in the According to the The efficiency or statistical significance of the related regression model can be seen in scatter diagrams which show the relation between observed and predicted values of wear rate on beads. The relationship between the measured and predicted wear rate obtained from the model is given in  Microscopic investigations were done on the four worn diamond segments. Worn surfaces were observed and the condition of the diamonds on the segments was considered. The observation of the worn diamond-segment surface of a saw blade is shown in By using microscopic observation, the conditions of the diamond particles can be seen on the working surface. From many observations of the worn surface, the different conditions of the diamond crystal were classified by different authors. By using this experimental model, the different conditions of the diamond crystal can be classified as follows. 1. 2. 3. 4. The undemanding wear was observed on the top and the side part of the segments by microscopic investigation. Also, the same undemanding abrasion types were seen on diamond crystals. Exploring the side and top surfaces of segments under microscope was the aim of this study. The different types of abrasion on the different surfaces of segments were observed at the end of the microscopic investigation. The whole abrasion type was more often observed than the fractured and pullout abrasion type on the side surface of segments. The percentage of crystals on the side surface of segments is given The fractured (36.73%) and the pullout (33.67%) crystal ratios are increased in the top surface observation ( Parallel to the purpose of this study, two different studies were performed. In the first, the relationships between the rock properties and wear on segments were investigated statistically, and in the second microscopic investigations were performed on wear on segments. After these investigations, the following conclusions were drawn: Relationships between the physico-mechanical properties of rock and the wear on segments give a good correlation with Shore scleroscope hardness ( The experiment results were used to develop statistical model. A close relationship was determined between the block cutter and the model results. The developed statistical model equation is given as follows: Because of the high correlation values ( By microscopic investigation, a higher ratio of fractured crystals (36%) was observed than the whole crystal (26.59%) and pullout crystals (33.37%) on the top surface of worn segments. The reasons can be attributed as follows: Crystals could be broken during the contact with rock due to the high cutting speed. Inadequate particle sizes of crystals were picked. Hard matrix for andesite rocks in the segment. The random crystal distribution in the matrix. As a results of this study the following recommendations can be made: Form the suitable matrix, homogeneous distribution and adequate particle size of diamond crystals depending on rock properties for the segment production. Select the adequate cutting speed. Use the developed equation which reflects the real condition before starting the cutting operation to predict the conjectural amount of wear on the segment. The purpose of applying the developed equation for preparing the segment of the blade is to obtain a high cutting efficiency. Evaluation of the data provided by the equation will increase the efficiency of the sawing process. This will enable engineers to increase production capability in the andesite sawing industry.