Cobalt (II) and nickel (II) were simultaneously extracted from magnesium and calcium synthetic sulphate solutions using the carboxylic extractant Versatic 10. The two metals were then separated by extracting cobalt using the phosphinic acid Cyanex 272. Statistical design and analysis of experiments were used throughout in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the solvent extraction factors, which were the extraction pH at equilibrium, temperature, extractant concentration and organic to aqueous phase ratio. A statistically designed experiment was also carried out in order to study stripping of the loaded, with cobalt and nickel, Versatic 10 organic phase by using synthetic nickel spent electrolyte. Cobalt was recovered from the loaded Cyanex 272 by synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte, in order to produce a solution suitable for cobalt electrowinning. The slope analysis method was used to determine the nature of the cobalt and nickel complexes extracted with each of the extractants. The number of stages required for extraction and stripping processes of cobalt and nickel was also evaluated. The results of the continuous, counter current, mini plant tests clearly demonstrated the feasibility of the simultaneous recovery of cobalt and nickel from magnesium and calcium sulphate solutions by Versatic 10, as well as their separation by Cyanex 272.The Laboratory of Metallurgy of the National Technical University of Athens has developed and patented a novel integrated hydrometallurgical method, suitable to treat low-grade nickel oxide ores efficiently and economically. It involves heap leaching of the ore by dilute sulphuric acid at ambient temperature, purification of the leach liquors and recovery of nickel and cobalt ( The present paper gives the results of a research study involving the separation of cobalt and nickel, in the presence of magnesium and calcium, by solvent extraction from a synthetic sulphate solution, with concentrations similar to those of a real leach liquor. The study was conducted in the framework of the Research Project BRE2-CT94-1020, entitled “a new approach to the metallurgical treatment of nickeliferrous laterites”, funded by the European Union. The solvent extraction technique is one of the most versatile methods used for the removal, separation and concentration of metallic species from aqueous media and has been widely used in the extraction of cobalt, in the presence of nickel from sulphate solutions ( The problem of cobalt or nickel extraction in the presence of other metal ions has been dealt with by many researchers, using carboxylic extractants. However, the so far published literature has given little attention to the specific problem of the separation and recovery of cobalt and nickel from magnesium and calcium in raffinate solutions, suitable for cobalt and nickel electrowinning. Sumitomo Metal Mining Company ( The present research work proposes a new route for the separation of nickel and cobalt, by solvent extraction, in the presence of magnesium and calcium, which is particularly suitable for solutions with high magnesium concentrations. More specifically, cobalt and nickel were simultaneously extracted by Versatic 10, leaving magnesium and calcium in solution. The loaded organic phase was then stripped by a synthetic nickel sulphate solution simulating a real spent electrolyte. Subsequently, cobalt was separated from nickel by Cyanex 272. The loaded with cobalt organic phase was stripped by a synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte. Factorial design of experiments and statistical analysis of the data were used to determine the main effects and interactions of the chosen factors and select the optimum conditions ( The Versatic 10 (Shell Chemicals) used in this work is a synthetic tertiary carboxylic acid consisting of a mixture of highly branched isomers of C The molecular weight is 172 and the density (24 °C): 0.91 g/cm The extractant Cyanex 272, registered by Cyanamid Canada, was kindly supplied by the Holland branch of the company, Cytec Holland. The reactive component C The organic diluent Exxsol D-80 was obtained from Exxon Chemical Holland. In all cases, the organic phases were modified with 5% TBP. The initial aqueous phase was a synthetic solution with 0.65 g/l of Co All batch experiments were conducted in a 500-ml five-necked, round bottomed split reactor, which was fitted with a glass stirrer, a vapor condenser, a thermometer and a pH electrode. The two phases were contacted by rapid stirring and the pH was controlled by small additions of 5 N NaOH, using an automatic titration device (Metrohm––Dosimat/Impulsomat). Heating was provided by an electrical mantle and the temperature of the liquid was controlled by a Fisons Scientific Apparatus monitor. Stripping of the loaded Versatic 10 organic phase was carried out by synthetic nickel spent electrolyte (55.45 g/l Ni Continuous tests were carried out in a laboratory solvent extraction unit (Bell Engineering Model 282). Nickel, cobalt, magnesium and calcium in the aqueous phases (aqueous feed and extraction raffinate) were analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometry. In order to determine the ability of Versatic 10 to selectively extract cobalt and nickel from magnesium and calcium sulphate solutions, extraction tests were carried out at various equilibrium pH values, at certain conditions. The effect of pH on the extraction of cobalt and nickel by Cyanex 272 from sulphate solutions was also investigated. The results, presented in Factorial design and analysis of experiments were used in order to determine the main effects and interactions of the solvent extraction factors. The factors studied and their levels, for Co and Ni extraction over Mg and Ca by Versatic 10 as well as for Co extraction over Ni by Cyanex 272, are shown in Parameters, which were kept constant during experimentation, were: stirring speed=1200 rpm, initial cobalt concentration=0.65 g/l, initial nickel concentration=3.8 g/l, initial calcium concentration=0.25 g/l, initial magnesium concentration=5.75 g/l. The concentration values of cobalt and nickel before and after solvent extraction experiments, in the presence of magnesium and calcium, by Versatic 10 are given in As can be seen in As can be seen from the appropriate columns of To study the main effects and interactions of the factors on both solvent extraction processes, Yates’ analysis and an analysis of variance were carried out on the percentages of Co pH=6.5, pH=6.0, The cobalt and nickel loaded Verastic 10, resulting from the extraction tests, was subjected to scrubbing with water at pH=6.0, O/A=4/1, Stripping of nickel and cobalt from the loaded organic phases was conducted using synthetic solutions. Their composition was selected on the basis of the industrial electrowinning applications. The industrial conditions for nickel electrowinning, in diaphragm cells type require 55–65 g/l of Ni spent electrolyte with 20–30 g/l of Ni drop in 6–10 days cathodes cycle. On the other hand, cobalt electrowinning in non-diaphragm cells type require 30–45 g/l of Co spent electrolyte with 6–8 g/l of Co drop in 6–7 days cathodes cycle ( Based on the conclusions drawn from preliminary experiments, the variables and levels chosen to study the stripping of cobalt and nickel from the loaded Versatic 10 organic phase by nickel spent electrolyte as well as the stripping of cobalt from the loaded Cyanex 272 by cobalt spent electrolyte are given in Parameters with constant values throughout the design were: organic/aqueous (O/A): 1/1, stirring speed: 1200 rpm, Versatic 10 organic phase: [Co synthetic nickel spent electrolyte: 55.45 g/l Ni, Cyanex 272 organic phase: [Co synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte: 30.8 g/l Co. The concentrations of cobalt and nickel in the loaded Versatic 10 before and after stripping, as well as the corresponding values for cobalt stripping from the loaded Cyanex 272, are given in As the tables show, high percentages of Co Based on the statistical analysis of the results ( If extraction were to occur by a simple cation exchange, the extraction reaction for a divalent cation, such as Co However, it is known that cationic extractants as well as other extractants, such as amines and solvating extractants, are polymerized or self associated in organic diluents and, thus, it can be considered that the general reaction for cobalt and nickel extraction is ( In the case of Versatic 10, both plots for cobalt and nickel were straight lines over the extractant concentration range 0.26–1.06 M. The initial cobalt concentration was 0.65 g/l and that of nickel 3.8 g/l. Based on the experimental data obtained at equilibrium pH=6.5 and Regarding extraction by Cyanex 272, the plot for cobalt was a straight line over the extractant concentration range 0.16–0.66 M. The initial cobalt concentration was 0.65 g/l and at equilibrium pH=6 and As Versatic 10 proved to be an efficient extractant for the simultaneous extraction of cobalt and nickel, in the presence of magnesium and calcium, from sulphate solutions, a Mc-Cabe Thiele diagram was constructed for Co After cobalt and nickel extraction by Versatic 10 and their stripping by synthetic nickel spent electrolyte, the aqueous solution contained 3.72 g/l cobalt and 77.05 g/l nickel (Ni spent electrolyte: 55.45 g/l and Ni for electrowinning: 21.6 g/l). Cobalt extraction isotherm was determined at the following conditions, which had been found to be optimum by the statistical analysis preceded: Cyanex 272 concentration=10% (v/v), diluent=Exxsol D-80, extraction pH=6.0 and Continuous tests were carried out in a laboratory solvent extraction unit (Bell Engineering Model 282). The effective volume was 185 ml for each mixer and 364 ml for the settler. The operating conditions for the simultaneous extraction of cobalt and nickel from a magnesium and calcium sulphate solution, using Versatic 10, as well as their stripping by nickel spent electrolyte were: organic phase=20% (v/v) Versatic 10 in Exxsol D-80 with 5%TBP; aqueous phase=0.65 g/l Co, 3.8 g/l Ni, 5.75 g/l Mg and 0.25 g/l Ca at pH=6.5; extraction stages=2; stripping stages=3; temperature=40 °C; strip feed=synthetic Ni flow rate (ml/min)=aqueous feed: 20.57, solvent feed: 8.94, strip feed: 3.58. At those conditions, cobalt and nickel extraction by Versatic 10, in the presence of Mg The corresponding operating conditions for the extraction of cobalt, from a nickel sulphate solution, using Cyanex 272, as well as for cobalt stripping by cobalt spent electrolyte were: solvent=10% (v/v) Cyanex 272 in Exxsol D-80 with 5%TBP; liquor=3.72 g/l Co, 77.05 g/l Ni as sulphates, pH=6.0; extraction stages=2; stripping stages=2; temperature=40 °C; strip feed=Synthetic Co flow rate (ml/min)=aqueous feed: 20.57, solvent feed: 10.29, strip feed: 5.72. At those conditions, cobalt extraction by Cyanex 272, in the presence of nickel, reached 99.7%. Cobalt stripping by cobalt spent electrolyte reached 99.6% (44.03 g/l Co for electrolyte feed: 30.8 g/l Co for spent electrolyte and 13.23 g/l Co for cobalt drop in electrowinning). Based on the data presented in this paper, there is suggested a complete solvent extraction process for nickel and cobalt separation from magnesium and calcium synthetic sulphate solutions. The process comprises the following steps: Contacting the initial sulphate liquor with the carboxylic Versatic 10 in a cobalt and nickel extraction circuit to produce a first raffinate, rich in magnesium and calcium, and a first solvent, rich in cobalt and nickel. Versatic 10, diluted in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, could extract cobalt and nickel, in the presence of magnesium and calcium, in two stages, at pH=6.5, Contacting the loaded with cobalt and nickel Versatic 10 with a synthetic nickel spent electrolyte in order to produce a solution suitable for nickel electrowinning. Nickel spent electrolyte solution (55.45 g/l in 2 M H Separating cobalt and nickel by solvent extraction using the phosphinic extractant Cyanex 272 to produce a third raffinate, rich in nickel, for electrowinning (77.05 g/l Ni for electrolyte feed: 55.45 g/l Ni for spent electrolyte and 21.6 g/l Ni for nickel drop in electrowinning) and a second solvent rich in cobalt. Cyanex 272, diluted in Exxsol D-80 with 5% TBP, could extract cobalt, in the presence of nickel, in two stages, at pH=6.0, Contacting the loaded, with cobalt, Cyanex 272 with synthetic cobalt spent electrolyte in order to produce a solution suitable for cobalt electrowinning. Cobalt spent electrolyte solution (1 M H The authors express their warmest thanks to the European Commission, Directorate General XII, for the financial support of the present work, which was carried out as a part of the research project BRE2-CT94-1020.