The effect of controlling strata movement in solid filling mining depends on the filling rate of the goaf. However, the mechanical property of the overburden in the backfill stope and the designed size of the backfill mining workface should also be considered. In this study, we established a main roof strata model with loads in accordance with the theory of key strata to investigate the stability of the overburden in solid dense filling mining. We analyzed the stress distribution law of the main roof strata based on elastic thin plate theory. The results show that the position of the long side midpoint of the main roof strata failed more easily because of tensile yield, indicating that this position is the area where failure is likely to occur more easily. We also deduced the stability mechanics criterion of the main roof strata based on tensile yield criterion. The factors affecting the stability of the overburden in solid dense filling mining were also analyzed, including the thickness and elasticity modulus of the main roof strata, overlying strata loads, advanced distance and length of workface, and elastic foundation coefficient of backfill body. The research achievements can provide an important theoretical basis for determining the designed size of the solid dense filling mining workface.Although large-scale and extensive coal mining can meet China’s ever-growing energy needs, it also causes considerable waste of coal resources and environmental damage. One reason is that the all caving method is applied in dealing with the goaf, causing strata movement and large areas of ground subsidence. Thus, old management of goaf roof at the mining workface must be disrupted to balance the demand for coal mining and the need for ecological protection to achieve sustainable development of coal mines, green mining, and reasonable mining Solid filling coal mining uses separate filling system, equipment, and technology to fill solid wastes, such as underground gangue waste into goaf to create a compacted backfill that can replace the role of the original coal rock in supporting the workface roof strata and ensuring that surface constructions can endure the consequent ground subsidence. Previous experiences have shown that the control effect of strata movement in solid filling mining depends on the filling rate (the ratio of mining height and final compacted height of the backfill body when its roof strata reaches a stable condition after full movement and subsidence) of the goaf. A solid filling coal mining research group at China University of Mining and Technology conducted a systematic study on relevant questions. Zhou et al. suggested using filling rate as a technical criterion to evaluate the results of solid backfilling and analyzed key factors to filling rate These studies show that the higher the filling rate in the goaf, the better the stability of the roof strata Based on key strata theory on strata control, we analyzed the movement and deformation features of the roof strata at filling stope, and established a mechanical model of main roof in the solid compacted filling stope. We introduced Griffith yield criterion and deduced the mechanical criterion of the stability of the main roof strata in the stope while considering tensile yield failure mechanism. We also analyzed factors concerning the stability of the roof strata in the solid compacted filling stope in a systematic manner in an attempt to provide reliable theoretical basis for the size design in a filling mining workface. As the mining workface advances, solid backfills, such as gangue, would immediately be filled into goaf and fully connect with the roof strata of goaf with the support of the rear ramming structure. Curbing or Mitigating the deformation of the immediate roof, main roof, and overlying strata is possible to avoid immediate roof fracture or fracture but not collapse, while the main roof strata only has bend subsidence. In this way, the movement and deformation of the roof strata can be controlled, as shown in For solid dense filling coal mining, the inclination length of the workface is usually in the range of 100–180 In The load acting on the main roof of stope in the solid dense filling mining workface includes the overlying strata load The deflection function of the main roof strata under the overlying strata load with four edges clamped at the elastic foundation is as follows: Coefficient By substituting the deflection function of the main roof strata The stress distribution law of the main roof strata under overlying strata load is analyzed by supposing that the advanced distance of workface According to the distribution law of stress Although the analysis of the stress of the main roof strata is conducted under the supposition of length 600 Substituting the stress components The main roof strata in a stope usually consist of thick and hard rocks, which makes it susceptible to brittle failure. Assuming that the failure of the main roof strata is caused by the stretch under the action of polyaxial stress and is in accordance with the Griffith yield criterion, judging The stress Rock can endure compression well but not tension, and the tensile stress at (300 The position coordinates of the long side midpoint (300 Therefore, to ensure the stability of the main roof strata and avoid tensile failure, Eq. Eq. To maintain the stability of the main roof strata in solid dense filling mining, maximum tensile stress Given the same parameters as above, According to the key strata theory, if a stratum plays a major role in strata activities, then the stratum is referred as the key strata. Key strata can be distinguished by their deformation and breaking features. When the key stratum breaks and all upper overlying strata bend in coordination, then the key strata can be referred to as the main key strata. If part of overlying strata bends, then it is called an inferior key stratum In solid dense filling mining, bending will not cause the main roof strata to break. Therefore, only the load of the strata below the main key strata in the overlying strata should be considered when determining the load Given the same parameters above, When gangue and other solid filling materials are filled into the gob, they become the main supporter, and serve to shore up the overlying strata load of the stope along with the surrounding strata. This method can adjust the stress and deformation features of the workface surrounding strata, and change the all caving mining method, thereby preventing mass caving and the fracture growth in the stope surrounding strata. The support provided by the filling substance on the overburden determines directly how the activities of the overlying strata can be controlled. Given the same parameters as above, A mine is planned to extract its #4 coal seam, which has an average thickness of 3.2 Using the key strata theory, the first layer medium sandstone stratum (the main roof strata) of the overlying strata of the stope is the first key stratum, the fifth layer medium sandstone stratum is the second key stratum, and the twelfth-layer fine sandstone stratum is the main key stratum in the overlying strata of stope. Hence, only the overburden load under the height of 160   The relationship between maximum tensile stress on the main roof strata of the filling stope and its thickness is nonlinear. Maximum tensile stress becomes smaller as the main roof strata become thicker. Maximum tensile stress on the main roof strata is affected more easily by the elastic modulus as the main roof strata becomes thinner. Thicker main roof strata will be more conducive to maintaining the stability of the overlying strata in a filling mining workface. The maximum tensile stress on the main roof strata of the stope increases in a linear relationship with the increases in upper overburden load The maximum tensile stress on the main roof strata in the filling stope increases as the advanced distance and length of workface increase. Therefore, the advanced distance of workface and workface length should be controlled to be more conducive to maintaining the overlying strata of a filling stope stable. The maximum tensile stress on the main roof strata decreases with the increase in elastic foundation coefficient. The bigger the elastic foundation coefficient, the smaller the tensile stress will be, thereby making it conducive to maintaining the stability of the overlying strata in a filling mining workface. Financial support for this work, provided by the