In this study the effects of various stripping parameters such as complexing agent (EDTA), organic to aqueous ratio (0.5, 1.0, 2.0), acid type (hydrochloric, sulfuric, sulfuric+hydrogen peroxide) and their concentrations (0.5, 1.0, 2.0N) were investigated on zirconium stripping efficiency from loaded Cyanex 272 in kerosene. Results showed that, all of these parameters had significant effect on the selective zirconium stripping.Zirconium ores contain small amounts of hafnium that must be removed when producing nuclear grade zirconium. In our primary experiment’s it is found that Cyanex 272 as an alternative for TBP/nitrate system can selectively extract zirconium from 2.0 In the present study, four factors in three-levels, i.e., complexing agent, organic to queues ratio, acid type and also acid concentration were considered. The stripping parameters and their selected levels are presented in The concentrations of hafnium and zirconium in the aqueous phase were determined by the ICP-AES (Varian liberty 150, Australia). Shaking of the organic and aqueous mixture was performed with a mechanical shaker. Cyanex 272 supplied by Cytec, Canada. Kerosene (Fluka) was used as a diluent. As a source of Zr(IV) and Hf(IV), ZrOCl Concentrations of zirconium and hafnium in the aqueous phase were 45 and 5  With reference to complexing agent, increase of EDTA concentration was expected to increase monotonically stripping efficiency of zirconium, but the results showed that in the concentration range of EDTA in this study, the increase of stripping efficiency is not monotonic. It seems that decrease of the stripping efficiency of zirconium with 2.5 Finally, as expected, with reduction of the stripping agent (aqueous phase), the stripping efficiency was decreased. According to the principle of the Taguchi method, for a given design factor, the current study defines high influence on stripping efficiency as a maximum S/N ratio. Therefore combination of the factors and the corresponding value of each level, i.e., 2.0 Referring to According to the Taguchi technique, to determine the optimal conditions and to compare the results with the expected conditions, it is necessary to perform a confirmation experiment. If the general design fails to meet specified requirements, the process must be reiterated using a new system until the required criteria is satisfied. In the present work, the required confirmation experiment for selective stripping should satisfy the optimum design factors combination as A Results of conventional experiment showed that, in the range of 0.3–2.0 Despite the results obtained by The conclusion of this study can be summarized as follows: The optimum combination of factors and levels introduced by the Taguchi method for selective zirconium stripping in order of importance are as follows: O/A equal to 2, 1.0 Regard to conventional method, in the optimum conditions that has been introduced by the Taguchi method, not only greater zirconium stripping efficiency was achieved but also the quantity of separation factor was increased up to about 100%. Because of third phase formation, use of hydrogen peroxide in the stripping solution is not recommended.