This paper investigates the detrimental effect of lizardite surface characteristics on pentlandite flotation. To reduce the effect, two different starch graft copolymers, starch–graft–polyacrylamide (S–g–PAM) and starch–graft–polyacrylic acid (S–g–PAA) were synthesized as depressants for lizardite. The flotation results show that at pH value of 8, where the flotation of lizardite and pentlandite are routinely performed, S–g–PAM and S–g–PAA improve pentlandite recovery efficiently, compared with the traditional depressant carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC). Experimental results demonstrate that S–g–PAM and S–g–PAA disperse the hydrophilic lizardite particles from the pentlandite surface and also flocculate lizardite particles.Lizardite ((Mg, Fe) Efficient flotation separation of valuable minerals from gangue minerals requires selective depressants Starch graft copolymer is a kind of renewable, biodegradable, inexpensive and widely obtainable biopolymer, which consists of similar polysaccharide main chains as CMC The lizardite and the pentlandite were obtained from Donghai, Jinchuan in China. X–ray powder diffraction (XRD) data confirmed that lizardite was 99% pure and pentlandite was 96.8% pure ( Acrylamide, acrylic acid and soluble starch are used as monomers; ceric ammonium nitrate and nitric acid are used as a redox initiator pair. Sodium Butyl Xanthate (NaBX) is used as the collector and Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol (MIBC) acts as the frother. Potassium nitrate (KNO To obtain the starch graft copolymers with high Mw, S−g−PAM and S−g−PAA were synthesized with the maximum %Add-on of 50% and 25%, respectively, according to the synthetic method described The SEM photographs reflected the variations between starch and starch graft copolymers ( Mineral flotation tests were carried out in an inflatable hanging slot flotation machine (XFGC A HITACHI S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDXS) was used to produce images and analyze the elemental composition of the surfaces of mineral samples. The infrared spectra of mineral samples were recorded with a NEXUS 670 Spectrometer. Approximately 1 Zeta potential was determined using a Malvern Zetasizer nano ZS zeta potential meter. For each measurement, 30 An optical microscopy (OLYMPUS BX51) was used for direct observation of the aggregation/dispersion of samples. The sample conditioning procedure was the same as flotation tests. After conditioning, a drop of the suspension was examined. For each sedimentation tests, 0.1 Flotation tests were performed to demonstrate the effect of lizardite on the flotation of pentlandite at pH 8. As shown in In order to investigate the reasons for the flotation results, floated and unfloated pentlandite particles obtained from flotation tests were collected for surface study. As a further surface chemistry investigation of the attachment of lizardite particles onto pentlandite surface, individual electro-kinetic studies were performed as a function of pH. Addition of starch graft copolymers is expected to improve pentlandite recovery in the flotation of lizardite/pentlandite system. Therefore, flotation tests were performed to compare the effect of the polymers. As shown in Section Zeta potential measurements were carried out again to analyze the reason why non–ionic S–g–PAM could change electro–kinetic behavior of lizardite. As shown in Zeta potential measurements showed that starch graft copolymers dispersed lizardite particles from pentlandite surface by changing the electrostatic interaction between the two minerals. In order to support this point of view, floated pentlandite particles in flotation tests ( Zeta potential measurements in With FTIR study and optical microscopy experiment, self–agglomeration has been found to be another factor influencing the attachment of lizardite particles onto pentlandite surface. Previous studies showed that the turbidity technique was suitable to study mineral particle flocculation (self-agglomeration) This study has demonstrated the detrimental effect of lizardite on the flotation of pentlandite can be efficiently depressed with the utilization of two starch graft copolymers. The depression mechanism is suggested to be a combination of dispersion and flocculation. Dispersion is due to the change of the electro-steric attraction to the electro-steric repulsion between lizardite and pentlandite, when lizardite becomes more negatively charged as starch graft copolymers adsorb preferentially on its surface. However, the adsorption mechanisms of two starch graft copolymers are different, S–g–PAA over–compensates the inherent positive potential of the lizardite by its abundant COO This work was supported by the International S&T Cooperation Program of China (2013DFR70580).