The present study investigates the effects of formulation and process parameters on the production of aprepitant nanosuspensions applying wet media milling and subsequent solidification. Six stabilizers were used: two brands of hydroxylpropylmethyl cellulose (HPMC E-15LV and Pharmacoat 603), hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC-SSL), polyvinylpyrollidone (PVP), D-α-Tocopherol polyethylene glycol 1000 succinate (TPGS 1000), Poloxamer P188 and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), while two diluents (mannitol and sucrose) were incorporated prior to solidification by two methods (spray- and freeze-drying). The polymorphic purity of the raw material, the particle size of nanocrystals, and the physicochemical properties of the final dried powders were assessed. Focus was placed on the energetic aspects of the crystal structure of aprepitant in order to rationalize particle breakage during wet milling. It was found that a combination of cellulosic polymers with SDS are suitable stabilizers for the production of aprepitant nanocrystals (∼300nm or smaller) by wet media milling. Regarding the solidification of the nanosuspensions, spray-drying is advantageous compared to freeze-drying, as it leads to the production of almost spherical individual micron-sized agglomerates of nanocrystals and few secondary agglomerates of them which are expected to exhibit improved handling behavior. Spray-dried nanocrystal agglomerates containing Pharmacoat 603 and mannitol exhibit reduced hygroscopity compared to those prepared with sucrose and HPC-SSL, making them the excipients of choice.Nanocrystals possess enhanced dissolution rate due to the substantial surface area increase, which is also accompanied by a reduction in the thickness of the diffusion layer, and possibly an increase in the saturation solubility of the drug ( Among several APIs that have been successfully formulated and marketed as nanocrystals, aprepitant represents a characteristic example of a poorly water-soluble substance whose bioavailability can be enhanced by nano-comminution ( Up until now, several reports describing the production of aprepitant nanocrystals by various methodologies can be found in the literature. Therefore, the present work aims to: a) fill the knowledge gap of the effects of different stabilizers on the aprepitant size reduction during wet nanomilling, b) focus on the energetic aspects of aprepitant’s crystal structure in order to rationalize particle breakage during nanomilling, and c) to compare freeze-drying and spray-drying as solidification methods of the aprepitant nanosuspension produced by using different stabilizer, after the addition of sucrose or mannitol as diluents. For this purpose, aprepitant nanosuspensions are produced by a planetary ball mill, using brands of substituted cellulose stabilizers differing in their substitution (one hydroxylpropyl and two hydroxypropyl-methyl cellulose brands) alone or in combination of surfactant (SDS). Subsequently the produced nanosuspensions are solidified by freeze- or spray-drying, after addition of sucrose or mannitol as diluents. Aprepitant as micronized crystalline powder (diameter, D Wet media milling of aprepitant was conducted using a Pulverisette 7 Premium planetary ball mill (Fritsch GmbH, Germany). 0.5 After preliminary experimentation following an one factor at a time approach, the optimum formulation and operating conditions were selected. The combination of HPC-SSL or Pharmacoat 603 and SDS was selected as the most suitable stabilizer ( The particle size distribution of the nanosuspensions was determined by dynamic light scattering on a Zetasizer nano ZS (Malvern Instruments, UK), using disposable polystyrene sample cells, and applying the Mie theory for particle size calculation. The results were recorded as the average of three measurements. Four batches of nanosuspensions of each formulation were combined corresponding to 2 2 The nanosuspension was diluted with 20 The particle size distribution of the spray-dried powders was determined by laser diffraction. A HELOS/BR laser diffractometer (Sympatec GmbH, Germany) fitted with the micro-dosing unit ASPIROS and combined with the dry disperser RODOS was employed. Samples were placed in the feeder and pressurised air of 4 The morphology of nanocrystal agglomerates was assessed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Samples were placed on a double-side electroconductive adhesive tape, which was fixed on an aluminium stub and then sputter-coated with gold under argon atmosphere to a thickness of 10 Residual moisture content was determined by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) using a Discovery TGA (TA Instruments, USA) controlled by TRIOS (TA) software. Weighted powder samples (1–5 The redispersibility was expressed as percent redispersibility index (RDI%), according to ( The polymorphic identity and purity of the raw material was investigated by a combination of polarized light microscopy, powder X-ray diffraction, differential scanning calorimetry, and infrared spectroscopy, and the crystal lattice properties were calculated by molecular as well as quantum mechanics computational methods. Small amounts of crystals were dispersed in high boiling point silicone oil (Wacker Chemie AG, Germany) and heated up to 300 XRPD patterns of the raw material, recrystallized pure polymorphs, and solidified nanocrystal agglomerates, were obtained with a bench- top diffractometer (Rigaku Miniflex 600, Japan) in order to assess crystallinity and polymorphic purity. Cu Kα radiation at 15 DSC scans were performed on a DSC 204 F1 Phoenix heat-flux differential scanning calorimeter (NETZSCH, Germany). Accurately weighted samples of ∼1 ATR-FTIR spectra were recorded with a Golden Gate MkII single reflection ATR accessory (Specac Ltd., England, UK) with ZnSe lens over a range of 4000–550 The energetic and structural aspects of aprepitant were investigated following a combination of approaches that provide insight into the intermolecular interactions that define the mechanical properties of the drug. Crystal morphology diagrams based on Bravais-Friedel-Donnay-Harker (BFDH) theory, which assumes that the slowest growing faces are those with the greatest interplanar spacing, d The energy of the crystal lattice of aprepitant form II was minimized with the help of the General Utility Lattice Program, GULP v.4.0 ( The energy frameworks defining the crystal structure of apreptiant were analysed using the PIXEL approach developed by Gavezzotti ( Aprepitant exists in two monotropically related crystal forms ( Despite the presence of small amounts of form I, form II is the major constituent of the given sample, and therefore the mechanical properties of form II are considered relevant to the milling process. The stabilizers used in the preliminary experiments of this study represent different chemical classes. Lutrol F68 and TPGS have surfactant properties, PVP K30 is a crystallization inhibitor, while the cellulosic polymers are thought to act mainly by steric hindrance of interparticle contact. Therefore their influences on nanomilling and nanosuspensions’ short term stability are expected to vary. In order to identify the optimal suspension composition and process parameters for nanocrystal size reduction and short term physical stability, preliminary milling runs were conducted using different amounts of stabilizer, beads, and milling time (total duration of milling cycles, excluding breaks). The different brands of non ionic cellulosic polymers having different proportion of methoxy and hydroxypropoxy substitution are expected to result in different viscosity of the milling liquid, in different abrasion and shear stress of nanosuspensions as well as in different interaction with the ionic surfactant (SDS). Particularly HPC-SSL and Pharmacoat 603 were selected as giving aqueous solutions of similar viscosity (about 3 Results of the z-average diameter vs milling time for various stabilizers up to 60 The effect of the stabilizer amount is more complex and seems to depend on its chemical nature, as several factors come into play. Generally, the use of high amounts of stabilizers and particularly surfactants should be avoided. For sterically acting (non surface active) stabilizers, higher amounts provide better surface coverage of the drug particles, which should increase their aid in size reduction. However, higher amounts of non surfactant stabilizers may also contribute to increased suspension viscosity, which in turn hinders the milling process. Therefore, when a large amount of stabilizer is necessary, addition of a surfactant may be used to aid wetting of the particles and facilitate comminution. In the present work, cellulosic polymers showed the best performance as stabilizers, and therefore relatively high amounts were chosen, since they are considered to act sterically. Milling time is another important factor, because particle breakage generally depends on the energy input to the mill, the collision probability, the existence of slip planes, the concentration of lattice defects, suspension temperature and its effects on the crystal’s mechanical properties. Generally, prolonged milling time is expected to facilitate comminution, because of the increased number of collisions between drug particles and milling beads. However, prolonged milling time may cause a temperature increase, which in turn promotes Ostwald ripening and particle enlargement by crystal growth. High temperatures may also affect the mechanical properties of the crystals, giving rise to ductile behavior, which hinders crystal fracture and comminution. This effect is more pronounced in ductile substances of low melting point, such as ibuprofen, and it is considered unlikely to occur in the case of aprepitant. In this study, a suitable milling scheme was adopted (i.e. 3 Insight into aprepitant’s particle breakage can be obtained by considering its mechanical properties, as well as the spatial distribution of intermolecular forces in its crystal lattice. Calculated mechanical properties, Nanocrystals produced by wet milling with the combination of the two selected cellulosic stabilizers (HPC-SSL and Pharmacoat 603) and SDS had similar z-average size (312 and 395 Regarding the residual water content, from the percent mass change listed in Regarding the particle morphology, Finally, particle size results of the solidified nanocrystal agglomerates by spray-drying, listed in Production of nanoparticles of aprepitant, of a size near to or lower than 300 Regarding the solidification of nanosuspensions, spray-drying is advantageous compared to freeze-drying as it leads to the production of almost spherical individual micron-sized agglomerates of nanocrystals and few secondary agglomerates of them which are expected to exhibit improved flow properties due to their favorable shape. Regarding the selection of diluents, mannitol combined with Pharmacoat 603 produced nanocrystal agglomerates with reduced hygroscopity compared to sucrose combined with HPC-SSL, making them the excipient of choice. The authors acknowledge