This work presents a theoretical approach, based on momentum and energy or Reynolds analogy, to investigate forced convection in microducts of arbitrary cross-section. H1 boundary condition is assumed for gas flow in the slip-flow regime with further complication of a temperature jump condition assumption. It is shown that applying an analogy concept, one can relate the slip-flow results to those of no-slip/no-jump ones available in the literature. Present results for slip flow in microchannels of parallel plate, circular, triangular, trapezoidal, polygonal, rhombic, and rectangular cross-sections are found to be in close agreement with those in the literature. A further modification, based on Chilton-Colburn analogy is applied to enable the Prandtl number variation effects when the Prandtl number is not equal to unity.Microscale heat and fluid flow is of great importance not only for playing a key part in the biological systems, but also for its application in cooling electronic equipment, see This paper uses the analogy between momentum and thermal energy equation to relate the heat transfer to pressure drop for such slip flow. Furthermore, these slip flow results can be related to no-slip flow data for which theoretical results are available in the literature for a number of boundary conditions. Here, the As such, this paper proposes a shorthand way of calculating slip flow forced convection from the already existing no-slip solutions. Application of this methodology to microchannels of parallel plate, circular, elliptical, rhombic, and rectangular cross-sectional shape is verified by comparing the results with those available in the literature. Furthermore, novel results pertaining to microchannels of hexagonal cross-sectional shape are reported following the application of the proposed heat and momentum transfer analogy. Effects of Prantdl number variation on heat transfer for microducts of semicircular and triangular cross-section are also investigated. Consider gas flow in a straight microconduit of arbitrary but axially-uniform cross-section as shown in The slip velocity can be found as Here, This can be integrated to give Assuming constant fluid properties, the fully developed thermal energy equation reads Now the thermal energy equation can be rearranged to read Integrating over the fluid volume ( Using the dimensionless temperature and with Note the analogy between Eqs. The above equation allows for prediction of heat transfer based on pressure drop for slip flow through a micro-duct of arbitrary but uniform cross-section. For instance, results of Hooman Note that, one can either use the friction factor for slip flow as given by Morini et al. Application of Eq. Despite the fact that the above correlation has been suggested for isothermal wall heating/cooling problems and is not applicable in our case where an isoflux boundary condition is assumed, a very interesting observation, by only recasting the results of Note that the exponent of Note that for the highest possible slip flow As an example, friction factor predictions of Tamayol and Hooman As a result, assuming the same Prandtl number for simplicity, the Nusselt number is obtainable as Note that As noted earlier, the fully developed Nusselt number is a function of the fluid Prandtl number for slip flow (unlike that of no-slip laminar internal forced convection). As such, Finally, novel results can be presented for microducts of polygonal cross-section. Application of the developed analogy technique to predict the heat transfer based on velocity field data is only possible when the friction factor is known a priori. Therefore, Eq. A simple model is presented to investigate fully developed slip flow forced convection through microducts of arbitrary but uniform cross-section subject to the The authors gratefully acknowledged the support from the