We report a method of closed femoral nailing, without locking, using only ultrasound guidance from the beginning to end of the operation. The method was evaluated as a prospective study in 150 cases of unilateral femoral mid-shaft fracture that underwent surgery within 1 week. There were 132 males and 18 females aged from 16 to 70 years (mean 26). The interval from injury to operation averaged 2.3 days (range 1–7). Twenty-seven cases had Winquist I comminution and 123 cases had no comminution. In 145 cases (97%), we were successful using this method, with an average operation time of 35.8min (range 30–50). In five cases, we had to change to using fluoroscopic control. Of these, in one case the fracture could not be reduced under ultrasound monitoring, one had nail incarceration, in one there was breakage of the flexible reamer and in two cases we were unable to pass the guide-wire across the fracture within 10min. Ultrasound is readily available in most hospitals and can be used as an alternative method for monitoring the fracture alignment in closed unlocked femoral nailing.Closed intramedullary nailing is considered the treatment of choice for femoral shaft fractures. Performing closed unlocked femoral nailing for simple or minimally comminuted fractures under ultrasound guidance from beginning to end of the operation without image intensifier control has been carried out by senior author (BM) Between April 1997 and August 2004 at Siriraj Hospital, we assessed 150 consecutive patients aged over 15 years with unilateral mid-shaft femoral fractures that were non-comminuted or very minimal comminuted (Winquist I). If surgery has been delayed, adequate skeletal traction must be applied. Preoperatively the nail length is estimated from the measurement of the length from greater trochanter to lateral epicondyle of the uninjured thigh. The nail diameter is estimated by measuring the width of the femoral canal at the isthmus on an anteroposterior radiograph. The patient is placed in the lateral position on a fracture table with the hip on the fracture side flexed to 30° around the centre post and the perineum against the T-piece. Traction is usually applied via a foot-piece. Adequacy of the traction force is assessed by ultrasound using a transverse scan. If the fragments are still overriding, the sonogram will show a bony cross-section from both fragments at the same time on the image display. If the fracture is adequately distracted, the sonogram will show only a single bony cross-section from either the proximal or the distal fragment on the image display ( Fracture alignment is then assessed with a 5 Once the fracture is reduced, surgical drapes are applied. The alignment of the proximal fragment can be checked by using the linear transducer to scan the anterior or lateral cortex. The moving end of the guide-wire can usually be visualised on the ultrasound scan as it is passed across the fracture site. Before reducing the fracture again, the guide-wire tip is slightly withdrawn to prevent it obstructing the fracture reduction. The fracture is reduced using the same manoeuvre as previously, and the guide-wire is then passed into the distal fragment. If the guide-wire is passed successfully into the distal fragment, there will be palpable rough surface contact and the guide-wire cannot pass the metaphysis. The ultrasound will show that the bone fragments remain well aligned after removal of the reduction force or wrench and the guide-wire is seen at the fracture gap ( As the reamer passes across the fracture gap it can be observed on ultrasound and the alignment will improve from the splinting effect of the reamer inside the medullary canal. Ultrasound may be used to monitor the fracture gap during the passing of the nail across the fracture site. If the nail becomes stuck at the fracture site, the ultrasound will show an increased distance of the fracture gap and movement of the distal fragment with each tap of the nail. There were 132 males and 18 females aged from 16 to 70 years (mean 26). The interval from injury to operation averaged 2.3 days (range 1–7). Twenty-seven cases were Winquist type I comminution and 123 cases were non-comminuted fractures. In 145 cases, the fracture was closed, but five had Gustillo In almost all the cases in this study, the fracture was reducible and could be visualised on ultrasound monitoring prior to the start of the operation. In one very muscular patient the fracture could not be reduced under ultrasound guidance and reduction was performed under fluoroscopic control. In 145 cases (97%), closed Kuntscher nailing was successfully performed under ultrasound guidance from beginning to end. The mean operation time in the successful group was 35.8 Closed femoral nailing is considered the treatment of choice for femoral shaft fractures. Although most recent series involve interlocking femoral nailing, simple, non-comminuted fractures often occur in the relatively low velocity injuries in remote area of ASEAN countries. If the fracture is in the middle third of the shaft and has no or only minimal comminution (Winquist type I), closed Kuntscher nailing is still commonly used. With a closed nailing technique, the extent of soft-tissue dissection and devitalisation is minimised and the fracture haematoma is not disturbed. Rapid healing of the fracture with good callus formation is predictable and the complications including infection are rare. Despite these advantages, the closed technique for nailing is conventionally possible only when there is an image intensifier. Thus, in developing countries where there is no image intensifier closed nailing is often not possible. An alternative method of closed, unlocked femoral nailing using ultrasound guidance is possible. We found this technique to be effective with a high success rate in appropriate patients. We believe there were three reasons for the high success rate in this study. Firstly, our indication was limited to cases with no or minimal comminution, in which the ultrasound was found to be more reliable than in more comminuted fractures. Secondly, the non-comminuted fracture usually results from relatively lower energy injury and trends to have less soft-tissue damage. This may make it easier to re-align the fracture fragments during closed reduction. Thirdly, a short time interval from injury to operation is also an important factor for successful reduction. The senior author (BM) had previously found that failure of reduction mostly occurred in cases operated on after 7 days. This study was started after this technique had been refined. The preoperative rehearsal of fracture reduction before starting the operation is very useful to identify the problem cases. The method is not difficult to master and most of the cases were operated by orthopaedic residents under supervision of one of the authors. One of our former resident has reported his success with this method in a provincial hospital. In conclusion, the technique described here can be used as an alternative method for closed, unlocked femoral nailing where there is no C-arm image intensifier. This may be a helpful alternative in developing countries.