Stochastic simulation is increasingly used to map the spatial variability in the grades of elements of interest and to assess the uncertainty in the mineral resources and ore reserves. The practical implementation requires specifying a stochastic model, which describes the spatial distribution of the grades, and an algorithm to construct realizations of these grades, viewed as different possible outcomes or scenarios. In the case of the Gaussian random field model, a variety of algorithms have been proposed in the past decades, but their ability to reproduce the model statistics is often unequal. In this paper, we compare two such algorithms, namely the turning bands and the sequential algorithms. The comparison is hold through a synthetic case study and a real case study in a porphyry copper deposit located in southeastern Iran, in which it is of interest to jointly simulate the copper, molybdenum, silver, lead and zinc grades. Statistical testing and graphical validations are realized to check whether or not the realizations reproduce the features of the true grades, in particular their direct and cross variograms. Sequential simulation based on collocated cokriging turns out to poorly reproduce the cross variograms, while turning bands proves to be accurate in all the analyzed cases.Geostatistical simulation is widely used in the evaluation of mineral resources and ore reserves to map geological heterogeneity at different spatial scales and to assess the uncertainty in the unknown values of coregionalized variables, such as the grades of elements of interest, petrophysical properties of the subsoil, or geometallurgical properties (work index, acid consumption, metal recoveries) ( When the coregionalized variables can be modeled (up to some nonlinear transformation) by Gaussian random fields, a few exact algorithms, such as the matrix decomposition ( To overcome these limitations, approximate algorithms can be applied, allowing dealing with large numbers of data on unstructured grids. In this category, one finds the sequential Gaussian ( The purpose of this paper is to assess the performance and check the accuracy of sequential Gaussian and turning bands simulation, through actual and synthetic case studies. It is often of interest to construct numerical models that reproduce the joint distribution of several coregionalized variables at unsampled locations, conditionally to the information available at sampling locations (conditional cosimulation). Because the variables are usually spatially cross-correlated, it is not sufficient to simulate each variable separately. Instead, a multivariate approach has to be used. In the case of representing the coregionalized variables of interest by Gaussian random fields, the problem of cosimulation consists in constructing realizations of a vector Gaussian random field, say {  Consider that where     The sequential approach is applicable to simulate any vector Gaussian random field, even when its correlation structure is not a linear coregionalization model Eq. Instead of cokriging with all the previously simulated vectors Here, simulation is performed in a hierarchical manner: the first component of To jointly simulate the components of In accordance with the linear coregionalization model, Let The simulation of the components of In order to make the simulated vector random field conditional to a set of pre-existing data, one can post-process the realizations obtained by turning bands (non-conditional simulation) in order to turn them conditional. This step is based on cokriging the difference between the simulation at the data locations and the actual conditioning data values ( One approach to assess the quality of a simulation algorithm is to compare the experimental statistics of a set of realizations (e.g., the mean value or the variogram calculated for given lag separation distances) with the underlying model statistics ( The synthetic case study shown in this section consists in simulating a single Gaussian random field with zero mean and isotropic spherical variogram on a two-dimensional regular grid Consider the average of the Gaussian random field over the whole grid:  For a given lag separation vector As for the case of the mean value, if the absolute value of the left-hand side member is greater than a critical value (for a pre-specified significance level), one will reject the null hypothesis that the variogram of the simulated field at lag The previous results concern the reproduction of the variogram at five different lags considered separately. One can also test for the reproduction at the same five lags simultaneously, by using a Hotelling test that can be seen as a multivariate extension of the Student test ( Although limited to a single variable, these experiments demonstrate that the choice of the simulation algorithm has an impact on the quality of the results. In particular, beyond the visual inspection of the variograms of realizations, the Student and Hotelling tests prove that there is statistical evidence that sequential Gaussian simulation fails in reproducing the target spatial correlation structure (variogram), whereas turning bands proves to be accurate. The problem of sequential simulation stems from the iterative nature of the algorithm: the error made at each stage by using a moving neighborhood approximation propagates at the next stages, insofar as the value simulated at one location is used as a conditioning data for all subsequent locations ( The Dar-Alu copper deposit is located at 29°24’46.6“N and 57°05’56.9”E, at about 135 A data set has been obtained from an exploration drilling campaign, where sample cores from 69 drill holes were analyzed for Cu (%), Mo (ppm), Ag (ppm), Pb (ppm), and Zn (ppm). For statistical analyses, the data have been composited at a regular length of two meters. The main statistics and experimental distributions of the analyzed grades are presented in The modeling stage consists of the following steps: in order to have representative distributions of the original grade data, cell declustering is performed to correct for the irregular sampling design ( each grade variable is transformed into a standard Gaussian variable ( the marginal binormality of the pairs of transformed variables is validated by examining their scatter diagrams, which exhibit an elliptic shape ( variogram analysis is performed on the transformed data in order to model their joint correlation structure. Since no obvious anisotropy was detected, omnidirectional sample variograms were calculated and fitted with isotropic models, using mixtures of six basic nested structures: a nugget effect and isotropic spherical models with ranges 30 m, 100 m, 150 m, 300 m, and 600 m, respectively. The fitting of the coregionalization matrices was achieved by recourse to a semi-automated fitting algorithm ( Cosimulation is performed on a regular grid with a mesh of 10 m In order to validate the results, the distributions of the simulated grades are compared with the distributions of original data, through quantile-quantile plots. It is expected that, on average over many realizations, the plots fit the diagonal lines, indicating an accurate reproduction of the data distributions. This is what effectively happens for the realizations obtained with both turning bands and sequential simulation ( To check that the realizations also reproduce the dependence relationships between grades, one can calculate the correlation coefficients between the Gaussian transforms of simulated grades in each realization. It is expected that these coefficients fluctuate around the experimental correlations ( Another criterion for assessing the quality of each simulation algorithm is to check the reproduction of the direct and cross variograms of the simulated Gaussian random fields. The results indicate that the direct variograms are well reproduced by all the algorithms ( The previous analyses allowed assessing the quality of the simulation algorithm (turning bands or sequential) but do not provide much insight into the chosen stochastic model (namely, a Gaussian random field model with the spatial correlation structure given by the variograms fitted in It is seen ( This study aimed at assessing the performance of two popular algorithms (turning bands and sequential) for jointly simulating coregionalized variables, through a synthetic case study (univariate) and a real case study (multivariate) from a multi-element deposit. The algorithms are fed with the same inputs: original conditioning data and Gaussian transformation functions in the real case study, variogram models, moving neighborhoods, output grids and numbers of realizations. The only differences are the use of previously simulated points in sequential simulation and the use of a finite number of lines in turning bands simulation, which is explained by the specificities of each algorithm. In both cases, turning bands accurately reproduces the spatial correlation structure, measured by the direct and cross variograms of the coregionalized variables under consideration, while sequential simulation produces some biases. Such biases are explained by a propagation of errors caused by the use of a moving neighborhood to determine the successive conditional distributions. This problem is more severe in the multivariate case when using collocated cokriging, in which case the reproduction of the cross variograms turns out to be poor. Accordingly, the choice of the simulation algorithm is relevant to accurately reproduce regionalized properties and the turning bands algorithm appears as an alternative of the sequential algorithm for the modeling of multi-element deposits. The authors thank the reviewers, Dr. Denis Marcotte and Dr. Joao Felipe Costa, for their recommendations that helped to improve the paper, and to Mr. Esfahanipour R. from the National Iranian Copper Industry Co. (NICICO) for granting access to the Dar-Alu copper deposit exploration data. The last two authors also acknowledge the funding by the Chilean Commission for Scientific and Technological Research, through Project Conicyt/Fondecyt/Regular/No. 1130085. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 