Copper-based composites appear to be a promising material for engineering applications due to their excellent thermophysical properties coupled with better high temperature mechanical properties as compared to pure copper and copper alloys. In the present investigation, copper-based SiCp composite (20% SiCp by volume) made by powder metallurgy route is investigated for its wear behaviour in terms of its thermal and mechanical characteristics. Dimensional equation between the interactive variables is stated to relate their influence on wear parameters of the material. Approximate Generalized Experimental Model (AGEM) which offers a better genesis of the wear situation is proposed based on the experimental response data to quantify the influence of interactive parameters on the wear. Copper powder (≤10μm) and α-SiC particles in the size range of 25–37μm were used to make green compacts of height to diameter ratio of 0.95–1.0 with compacting pressure of 438MPa. The compacts sintered at 860°C in nitrogen atmosphere were subjected to physical, mechanical and microstructural characterization. The wear test with an experimental plan of four loads (15N, 25N, 45N, and 65N) and four sliding speeds (0.6, 1.2, 1.8, 2.4m/s) was conducted on Pin-On-Disc machine to record loss in mass due to wear for a total sliding distance of 2500m. The wear rate (mm3/m) calculated for each load and sliding speed combination was used to state the dimensional equation in terms of wear rate parameter, interface parameter (X) and thermal parameter (Y) defined by dimensional analysis approach to quantify the influence of interactive tribological and materials parameters on the wear system under study. Plotting of wear regime maps has been attempted to delineate the boundaries between competing wear mechanisms which govern the wear modes ranging from mild to severe, oxidative, melt wear and alike. The dominance of a wear regime is discussed in the light of SEM micrographs of worn surfaces as for typical experimental conditions.Particulates make excellent inclusions, primarily because they lead to predictable isotropic behaviour in the composite. Some of the metal matrix composites like copper composite have been attracting attention because of their good mechanical, thermal and tribological properties. These composites are been considered preferably for applications where good wear resistance without loss of thermal and electrical conductivity of the matrix is the prime consideration. Tjong et al. The friction and wear of Al–Cu–SiC aluminium matrix composite pins for dry sliding against 4Cr13, W Mapping of wear phenomenon to delineate the boundaries between various regimes through which phenomenon progresses has acquired sufficient importance since the time it was first attempted by Lim and Ashby for Steel Wear mapping is now established as an approach to examine the involved issue of wear for giving an integrated view of wear situation in one single map Kennedy et al. To overcome the limitation of the conventional plots that study one variable at a time to conveniently resolve mild and severe wear regimes, the approach based on dimensional analysis using the Buckingham theorem has been attempted to formulate approximate generalized experimental model in which the interactive influence of various parameters gets quantified for their combined influence as against conventional approach of the one variable at a time. In the present work, the dimensional analysis approach as developed by Paretkar et al. The dimensional analysis approach adopted by Paretkar et al. In this present investigation, conventional data of wear rate (mm As per the definition this parameter is volume of material lost per unit cross sectional area per unit track, i.e. The configuration of the term as per dimensional analysis is The wear particles detach from the surface due to plastic deformation. The deformation is governed by the instability parameters such as stress, strain, work hardening exponent, microstructural parameter that is volume fraction of copper matrix, bulk shear stress, bulk hardness, coefficient of friction and time duration of sliding between the pin and counterface. These parameters are configured in the Besides plastic deformation, the rate of detachment of wear particle is accelerated at elevated temperature due to drop in mechanical properties of the copper matrix and weakening of the particle-matrix interface. The thermal parameter ( Copper-based composite containing 20% (by volume) SiC (hereafter referred as 20SiC) for the wear test were produced by a powder metallurgical route. The powders of copper and SiC were used to prepare the compacts. Copper powder used for making composites was of electrolytic grade having 99.97% purity (Make-Kemphasol) with particle size less than 10 The green compacts were then sintered in a nitrogen atmosphere at 860 The flow curve properties are obtained by plotting compression test data as indicated in The values of theoretical thermal conductivity ( The Pin-on-Disc configuration was employed as the wear test rig (TR-20, Make-DUCOM, Bangalore), as shown in The wear test plan generated total 16 points for plotting wear rate as a function of sliding speed/applied load. Plotting of this basic wear test data in three different ways is attempted to reveal important wear characteristics with increasing clarity in successive stages of analysis. The stages of plotting their outcome is as follows: Plotting wear rate in terms of sliding speed or applied load established the basic trends. The mild, moderate and severe regimes and wear transition are identified with clarity on the basis of dimensional analysis approach. A comprehensive wear mechanism map to delineate boundaries between competing wear mechanisms and wear modes. All these stages of analysis provide pertinent. Information on understanding wear phenomenon in totality.  In the dimensional analysis approach the terms In an attempt made to individually study the effect of variation of   In order to understand wear transitions as occurring in the materials investigated, it is necessary to identify them from mild to severe wear for a given range of applied load and in terms of the concurrent host parameters as structured in Interface parameter: Thermal parameter: The combined effect gets quantified in terms of the exponent obtained for In this experimental plan for wear test, one parameter is varied at a time while other parameters fixed. However since number of parameters from experimental run are combined in It is observed that when Similarly, when Normally the mild wear regime arises typically due to combined action of transfer of particle from counterface and mild oxidation of sliding copper composite. While discussing with reference to the interface parameter ( There may be iron transfer from counterface material to the pin surface possibly due to the strong adhesive forces as the small real area of contact results in high stresses at the asperities The area of the counterface is fairly large as compared to its portion that covers the small area of the pin. The formation of mechanical mixed layer (MML) on the pin surface could lead to reduced wear rate. The composition of MML is evident from SEM-EDS as shown in The reduction in wear rate could also result from decreasing coefficient of friction with increasing sliding speed as discussed earlier in The continued sliding action could lead to more and more iron particle transfer to the pin surface as evident from SEM-EDS analysis as shown in The initial part of the curve indicates decrease in wear rate with increasing sliding speed as result of oxide film formation and its thickening to a critical thickness before it gets detached. Further to this the rate of oxidation of the metallic materials is enhanced due to frictional heating and alters wear behaviour Once the critical shear strain and thickness of MML is reached, it results into dislodgement of wear particles in accordance with the delamination theory of wear While discussing severe regime in the graph plotted for  Beside the primary function of load transferring, SiC offers resistance to flow of the copper matrix as it flows due to rise in temperature at the interface. In other words, SiC acts as load transferring element while restricting the flow of copper matrix which is becoming more ductile with attainment of high temperature at the interface The It is seen that overall trend of From the above discussion, it can be seen that in the modified AGEM the nature of variation of wear parameter Based on the conclusions of the forgoing studies, the wear modes and mechanisms can be categorized on the basis of those influenced by Interface parameter ( The competing mechanisms in each of these categories can be stated as Plasticity dominated wear mechanisms–adhesive wear, abrasive wear and delamination wear. Thermally induced wear mechanism–oxidative wear and Melt wear From the above discussion it can be concluded that The modified AGEM clearly indicates the trends in the variation of wear parameters ( The sharp changes in the trends can be interpreted to distinguish between the competing mechanisms leading to transitions in wear from mild to severe. The variations of the terms structured in the parameters The microstructural (SEM) observations fully support the predicted possible wear mechanism and their transitions as getting quantified through the parameters The analysis done so far based on dimensional equation defining the AGEM adequately relates the transitions in wear from mild to severe. However a comprehensive presentation of the competing mechanisms cannot be perceived through the Having analyzed the role of coefficient of friction and flash temperature as well as relating it with some representative SEM worn surfaces, it is possible to locate important wear modes that prevailed in this material under the set of operating conditions employed. Thus the following wear modes are identified for 20SiC and depicted in wear mechanism map as shown in delamination wear, adhesive wear, mild melt wear, severe melt wear, wear transitions. The wear regime map emerging from the experimental data of AGEM can be used as an effective tool for characterizing the material and its wear performance. Numerical values appearing on the contours of friction, temperature, wear rate in a particular regime are good indication of variation in normalized force and normalized velocity. From practical view point the combination of load and sliding speed in any operating system can be suitably altered to restrict the wear to a particular mode as indicated from the map. Also the limiting values of the parameter at which wear transition is located can serve as an important design data for selecting wear resistant material.  The conventional method of analysis has limited scope in indicating any possible transitions for heterogeneous material like Cu–SiC Using dimensional analysis approach, it is possible to indicate with clarity the mild regime and severe wear regime with a well defined transition point. Also dimensionless wear rate parameter ( The The limitation of the AGEM in respect of projecting wear modes from the plots of Wear regime map provides basis for selecting optimum operating variables and also can be useful in locating working domain for practical application.  An empirical formula proposed by Lim and Ashby