Nickel powder was directly prepared in a molten Na2CO3–K2CO3 electrolytic cell at 750 °C. In the molten bath, porous NiO pellets were acted as the cathode and Ni10Cu11Fe alloy was applied for oxygen gas evolution anode. The electrochemical reduction of NiO was determined to follow a one-step reduction mechanism by cyclic voltammetry measurements and potentiostatic electrolysis combined with XRD analysis and EDX tests. Furthermore, two-electrode constant voltage electrolysis under different cell voltage was conducted to optimize the energy efficiency and product quality. A relatively low energy consumption of 1.05 kWh for production 1 kg nickel powder was achieved under 1.1 V with a current efficiency of 95.4%. The present work demonstrates a “green” and energy efficient nickel production way and further evidences that molten carbonate electrolysis (MCE) can be an environmental sound technology for metal production.Nickel possesses of excellent properties of strong magnetic, high melting point, good corrosion resistance and plasticity, and can further improve its corrosion resistance, oxidation resistance, high temperature strength and some physical properties by alloying with other elements. It is widely used in the industrial fields of preparation of alloys, catalyst, electroplating and batteries, etc. Currently, nickel is produced by either hydrometallurgy or pyrogenic process. Generally, hydrometallurgy processes are applied to produce nickel with high purity. At present, about 90% of nickel in the world is produced by pyrogenic process, which still costs high energy consumption. Thermodynamically, solid NiO can be reduced to Ni by charcoal at high temperature (NiO + C = Ni + CO (g), ΔG = −81.9 kJ/mol, 900 °C according to the calculation by HSC Chemistry 6.0 Molten salt electrolysis has been very successful for industrial production of aluminum, magnesium and other active metals with high productivity and efficiency. It can be also applied to the production of the less active metals, including nickel and nickel-based alloys. Suzuki et al. reported that the preparation of nickel powder from NiO powder in molten CaCl Molten salt technologies have shown some advantages for preparation of nickel and nickel alloys, but a cost-affordable inert anode is still a big challenge in the molten chlorides. For a “green” electrolytic process for metal extraction, it should be near-zero emission, high energy efficiency and producing high quality products. It's more recent that researchers turned to molten carbonate electrolysis. Licht et al. proposed and investigated that electrodeposition of iron in molten Li About 20 wt% NH The cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements were conducted on a CHI1140a electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instrument Co. Ltd., China) to investigate the reduction mechanism of NiO. A nickel wire electrode (1 mm in diameter, 5–6 mm immersed into the melt) and a NiO coated nickel wire electrode (NCE) were employed as working electrodes, with a Ni10Cu11Fe alloy rod (20 mm in diameter) as counter electrode. The NCE was manufactured by repeatedly dipping an nickel wire (1 mm in diameter) into a NiO powder/ethanol suspension (3 g NiO in 5 mL ethanol under sonication for 15 min), then dried under infrared lamp to volatilize the residual ethanol for use. The reference electrode was a silver wire dipped into an Ag In order to investigate the reduction mechanism of NiO, potentiostatic electrolysis was performed under different potentials for 11 h. The sintered NiO pellet (∼0.6 g) was used as working electrode, with a Ni10Cu11Fe alloy rod (20 mm in diameter) as counter electrode, and the above mentioned reference electrode. The applied potentials (−1.30 V ∼ −1.75 V) for the electrolysis were in line with potentials related to the reduction current peak on the cyclic voltammograms. The electrolysis was conducted on a CHI1140a electrochemical workstation (Shanghai Chenhua Instrument Co. Ltd., China) under Ar atmosphere. The electrolysis products were washed in distilled water, dried in vacuum oven, conserved in ethanol and analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI Sirion field emission) and X-ray diffraction spectroscopy (XRD, Shimadzu X-ray 6000 with Cu Kα1 radiation at λ = 1.5405 Å). Two-electrode constant cell voltage electrolysis was conducted to prepare nickel metal from NiO. The NiO pellets assembly cathode was electrolyzed for 11 h under different constant cell voltages (0.5–1.9 V) with the Ni10Cu11Fe anode. The electrolysis was controlled by a DC power system (Shenzhen Neware Electronic Ltd., China). The obtained final samples were characterized by the above mentioned SEM, EDX and XRD. The current–time curves were recorded during the electrolysis and then the current efficiencies were calculated from the charge passed and the mass of the product during single electrolysis. Cyclic voltammetry were conducted starting from the open circuit potential of 0.85 V to investigate the reduction mechanism of NiO in molten carbonates. As shown in Potentiostatic electrolysis was conducted to further study the reduction mechanism of NiO, and to evaluate whether there is any intermediate product during the reduction process. Potentials of −1.30 V, −1.40 V, −1.50 V and −1.75 V were selected in line of the reduction peak (c1) on the CV curve (  Constant cell voltage electrolysis was conducted to further optimize the electrolytic conditions, aiming to evaluate the direct electrolysis energy consumption for nickel production. The SEM images of NiO precursor and the products obtained under different cell voltages are shown in Current-time (i ∼ t) curves during electrolysis under different cell voltages are shown in Although it is far from industrial application, the direct electrolytic energy consumption and energy efficiency can be roughly estimated based on the i ∼ t curves and the applied cell voltages. Current efficiency and energy consumption of electrolysis was calculated and summarized in Pure nickel metal was successfully prepared by electro-reduction of NiO precursors in molten Na The authors thank the