Salt-soluble protein, surface reactive sulfhydryl content, and surface hydrophobicity of Alaska pollock, Pacific whiting, and threadfin bream surimi were characterised, as affected by various comminution conditions. Chopping time/temperatures were explored in consideration of their habitat temperatures. Salt-soluble protein (SSP) significantly decreased when chopping time was extended. Corresponding to our follow-up study, no relationship between SSP and gel texture was found. Surface hydrophobicity was inversely proportional to SSP concentration, indicating the unfolding of protein upon comminution. Alaska pollock surimi demonstrated aggregation during chopping at 10 and 20°C, based on the surface hydrophobicity. Surface reactive sulfhydryl (SRSH) contents of the three fish species behaved differently. The SH groups were oxidized to disulphide bonds when higher chopping temperature was applied. As a result, increased SRSH content was not observed in Alaska pollock (10 and 20°C chopping) and threadfin bream paste (25 and 30°C chopping).Alaska pollock, Pacific whiting, and threadfin bream have been extensively utilized in the surimi industry ( Commercial industries have tried various approaches to enhance gel qualities of surimi. Some examples are mixing PW surimi with enzyme inhibitors, such as egg white, or the application of fast cooking technology that can significantly reduce enzyme activity from endogenous proteolytic enzymes ( A number of analyses, to elucidate the effect of various chopping conditions on structural changes of fish actomyosin, were extensively studied, based on biochemical measurement of protein solubility, degree of protein unfolding, and oxidation of sulfhydryl group. Protein solubility in salt solution can reveal the structural changes of protein. Salt solubilizes the actomyosin by binding to the myofibrillar protein (through the electrostatic repulsive force resulting in unwinding protein structure) and increases water binding sites ( Alaska pollock (AP) ( Paste preparation was conducted according to the method of Since comminution variables (time and temperature) were dependent on each other, chopping was switched on and off to fulfil two variables while controlling temperature. Until the total chopping time was achieved, if the surimi paste sample reached the target temperature, chopping was halted until the temperature decreased by 5 In our preliminary study, a linear relationship between chopping time and paste temperature was observed. With the use of a circulating coolant at −5 SSP was measured as outlined by According to the method established by Using the surimi paste, protein surface hydrophobicity ( The data for all biochemical properties were mean values from at least two replications. In each replication, for SSP and SRSH content, six samples were prepared and tested. ANOVA in SPSS (version 13) software package (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA) was used to compare the treatment effects. The general linear model was applied for further analysis, using Tukey’s test with statistical significance at a level of For better understanding, the following abbreviations were used: AP for Alaska pollock, PW for Pacific whiting, and TB for threadfin bream. Chopping temperature for each species was then denoted, followed by chopping time. For example, AP0-21 indicates Alaska pollock chopped at 0 Regarding chopping methodology in this study, chopping was not continuously performed; therefore, any conformational changes of the protein might not only depend on chopping time. Protein might undergo aggregation during waiting time through mediated endogenous transglutaminase. The effect of setting during chopping could be negated, based on the optimum setting condition of each fish species. SSP of AP, PW, and TB surimi pastes are illustrated in In muscle chemistry, it is generally believed that higher SSP means better gel texture (breaking force and penetration distance). In the current study, SSP of all fish species significantly decreased ( A decrease in SSP could result from protein unfolding and aggregation during longer chopping. If proteins are fully unfolded, they will form aggregates; as a consequence, aggregated proteins that are not soluble in salt solution will then be precipitated during centrifugation and removed. However, for Pacific whiting surimi or other species with high proteolytic enzymes, special attention may be necessary when chopping temperature exceeds 20–30 Another factor that reduces SSP concentration is aggregation of unfolded proteins through carbonylation ( The disulphide bonds between or within protein molecules play an important role regarding the functionality of protein in different systems. Many studies have elucidated the disulphide formation during heat-induced gelation ( The SRSH content of AP0 and TB15 significantly increased ( Changes in SRSH content of PW surimi paste were clearly different from AP and TB ( Stabilization of SH content of PW was previously reported. Surface hydrophobicity was measured to quantify the extent of protein unfolding, as affected by various chopping conditions. An increase in Regarding Alaska pollock, it was interesting to note that AP0 samples demonstrated higher An increase in exposed hydrophobic amino acids was believed to enhance the aggregation of protein network resulting in better gel qualities ( Both chopping time and chopping temperature had a great impact on the biochemical characteristics of myofibrillar proteins. Salt-soluble protein concentration decreased significantly as chopping time was extended and the reduction rate increased when chopping was performed at higher temperature. SSP concentration from surimi could not be used to predict gel texture as it always decreased while there is evidence of improved gelation properties during prolonged comminution (