This article examines whether using multifactor models to forecast expected returns leads to superior performance relative to a single-factor model in a domestic UK asset allocation framework. The evidence in the article suggests that when the investor faces no investment restrictions that using the conditional versions of the models tends to generate better performance compared to the unconditional versions of the models. Furthermore, the conditional version of the single-factor model tends to outperform the multifactor models. When the investor faces investment restrictions, the differences between the models become less substantive.Linear factor models are a central area in finance research and have many practical applications. Linear factor models have important uses in areas such as explaining the covariance among asset returns, risk management, and performance evaluation. They also have a strong theoretical basis in models such as the capital asset pricing model (CAPM), arbitrage pricing theory (APT), and intertemporal CAPM. Much of the early work in linear factor models was based on the single-factor model, which normally used a stock market index. However, recent research suggests that the single-factor market model provides a poor description of cross-sectional stock returns (see Much of the early work of multifactor models focused on models based on industry effects Empirical evidence on tests of asset pricing models suggests that multifactor models have some success in explaining the anomalies of the CAPM A recent study by This article examines the out-of-sample performance of linear factor models in forecasting expected returns There are three main findings to the article. The first is that when the investor faces no investment restrictions, then using the conditional versions of the factor models tends to generate better performance compared to the unconditional versions of the factor models. The second is that comparing the performance across the conditional versions of the factor models suggests that the single-factor model tends to outperform the multifactor models when the investor faces no restrictions. Finally, when the investor faces investment restrictions, the differences between the conditional/unconditional versions of the models and the single-factor/multifactor models become less substantive. However, there is little evidence that multifactor models outperform the single-factor model. The article is outlined as follows. Since the focus of the article is on the usefulness of linear factor models at forecasting expected returns, the sample covariance matrix is used to estimate the covariance matrix. The following models of expected returns are used: Single-factor model (CAPM)—the estimator of expected excess returns given by the single-factor model (CAPM) is Multifactor models—the estimate of expected return from a The betas and factor risk premiums are also estimated using conditional versions of the models where betas and factor risk premiums are modeled as functions of a common set of forecasting instruments that are assumed to capture the information set used by investors. The factor risk premiums are estimated as a linear function of the information variables. The conditional betas are estimated assuming the conditional betas are a linear function of the information variables. Using the previous 60 months, the excess industry portfolio returns are regressed on a constant, the excess returns on the factor portfolios, and the products of the excess factor portfolio returns and the information variables. The estimated beta is equal to the average conditional beta plus the slope coefficients in the conditional beta function times the current values of the information variables. This article takes the perspective of a mean-variance investor who allocates their wealth across the risk-free asset and 10 industry portfolios. Using the notation of Subject to The mean-variance strategies are implemented as follows. At the start of 1987, the expected excess return vector and covariance matrix is estimated over the prior 60 months (i.e., between January 1982 and December 1986). The different models are used to estimate expected returns and the sample covariance matrix over the prior 60 months is used as the covariance matrix. This is the same across all models. Given estimates of expected returns and the covariance matrix, the mean-variance optimization is performed for a given level of risk tolerance. A number of different performance measures are used to evaluate the out-of-sample performance of the mean-variance strategies. The first is the The second performance measure is based on the conditional performance measure of The third performance measures utilizes the portfolio weight measure of The mean-variance strategies are estimated using 10 industry portfolios between January 1982 and December 1996. This explores the performance of domestic asset allocation strategies. This ignores the possible benefits of international diversification. One possible motivation for this is the evidence that investors hold a greater proportion of domestic equity than that predicted by financial theory (home bias). Mineral extraction—group numbers between 123 and 165. Building and chemicals—group numbers between 210 and 255. Engineering—group numbers between 261 and 270. Printing and textiles—group numbers between 282 and 297. Consumer goods—group numbers between 320 and 380. Distribution, leisure, and media—group numbers between 412 and 436. Retailers and other services—group numbers between 440 and 490. Utilities—group numbers between 620 and 680. Financials—group numbers between 710 and 794. Investment trusts—group numbers between 801 and 980. The mean monthly excess returns in Four different factor models are used to estimate expected returns of the industry portfolios. These include: Single-factor model—excess return on the Financial Times All Share Index (FTA) Multifactor models (a) APT. This follows from (i) Excess return on the FTA index. (ii) Term structure—difference in monthly returns between 15-year government bonds (obtained from Datastream) minus the risk-free return. (iii) Monthly percentage change in UK industrial production (obtained from Datastream). (iv) Monthly percentage change in inflation (obtained from LBS).   (b) The first factor is the excess return on the FTA index. The size and book-to-market factors are constructed from six portfolios as in Beginning in July 1981, stocks were ranked in ascending order on the basis of their market value at the start of the year and grouped into two portfolios. Within each group, the stocks are ranked on their BM in ascending order and grouped into three portfolios. This gives six size/BM portfolios (S/L, S/M, S/H, B/L, B/M, AND B/H). Equally weighted monthly returns are estimated over the next 12 months. This process is repeated each year until July 1995. For the final year, equally weighted returns are calculated for 18 months. The portfolio returns between 1982 and 1996 are used to form the size and BM portfolios. The size factor is the difference in the mean return of three small firm portfolios and the mean return of three large portfolios (SMB). The BM factor is the difference in the mean return of the two high BM portfolios and the mean return of the two low BM portfolios (HML). This will be referred to as the FF benchmark. (c) To the calculate conditional performance measures, the information set of investors requires to be specified. The following information variables are used (see Lagged dividend yield on the FTA index (obtained from LBS). Lagged 1-month risk-free return. The first set of tests assumes that the investor faces no investment restrictions and unconditional estimates of the industry portfolio betas and factor risk premiums are used. The mean-variance strategies are estimated each month using the four models of expected returns.  In contrast to the traditional factor models, the FF and Carhart models have negative performance with the Sharpe and FS measures. The underperformance with the FS measure is economically large and statistically significant for the FF model. The relatively low values of the   The analysis in  There is a substantial improvement in performance for the FF model whenever conditional estimates are used. The Sharpe performance of the model is no longer negative and now outperforms the market. There is also an increase in the abnormal returns of the FF model using both performance measures, although the difference is statistically insignificant  When investment restrictions are imposed as in  This article has examined the out-of-sample performance of monthly mean-variance strategies using various factor models to estimate expected returns. The article explores whether multifactor models leads to better performance compared to the single-factor model and whether conditional versions of the models outperform unconditional versions of the models. The evidence in the article suggests that when the investor faces no investment restrictions, there is substantial benefit in terms of higher performance using the Sharpe and FS measures of using the conditional versions of the models. This is consistent with the results of When the investor faces investment restrictions, the evidence becomes more mixed as to whether conditional versions of the models outperform unconditional versions of the models. This is because the abnormal returns of the strategies tend to be small and statistically insignificant. Furthermore, there are less substantive differences across the four-factor models. However, there is little evidence to suggest that using multifactor models leads to superior performance relative to the single-factor model. These results are to some extent consistent with Helpful comments were received from an anonymous reviewer.