A novel hybrid adsorbent (HA) composed of cellulose fiber, activated carbon, and anion exchange resin Dowex 1×8 was prepared for the preconcentration and separation of noble metals, namely, gold (Au), palladium (Pd) and platinum (Pt), in geological samples. The optimal experimental parameters, such as flow rate, sample volume and interfering ions, were investigated. The accuracy of the method was confirmed by added/found method for tap and sea water, and evaluated by analyzing certified reference materials with good agreement. Under the optimal experimental conditions, the detection limits (3σ criteria) of the developed technique were 0.008ngmL−1 (Au), 0.017ngmL−1 (Pd) and 0.014ngmL−1 (Pt) and the sample throughput reach to 30 samples every eight hours. Moreover, the adsorption capacity of HA for Au, Pd and Pt was determined to be 48.2, 35.9 and 29.8mgg−1, respectively.Gold (Au), palladium (Pd) and platinum (Pt) are precious metals (PMs), which have excellent physical and chemical properties, and their high economic value has been the focus of considerable interest from explorers in addition to their low abundance on earth. Therefore, accurate and rapid determination of PMs in massive different types of geological samples is required in geological survey, mining and extraction activities. However, direct determination of PMs in geological samples is often restricted owing to interferences caused by matrix elements and in some cases insufficient sensitivity. As a consequence, numerous different separation and preconcentration procedures have been developed and applied, based mainly on fire assay, liquid–liquid extraction, solid phase extraction (SPE) and coprecipitation ( With increased demand for PMs, there is a growing need for batch analysis of geochemical exploration samples. In the present study, a convenient and low cost hybrid sorbent was first reported, which was easily synthesized for the analysts and a custom-made multicolumn solid phase extraction device was used for batch analysis. This system was selected based on the following conditions: (i) synthetic adsorbent without the use of extra chemical reagents; (ii) the functional hybrid adsorbent (HA) with the porous network structure may be easily implemented using SPE and suitable for the analysis of large-scale geological survey samples. All solvents were reagent grade or better. Strongly basic anion exchanger Dowex 1 The digestion was carried out using aqua regia as described by The solution was slowly poured into the Büchner funnel, then the PFA vessel and the Büchner funnel was washed three times with HCl (0.25 The influence of several experimental parameters (e.g., amounts of AC, IER, and sample flow rate) on the sorption efficiency of PMs was investigated using the adsorption model with 100 Quantitative recoveries (>95%) were obtained in the range of 3–4 The influence of flow rate on the adsorption of analytes on HA was investigated with the sample flow rate ranging from 4 The effect of sample volume on the retention of analytes was investigated by passing 100, 200, 300, 400, 500 and 600 It is revealed that common ions induce no significant effects on the assay ( In this study, a novel reliable, simple, and inexpensive HA was prepared and a multicolumn solid phase extraction device was applied for batch analysis. In addition, CF, as the supporter, increased the adsorption speed because of its high hydrophilicity and reduced the consumption of AC and IER. Optimal conditions for preconcentration were investigated systematically. The proposed method was applied to the preconcentration of PMs in WGB-1, TDB-1 and GPt-4, with satisfactory results. The comparison of detection limits of this method with other methods is listed in This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 