Over the past 40 years, economists have devoted considerable effort to estimating long-run trends in commodity prices. The results indicate that the real prices for many commodities have fallen, suggesting to the surprise of many that resource scarcity is declining over time. Almost all of this work, however, uses the US producer price index or other standard price deflators, which recent research shows overestimate inflation for several reasons. This article examines copper prices with adjusted deflators designed to eliminate this bias. It finds that the trend over time, which is significantly downward when no adjustment is made to the deflator, displays no tendency in either direction or is significantly upward depending on the magnitude of the deflator adjustment employed. These findings suggest that real resource prices provide less support than widely assumed for the hypothesis that resources are becoming more available or less scarce over time.Copper, oil, and many other natural resources are nonrenewable at least on any time horizon of relevance to the human race. As the easiest-to-find and richest deposits are exploited, many anticipate that the real price of mineral commodities will rise reflecting their increasing scarcity. However, dozens of empirical investigations using modern econometric techniques have failed to detect statistically significant upward trends in the long-run real price of mineral commodities, as In earlier work on commodity prices, nominal prices are almost always reported in US currency, and converted to real prices using the US producer price index (PPI) and other standard deflators. The choice of deflator is rarely explained in any detail, and in a few cases not even identified. Copper is a good choice for a pilot study for several reasons. First, it is an important metal. Recently the world has produced some 15 million tons of refined copper annually ( The analysis begins in Section One of the main reasons for assessing long-term price trends for nonrenewable commodities is the concern that depletion over time is increasing their scarcity. As society exhausts existing mineral deposits, it is forced to exploit lower grade, more remote, and more difficult to process mineral resources. This tends to push the costs and prices of mineral commodities up over time. Simultaneously, however, new discoveries and new technologies in exploration, mining, and mineral processing tend to reduce the costs and prices of mineral commodities. If the cost-increasing effects of depletion are greater than the cost-reducing effects of new discoveries and technology, the real prices of mineral commodities tend to rise over time, reflecting growing scarcity and declining availability. Just the opposite is the case when the cost-reducing effects of discoveries and technology are greater than the cost-reducing effects of depletion. As a result, long-run trends in real prices are widely accepted as a useful measure of changes in resource availability. The formal theory in this area dates back to Hotelling also demonstrates that user costs must rise by Some followers of Hotelling argue that his analysis implies that the market prices of mineral commodities will rise at This means that empirical studies are needed to determine if the influence of technological change, new discoveries, and other developments pushing real mineral commodity prices down have more than offset the effects of mineral depletion and other factors tending to increase mineral scarcity over time. Many such studies have been carried out and generally they find that prices since the 1870s, despite quite large fluctuations in the short run, have followed either constant or falling long-run trends. Claims that the official price series in the United States and elsewhere overstate inflation arose over 40 years ago ( The renewed interest in price indexes has been spurred by a growing realization of the adverse consequences of incorrectly measuring inflation. As noted by To the above list one should add the ramifications for deriving real price trends for primary commodities, which is the focus of this study. Inaccurately measured prices also have important ramifications for the related issue of trends in the barter terms of trade for countries exporting and importing mineral commodities, a topic the concluding section argues is in need of further research. There are three main reasons why the US and other price indexes overstate inflation. In constructing the price series, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) used a modified Laspeyres index up to year 2002 (see below). In this type of index, the weights of the different items are derived from consumption expenditure surveys from a particular base year. This base-year “basket” has been re-estimated infrequently: in the case of consumer goods, only about every 10th year ( There are at least three flaws in the official CPI and PPI when it comes to handling new products on the market. The first arises because new products are introduced in the indexes with a long lag. A frequently cited example is the cellular phone, which appeared in 1983, but was not included in the CPI until 1998. Other examples include room air conditioners, VCRs, and personal computers, which were all included “years after they were first sold in the market place” ( A second flaw occurs because improved versions of many products are introduced as completely new goods, which means that the quality improvements they reflect are ignored. A third flaw arises because new products are included in the indexes without allowing for the consumer surplus gain (compensating variation) they generate ( In the official price indexes, aside from a few recent exceptions noted below, goods are measured in standard units, such as The quality issue has indeed become highly visible to all who follow the market for computers and related electronic products. Here quality improvements, as measured, for example, by capacity, have far outpaced prices, in fact by 15–30% per year according to several estimates for the 1980–99 period ( The method used by Authors using this method (see The estimation method can be illustrated with the help of a simple graph depicting Engel curves ( Results that upset conventional wisdom and established practice tend to receive mixed reviews. This was the case with the Boskin report. The first reactions by officials and researchers at the BLS were largely sceptical. Now, most of the recommendations advanced by the Boskin Commission are officially endorsed. The Commission recommended the use of a superlative Törnquist index, which is similar to the Fischer ideal price index ( BLS officials now also agree that previous methods for handling new products lead to upward bias in the CPI ( When it comes to the third bias, pure-quality changes, controversy still lingers, both regarding estimation methods and the numbers advanced by the Boskin Commission. The Commission relied mainly on the hedonic method for separating quality-induced price changes from pure inflation. With this method, price changes for a good are regressed against quality changes, as reflected by technical specifications (such as horsepower, fuel consumption, and expected life in the case of automobiles). The share of the price increases accounted for by changes in such technical characteristics is attributed to quality improvements, and the remaining share is attributed to inflation. Objections to the Boskin report on this issue have focused on three related points. First, the method it uses for some product categories, it is claimed, is subjective and judgmental. Second, quality can deteriorate as well as improve, and for many goods and services no reliable methods for estimating quality changes exist (  Lately, researchers at the BLS have themselves made some simulations of bias in the CPI during the past two decades. In one of these studies, Adding up the overestimation of CPI due to neglect of quality improvements and consumer substitution, and late introduction of new goods, as estimated by Stewart and Reed and by Abraham, suggests that inflation in recent decades has been overestimated by at least 0.62% points (0.45 Revisions in the official CPI indexes, starting in 1983, probably explain why many studies listed in In summary, there is now wide agreement that the CPI has overestimated inflation in the United States for the four decades prior to the late 1990s, when more important revisions were initiated. Disagreement and uncertainty remain over the size of the bias (as is evident from the large confidence intervals reported by most authors in It is also notable that the consumer or retail price indexes in other large countries, though not examined in the same detail, contain similar biases as in the United States. There are three main hurdles when it comes to estimating the inflation bias over the 1870–1950 period. First, there is only one systematic attempt to estimate inflation bias for years prior to 1950 ( As the BLS has used the Laspeyres index since 1917, the substitution bias that it produces clearly dates back to the earliest official CPI figures. Similarly, the late introduction of new goods is not a new problem. It seems to have been as pronounced, if not more so, before the 1950s as after. The only comprehensive study that has estimated inflation bias before 1950 is The type of systematic and broad-based estimations of quality change in products and services that the studies cited in It is also the case that during the 1920s and 1930s, a long range of what were then technically sophisticated consumer goods, including telephones, radios, and electrical appliances of various types, became widely available for the first time. Clearly there were many quality improvements in such products in the years up to 1950, although they have not been estimated. There is also an While there is little reason to believe that quality improvements in technically advanced products were any less pronounced before 1950 than after, the overall bias induced by quality changes may nevertheless have been smaller. Far less quality change tends to occur in what This section estimates the trend in real copper prices over the 1870–2000 period using as deflator an adjusted CPI that reduces the reported inflation. In the benchmark case, we take the inflation bias to be 1.0% point a year throughout the period. This number is smaller than the estimates for recent decades reported by most of the studies listed in  The base case focuses on the real copper prices over the period 1870–2000. It considers the average annual US producer price. While the LME price of copper would also be quite appropriate, we use the US producer price in the base case to facilitate comparisons with the many earlier studies that use this price (see The base case also uses the US CPI to deflate nominal prices rather than the more commonly used US PPI. This is in part because the inflation bias in the CPI has been studied more thoroughly than in the PPI or other price indexes. The major consideration favoring the use of the CPI, however, is the fact that it reflects the real price of copper in terms of a representative basket of consumer goods and services. As a result, it more accurately assesses the impact of commodity price trends on the welfare of society—that is, consumers or people in general—than other deflators. The base case further assumes that the long-run trend in real copper prices is linear and it reduces, as mentioned, the official inflation rate by 1% point a year to correct for the overestimation of the CPI. Specifically, the base case estimates the following equation: Since the independent variables (time and the constant) are predetermined, we use generalized least squares (GLS) to estimate the parameters. We also use the augmented Dickey–Fuller (ADF) procedure—or where necessary the Ouliaris, Park, and Phillips (OPP) test—to test for stationarity, as only data series that are trend stationary can be modeled in their level forms (that is, un-differenced) without generating possibly spurious results.  The results when we re-estimate Eqn. The second alternative, a correction of 1.5% points per year, is similar to the upper tail of the range of bias estimates put forth by An adjustment of 0.5% points suggests that the long-run price trend is downward as when no adjustment is made to the CPI. However, it is no longer significant. With the 1.5% point deduction, the long-run trend is upward, as in the base case, and statistically significant at the 1% level. Using the LME price instead of the US producer price does not affect the results, as Several earlier studies use the PPI to deflate nominal commodity prices. To determine if our results are sensitive to the choice of deflator, we re-estimated Eqn. The base case assumes that the long-run trend in real copper prices is linear. There are, of course, other possibilities. Since the ADF test is valid only when the underlying trend is linear, we used the OPP procedure to test for stationarity. When copper prices are deflated by the adjusted CPI (using a 1.0% point annual reduction) and the unadjusted CPI, this test indicates that the resulting real copper price series are trend stationary. This finding holds both when real copper prices are assumed to be following a quadratic trend and an inverse trend. The Schwartz criterion, which is conventionally used to compare the performance of different equation specifications, indicates that the inverse relationship provides a slightly better fit than the linear trend, and that both the inverse and linear trends do better than the quadratic. The inverse function, however, implies that the price of copper is gradually approaching some stationary or permanent level, which seems questionable when prices are rising. Whether one uses the linear or the inverse relationship, however, does not greatly alter our earlier findings. With the inverse function, the trend in real copper prices is significantly downward if no adjustment to the CPI deflator is made. When the CPI is reduced by 1% point a year, the trend is upward, and the coefficient is statistically significant at the 10% level. Of course, if the quadratic were the true long-run trend, this would have important implications for availability and prices in the future. The estimated quadratic trends reported in According to One possibility is that the long-term price trend is unaffected. Successful efforts to raise copper prices artificially tend to reduce demand and stimulate supply. So once they collapse, a competitive market will for a period generate prices below the level that would otherwise have prevailed. Just the opposite occurs when government price controls or other market interventions keep the price below competitive levels. If the higher or lower prices that follow such market interventions offset the price distortions they produce while in place, nothing has to be done in the estimation of long-term price trend to account for their effects. We then “only” have the problem that the price swings, caused by market interference, induce noise in the estimations, which lowers the The alternative (extreme) assumption is that once the supply restrictions are relaxed, prices move directly back to their long-run competitive trend. That is, artificial price distortions, once over, have no subsequent influence on either supply and demand. In this case we can estimate the true long-run price trend during periods under competitive conditions by omitting the years when collusion is in effect. The benchmark results for the 1870–2000 period have so far survived the robustness tests made, except for the attempt to control for market interventions, which was inconclusive. There is, however, a serious concern that the CPI data available for the years 1870–90, especially, but also 1890–1912, are uncomfortably unreliable. An official CPI estimate for the United States was first compiled by the BLS for 1917 (and stretched back to 1913). The numbers for earlier years “are based on the efforts of economists and economic historians who have created CPI estimates and linked them to the modern series” ( The various consumer price estimates for 1870–90 are based almost exclusively on food price data and are hence fragmentary and unreliable. These problems with the CPI data for 1870–1916 suggest examining to what extent, if any, our findings are altered when the years before 1917 are excluded. The results, also reported in Growing evidence indicates that the US CPI and other standard deflators have overestimated inflation. The magnitude of the bias is uncertain; the point estimates range from 0.9% to over 2.0% points a year, and vary somewhat with the time period covered. Though most of the evidence applies to the period after World War II, there are good reasons to believe that consumer price series for earlier years, all the way back to the 1870s, are biased as well. When the nominal price of copper is converted to a real price using the CPI with no correction for the overestimation of inflation, the linear trend over the 130-year period, 1870–2000 is downward and statistically significant. When the CPI is reduced by 0.5%, 1.0%, and 1.5% points a year to correct for its upward bias, this finding is called into question. With the two higher adjustments, the estimated trend is upward and with the 1.5% point adjustment, it is statistically significant at the 1% level. Moreover, this finding is quite robust. It holds whether nominal copper prices are those reported by the North American producers or the LME. It holds if the PPI is used to deflate nominal prices instead of the CPI. It holds if one assumes the true trend in real prices follows an inverse relationship rather than a linear one. It holds, though with much less statistical certainty, when periods of market manipulation are excluded from the analysis. The results derived here do presume that the price of copper has followed one constant secular trend over the past 130 years. While our tests for trend stationarity provide some support for this assumption, there are reasons to suspect that the long-run trend in copper prices has changed from time to time as important new end uses for copper have arisen, as close substitutes have been developed, as major innovations have reduced copper production costs, and as the world economy itself has experienced structural changes. In particular, If the long-run trend in copper prices has changed from time to time, this provides yet another reason to question the widespread belief that the price of copper has persistently, for a century or longer, been following a downward trend. Moreover, whether the long-run trend has or has not been following a single long-run trend does not alter the fact that the actual path of real copper prices properly deflated for inflation has remained constant or risen (depending on the assumed size of the inflation bias), rather than fallen, over the past 130 years. Two main themes for further research are suggested by our study. The first is to examine to what extent our finding for copper can be generalized to other mineral commodities. Comparing copper price trends as conventionally estimated with those for other mineral commodities provides some tentative indications. In the case of petroleum, lead, zinc, and tin, long-run real price trends, when estimated with an unadjusted deflator, are more or less constant, neither rising nor falling significantly. Adjusting the deflator, as we have done in the case of copper, would most likely convert the trends for these commodities from stationary to rising (though with quite pronounced short-term fluctuations). For another group of mineral commodities, including aluminum, nickel, and silver, the decline in the unadjusted price series is greater than for copper, and may be sufficiently large to persist even after adjusting the deflator. Further detailed investigation is clearly needed to determine which other mineral commodities have experienced rising long-run price trends. It is important, however, to keep our results and those of future studies in perspective. Even if mineral commodity prices and hence mineral scarcity in general are rising, what is truly surprising is that the increases have not been greater. Given the sharp growth in per capita incomes, particularly in the developed countries, and also in world population, the consumption of all mineral commodities over the past 130 years has exploded. Despite the huge increases in production that have made this possible, A second intriguing avenue for further research, raised by our findings, is the possibility that the barter terms of trade for countries exporting mainly primary commodities and importing manufacturing products have declined less than the available estimates suggest, or perhaps not at all. The price trends for primary commodities, as measured by the standard price indexes, are largely free of the biases that beset the price trends of imported manufactured goods, as quality change and the delayed introduction of new products, are much less of an issue. One cannot, however, use the estimated bias in the US CPI (or PPI) as a measure of the bias in the price of the manufactured imports of primary product exporting countries. The biases, which Boskin While the share of primary products (excluding fuels) in low- and middle-income countries’ exports has generally declined over the years, these products continue to dominate exports for some 50 of the poorest countries. Though the data are incomplete, in almost all sub-Saharan African countries, food, agricultural raw materials, and ores and metals account for more than half of the exports, and in most cases, for more than two-thirds. With a few exceptions, manufactured goods make up more than 60% of these countries’ imports ( Long-term trends in the terms of trade are also of significance for net-importers of minerals, including many of the developed countries as well as populous and rapidly growing China and India. Rising commodity prices, to a large extent driven in recent years by the growth of demand in these countries, could influence unfavorably their future growth prospects. So, the terms of trade issue is still of high relevance, for both exporting and importing countries, and a challenging area for future research that this study suggests is in need of attention. The authors are grateful to Phillip Crowson, Peter Howie, and Marian Radetzki for helpful comments on an earlier draft, and to Alejandro D. Lombardia and John Tyler Hodge for excellent research assistance. We are also indebted to three anonymous reviewers whose constructive comments improved the paper considerably.