The effects of process history on the particle morphology of uranium ore concentrates (UOC) synthesized from natural uranium ores were investigated. A purified UOC was extracted from a uranium-rich ore by sulfuric acid leaching and purified by two commercial solvent extraction processes: the Dapex process using di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (DEHPA), and the Amex process using Alamine® 336. The UOC from either route was precipitated from its respective strip solution by ammonia and calcined. Powder X-ray diffraction (P-XRD) was used to confirm the crystallography of the UOC; while Rietveld refinement was performed for quantification of U oxide phase composition. Inductively coupled plasma - mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) was used to quantify impurity concentrations of the calcined material. As expected, different impurities were present due to processing via the Dapex and Amex process. To further correlate the impurities to the process history, particle morphology was quantified from scanning electron microscopy (SEM) micrographs using the MAMA segmentation software. In addition, a deep neural network was trained on the SEM images to distinguish between process histories. The results provide a real-world representation of how particle morphology will likely change based on processing at commercial facilities as opposed to high purity material experiments in a laboratory setting.Uranium milling is the process of extracting and purifying uranium ore concentrates (UOC) from uranium-rich geological deposits. On the order of 62,071 tons of uranium were produced worldwide in 2016 by commercial U mills; Kazakhstan’s and Canada’s production combined to account for over 62% of the total annual production ( Conventionally, the milling process begins by excavating uranium-rich ores from the ground by underground or open-pit mining. The size of the ore is then reduced by crushing, milling, and grinding steps before being leached in an acidic or alkaline solution. More recently, in-situ recovery (ISR) has been used to recover uranium by injecting the leach fluid directly into underground deposits and then pumping the uranium-bearing leach liquor to the surface for further processing ( Most uranium minerals occur naturally in the tetravalent (U Thickening, filtering, and decantation steps are then used to separate the uranium-bearing leach solution from undissolved solids in the post-leach slurry ( Concentration and purification by ion exchange involves contacting the post-leach solution (either acidic or alkaline) with resins that selectively adsorb uranium ( Purification by solvent extraction uses an acidic aqueous phase and an organic phase consisting of either alkyl phosphoric compounds or tertiary amines ( Reviews of uranium solvent extraction systems note that the Dapex process more rapidly extracts uranium from the aqueous phase, can better tolerate solids in the feed material, and is generally more stable than Amex processes ( Purified elutes or strip solutions are then precipitated as uranium ore concentrates, or yellowcakes. Possible precipitates include sodium diuranate, magnesium diuranate, ammonium uranyl carbonate, uranyl peroxide, and ammonium diuranate ( In recent years the surface morphology of uranium ore concentrates has been studied as a way of identifying the process history of unknown nuclear materials. Traditionally forensics investigations of interdicted nuclear materials focus on the chemical and isotopic signatures by means such as powder X-ray diffraction (P-XRD), mass spectrometry, and chronometric techniques ( The morphological properties of UOCs are most often studied with scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The particle morphology as seen in the SEM images can be described qualitatively by a uniform lexicon developed by Hanson A uranium-rich ore was sourced from the University of Utah Department of Geology and Geophysics curator. The specimen was labeled as carnotite ore (K Roughly 20 g of the ore were thoroughly crushed with an alumina mortar and pestle. This work was performed inside of a sealed glovebox to prevent the dispersion of uranium particulates. The powdered ore was mechanically sieved for 10 min at the middle amplitude setting. The powdered ore below US Standard mesh size 100, or 0.150 mm, were collected for later use. A small amount of the minus 100 mesh material was set aside for power P-XRD characterization. One gram of crushed ore was used for each of the two processing routes of interest. A 50 mL leach solution of 80 g/L H Each post-leach solution was then purified by either the Dapex or Amex solvent extraction route. For the Dapex route, post-leach solutions were first adjusted to pH 1.0 with ammonium hydroxide ( The loaded Dapex phases from each extraction cycle (150 mL total) were combined and mixed with a PFTE-coated stir bar in a 500 mL Erlenmeyer flask at room temperature. A 0.5 M sodium carbonate strip solution was prepared by completely dissolving the appropriate amount of Na The Amex SX route organic phase was composed of 3 v/v% Alamine® 336 obtained from BASF and 1 v/v% 1-tridecanol (TCI Chemicals) in kerosene ( Pregnant strip solutions from the Dapex process were acidified by the slow addition of 1.5 M sulfuric acid while heating the solution to maintain a volume of 150 mL, filtered at pH 6.5 to remove precipitated impurities, and then brought to pH 1.5 before precipitation as ADU ( NH ADU precipitates were dried on the funnel at room temperature overnight, then dried in an oven at 80 °C for 24 h. The dried precipitates were finely ground with a mortar and pestle using a small amount of Powder X-Ray diffraction spectra were measured using a Bruker D2 Phaser with a Cu K-α anode operating at 10 mA and 30 kV. Approximately 10 mg of a sample were packed into a silicon zero-background sample holder. Spectra were measured between 10° and 90° 2θ, using 0.02° 2θ step sizes and 1.0 s per step; the total time for each scan was about 70 min. The sample stage was set to rotate at 15 rpm during the measurement. The Sample digestion for ICP-MS analysis followed a procedure adapted from Spano et al ICP-MS analyses were performed by the ICP MS Metals Lab at the University of Utah Department of Geology and Geophysics using an Aligent 8900 Triple Quadrupole ICP-MS. Inorganic Ventures standards were used to obtain calibration curves; Certified Reference Material 1643f (National Institute of Standards and Technology, Gaithersburg, MD) was run with samples in order to assess the quality of the calibration solution. Agreement between measured and certified values were within 5%. 50 µL of indium internal standard was added to 5 mL of the dissolved and diluted UOC. Samples were analyzed without any additional dilution. Three aliquots were used for each replicate synthesized. The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard C967-20 was used as a guideline in selecting the following analytes measured by ICP-MS: Na, Mg, Al, P, K, Ca, Ti, V, Fe, As, Zr, Mo, and U ( SEM stubs were prepared for each replicate by dusting a small amount of UOC onto double-sided carbon tape. Loose material was tapped off the tape to prevent the dispersion of radioactive materials while the stubs were under vacuum in the SEM’s chamber. A FEI Nova NanoSEM 630 High Resolution Scanning Electron Microscope was used to image each sample. Micrographs were acquired at 10,000×, 25,000×, 50,000×, and 100,000× magnifications to encapsulate the full range of particle morphology features. 30 micrographs were captured at each magnification for each replicate. Particle segmentation was performed using the Image classification used the Resnet34 architecture pre-trained with ImageNet weights, and a fully connected layer and binary output ( The image data was augmented during training by rotating images between 0° and 10° in the clockwise or counterclockwise direction, and flips across the horizontal and/or vertical axis before randomly cropping the image to 224 × 224 pixels, the input size of the CNN. These techniques make the trained models more robust to noise and improve generalization. Validation and test images were only randomly cropped to the network’s input size. Preprocessing, training, and testing were carried out with the The ADU precipitate from each route had a vibrant yellow color during filtration and washing, which changed to a light orange after drying at 80 °C. The average ADU yields were 0.61 ± 0.04 g for the Dapex route and 0.58 ± 0.10 g for the Amex route starting with 1.00 g of ore. Upon calcination, the Dapex route ADU experienced relative mass losses of 8.8 ± 0.3%; the Amex route ADU lost on average 7.9 ± 0.2% of its original mass. The calcined UOCs ranged from light brown to medium brown in color; it has been noted that UO From their molar masses, complete conversion of pure ammonium diuranate, (NH  P-XRD spectra comparing the calcined Dapex and Amex route ore concentrates with α-UO  The purity of the calcined uranium ore concentrates was determined by comparison to ASTM C967-13: “Standard Specification for Uranium Ore Concentrate” ( Each route produced ore concentrates above the 65 wt% uranium standard. U concentrations of 80 ± 4 wt% and 88 ± 6 wt% were seen for the Dapex route and Amex route, respectively. Sodium was the primary impurity in UOCs produced by each route, though the measured sodium impurity concentrations were well below the ASTM rejection limit of 7.50 wt%. Calcium impurities were near the rejection limit of 1.00 wt% for both the Dapex route (0.87 wt%) and the Amex route (0.73 wt%). Phosphorous and arsenic impurities were also measured for both routes, though at concentrations well below their specified penalty limits of 0.10 wt% (P) and 0.05 wt% (As). Aluminum, iron, titanium, vanadium, and molybdenum impurities were measured in the Dapex route UOCs but were mostly below the detection limit for the Amex route. This supports the literature’s claims that tertiary amines are more selective for uranium than alkyl phosphoric compounds (  SEM micrographs at each acquisition magnification can be seen in At magnifications of 10,000× and 25,000×, the appearances of the UOC morphologies would better be described as clumped agglomerative material where individual microparticle boundaries are not well defined, but the grains are generally rounded. The surface of the agglomerates would better be described as somewhat smooth. Additionally, the surfaces could be said to have prominent hollow spaces between agglomerations of particles. The primary difference seen in the morphologies of the Dapex route and Amex route is the apparent density of the agglomerations, where the Amex materials could be said to be somewhat more densely agglomerated. Particles were segmented from SEM images acquired at 50,000× magnification, which was chosen due to the optimal balance of particle edge clarity and the number of particles per image. Using the To determine if the size and shape distribution of quantified particles was statistically different, the Kolmogorov Smirnov (KS) test was applied. This method has previously been applied to segmented UOC particles to determine whether pixel area distributions changed with calcination conditions ( Given the timely nature of manual particle segmentation, it is of interest to know the number of particles required to reject the null hypothesis at a fixed confidence interval. Random samples of equal sizes were drawn from each route’s pixel area cumulative probability distribution ( Whereas Olsen et al The best CNN model used only SEM micrographs taken at 25,000× magnification for training and testing. The model was trained for 15 epochs with Resnet34 weights pre-trained with ImageNet frozen so that only the penultimate fully connected layer (128 nodes) and the output layer weights were updated, then training was resumed for an additional 25 epochs with all weights unfrozen (  Previously published laboratory-scale work quantifying the morphologies of impure uranium ore concentrates showed significant differences in the size and shape distributions of calcined UOCs with small amounts of a single impurity element added before precipitation ( Despite the impurity differences, the observed particle morphologies were highly similar and consistent with the published literature for material produced by calcining ammonium diuranate yellowcakes. Quantitative particle morphology analysis identified statistically different particle size distributions by the Kolmogorov-Smirnoff test, despite having nearly identical mean particle sizes. A convolutional neural network was trained using SEM images of UOCs from each SX route taken at 25,000× magnification. Classification accuracies of 97.22% were achieved using the Resnet34 architecture and transfer learning techniques. Meta-analysis of the trained neural network and uncertainty estimates for predictions should be applied in future work to better understand which image morphology features neural networks are using for classification, and how the learned features can be better applied to characterizing materials by their morphologies.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: