Mineralogy and geochemistry of modern shallow sediments (up to 5m thick) within the zone of water table fluctuations were studied to determine the likely sources and processes responsible for releasing As into groundwater. Samples were collected from different geological settings with varying groundwater As concentrations during dry (December 2005) and wet (September 2006) seasons at Sonargaon, Bangladesh. Stratigraphic sequences of the studied sediments showed three distinct lithofacies, viz. clayey-silt, silty-clay, and silty-very fine sand, corresponding to fine-grained overbank associations. Total As concentrations of shallow sediments ranged from <1 to 16mg/kg without a significant difference in the range of As concentrations between the seasons. Sequential chemical extraction analysis of As revealed that >80% of the As was fixed in insoluble and organic phases, while the amount of As in reducible and acid-soluble phases was very low (<20%) and varied inversely with total As content. Total As concentration varied with mica content (muscovite and biotite) and its related elements (Al, Mg and Fe), but not with total organic C, suggesting that biotite is the major host phase of As. Arsenic appears to be liberated from biotite and/or other As-bearing minerals via chemical weathering (i.e., hydration–decomposition), either from the near-surface sediments which are subject to seasonal cycling of the redox conditions, or from within the aquifer sediments. Once released, progressive diagenesis to form As-bearing organic matter may be responsible for controlling As distribution in the sediments and coexisting groundwater of the study area.Increased concentrations of As in shallow, geochemically reducing sedimentary aquifers of the Bengal Delta Plain (BDP), in large areas of Bangladesh and neighboring West Bengal, India, are major environmental health concerns for these densely populated regions. As many as 100 million people are potentially exposed to excessive As in their drinking water (e.g., Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain the sources and processes responsible for release of As into groundwater. The most widely accepted hypothesis for the BDP aquifers involves microbially mediated reductive dissolution of secondarily formed As-containing Fe oxyhydroxides (FeOOH) coating sand grains and adsorbed on clay minerals ( Iron oxyhydroxides are formed via chemical weathering (or early stage diagenetic reaction) of primary minerals, including biotite, chlorite and Fe-oxide minerals such as magnetite, under aerobic conditions in shallow sediments and/or surface water (e.g., The study was conducted within a ∼4 The study area lies on the eastern margin of the uplifted Pleistocene Madhupur Tract. In the western part of the area, dissected Pleistocene terraces vary in altitude from 10 to 20 Based on detailed groundwater chemistry ( In December 2005, when irrigation began, samples were collected from the northern, eastern, and central parts of the area. In the eastern area, sediment was bored at the edge of a natural levee near Darikandi village (DRKA, To compare seasonal variations of As in the sediments, a second sampling was conducted at the same sites in September 2006. Drilling was performed ∼50 The fields were plowed and cultivated for various crops (e.g., rice, vegetables) but were not irrigated during the sampling period in the dry season and were flooded in the rainy season. During drilling, basic lithofacies and sediment color were recorded in the field. Samples were immediately vacuum-packed in O Prior to the analyses, approximately 50 Grain size distribution of whole sediment samples was determined by laser diffraction and scattering spectroscopy (SALD-3000S, Shimadzu) after dispersion of the samples in sodium hexametaphosphate solution. The reproducibility of analytical results for duplicate samples was within ±5%. Bulk mineralogy of the sediments was identified by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku Geigerflex instrument (RAD-IA system) with Ni-filtered Cu Kα radiation (30 The major chemical composition and total S content of bulk sediments were determined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF) photometry (VXQ-160S, Shimadzu) using glass bead samples, which were prepared by fusion of sediment samples with lithium borate (1:3 ratio). Calibration lines were obtained using glass beads prepared by the same procedure with reference sedimentary rock samples (sedimentary rock series, JSd-1, JSd-2, JSd-3, JSI-1 and JLk-1; Geological Survey of Japan, Total As concentration of bulk sediment was determined by hydride generation atomic absorption spectrophotometry (HG-AAS) (SAS 7500, Seiko). The total As in bulk sediments was determined according to the method described by Sequential chemical extraction of As in different mineral forms was conducted progressively on dried bulk samples with an initial weight of 1.0 Each As phase was extracted in a 50 Total organic C (TOC) of bulk sediment samples was measured by dry combustion according to a method described by The lithofacies of six sediment columns collected during the dry (December 2005) and rainy (September 2006) seasons at the DRKA, KMCA and MCCA drilling sites are shown in The lithological characteristics are similar to those from other cores drilled at the same site. Sediment from the surface to 400 The depth of the local water table was similar for all drilling sites in each sampling period, but was lower in the dry season than in the rainy season. During the dry season, the water table was 320, 360 and 340 The sediments to 200 Conventional XRD analysis confirmed that the major minerals of the sediments studied were similar. However, the relative abundances of each mineral were distinctly different among the sediment columns. Quartz was the most abundant mineral in every sample, and mica (muscovite and biotite), chlorite, and feldspars (K-feldspar and plagioclase) were the next most abundant minerals. Amphibole was observed in the silty-very fine sand sediments. Although the mineral assemblages were similar in the silty-clay and silty-very fine sand sediments, clay minerals such as smectite and illite also were identified in the former. No remarkable variation in bulk mineral constituents was observed in oxidized and reduced sediments for all sediment columns. The XRD peak intensities of plagioclase, chlorite, kaolinite and mica in sediments collected during the rainy season at the MCCA site were slightly higher than those in the dry-season sediments (e.g.,  The concentration of some major inorganic components, total organic C (TOC), and total S by depth at the DRKA, KMCA, MCCA, and GNGA sites are shown in Chemical composition was associated with mineral composition. As shown in The MnO content was very low (<0.13 The TOC was <1.0 Total S concentration for almost all of the sediments studied was below the detection limit of 100 Total As concentrations in the sediments studied were generally in the range of 4 to 10 Arsenic concentration in the oxidized sediments at GNGA showed ranges (5–8 The relationship of fractions of As in different chemical forms to total As is shown in Fairly low percentages of As were adsorbed on or fixed in reducible and acid-soluble phases in all sediments (<20% for those from DRKA, KMCA and MCCA, and <5% for those from GNGA) ( The range of As in insoluble and organic phases changed systematically according to the drilling site. The concentration range of insoluble As was greater than that of organic As in sediments from DRKA, while both ranges overlapped in sediments from KMCA. The concentration of organic As was slightly higher than that of insoluble As at MCCA, and the organic As was clearly higher than the insoluble As at GNGA. Concentrations of extractable Fe and Mn are given in Although the levels of As enrichment in the local groundwater are different, the total As concentrations of the studied sediments are comparable to those in sediments collected in other As-enriched areas in Bangladesh, such as Brahmanbaria, Chapai Nawabganj Faridpur, and Lakshmipur ( As noted above, more than 40% of the As is hosted dominantly by silicates in all samples analyzed in this study. Similarly, most of the extractable Fe and Mn also are liberated from the insoluble phase. Biotite separation and chemical analysis of the fractions were not attempted in this study because magnetic separation is not suitable for very fine-grained sediments. Biological activity plays an important role in controlling the fate and mobility of As in subsurface sediments ( Several researchers have shown that organic matter has the potential not only to release As as aqueous complexes from soils and sediments into the groundwater via desorption in association with changing redox conditions, but also to inhibit As mobility by forming insoluble metal complexes (e.g., The amount of organic-phase As increased with decreasing As in groundwater near the drilling sites. The ratio of organic As to insoluble As was lowest in sediments from the DRKA site, which has the highest level of As in the groundwater among the four drilling sites ( Alluvial sand in the delta plains and floodplains of the GBM river systems is usually enriched in mica (5–30%), and biotite usually comprises approximately 65–75% of the total mica ( Pyrite is only a minor mineral and is found especially in clayey samples in the sediments studied. It acts as a sink of As, as reported previously (e.g., Special thanks to Kaori Okazaki, Osaka City University, for her technical support. We are also grateful to Dr. K. Furuyama, Department of Geosciences, Osaka City University, for help with the XRF analyses. We thank Saadat Sayem, student of the Department of Geology, Dhaka University, and residents of the study area for their valuable support during sample collection. The authors are also grateful to Dr. Abhijit Mukherjee, Dr. Alan E. Fryar and two anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments and suggestions that improved the manuscript. This work was supported by JSPS (Scientific Fund Nos. 12440145 and 21241005). Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 