Electrochemical oxidation with electrogenerated H2O2 (EO- H2O2), electro-Fenton (EF), photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) and solar PEF (SPEF) have been applied to mineralize bisphenol A solutions in 0.050 M Na2SO4 or 0.008 M NaCl + 0.047 M Na2SO4 at pH 3.0. The assays were performed in an undivided cell with a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and an air-diffusion cathode for continuous H2O2 production. The PEF and SPEF processes yielded almost total mineralization due to the potent synergistic action of generated hydroxyl radicals and active chlorine, in conjunction with the photolytic action of UV radiation. The higher intensity of UV rays from sunlight explained the superior oxidation ability of SPEF. The effect of applied current density was studied in all treatments, whereas the role of bisphenol A concentration was examined in PEF. Bisphenol A abatement followed a pseudo-first-order kinetics, which was very quick in SPEF since UV light favored a large production of hydroxyl radicals from Fenton's reaction. Eight non-chlorinated and six chlorinated aromatics were identified as primary products in the chloride matrix. Ketomalonic, tartronic, maleic and oxalic acids were detected as final short-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids. The large stability of Fe(III)-oxalate complexes in EF compared to their fast photomineralization in PEF and PEF accounted for by the superior oxidation power of the latter processes.Bisphenol A (2,2-bis(4-hydroxyphenyl) propane, C Several authors have reported the removal of bisphenol A from water by different methods including adsorption ( This work aims to compare the mineralization of synthetic acidic bisphenol A solutions in sulfate and chloride + sulfate containing Fe Bisphenol A (>99% purity) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All the other chemicals used of HPLC or analytical grade were purchased from Fluka, Panreac, Sigma-Aldrich and Acros Organics. High quality water (Millipore Milli-Q, resistivity > 18 MΩ cm) was employed for the preparation of all solutions. Solutions of 150 mL of bisphenol A in 0.050 M Na The assays were conducted at constant The solution pH was measured on a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter. All samples were filtered prior to measurements. HPLC analysis were performed by injecting 10 μL into a Waters system composed of a 600 liquid chromatograph coupled to a 996 photodiode array detector. Bisphenol A decay was monitored by reversed-phase HPLC using a BDS Hypersil C18, 250 mm × 4.6 mm, column at 25 °C and the photodiode detector set at λ = 254 nm. The mobile phase was 30:70 (v/v) acetonitrile:water (KH Total organic carbon (TOC) was determined by injecting fresh samples to a Shimadzu VCSN TOC analyzer. From TOC removal (△(TOC), in mg L Average data for replicated kinetic and mineralization assays are reported below, with small standard errors < 4% within 95% confidence interval in all cases. Primary aromatic intermediates formed at short electrolysis time when treating 0.556 mM bisphenol A solutions in both background electrolytes at First, solutions of 150 mL containing 0.556 mM bisphenol A (100 mg L For the above trials, The larger mineralization achieved in EF can be explained by the additional production of It can be noted that TOC removal by EF did not differ much from that in EO-H The superiority of PEF over EF can be ascribed to the photolytic action of UVA light. This radiation promotes the formation of additional amounts of The fast photolysis of intermediates like Fe(III)-carboxylate complexes explains the almost total mineralization of bisphenol A with 98.5% TOC reduction achieved by PEF. This indicates that the combined action of BDD( Moreover, the exponential decay observed in The effect of an increase in  The influence of bisphenol A concentration on the mineralization power of EAOPs was assessed for the PEF process at 100 mA cm Once clarified the degradation behavior of bisphenol A in pure sulfate medium, the study was extended to a mixed electrolyte in the presence of NaCl, at pH 3.0. First assays with only 0.070 M NaCl (with the same conductivity as 0.050 M Na  In EO-H  The effect of bisphenol A concentration from 0.112 to 0.556 mM on TOC removal and MCE in the mixed electrolyte at 100 mA cm It has been well established that bisphenol A obeys a pseudo-first-order decay upon the action of hydroxyl radicals using EO in 0.1 M Na The organic intermediates accumulated in 0.556 mM bisphenol A solutions in 0.050 M Na The pathway is initiated by the chlorination of bisphenol A ( The pathway of PEF and SPEF treatments with a BDD/air-diffusion cell allow an almost total mineralization of bisphenol A solutions in 0.050 M Na The authors thank financial support from project