Incorporation of a carbon-based nutrient enhancement strategy for drinking water biofiltration is an attractive option, especially for source waters which contain recalcitrant organics. This study compared biofilters that were operated in parallel and individually enhanced with amino acids (including alanine, phenylalanine, and tryptophan), inulin, and sucrose to increase biomass concentration and promote biodegradation of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) in the source water, including disinfection by-product (DBP) precursors. Biomass activity was characterized by measuring adenosine tri-phosphate (ATP), dissolved oxygen (DO) consumption, and through the use of laccase and esterase enzyme assays. Performance was evaluated in terms of headloss, turbidity, pH, DOC, UV254, and DBP formation potential (DBP FP). The introduction of carbon-based nutrients significantly increased biomass activity, where ATP values peaked at 976 ng/g of filter media, 853 ng/g, and 513 ng/g for amino acids, inulin, and sucrose-spiked biofilters, respectively, while a non-spiked control only reached 104 ng/g. DO utilization by the enhanced biofilters was significantly higher than the control, with a strong correlation between ATP and DO uptake observed for all filters (R
                     2 > 0.74). Laccase and esterase enzyme activities of enhanced biofilters were also elevated (p > 0.05), suggesting greater biodegradation potential. Operational parameters such as headloss development and turbidity control were not impaired by carbon supplementation strategies or an increase in biomass concentration and activity. However, the enhancement strategy did not provide improvement in terms of source water carbon removal (DOC and UV254) or DBP FP when treated filters were compared to a control.When considering biofiltration, indigenous microorganisms are allowed to colonize filter media in order to help remove biodegradable organic compounds including disinfection by-product (DBP) precursors and pharmaceuticals ( While nitrogen/phosphorous addition and the concept of engineered biological filters with supplementation has been previously examined, few studies have focused on the benefits of carbon-based nutrients which may be essential, especially when considering waters that contain low (≤ Biofilter performance depends on the type of microbes present and their activity level. Seeding filters with specific microbes known to degrade DOC may appear promising, however it has been shown that over time the natural flora will prevail as they are better adapted for a given water matrix ( The objective of this study was to increase biomass activity and improve biofiltration performance using carbon-based nutrient enhancement strategies (addition of prebiotics), including amino acids (alanine, phenylalanine, and tryptophan), inulin, and sucrose to pilot filters in the absence of a pre-oxidant. Performance was evaluated in terms of organic removal (DOC, UV A pilot biofiltration study was conducted at a conventional drinking water treatment plant which treats surface water from Lake Ontario, Canada. Pre-chlorination is practiced year-round for zebra mussel control; any remaining chlorine residual was quenched using sodium bisulphite (2.3 mg/L) prior to granular filtration. Four parallel filter columns made of acrylic ( Media samples were collected from the top 5 cm of the media, prior to backwash procedure, for biochemical characterization by way of ATP measurements and enzyme activity assays. Total ATP was determined for 1 g of media using a Luminultra analysis kit (DSA-100C, Fredericton, New Brunswick, Canada) according to instructions provided by the manufacturer. For the enzyme assays, 2 g of media sample was dissolved in trisaminomethane buffer, sonicated 15 min and analyzed immediately. Esterase and laccase enzyme activities were analyzed with their corresponding substrate analogues, 4-methylumbelliferone acetate (4-MUB acetate) and L-3,4-dihydroxyphenlaniline (L-DOPA), respectively, as described by DO and temperature were measured by Hach HQ30d multimeter with Hach LDO probe as per EPA-NERL 360.1 ( DBP formation potential (THM FP, HAA FP) was examined by first chlorinating the samples in duplicate to ensure a residual of 1.0 ± 0.5 mg/L after 24 ± 2 hr at 20°C, as described by Standard Method 4500-CI G ( To determine if the difference between the control and an enhanced pilot filter was significant, a two-tailed (α/2) Student's paired Following nutrient supplementation, biomass activity levels (as measured by ATP) demonstrated a marked increase after 14 days of operation ( All biofilters receiving nutrient addition consumed significantly higher DO than the control ( Microbial communities can utilize the easily biodegradable NOM present in water, including sugars and amino acids ( Influent turbidity fluctuated between 0.3 and 2 NTU with the exception of one value (12.7 NTU) associated with a storm event (> DOC and UV Disinfection by-product formation potential (DBP FP) was also evaluated to (1) assess the contribution of DBP precursors associated with nutrient addition, and (2) to determine precursor removal. Amino acids in the influent contributed 59 μg/L THM FP and 45 μg/L HAA FP, while the contribution of inulin and sucrose was below the detection limit (THM: 4 μg/L, HAA: 2 μg/L). Amino acids serve as DBP precursors, likely due to their aromatic structure (phenylalanine and tryptophan) ( Neither inulin nor sucrose served as DBP precursors. The effluent from the inulin-enhanced biofilter had a significantly lower concentration than the control and outperformed the other nutrient-supplemented filters in terms of THM FP ( Nutrient enhancement may serve as a viable option to maintain stable biomass concentration in the event of upstream ozone upsets. However, the addition of amino acids, inulin, and sucrose had no positive impact on the overall organic carbon removal through the filter in the absence of ozone; there was also no negative impact on operational parameters including headloss and turbidity, leaving room to further investigate other carbon-based strategies or dosing regimens. Nutrient type should be carefully selected to avoid potential DBP precursor breakthrough. Biofilters are aerobic; their metabolic activity was reflected by a strong correlation between dissolved oxygen consumption and ATP levels. Inulin addition represented the preferred nutrient strategy when compared to amino acids or sucrose, as this nutrient had lower effluent THM FP compared to the control. Future studies will be conducted with upstream ozonation to determine the impact of carbon supplementation in the presence of more easily biodegradable organics. In addition, studies could be conducted to determine the impact of carbon-based nutrients on the microbial composition in the biofilm. This work was funded by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at