The multi-platform simulation technique is employed in this study to analyze the Daikai subway tunnel that collapsed during the 1995 Kobe earthquake. The generalized distributed simulation framework (UT-SIM framework), developed at the University of Toronto, is used to perform the analysis. The soil-tunnel system is subdivided into two substructures: the soil domain and the tunnel domain. The open-source finite element analysis program OpenSees is used to model the soil domain subjected to the ground motion excitation, while the state-of-the-art reinforced concrete analysis software package, VecTor2, is used to model the nonlinear behavior of the tunnel. The two modules are integrated with the UT-SIM framework. The integrated soil tunnel models, through the multi-platform simulation technique, replicated the damage of the center column and the actual failure mode of the tunnel. The results of the soil and tunnel models are post-processed and visualized. It is confirmed that the multi-platform simulation method can replicate the crack pattern, as well as the deformation and failure mechanism of the center column.The Hyogoken-Nanbu (Kobe) earthquake in 1995 affected three major cities in Japan namely, Kobe, Kyoto, and Osaka. Among these cities, Kobe suffered the most damage, especially to its infrastructure. Daikai Subway Station tunnel (hereafter Daikai tunnel) was the first modern underground tunnel that did not cross an active seismic fault but that suffered severe damage and collapse during an earthquake without liquefaction of the surrounding soil [ There have been several studies where the collapse of the Daikai tunnel was investigated. Yoshida and Nakamura [ Several numerical simulations of the Daikai tunnel have been carried out by researchers to understand the tunnel collapse mechanism. For example, An et al. [ Huo et al. [ The Daikai tunnel collapse was also attributed to various causes. Sakai and Nozu [ Most of the studies summarized above and a few others (e.g. [ The multi-platform simulation also known as the numerical-numerical hybrid simulation was primarily introduced to exploit advanced computational tools in numerical modeling of the complex structural behavior and failure mode [ Several multi-platform simulation platforms (frameworks) such as: UI-SimCor [ This study introduces a challenging application of the proposed UT-SIM multi-platform simulation framework. The Daikai tunnel and the surrounding soil are considered for analysis to understand and to replicate the collapse mechanism of the tunnel during the 1995 Kobe earthquake. The accuracy of the proposed UT-SIM framework is evaluated by comparing the deformation and the crack pattern of the tunnel, in particular the center column with the observed failure modes. The Daikai soil-tunnel models are divided into two numerical models: the tunnel model and the surrounding soil model. The tunnel model is analyzed with VecTor2 [ The soil domain is modeled in OpenSees [ The UT-SIM framework and the integration of the soil and tunnel models are introduced in Section The proposed study adopts the multi-platform simulation technique for conducting the seismic analysis of the Daikai tunnel to replicate the collapse and failure mechanism of the center column of the tunnel under the 1995 Kobe earthquake. The UT-SIM framework is adopted for the multi-platform simulation by partitioning the complex soil-tunnel system into two modules namely: (1) the integration module; and, (2) the substructure module. The soil domain acts as the integration module, while the substructure module portrays the tunnel. State-of-the-art software packages, particularly, OpenSees and VecTor2, are used as the integration and substructure modules, respectively. The main objective of this study is to model the collapse of the Daikai tunnel and capture the complex shear-related failure mechanism of the center column of the tunnel. Hence, the numerical elements of the critical component of the complex system (the substructure module herein) are modeled with sophisticated nonlinear hysteretic constitutive models for the reinforced concrete structural elements in VecTor2. The integration module, on the other hand, is modeled as a linear elastic soil domain in OpenSees with equivalent linear soil properties corresponding to the effective shear strain level of each soil layer extracted from the free-field equivalent linear analysis of the site. The integration module and substructure module are integrated through the UT-SIM framework. The process of developing the numerical models of the soil-tunnel system is summarized in The linear soil properties (i.e. shear wave velocity profile along the depth) for one-dimensional site response analyses are determined from the borehole data available in the Daikai tunnel site, obtained from Yoshida and Nakamura [ Based on the soil properties and reference shear modulus reduction and damping curves, several one-dimensional free-field equivalent linear site response analyses are performed in the frequency domain in DEEPSOIL [ Then, the equivalent linear analysis with the selected effective shear strain ratio is utilized to extract the equivalent linear properties (shear modulus and damping ratio) for each soil layer. Extraction is based on the average effective shear strain measured along the depth of each layer and is corresponding to the reference modulus reduction and damping curves assigned to each layer. A linear elastic two-dimensional plane strain numerical model of the soil domain (integration module) is established in OpenSees adopting the extracted equivalent linear soil properties (shear modulus and damping ratio) from the selected equivalent linear analysis. The two-dimensional soil domain is modeled except the finite elements representing the tunnel. Tunnel's mass is included as lumped masses along the perimeter. Then, a detailed two-dimensional tunnel model (substructure module) is developed in VecTor2. The tunnel geometry and reinforcement are implemented in the numerical model from the Daikai tunnel lining drawings, obtained from Iida et al. [ The equivalent linear approach is widely adopted in dynamic simulation of tunnels (e.g., [ In the component level decomposition method [ The multi-platform simulation is launched after establishing the numerical models of the soil and tunnel models through the following steps: UT-SIM framework establishes network connection between the soil model (integration module) and tunnel model (substructure module). The initial stiffness of the tunnel is generated in VecTor2 and transferred to OpenSees. This allows the soil model to assemble the global stiffness matrix of the complete model despite the absence of the tunnel in the soil model. The soil model conducts the dynamic analysis and predicts the target nodal displacements at the interface nodes using the collected tunnel stiffness to resolve the unbalanced forces at the soil-tunnel interface. The target nodal displacements are sent to VecTor2 model through the UT-SIM framework. The tunnel model receives the nodal displacements from the soil model, and conducts a static analysis to obtain the nodal restoring forces at the interface nodes. Then, the tunnel model returns the restoring forces to the soil model through the UT-SIM framework to complete the dynamic analysis step. Steps 3 through 6 are repeated until the end of dynamic analyses. It is worth mentioning that the multi-platform simulation of the soil and tunnel models accounts for both the kinematic and inertial interactions between the soil and tunnel models. During the dynamic analysis, the presence of the nodal resorting forces from the tunnel model at the interface nodes in the soil model prevents the development of the free-field motion at the tunnel boundaries in the soil model, which implies the kinematic interaction between the soil and the tunnel. Whereas, the dynamic (inertial) interaction between the soil and the tunnel is modeled by including the tunnel's masses in the soil model. The UT-SIM allows the integrated modules to proceed with the following dynamic time steps through the chosen time integration and nonlinear solution method. The non-iterative implicit-explicit time integration scheme is chosen to conduct a basic communication loop between the integration and substructure modules for each dynamic time step calculation. The Alpha-OS method [ As a side note, when OpenSees is employed as the integration module through the UT-SIM, an interface element, named the Substructure element, is created and implemented in OpenSees to collect the restoring forces from the substructure module. After conducting the multi-platform analysis, the output data files from the soil and tunnel models are post-processed and thoroughly investigated. The analysis procedure using the UT-SIM framework is illustrated in During the multi-platform simulation, a network communication log file is generated by UT-SIM to post-process the data exchanged throughout the dynamic analysis steps. The log file contains the data of the dynamic analysis steps, the target displacements predicted by the integration module, measured displacements and restoring forces obtained from the substructure module at the interface nodes. In contrast to the hybrid simulation which includes physical specimen tested in a laboratory, the target and measured displacements at the interface are identical in the multi-platform simulation unless significant convergence issue took place at the interface which is not the case in the study. For more details and applications of UT-SIM framework, see Huang and Kwon [ The Daikai Station was built in 1964, and the tunnel was constructed using the cut-and-cover tunneling method. The station layout consists of three main tunnel sections: (1) the station main section, which collapsed during Kobe earthquake; (2) the station tunnel section; and, (3) the station access section between stations. No severe damage was observed in the latter two sections [ The closest recorded ground motion to the Daikai tunnel site (34.671N, 135.162E) during the Kobe earthquake was recorded at the Port Island vertical array (34.670N, 135.208E), which is 4.2 km away from the Daikai Station. The vertical array recorded the Kobe ground motions at four depths: 0 m, 16 m, 32 m, and 83 m below the ground surface. The recorded ground motion at the depth of 83 m is used in the numerical analysis, which will be discussed in detail in the following section. The raw data of the recorded ground motion are corrected and filtered to eliminate the low frequency noise content. The Butterworth high-pass filter is selected with a calculated corner frequency to obtain the corrected ground motion record. The numerical criterion to calculate the corner frequency for the selected filter is evaluated by [ Detailed two-dimensional FE models of the rectangular reinforced concrete tunnel and the surrounding soil are established. Then, the two models are integrated with the UT-SIM framework. The modeling and analysis of the two models are described in the following section. The design material properties and reinforcement details of the tunnel are adopted from the various literature [ The detailed reinforced concrete tunnel is modeled with VecTor2. VecTor2 uses a smeared, rotating-crack formulation for reinforced concrete based on the MCFT [ In this section, the soil profile and soil characteristics at the Daikai tunnel are briefly described. After the tunnel collapse in 1995, several boreholes were drilled to extract samples and measure the shear wave velocity and SPT N-value. In this study, one-dimensional equivalent linear free-field site response analysis is conducted using the measured soil data. Afterwards, the extracted soil properties from the equivalent linear analysis are implemented in the two-dimensional soil model. The soil profile of the Daikai tunnel site was adopted from Yoshida and Nakamura [ Prior to conducting the dynamic analysis for the two-dimensional soil model, several one-dimensional equivalent linear free-field site response analyses are conducted with various effective shear strain ratios in DEEPSOIL using the soil properties from the analyzed borehole. The soil column is discretized into 64 vertical soil elements, and the soil properties are obtained from A nonlinear free-field time history analysis of the soil column is also conducted in DEEPSOIL. The Generalized Quadratic/Hyperbolic (GQ/H) model [ The corrected NS ground motion component that was recorded at Port Island vertical array at depth of 83 m is applied at the soil column base. The rigid half-space bedrock option is selected in analysis. The recorded ground motion at the depth of 83 m was also applied in conducting analyses by Huo et al. [ Equivalent linear analyses are performed with effective shear strain ratio (α) of 0.50, 0.55, and 0.60 to choose the effective shear strain ratio that produces a shear strain profile similar to the shear strain profile calculated from the nonlinear analysis, particularly at the depths of the tunnel. The maximum shear strain profiles with the three selected effective shear strain ratios are illustrated in The significant decrease in the shear moduli and increase in damping within the top 5 m are observed in The surface spectral acceleration response spectra from the equivalent linear analysis with α = 0.55 and nonlinear analysis are illustrated in A detailed two-dimensional plane strain soil model is developed in OpenSees with a depth of 30 m and a width of 100 m, which assures that the free-field boundaries at the model's edges have a minimal influence on the soil-tunnel interaction. The dimensions and element discretization of the two-dimensional soil model are illustrated in Once the tunnel and soil models are established in VecTor2 and OpenSees, respectively, the models are integrated as shown in Prior to conducting the dynamic analysis of the integrated soil-tunnel models through the multi-platform simulation framework, the tunnel model is individually analyzed under reversed-cyclic nonlinear pushover analysis in VecTor2. The cyclic pushover analysis of the tunnel is not considered as a substitute of the dynamic analysis of the tunnel. Rather, it is introduced to obtain the global performance of the tunnel and, in particular, the center column under severe lateral loading. Moreover, the pushover analysis is also suitable for predicting the failure mechanism of the tunnel under constant vertical and incremental lateral loading conditions. The tunnel model described in Section The post-processing tool, Augustus, that is included in the VecTor2 software package, is used to visualize and post-process the results of the cyclic pushover analysis. Numerous hairline cracks appear in all the tunnel RC elements after completing the first lateral displacement cycle (at 25 mm). In the successive displacement cycle, the first noticeable crack is observed initiating at the side walls with a crack width of 33 mm. All tunnel elements developed cracks with different widths except the base slab due to the fixation of the bottom nodes, which produced excessive horizontal and vertical lateral rigidity.  The maximum recorded shear stress in the center column under the cyclic pushover analysis is 3.7 MPa, which exceeds the shear capacity of the column. The shear capacity of the column was defined as 1.5 MPa and 2.35 MPa for the shear strength and yielding shear strength associated with yielding of main reinforcement, respectively [ The dynamic analysis of the integrated soil-tunnel models through UT-SIM framework is presented. The dynamic analysis is conducted considering the extracted soil properties from the one-dimensional equivalent linear free-field site response analysis. The dynamic analysis is carried out under the horizontal (NS) and vertical (UD) ground motions simultaneously. The ground motion components are of the Kobe earthquake recorded at the Port Island vertical array at a depth of 83 m, and are applied along the base of the soil domain. Rayleigh damping is assumed at the first and third modal frequency of the integrated soil-tunnel model. Various Rayleigh damping coefficients are defined for the different soil layers in the soil domain. The Rayleigh damping coefficients are calculated based on the extracted damping ratio of each soil layer from the one-dimensional equivalent linear free-field site response. The deformation and crack pattern of the tunnel model are visualized with Augustus. At the beginning of the dynamic analysis, all the tunnel RC elements appeared uncracked with only hairline and minor cracks (w The peak lateral displacements of the soil-tunnel models that took place at t = 5.65 s are presented in From the previous cyclic pushover analysis, it was obvious that the center column is susceptible to shear failure accompanied with an axial-load capacity drop. The center column's vulnerability to shear failure requires drawing attention to the response of the tunnel and, in particular, to the center column under the dynamic soil-tunnel interaction.  The failure of the center column is inevitable at t = 5.60 s, as the center column experiences a steady declination in the shear stress soon after reaching the peak value. The drop in the shear stress is followed by a significant sudden drop of 35% in the axial load, which coincided with severe and steep diagonal shear cracks in the center column as shown in At t = 6.72 s, the diagonal shear cracks in the center column appear wider (w It can be concluded from the analysis results that the shear failure is accompanied with a significant drop in the axial capacity of the column that is heavily influenced by shear-related failure mechanisms. The failure of the center column is typically followed by the collapse of the upper slab, and hence the utter failure of the tunnel. The cracking of the center column is the result of the insufficient shear reinforcement in the column as previously described in the literature (e.g., An et al. [ This paper introduced a geotechnical application of the generalized integration simulation framework, UT-SIM, which was developed at the University of Toronto to perform the multi-platform simulation technique. The collapse of the well-known Daikai tunnel during the 1995 Kobe earthquake was investigated using the multi-platform simulation to replicate the tunnel's failure. The multi-platform simulation was proposed to exploit the state-of-the-art FE software packages in modeling the soil-tunnel system and to reproduce the complex behavior of the center column of the tunnel, and hence replicating the tunnel's collapse. Prior to conducting the multi-platform simulation, one-dimensional equivalent linear site response analysis was performed to extract the soil properties from the available borehole log data at the tunnel site. Modeling the Daikai tunnel collapse required a software package capable of accurately performing the shear-critical behavior of the center column. Therefore, VecTor2, which can capture the complex shear-related failure mechanism in RC elements, is selected for modeling the tunnel model. The open-source finite element analysis program OpenSees was employed to model the surrounding soil domain using the extracted soil properties from the one-dimensional equivalent linear site response analysis. Then, the soil-tunnel models were integrated through a communication module via the UT-SIM framework. The study investigated the effectiveness and accuracy of the proposed integration framework, as well as the realistic behavior of the integrated soil-tunnel models. The dynamic analysis of the soil-tunnel models was examined under the 1995 Kobe earthquake horizontal and vertical ground motion components recorded few kilometers away from the Daikai tunnel site. During the dynamic analysis, the center column started to develop wide diagonal shear cracks that indicated insufficient shear reinforcement of the center column. The progressive degradation in the shear capacity of the center column was accompanied with the axial failure caused by a 75% loss in the column's initial axial capacity. The failure of the center column has followed by the failure of the tunnel. It can be stated with confidence that the multi-platform simulation framework can realistically capture the unique shear failure mechanism observed in the Daikai tunnel failure. The research project was carried out with the financial supports from Discovery Grant of