In the present work, experiments have been performed for leaching potassium from phosphorus-potassium associated ore in sulfuric acid/fluorite system with the assistance of ultrasound. The effects of reaction temperature, sulfuric acid concentration, liquid/solid ratio and fluorite dosage on the leaching of potassium were investigated. The results show that the dissolution fraction of potassium can be significantly improved in the presence of ultrasound and under the optimum reaction conditions a dissolution fraction of 94% can be reached. The kinetics analysis shows that the leaching reaction follows the classical unreacted-core shrinking model with internal diffusion being the rate-limiting step.Potassium is one of the essential nutrients for plant and crop growth ( Ultrasound is a sound wave with a frequency greater than 20 Recently, phosphorus-potassium associated ore, which contains 6–12% P Considering the natural symbiotic association of phosphorus and potassium in the ore, the comprehensive use of phosphorus and potassium for preparing PK fertilizer has more economical advantages. In this work, potassium and phosphorus were leached out from the phosphorus-potassium associated ore based on low-temperature acid leaching method by using sulfuric acid and fluorite (CaF Phosphorus-potassium associated ore from Yiling district of Yichang city, Hubei province, China was grinded to pass through a 150-mesh sieve. The chemical analysis of the ore performed by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF, EDX-8000, Shimadzu) is shown in Sulfuric acid (H In a typical ultrasound-assisted leaching experiment, a certain amount of sulfuric acid solution was added into the flask submerged in the ultrasonic bath. After the desired temperature of the sulfuric acid solution was reached, ore (37.5 The leaching of soluble potassium from the phosphorus-potassium associated ore proceeds through two consecutive steps. In the first step, the generation of HF occurs through the reaction of H In the second step, the generation of soluble potassium occurs through the reaction of the generated HF with potassium feldspar. Many side reactions can also occur during the leaching process. In the leaching process, liquid/solid ratio (L/S, ratio of the volume of acid solution (mL) to the mass of ore (g)), acid concentration (C, wt.%), CaF Liquid/solid ratio is one of the key factors influencing leaching efficiency. As shown in It can be observed from The decomposition of potassium feldspar needs the reaction of sulfuric acid and CaF Generally, temperature is the key parameter regarding reaction kinetics of chemical processes ( The experiments have been conducted at four different reaction temperatures in the range of 60–90 XRD and SEM characterizations were performed on the filter residue, which was obtained under the reaction conditions of ultrasound power of 100   The reaction rate in a liquid/solid reaction system is generally controlled by one of the following three steps occurring in succession: diffusion through the liquid film, diffusion through the ash/product layer, and chemical reaction at the surface of the solid particles ( Therefore, Eqs. The determined activation energy for leaching is 20,253 The small value of relative mean square of errors means that the unreacted-core shrinking model can be reliably used to describe the relationship between dissolution fraction of potassium and leaching parameters. In this work, the leaching of potassium from phosphorus-potassium associated ore was investigated. The results show that with the assistance of ultrasound the dissolution fraction of potassium can be substantially increased and under the optimum conditions a dissolution fraction of 94% can be reached. The improved dissolution fraction of potassium in the presence of ultrasound can be attributed to the cavitation effect which can enhance the intra-particle diffusion, increase the mass transfer rate, disintegrate large ore particles to small ones, exposing a large surface area, and enable the easy penetration of the leaching acid into ore particles. In addition, the strip structure of the product obtained in the presence of ultrasound may also contribute to the improved dissolution fraction. The kinetics analysis shows that the leaching reaction follows the classical unreacted-core shrinking model with internal diffusion being the rate-limiting step. The authors gratefully acknowledge the funding support of