Au nanoparticle (AuNP)/ferritin satellite nanostructures are constructed by simply mixing AuNP and a ferritin mutant minT1-LF, which can be precisely delivered to a titanium surface. Different size AuNPs can be introduced into this satellite nanostructure while the ferritin-internalized NP is interchangeable. Moreover, AuNP/ferritin satellite structures can be assembled to a further complicated membrane structure.Assemblies of plasmonic nanoparticles (PNPs) have attracted considerable attention due to their potential for producing functional materials with novel electronic, magnetic, and optical properties, which are not available in discrete nanoparticles In this letter, we present a simple method to fabricate AuNP/ferritin satellite nanostructures, which can be completed within 1 To create AuNP/ferritin satellite nanostructures in solution, we have to identify a condition under which ferritin adsorbs to AuNP and simultaneously no aggregation among ferritin molecules takes place. Citrate capping AuNP is known as one of the most easily synthesized NPs, whose surface is negatively charged due to the exposed citrate Citrate capping PNPs of AuNP15 (sphere, ∼15 minT1-LF with an iron core (minT1-LF(Fe)), minT1-LF with a cobalt core (minT1-LF(Co)), Δ1-LF with an iron core (Δ1-LF(Fe)) were prepared as described previously The patterned 5-nm-thick Ti layer with dimension of 100 To test whether minT1-LF can bind to citrate capping AuNPs, we compared the AuNP/minT1-LF(Fe) and AuNP/Δ1-LF(Fe) by SDS–PAGE analysis. As a result, a clear minT1-LF protein band was observed from the lane of each AuNP/minT1-LF(Fe) complex solution, while no protein band was observed in the case of Δ1-LF, ferritin without minTBP-1 ( Each AuNP/ferritin product was dropped on a Si substrate and was subjected to SEM observation after water rinsing and nitrogen-blow drying. The all high resolution images of Au15/minT1-LF(Fe), Au36/minT1-LF(Fe), Au15/minT1-LF(Co) and Au36/minT1-LF(Co) showed clearly the wart-like architectures of the AuNP/ferritin satellite nanostructure ( The satellite structures were further characterized by TEM observation. Two microliters of each AuNP/ferritin product was dropped onto a carbon-coated TEM grid and after 2 As described above, minT1-LF could selectively adsorb to Ti and Si surface. The selectivity could be further enhanced by adding a surfactant agent TWEEN 20, which resulted in minT1-LF only binding to the Ti surface. To find out that whether this property was retained by the AuNP/ferritin satellite structures, each AuNP/ferritin solution including 0.2% TWEEN 20 was dropped onto Ti-patterned Si substrate. After rinsing with water, the substrates were observed by SEM. As shown in Beside adsorption selectivity, we found out that AuNP/ferritin satellite structures can be assembled to a further complicated membrane structure. In a typical experiment, AuNP36/minT1-LF(Fe) was dropped on a Si substrate and let air-dried, which was subjected to SEM observation after water rinsing and nitrogen-blow drying. As a result, a membrane with a size of several μm, where AuNP36/minT1-LF(Fe) satellite structures are closely packed, was observed near the edge area of substrate ( In conclusion, we reported an extremely simple method to construct AuNP/ferritin satellite nanostructures using a ferritin mutant, minT1-LF. AuNPs with different sizes were successfully accommodated at the center of the satellite nanostructures. It is possible that the other PNP candidates could be introduced similarly after modifying their surface. Moreover, it was demonstrated that NPs inside minT1-LF is interchangeable, which could be Fe, Co, or other QDs. Certainly these advantages will provide us more freedom to design desirable satellite structures with varied NP contents for studying interaction between plasmons, or plasmon and photoluminescence. Moreover, AuNP/ferritin satellite structures can be assembled to a further complicated membrane structure. Furthermore, our proposed PNP/ferritin structures can selectively recognize target substrates and can be immobilized to nanometer Ti sites precisely, while the satellite structure remains intact, which may facilitate miniaturization and integration processes in conjunction with top-down techniques. We would like to thank Yasuhiro Kakihara for his technical support. And we would also like to thank Leigh McDowell for the critical reading. This letter was partially supported by the Core Research for Evolutional Science and Technology (CREST), Japan Science and Technology Agency, and the International Human Frontier Science Program. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 