The main objective of this study is to improve the basic understanding of electrochemical bioleaching as an advanced hydrometallurgical process suitable for the treatment of high grade complex sulfide ores and to use this understanding for analyzing the potential of this process for copper recovery from high grade chalcopyrite ores and flotation concentrates. Using a typical flotation concentrate from the Sarcheshmeh copper processing complex (located in the south-east of Iran) and mixed mesophilic as well as moderately thermophilic microorganisms, leaching experiments were performed in a stirred bioreactor. The emphasis was given on the comparison between the results of bioleaching and that of electrochemical bioleaching tests. From the results of this study, it can be pointed out that compared to the conventional bioleaching; the electrochemical bioleaching of chalcopyrite flotation concentrate leads to about 35% more copper recovery. It seems that the main reason for increasing copper recovery by electrochemical bioleaching is the control of redox potential between 400 and 425mV. Under this condition, the precipitation of iron oxy-hydroxides on the surface of chalcopyrite, which can act as a diffusion barrier and prevents chalcopyrite dissolution, is significantly reduced. This leads to a higher electrochemical reduction of chalcopyrite and its improved dissolution.Chalcopyrite is the most important copper-bearing mineral in the world. This mineral is known to be recalcitrant to hydrometallurgical processing. Much effort has been directed towards developing a hydrometallurgical process suitable for the treatment of high grade chalcopyrite ores with very limited success. It was believed that biohydrometallurgical techniques could offer one of the better alternatives for treatment of such ores. In the last three decades, microbial leaching operations have been developed into an emerging biotechnology. During this period, bioleaching has been applied successfully to the extraction of copper from low grade and secondary copper sulphides such as chalcocite and oxidation of refractory gold ores in both uncontrolled dumps and designed bioheaps. Also during this period of time, stirred tank bioleaching has been commercialized for cobalt recovery and for biooxidation of refractory gold concentrates. However, in the case of chalcopyrite ores and concentrates, biohydrometallurgy remains a promising technology ( Among the various microorganisms used in the bioleaching of metals, mixed thermophilic cultures have shown higher potential for copper recovery from chalcopyrite compared to mesophiles. In practice, moderate thermophilic microorganisms are being preferred, because they are more resistant to higher pulp densities and higher heavy metal concentrations than extreme thermophiles ( Different studies have shown that applying negative potentials to the pulp significantly enhances the activity and growth of microorganisms and increases the dissolution rate of chalcopyrite ( A representative copper sulfide flotation concentrate, obtained from Sarcheshmeh Copper Mine (Kerman, Iran) was used in all experiments. X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analyses of the sample showed 27.73% Cu, 24.59% Fe, 14.82% S, 0.99% Zn and chalcopyrite (CuFeS Two types of mixed cultures were used in the bioleaching tests. The first one contained strains of The concentration of total iron and copper in the leach solutions were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS, Varian 220). After each test, the solid residue was filtered, rinsed with distilled water, left to air dry and sent for analyzing by AAS and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray microanalyzer (EDAX)(Cam-Scan MV 2300). Prior to the SEM studies, the samples were coated with a thin gold layer. Free cells in solution were counted by direct counting using a Thoma chamber of 0.1 The leaching experiments were performed in a double- wall, three-chamber, three-electrode, two-litter glass electrobioreactor with four baffles, thermostated at the desired temperatures of 35 This study consisted of the four types of experiments namely, chemical leaching (CL), electrochemical leaching (ECL), bioleaching (BL) and electrochemical bioleaching (EBL). Chemical leaching tests were carried out as observing runs at 35 It is generally believed that even in high acidic solutions, the passivity of chalcopyrite surface by an iron-bearing precipitate is responsible for slow and incomplete extraction of copper. In order to improve the dissolution rate of chalcopyrite, the formation of the so called passive layer must be prevented. One of the most discussed solution for this problem, is the possible control of pulp oxidation reduction potential (ORP) during the bioleaching process. To evaluate the influence of the electrochemical reactions on copper recovery during chemical and bacterial leaching, the results reported in this work focus on the comparison between processes in which the ORP was controlled and the classic bioleaching experiments. The solution ORP during (bio)-leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate depends on the ferric to ferrous ion ratio (Fe In During electrochemical leaching and electrochemical bioleaching runs, the ORP in the cathodic compartment of the electro-bioreactor was controlled at the desired levels, while the pH gradually increased, whereas at the anodic compartment, the ORP gradually increased and the pH decreased. On the other hand, a higher ability of mesophilic bacteria to oxidize Fe (II) could lead to more current flow through the electrolyte that decreased the ORP and regulated it at the desired value. Results of copper and iron dissolution as a function of leaching time for different process under otherwise similar conditions ( The results in Results of this study show that in all experiments the extraction of iron is significantly lower than that of copper. The reasons for the low iron dissolution in the electrochemical bioleaching and bioleaching processes may be different. In the electrochemical bioleaching process at low solution potentials, the low leachability of pyrite (Eq. In the electrochemical bioleaching mode, current passes across the cathode and anode and several electrochemical reactions can occur. At the cathode compartment, the main opposing reactions that influence the solution ORP are reactions A gradual increase of pH occurs in the catholyte especially in the presence of mesophilic bacteria. The pH increase may be caused by the reduction of protons as a consequence of high current passing across the electrolyte, low solubility of pyrite as an acid producer (Eq. The water decomposition leads to the formation of a highly corrosive medium due to a very low pH value and a very high solution potential (∼ It should be explained that the electrochemical transformations in electrobioleaching have two distinct influences on biological and chemical subsystems which lead to increasing copper dissolution. In the biological subsystem, as counted by microscopic observations, the concentration of mesophilic cells increased from about 3 In the chemical subsystem as proposed by In the presence of microorganisms, elemental sulfur is oxidized to sulfate (Eq. In the case of electrobioleaching, there is a periodic electrical contact between semiconducting metallic sulfide minerals such as chalcopyrite and the working electrode which leads to higher charging of these particles. H Furthermore, it is generally believed that high Fe(III) concentration in solutions originated from conventional bioleaching of sulfide minerals are responsible for the formation of iron-hydroxyl precipitates as a barrier for mineral dissolution. From the results of this study, it can be concluded that the controlled potential in electrochemical bioleaching process of chalcopyrite concentrate in the presence of moderate thermophiles, significantly reduces the formation of iron oxy-hydroxide on the surface of chalcopyrite by increased reduction of Fe(III) to Fe(II). As a result of this process, electrochemical dissolution of chalcopyrite and copper recovery can be increased. This conclusion is confirmed by SEM/EDAX analysis of the leaching residues. In order to investigate the effect of bacterial activities on the surface behavior of chalcopyrite concentrate, the morphologies of the conventional and electrochemical bioleaching residues were examined using SEM photographs, in addition to their elemental compositions with EDAX microanalyses (  Compared to the chemical leaching and bioleaching, the copper recovery by electrochemical bioleaching could be increased up to 35%. At optimum condition around 90% of copper could be leached from the chalcopyrite concentrate. The cell concentrations in the electrochemical bioleaching increase drastically up to an excellent level near to 10 SEM-EDAX analysis of the solid residues shows clear differences in the composition of reaction products during bioleaching and electrochemical bioleaching. Applying potential to the slurry significantly reduced the formation of jarosite that is known as a barrier for chalcopyrite dissolution. From the results of this study, it can be concluded that an electrochemical bioleaching process has an excellent potential to be used for copper recovery from chalcopyrite concentrate in industrial scales. However, even when copper recovery is high enough to justify the process economically, the objective of the second phase of this program is to evaluate the optimum process conditions for solid densities up to 20%. This should increase the industrial application potential of this process. The authors appreciate the support of the