ZnO thin film has been deposited on a sapphire (001) at a temperature of 400°C using a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) with oxygen pressures of 50, 200, 300, 400 and 500mTorr. The photoluminescence (PL) intensity of ultra-violet (UV) luminescence increases as the oxygen pressure increases up to 300mTorr. This is probably because the stoichiometry of oxygen-deficient ZnO film is improved by increasing oxygen pressure. Stoichiometry of ZnO films has been more improved by O2 ambient annealing, but the textured micro-structure of the ZnO changes to the one with multi-orientation. The intensity of UV luminescence is generally proportional to the electrical resistivity and stoichiometry, but not much related to the micro-structures.Zinc oxide (ZnO), a II–VI compound semiconductor with wide direct bandgap of 3.3 A PLD chamber evacuated by turbomolecular pump to a base pressure of 5×10 Photoluminescence (PL) spectra obtained from samples deposited with various oxygen pressures are shown in  The stoichiometry effects are partially supported by the results of the resistivity measurement as shown in  The PL intensity of ultra-violet (UV) luminescence and the electrical resistivity generally increase as the oxygen pressure for the PLD of ZnO increases. This is probably because the stoichiometry of oxygen-deficient ZnO film is improved by increasing oxygen pressure. Stoichiometry of the ZnO films is more improved by oxygen ambient annealing, but the textured structure of the film is broken. The electrical resistivity is inversely proportional to the intensity ratio of the defect-related emission to UV, regardless of the micro-structure. In the present experiment, the best quality with the minimum intensity ratio (defect-related/UV) is obtained from the ZnO sample grown at an oxygen pressure of 400 Authors would like to thank Dr. J.H. Song of Korea Institute of Science and Technology for the backscattering spectrometry and also thank W. K. Choi of Korea Institute of Science and Technology for his sincere technical support. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Korea Research Foundation made in the program year of 1998 (1998-017-E00173).