The deportment of all the rare earth elements (REE) during the precipitation of ferrihydrite was investigated by pumping ferric sulphate solutions into a REE-containing solution at 75°C. At a pH of 3.5, controlled by NaOH additions, increasing concentrations of the light rare earths in the 0 to 4–5g/L range resulted in 2 to 3% REE adsorption on ferrihydrite. Light rare earth concentrations >4 or 5g/L generated Na-REE double sulphate salts and gave up to 15% REE contents in the precipitates. Heavy REE concentrations as high as 10g/L resulted in a near-linear increase in the adsorbed REE contents, up to 5–8% REE, and Na-REE double sulphate salts were not detected at the concentrations studied. Up to 70% REE precipitation occurs from <1g/L REE solutions but the extent of precipitation decreases sharply to ~15% in more concentrated REE media. Formation of Na-REE double sulphate salts significantly increased the overall precipitation of the light rare earths. Increasing solution pH greatly increased the extent of REE adsorption on ferrihydrite, and controlled ferrihydrite precipitation at pH <3.5 offers a potential means of reducing REE losses during iron precipitation. X-ray diffraction analysis and mineralogical examination of the products consistently identified dominant ferrihydrite, although the “crystallinity” of the ferrihydrite decreased as the REE concentration increased. The conclusion is that the rare earth elements adsorb on the surface of the fine grain ferrihydrite precipitates and the adsorption somehow impedes the “crystallization” of the ferrihydrite.The rare earth elements (REE) or lanthanides “are strictly the fourteen elements following lanthanum (cerium to lutetium) in which the fourteen 4 Ferrihydrite, which has also been described as ferric hydroxide, amorphous iron hydroxide, iron gel, etc., forms by the rapid hydrolysis of Fe The behaviour of the rare earth elements during ferrihydrite precipitation is clearly of relevance to rare earth processing. Several investigations have been reported on the deportment of low concentrations of REEs in geological and environmental situations. The adsorption of lutetium (Lu The above discussion indicates that ferrihydrite precipitates can adsorb rare earth elements. However, most of the reported studies involved low concentrations of the rare earths, such as those typically encountered in geological or environmental situations. Because of the importance of minimizing rare earth losses during ferrihydrite precipitation in commercial rare earth processes, the present fundamental study was undertaken to elucidate the behaviour of the rare earth elements at the higher concentrations likely to be encountered during ferrihydrite precipitation in a commercial sulphate-based rare earth process. The rare earth elements were considered individually, and it is appreciated that more complex behaviour might result in the presence of several rare earth species. Ferrihydrite was precipitated by pumping 100 The precipitates made at 90 As estimated by FE-SEM analysis, all the precipitated ferrihydrite particles were < The final products were dried overnight at 110 The experiments were run for a total time of 180 The effect of repulping on the composition of the precipitates after sequential repulping stages was investigated. The initial precipitation was carried out at 75 The selected precipitation pH was based on the need to produce a filterable ferrihydrite product essentially free of other iron phases. However, the effect of solution pH on the behaviour of the rare earths during the precipitation reaction was also explored. It is known that rare earth ion adsorption on ferrihydrite is strongly pH dependant. In the present study, solutions containing 5 The above synthesis experiments suggest a possible means of reducing rare earth losses during the precipitation of an iron impurity as ferrihydrite. If the precipitation is carried out in a relatively acid medium, at pH values The light rare earth elements (cerium to gadolinium) behave somewhat differently than the heavy rare earth elements (terbium to lutetium), and are considered separately. As the concentration of the rare earth ions increased > The compositional data presented in   The percentage of the individual light rare earths precipitated in the above experiments was calculated from the initial solution concentrations and the mass/composition of the precipitates. The results for cerium, lanthanum, praseodymium, neodymium and samarium, are shown in  The heavy rare earth elements differ from the lighter members of the series in a number of ways (  Terbium, holmium, erbium, thulium and lutetium behave in a similar manner during ferrihydrite precipitation from sulphate solutions at 75  In ferric sulphate media at 75 X-ray diffraction analysis and mineralogical examination of the products consistently identified dominant ferrihydrite, although the “crystallinity” of the ferrihydrite decreased as the rare earth ion concentration increased up to 8 The authors are indebted to CANMET employees Derek Smith for the numerous X-ray diffraction analyses, Rolando Lastra for the SEM investigations and Yves Thibault for the electron microprobe analyses.