The advection–dispersion model (ADE) is proposed for an accurate description of fluid flow and solute transport in porous media via the conformable derivative. Analytical solutions of the proposed conformable advection–dispersion equation (CADE) are obtained subject to various initial and boundary conditions. The analytical solutions of CADE in each case are reduced into the classical ADE with the conformable derivative order 
                        α
                        =
                        1
                     . Furthermore, compared with the classical ADE, the applicability of the presented CADE models is also validated on the basis of experimental data in literatures.The modeling of fluid flow and solute transport in porous media is of primary importance in tremendous applications, including those relevant to hydrogeology, groundwater management, environmental protection and energy extraction. In general, the main fluid flow and solute transport in porous media involve advection and dispersion in natural pore-fracture networks Khalil et al. In this work we generalized the classical ADE by employing the conformable derivative, leading to the conformable advection–dispersion equation (CADE). Analytical derivations and experimental evaluations validate the potential applications of CADE models. Comparisons of experimental data in literatures with CADE models indicate that the proposed CADE models have the advantage of accurately depicting the long-tailed (power-law) breakthrough curves of fluid flow and solute transport in porous media. In addition, further discussions demonstrate that the conformable derivative provides a bridge between the general Euclidean space and the fractal space which has the characteristic of power-law. Therefore, the CADE models make it possible to describe the flow and transport phenomena in fractal media via conventional approaches.  Given a function   The one-dimensional ADE for the description of concentration distribution of fluid flow and solute transport in porous media is represented as The conformable advection–dispersion equation for an instantaneous point source is expressed by Employing the Fourier transform  Considering the conformable advection–dispersion equation in semi-infinite media with appropriate input conditions Using a transformation The ordinary differential equation It is worth noting that since the conformable fractional derivative reduces to the classical integer derivative with the differential order  Ogata and Bank This type of analytical solutions have attracted numerous applications for different advection and dispersion problems incorporating the other factors such as zero order production, first order decay, and adsorption  As previous theoretical investigations, interestingly, it is found that all the analytical solutions of the presented CADE model can be obtained by replacing the time variable  Let As a consequence, invoking the concept of integer derivative of a function with respect to another function in   As mentioned at previous sections, the proposed CADE models have the ability of modeling the long-tailed (power-law) flow and transport phenomena in porous media. In general, the porous media exhibit fractal characteristic, i.e., power-law relationship, so that can be referred as fractal media The main objective of this work is to develop analytical solutions for the advection–dispersion equations involving the conformable derivative. The CADE models represented by these solutions are validated by depicting the time-dependent behavior of fluid flow and solute transport in porous media. All presented CADE models are in excellent agreement with the experimental data in literatures, which indicates that the presented CADE models can be used for the accurate description of fluid flow and solute transport in porous media. This work is supported by the