It is known that fire and high temperatures cause degradation of natural building stones. There are many studies focused on the effect of high temperature on physico-mechanical properties of sandstone and granites while there are a few insufficient studies on limestones and marble. Almost all of the studies performed on limestone and marble are established at temperatures lower than 1000°C and just focused on investigating some of the physico-mechanical properties of natural building stones and therefore some of the physical and mechanical properties of limestones and marbles exposed up to this temperature are not studied in detail. That condition cannot explain how the properties of marble and limestone change with high temperatures, which are widely used in many areas of our lives as building materials.
                  The aim of this study is to investigate the changing of physico-mechanical properties of natural building materials including limestone and marbles exposed to different temperatures ranging from room temperature up to 1000°C in the oven. For this purpose, samples were exposed to the heat separately starting from 200°C, gradually 400, 600, 800 and 1000°C and then some physico-mechanical properties of them and reference sample at room temperature were determined. The results obtained from the tests were analyzed in detail in terms of criticality of temperature degree, positive or negative effect of temperature rise, reusability of the building stone exposed to heat.
                  As a conclusion of the study, important results are given in many aspects such as, usage areas of fire exposed natural stones, safety precautions at usage areas in addition to gained properties of natural stones due to temperature.Natural stones are widely used in all areas of our lives. Exact properties of the natural stones must be known especially for constructing structures such as, buildings, bridges, and tunnels. Via this method safe and healthy living areas could be created. Besides knowing the most physico-mechanical properties of natural stones, it is also required to define how natural stones are affected by the heat which is an important factor. In many fields, such as energy, geology, civil engineering, the disposal of highly radioactive nuclear waste, the underground storage and mining of petroleum and natural gas, the development and utilization of geothermal resources, the safety of drainage and comprehensive utilization of coal seam gas and the post-disaster reconstruction of underground rocks engineering are all related to the strength and deformation characteristics of rocks under high temperatures ( It is important to predict the behavior of natural stones, which are located around high temperature and heat sources, against the temperature to take necessary security measures with estimating the damage. The physical, mechanical, chemical and petrographical properties of rock, which are used as building materials, are important from the aspect of their uses in our daily life ( Marble is a material that is constantly used in building, either for structural (columns, floors, etc.) or decorative purposes (frieses, reliefs, statues, etc.). It is a noble material of particular beauty and easy manipulation, but it is susceptible to alteration by natural atmospheric agents or others resulting from urban and industrial activity ( Rocks are composed of minerals, bounding matrix, and cracks and pores. The geometry and density of the cracks and pores are the main controlling parameters for the physical properties of rocks ( Cracks, crusts and spalling were observed on the blocks following the fire hazard. One should note that the term crack refers to discontinuities formed by thermal gradients within the marble blocks during the fire ( Fire disaster related changes in the petrological and petrophysical properties of the building materials can often lead to stability problem. It is important to establish the effect of fire and high temperature on the building structure, including natural stone. The walls of a building must necessarily attain a high temperature in a fire and suffer serious deterioration in strength and stability. Natural stone can be seriously affected in building fires, so it is useful to ascertain on which occasions the structure can be restored without replacement of stone and when it is necessary to include new stone material to maintain the structural integrity of the building ( The calcinations of calcite from 800 These materials generally do not spall severely because the grains sit in a matrix and the stone can to an extent ‘absorb’ the stress produced by fire. Dense materials, such as granites or marble, experience physical breakdown due to the micro-cracking generated by the thermal expansion of minerals. The absence of a matrix, which in more porous materials absorbs the stresses generated by the expansion of mineral grains, increases the likelihood of mechanical breakdown. The very low porosity also favors this kind of disintegration due to the denser packing of minerals with different thermal and structural properties in the stone. It has been observed that, independent of the stone type, the lower the initial porosity the greater the porosity increase generated during fire—changes up to 13 times the initial porosity have been reported in building stones with low porosity. In addition to this, calcareous stones undergo severe processes of physical destruction in zones affected by fire above 800 The most catastrophic change occurred in limestone cores, beginning to take place above 600 Researchers investigating the effects of different temperatures on natural stones have demonstrated different features of the natural stones. Some of these studies such as The most serious studies about the effect of temperature on the sandstones were made by  Although the subject which the effects of temperature on the natural stones have been studied by different researchers, there are less number of articles that try to explain the changes of the stones by performing extensive physical and mechanical tests at very high temperatures. Studies have often tried to explain the behavior marble and limestone have shown against the heat, such as; investigation on degradation of historical buildings (  The effect of temperature on marble was investigated by   In all of the investigated studies, exposed temperatures are generally less than 1000 In the study, the aim is to determine the changes of the properties of the natural stones against the temperature, which are commonly available in Turkey, commercially producible, having different structures and textural characteristics. In this study, eight different samples (four of which are limestone and the others are marble) were used. Commercial names of samples used in the experiments with sample codes are given in Firstly, samples were taken from natural stone quarries and drilling machine was used to take core samples, then they were cut with circular saw in the desired dimensions and the surfaces were smoothed. To determine the effect of temperature, samples which were non-exposed to heat were separated from the samples exposed to heat and were compared by the properties. In existing literature, three principal methods can be identified for the ‘laboratory’ investigation of fire effects. The most common method is to model the effects of the increased temperatures generated during fires within ovens. More recently, however, there has been some exploration of the use of real fires and laser-based techniques to replicate both temperature effects and associated chemical reactions. The use of ovens to simulate the heating generated by fire has the advantage of their availability and automatic function, as well as the high degree of standardization and replication that can be obtained in such tests. In addition, the wealth of results in the literature obtained with this technique guarantee a database for comparison of new results ( To explain the effect of temperatures, different degrees of temperature were selected. The purpose of this operation is to clearly show what kind of changes occurs at different temperatures. The highest temperature used in the study was determined as 1000 Thin sections of the natural stone samples were prepared and then were examined under a polarized microscope to determine the textural features of each sample. The petrographic descriptions and microphotographs of the samples were determined from these thin-sections and the results are given in To introduce the different aspects of the physico-mechanical changes of marble and limestone depending on the temperature, samples which were not exposed to temperatures and the ones exposed to different temperatures were prepared and tests were carried out under the conditions specified. The physico-mechanical tests include density (D) ( Some physico-mechanical properties of all samples before exposing to the high temperatures are given in Density values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Bulk density values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 As the heat increased, increases in bulk density were also observed due to increase in void space of the rock. This case does not draw an analogy with the changes happen in the density. This phenomenon occurs because mineral structure and void space of the rock are affected by heat changes for different rates. Therefore changes in density due to heat are limited. Ratio of fullness values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 The strength of a material decreases with increasing porosity but is also related to pore size, pore shape and spatial distribution. Pores may occur within the grains or in the grain boundaries. A comprehensive study of porosity can provide valuable information in order to determine whether a given type of marble is susceptible to thermal stresses or not ( Porosity values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Apparent porosity values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Hardness values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Water absorption values at atmospheric pressure were measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Water absorption coefficient by capillarity values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Uniaxial compressive strength values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000  Tensile strength values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Abrasion resistance values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Freeze-loss values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 Freeze–thaw resistance values measured from the samples which were heated from room temperature up to 1000 The following results were obtained from the studies done with the samples which have different characteristics of limestone and marble under the influence of high temperature and fire to determine the changes in physico-mechanical properties against temperature to natural building stones. The temperature above 800  Density does not affect the temperature significantly. Increase in the temperature causes decrease in the weight of bulk density caused. By analyzing the densities of all natural stones, the effect of temperature changes with the same tendency was determined. Increase in ratio of fullness of natural stones by decrease of temperature was determined. One of the most important features describing the deterioration of physico-mechanical properties of rocks is decrease in occupancy rate. It is determined that increase in the temperature increases the porosity of the natural stones. When the temperature increases, apparent porosity values also increase. This situation is caused by capillary cracks occurring due to heat, materials from the structure, etc. The effect of temperature on hardness is limited. It is determined that there is not a huge change on hardness of the samples even with a rise of temperature. Considerable increases in the amount of water absorbed have been identified on natural stones under the influence of high temperatures. These increase rates for all kinds of marble and limestone are approximately parallel to each other. Increase in the amount of absorbed water by increasing temperature can trigger the structural demolitions. Therefore, safety measurements should be taken while exposing with water when a fire has been detected. It is determined that rising temperature produce capillary cracks and capillary cracks cause increase in the capillary water absorption coefficient on the natural stones. Temperature changes for natural stones are affecting the compressive strength values. Especially, strength values of the samples with 600 Tensile strength of the samples decreases with increasing temperature. For the limestones, this is observed in an irregular shape at different temperatures with decrease/increase. For the marbles, strength is regularly decreases depending on the increase of temperature. Usage areas of the natural stones exposed to fire or high temperatures are very important depending on the level of temperature. Temperatures reaching 600–800 As a result of freeze and thaw test, mass loss/change for almost all samples occurs at the critical temperature of 600 No noticeable changes are observed between the compressive strength values of freeze–thaw cycle of temperature exposed natural building stones and compressive strength values of samples without freeze–thaw experiments. Experiments of frost mass loss and frost compressive strength, while providing for the learning characteristics of natural stones that are exposed to temperature, are not appropriate to compare the different properties of the samples against changing temperature. This study is supported by