The ongoing development of new, advanced technologies created increasing demands for rare earth elements (REE) in the international markets, with emphasis on identifying new resources to ensure adequate supply and access. The present study investigates the use of clay minerals as a source for extracting rare earth metals by leaching with sulfate and chloride salts. It was found that REE adsorbed on clays can be easily recovered via an ion-exchange mechanism during leaching with monovalent salt solutions under ambient conditions. The leaching efficiency of various salts at 0.5M and 25°C was investigated as a function of monovalent cation type (i.e. Li+, Na+, Cs+ and NH4
                     +) and salt system (sulfates vs. chlorides). The initial concentration was based on a 3:1 stoichiometric ratio between all trivalent lanthanides in the clay and the exchange monovalent cation. Leaching efficiency (in terms of % REE extracted) decreased in the order Cs+
                     >NH4
                     +
                     >Na+
                     >Li+, from 90% to ~60%, respectively, with sulfates exhibiting ~10% better extraction behavior than chlorides. Differences in rare earth metal desorption capability were explained in terms of differences in cation hydration energies: species with low hydration energy extract to a lesser degree compared to species with high hydration energy (i.e. higher affinity for water). Based on these findings, (NH4)2SO4 was identified as the lixiviant of choice for further studies.Rare earth elements (REE) are mostly associated with the hi-tech industry because of their various uses in high strength permanent magnets, lasers, automotive catalytic converters, fiber optics/superconductors, and electronic devices. Because of the ongoing development of new advanced technologies, there is an ever-increasing demand for REE in the international markets, with emphasis on identifying new resources to ensure adequate supply for present and future use. World production of REE is dominated by China, the United States and Australia; however, in terms of reserves and resources, China dominates the world potential with reserves estimated to be over 90% of the total ( The designation “rare earths” refers to the elements of the Periodic Table known as “lanthanides”, further divided as a function of their atomic number into the “cerium group” (or light REE: La, Ce, Pr, Nd, Pm, Sm, Eu, Gd), and the “yttrium group” (or heavy REE: Y, Tb, Dy, Ho, Er, Tm, Yb, Lu). The term “rare earth” is actually a misnomer, because these elements are more abundant in the Earth's crust compared to silver, gold or the platinum-group metals and are part of more than 200 rock-forming minerals ( REE are part of many various rock-forming minerals, but the main commercially significant sources, as reviewed by    Carbonate and phosphate sources, in spite of being high grade, are associated with elevated recovery costs due to difficulty in mining, separation, and need of aggressive conditions to solubilize the REE. For example, bastnasite is generally leached with concentrated H Although ion-adsorption clay deposits are substantially lower grade than other types of lanthanide sources, the lower grade is largely offset by the easier mining and processing, costs, and the very low content of radioactive elements (normally associated with yttrium). These deposits are mined by open-pit methods and no ore beneficiation is required. A simple leach using monovalent salt solutions at ambient temperature can produce a high-grade REO product ( Clay minerals are part of the phyllosilicate class, containing layered structures of shared octahedral aluminum and tetrahedral silicon sheets; water molecules and hydrated cations can move in and out of the interlayer spaces. Very often, isomorphous substitution of one cation with another (of similar size but with lesser charge, e.g. Al  Ion-adsorption clays are leached with concentrated inorganic salt solutions of monovalent cations (i.e. M Eq. The permanently chemisorbed species can only be liberated via more aggressive and non-selective acid leach and are not the subject of the present research work. Because of their abundance in surface layers in nature, high specific surface area for adsorption and relative ease of mining and processing, these clay minerals warrant a detailed study as important sources of rare earths. Until present, extensive research has been conducted on the uptake/sorption of lanthanides on clay minerals, both from the standpoint of conditions influencing the process and the mechanism. Despite the clear advantages of processing clay materials as REE sources, virtually no in-depth systematic work has been conducted to research the desorption/recovery of lanthanides from clays. The only known investigation on the extraction of REE from kaolinite ( The general scope of this paper is twofold: (1) to establish the underlying mechanism of rare earth metal desorption from clay materials and (2) to investigate the desorption capability of various leaching agents (i.e. monovalent metal sulfates/chlorides, where M The final aim of the present research work is identify the optimum extraction conditions in order to acquire knowledge that will enable the development of novel leaching procedures/reagents for the commercial production of rare earth oxides from various clay materials. Two types of natural clays of undisclosed origin and known to contain adsorbed REE were employed in the present work, referred to as YR (yttrium-rich) and YM (yttrium-medium), respectively, depending on their initial yttrium content. X-ray Fluorescence (XRF, Philips PW 2404) was employed to determine the overall chemical composition of clays; the samples were analyzed using pressed powder pellets, with the calibration refined using both Standard Reference Materials (SRMs) and synthetic ones. The composition in terms of adsorbed REE was also determined by aqua regia digestion, following the conventional reflux procedure as described by For the preparation of all solutions used in the present work, de-ionized water and the following A.C.S. reagent grade chemicals were used: M Measured amounts of dry clay samples and 0.5 At the end of the experiment, the solids were separated by vacuum filtration (Whatman 541 filter paper, 22 Qualitative XRD analysis revealed a complex pattern showing illite, mica, quartz, and kaolinite as major components. The majority of studies reporting on the ion exchange process between clay minerals and cations in solution involved the use of Na Extensive work on exchange selectivity of lanthanide ions on montmorillonite (  The OLI software ( Based on the literature information and the OLI results, it was decided to conduct the leaching experiments at 25 Clay leaching tests were conducted following the procedure described in the Experimental section and under conditions selected as explained in the previous section. Leaching with sulfate salts ( Individual lanthanide extractions vary widely from element to element, with Er and Tm exhibiting the lowest extraction from both clays, in both systems, even when leached with Cs-based lixiviants. Despite detectable Ce content in both initial clays (i.e. 0.008–0.02 By analyzing the comparative leaching of lanthanides from clays, it can be observed that Cs-based lixiviants achieved the highest extraction level, and although 0.5 The kinetics of REE leach were very fast for both clays, with less than 5 Cation exchange at charged clay mineral surfaces is a widely researched topic, but a unified description of the underlying forces that govern selectivity is lacking. One theory argues that selectivity is due to the ionic radius (  However, a comparison of extraction efficiency with hydration enthalpy (ΔH Considering the reversibility of the ion-exchange process, a new model for the lanthanide desorption mechanism is proposed here, based on studies conducted on REE adsorption on montmorillonite by According to Kraepiel's model, Hydrated monovalent M Monovalent cations undergo partial or total dehydration. Ion-exchange reaction takes place (following a 3:1 Once desorbed, lanthanide ions hydrate and migrate into the bulk of the electrolyte solution. The present study investigated the extraction process of rare earth ions adsorbed on two types of clay minerals via leaching with sulfate and chloride electrolyte solutions of monovalent cations (Li, Na, Cs, and NH A mechanistic model was developed that takes into account the hydration effects and rationally explains the alkali selectivity sequences. It also explains the adsorption preference of clays for monovalent cations over trivalent lanthanides, and thus the ease of REE desorption from clays via ion exchange. The REE extraction was considered an ion-exchange process following a 3:1 The present work emphasized the use of ion-adsorption clays as a source of REE and identified (NH Financial support from the