Air-assisted solvent extraction (AASX) in continuous-mode is a new development in the solvent extraction process for the extraction of valuable metals from dilute solutions. The main aim of this research was to investigate the effect of the flowrate of liquid and air phases on Cu recovery and organic phase recycling in a two-stage AASX system at pilot scale. The experiments were carried out in continuous-mode and the effect of the flowrates of liquid (18–30 L/min) and air (5–15 L/min for the first stage and 20–40 L/min for the second stage) were evaluated. Response surface methodology was used for designing the experiments, and results were analyzed by the analysis of variance (ANOVA). It was found that increasing the liquid flowrate reduced the Cu recovery in both stages by decreasing the retention time. While, enhancing the air flowrate in the first column increased the Cu recovery and organic phase recycling probably due to the adsorption of uncoated portion of the organic phase and collection of the smaller coated bubbles. Maximum Cu recovery (85%) and organic phase recycling (84%) were achieved at liquid flowrate of 18 L/min, first column aeration of 15 L/min, and second column aeration of 30 L/min for a solution containing 150 mg/L copper. Moreover, 98 and 94% Cu recoveries were obtained for 50 and 100 mg/L Cu solutions, respectively. The results indicated that using the newly developed AASX process, the application of the solvent extraction process could be extended to treat dilute metal-bearing solutions such as acid mine drainage.Various technical and economic problems of conventional processes for purifying and concentrating dilute solutions have led to the introduction of novel alternative methods such as molecular recognition technology ( A number of studies have been carried out to find a practical method for using AASX.  It is found that although small bubbles have an important role in AASX process with high coating degree (high retention time in OCC) and low upward velocity (improve Cu recovery), the low upward velocity of these bubbles, as well as uncoated organic phase, leads to reduced the organic phase recycling. Moreover, Although the previous research showed the high potential of AASX process in continuous-mode, the efficiency results were still low in comparison with the conventional solvent extraction methods. In this research, a modified AASX (adding a second stage and aeration in the columns) was used to improve efficiency. The effects of liquid flowrate, first and second column air flowrates were investigated by an experimental design using the response surface methodology (RSM). Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for analyzing the related responses, and finding the optimum condition. The organic phase contained the commercial grades of LIX 984-N (the mixture of LIX 860N-I and LIX 860N-I, BASF Company) as Cu extractant, kerosene (Isfahan Oil Refinery Company) as a diluent, and silicone oil. Also, an industrial grades of copper sulfate (CuSO A modified setup of a continuous-mode AASX process was used on a pilot scale. In this setup, the aqueous phase was prepared in a solution tank. The aqueous phase flowrate was adjusted by a valve embedded in the pipe line (measured by a rotameter). Increasing the aqueous phase velocity through the venturi tube drew the air from the organic coating cylinder (OCC). The suction of venturi tube caused to introduce the air via sparger (at the bottom of cylinder) to OCC which contained organic phase and led to produce coated bubbles. Thereupon coated bubbles were added to the aqueous phase in the venturi tube. The mixture of aqueous phase and coated bubbles (liquid phases) was introduced to the first column with the diameter of 0.125 m and the height of 2.1 m. The liquid flowrate was adjusted by the related valve to change the retention time and turbulence in the columns. The apparatus used in this research was a two-stage AASX system with the output solution of the first column was transferred to the second column with the diameter of 0.125 m and the height of 1.8 m In addition, aeration in the columns was performed via spargers (hole sizes ranging from 40 to 90 µm) embedded at the bottom of the columns. A schematic of the mentioned set-up is shown in The froth of each column was overflow to a launder and the froth interface was around 10 cm below the top edge of the column. Main effects and interactions of some critical parameters such as the liquid flowrate and aeration in both columns on the efficiency of AASX process (Cu recovery and organic phase recycling) were evaluated by a set of experiments designed by the response surface methodology (RSM). The Central Composite (CCD) and Box-Behnken (BBD) designs are the main RSM methods used to evaluate the effects of parameters and predict the optimum condition of a process, statistically ( The investigated parameters and their levels are shown in In these experiments, the organic phase contained 30% extractant and 50 mg/L silicone oil. Also, the aqueous phase contained 150 mg/L Cu and 50 mg/L pine oil at pH of 1.5. The aqueous phase flowrate passed through the venturi tube was set at 30 L/min. After the system was stabilized (the time of three minutes which was equals to two times the system retention time), the samples were taken from the top and bottom outputs of the both columns over 30 s. The average level of the organic phase in OCC was set at 28 cm. Cu concentration in the samples was measured by atomic absorption spectrometry (Shimadzu AA-670). A Box-Behnken design was used to investigate the effects of operational parameters such as liquid flowrate (ranging from 18 to 30 L/min), aeration in the first column (ranging from 5 to 15 L/min), and aeration in the second column (ranging from 20 to 40 L/min) on the efficiency of AASX process such as Cu recovery and organic phase recycling (in the first and second columns and overall the process). The mean bubble size (diameter) and bubble size distribution in the first column were determined. The experimental conditions and the related responses are shown in In the above equations, the coded values of the parameters are used, and X The effects of the operational parameters such as the liquid and air flowrates on the bubble size, bubble size distribution, Cu recovery, and organic phase recycling in the first column were investigated. As can be seen in   By enhancing the first column air flowrate from five to 15 L/min, organic phase recycling increases from 48% to 65% ( The Cu recovery ranged from 10 to 34% and the organic phase recycling ranged from 34 to 56% in the second stage. Results ( Increasing the air flowrate of the first column from five to 15 L/min reduces the Cu recovery from 39% to 26% in the second column ( Results show that increasing the liquid flowrate from 18 to 30 L/min causes the organic phase recycling in the second column (calculated by the amount of organic phase in the samples of second column outputs) to be reduced from 46 to 36% ( The overall efficiency of the AASX process, that is Cu recovery and organic phase recycling, was evaluated. Results show that the overall Cu recovery varies from 68% to 87% and the overall organic phase recycling ranges between 65 and 84%. The main parameter affecting Cu recovery is liquid flowrate, and the main parameters of organic phase recycling are the liquid and air flowrate in the first column with the confidence level of more than 99%. As can be seen in  Optimization of the process is the main aim of RSM modelling done by ANOVA analysis. Optimizing the AASX process was by maximizing the Cu recovery and organic phase recycling in the overall process. The optimization predicts that the overall Cu recovery of 83% and organic phase recycling of 82% may be achieved at the liquid flowrate of 18 L/min, air flowrate of 15 and 30 L/min for the first and second column, ( The experiment at the optimized condition using the two-stage AASX with aeration showed improving the Cu recovery and organic phase recycling by 20% and 44% (50 mg/L of Cu solution), respectively, compared to optimized condition of the single-stage AASX without aeration (Cu recovery of 78% and organic phase recycling of 38%) ( According to the results obtained, it is supposed that adding more stages or using taller columns leads to improve the efficiency of AASX process through increasing the retention time. A modified 2-stage AASX system was used in a continuous mode to recover Cu from dilute solutions by applying aeration in both columns. Effects of the liquid and air flowrates on Cu recovery and organic phase recycling, were evaluated by applying ANOVA analysis on the results of the experiments designed by response surface methodology. Total Cu recovery (in both column) and total organic phase recycling varied from 68% to 87% and 65 to 84%, respectively. Copper recovery and organic phase recycling were enhanced by aeration to both columns through collecting small-coated bubbles and uncoated organic phases which contain Cu and have high specific surface area and retention time. Increasing the air flowrate of the first column from 5 to 15 L/min was led to increase Cu recovery from 76 to 82% and increase the organic phase recycling from 48 to 65%. Copper recovery in the first column was increased from 62 to 76% by decreasing liquid flowrate from 30 to 18 L/min which was attributed to increasing the retention time. High Cu recovery in the first column led to reducing the Cu recovery in the second column due to the limited loading capacity of the organic phase. Increasing the air flowrate in the first column and reducing liquid flowrate enhanced the organic phase recycling in this stage. Increasing the liquid flowrate from 18 to 30 L/min caused the overall Cu recovery to decrease from 83 to 72%. The overall organic phase recycling varied from 74 to 65% by increasing the liquid flowrate from 18 to 30 L/min, and from 74 to 82% by increasing the air flowrate of the first column from 5 to 15 L/min. The optimum condition was determined by applying ANOVA analysis to the overall efficiency models. Maximum efficiency of AASX (Cu recovery of 85% and organic phase recycling of 84%) was obtained at liquid flowrate of 18 L/min, first column air flowrate of 15 L/min, and second column air flowrate of 30 L/min. It could be concluded that modified AASX apparatus in continuous-mode could be used as a novel method to extract valuable metals from dilute solutions.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Mr. Seifollah Akbari, Mr. Sina Rahmati and Mr. Saeid Mansoori are acknowledged for their assistance during a part of experiments.