This study examined the role of epoxy, present in glass fibre reinforced laminate (FR-4), in inhibiting the leaching of copper from electronic wastes (e-wastes). FR-4 makes up the majority of the base materials used in printed circuit boards and would be a prevalent polymeric constituent of e-wastes. To mimic the spent medium based leaching of fungi, leaching of e-waste was performed using citric acid. Metal dissolution tests with citric acid revealed epoxy decomposition during the leaching process and this in turn inhibited copper dissolution by two routes. The first route is by raising the solution pH from 1.8 up to 4.88 through the cleavage and release of amine group in solution and through the transformation of the epoxy surface sites. Both promoted the removal of copper from solution by adsorption of copper on the epoxy followed by its precipitation as di-copper citrate. Tests over various leaching conditions specifically at pH1.8–3.0, temperatures from 30 to 90°C, pulp densities of 5–100g/dm3 and periods of up to 24h revealed various aspects of the process. These included epoxy decomposition induced copper loss of up to 40.3% and the masking of copper dissolution self-catalysis by Cu2+ ion. This study showed that inhibition of copper leaching can be minimised. This required spent medium leaching at low pH (1.8), low pulp density (5g/dm3) and high temperature (90°C). These results demonstrated the impact of epoxy depolymerisation in e-wastes leaching and the potential merit of spent medium leaching in overcoming these effects and in optimising the recovery of copper from e-wastes.The rapid advance in information technology and the relentless desire of consumers for the “state of the art” products have led to an accelerated obsolescence of electronic goods. Without the systems and the technology in place to effectively capture and manage these wastes, the accumulation of e-wastes has become a pervasive problem at the local, regional and national levels. The problem with waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE) include its growing volume, its toxicity, and its content of valuable resources (e.g., gold, copper) that are lost when e-waste is disposed ( Bioleaching offers a promising technology. This technology uses naturally occurring biological micro-organisms and their metabolic products in extracting the metallic fractions from wastes such as spent catalyst and electronic wastes ( Fungi however also offer numerous advantages. This include their ability to dissolve metals under alkaline conditions by complexing the metallic fractions with organic acid metabolites and the lower toxicity of the resulting complexed metals ( Ground electronic wastes (copper-rich) were obtained from Total Union PCB Recycle in Hong Kong. The metallic components of the PCB were separated by crushing, milling and by magnetic separation. A copper-rich fraction of this waste was collected. This waste was used as received with minor size separation. After undergoing sieving, a waste fraction with a mean particle size of 104 The flame retardant epoxy (FR-4) used in this study was supplied by All Engineering Australia. This was shredded and sieved to a mean particle size that is closely similar to the copper rich waste (~ The chemical leaching tests were undertaken using reagent grade citric acid (251275, Sigma Aldrich, 99.5%) and sulphuric acid (435589, Sigma Aldrich, 95–98%). The process of recovering copper from copper rich waste using citric acid is shown in Parallel tests were conducted to estimate the copper loss through adsorption and/or precipitation during the leaching process. The working flowsheet in To examine the role of epoxy in inducing copper precipitation, pure copper metal was leached with and without the addition shredded FR-4 epoxy. Epoxy residues were also recovered after 24 The process of leaching copper is subject to the primary leaching reactions and secondary reactions. The primary reactions or copper dissolution proceeds by a two stage redox reactions (Eqs. The corresponding cathodic reaction to support the oxidation of copper was achieved from air that dissolved from the atmosphere. This has an E° of 1.23 The resulting reaction is ( Copper ion reacts with SO The effect of secondary reactions, on the other hand, is manifested by inhibition of metal dissolution reflected by the slower rate of reaction and/or lower metal recovery. A key issue that continues to hamper the practical implementation of the bioleaching technology in processing electronic waste is the effect of increasing waste pulp densities that results in significant reduction in metal recovery ( Precipitation can hamper the hydrometallurgical recovery of metals from e-wastes. The reaction achieves this by transforming dissolved metals to less soluble solids and by reducing the leaching kinetics as precipitates foul the metallic surfaces that are being leached. Precipitation in hydrometallurgical processing is promoted by saturation of dissolved metals ( In this study, the role of epoxy in promoting precipitation in fungi induced dissolution of metals is shown in The nature of the precipitates recovered was confirmed by FTIR, SEM-EDS and by X-ray diffraction. The FTIR spectra in The formation of precipitates under the acidic leaching conditions (pH The mechanism of copper uptake in the epoxy was further investigated by examining the changes in the surface chemistry of the epoxy residue after leaching. This was conducted by examining effect of leaching on the surface functional groups on the epoxy FTIR and on the epoxy surface charge by zeta potential measurement. The impact of these surface chemical transformations on the surface charge of the epoxy residue was examined and compared with that of the neat epoxy in The effect of epoxy pulp density on the removal of dissolved copper from 5000 This is followed by the separation of the di‑copper precipitate: The di‑hydrogen citrate from Eq. The effect of increasing the epoxy pulp density on copper loss as a result of adsorption and precipitation is shown in To show the relative effect of the copper loss on the actual metal recovery, the copper extraction and the copper extraction corrected for the copper loss are compared in The effects of temperature and pH on the epoxy induced removal of copper from solution are shown in This study revealed the role of acid induced epoxy decomposition in the inhibition of copper leaching in citric acid. Decomposing epoxy reduced the overall copper recovery by promoting copper loss by precipitation. The mechanism of copper precipitation in citric acid leaching appears to involve epoxy depolymerisation from the solvolytic attack by citric acid. Epoxy depolymerisation led to the formation of net negative surface charge and the release of alkaline amine group, both of which promoted copper adsorption on epoxy surface. The resulting high copper adsorption was proposed to induce metal cluster formation and eventually the formation of distinct di‑copper citrate precipitates. Removal of copper from solution by these processes is minimised at the lower pH and higher temperature. Overall the impact of epoxy decomposition during the leaching process is sufficiently significant to warrant attention. Increasing the epoxy pulp density (equivalent of 10 to 100 This research was supported under