Accurate simulation of the single-particle breakage plays an essential role in studying and understanding the behavior of crushable granular materials. Peridynamics has a significant advantage in the simulation of particle breakage owing to its treatment of discontinuities and fractures. This work simulates the single-particle breakage by peridynamics. The particle breakage patterns and the force-displacement curves are focused under different material point discretization schemes, viz. regular discretization scheme, modified regular discretization scheme, hexahedral element converted discretization scheme and random-packing discretization. The result shows that the material point discretization scheme has a great influence on the breakage patterns while less impact on the maximum contact force. Besides, a program for extracting the fragments from the failure bond data is provided to offer an inside vision of breakage patterns.Particle breakage has plenty of engineering applications in geotechnics and comminution processes. Understanding the breakage behavior of a single particle may help find the macroscopic description of the mechanical response of particle assembly breakage, which is vital for designing efficient comminution operations and geo-mechanical analysis. The earliest literature focused on the experimental study of fragment distributions of a single-particle in brittle solids [ The peridynamics (PD) was invented to solve mechanical problems with discontinuities by Silling [ However, the fracture path simulated by peridynamics has mesh sensitivity [ This work aims to explain the mesh dependency in simulating a single particle, to give the breakage patterns and discuss the influence of m-value on the fracture patterns. A proper discretization scheme is found with the capacity of accurately simulating single particle breakage in small-scale material points. This work may provide useful information for those who are interested in analyzing particle breakage phenomena using peridynamics. In In the peridynamic theory, two material points interact with each other through a bond within a finite distance As shown in The bond-based PD pairwise force To characterize the crack path, the local damage is defined by The mesh-free peridynamics can be implemented by discretizing the body into material points with their representative volumes. For the The explicit time integration is adopted here to solve the equations of motion. The central difference method is applied. Denote that the material displacements of a material point The selection of the time step Δ The particle crushing needs a contact model for the interaction of multiple objects. The contact model for peridynamics is usually local (short-range force model). Referring to the contact model of Macek and Silling [ The body is fractured into pieces if the load is sufficiently large. A program for searching the fragments is necessary to give the exact fragment mass or volume distribution and their numbers. An easy way to do such work is based on the bond state parameter Notice the 'longer' bond (with a larger To discuss the influence of discretization on the crushing pattern of the single spherical particle, we present four discretization schemes. The first one is based on a regularly discretized cube, whose center is the origin in the Cartesian coordinate and the side is assumed to be 2 The second discretization scheme is a modified version of the first one. The first discretization scheme is rough due to the inaccuracy near the sphere surface. Here a correction of material point positions and volumes near the surface is proposed. Firstly, the material points whose position vectors satisfy | In addition to the regular lattice generation scheme of material points, the mesh-free discretizations for peridynamics are usually adopted by applying centroidal Voronoi tessellation [ In Eq. The fourth discretization method is the random-packing scheme. Material point positions obtained from randomly distributed points follow the uniform distribution. And the material point volumes are assumed to be the same, which is the total spherical particle volume divided by total material point number. We call such discretization scheme S4. Comparing the four discretization schemes above, an index The aforementioned four discretization schemes create the single spherical particle model: regular discretization (S1), modified regular discretization scheme (S2), hexahedral discretization (S3), and random-packing discretization (S4). See Kalthoff-Winkler experiment is a dynamic fracture benchmark to get the dynamic fracture transition. Authors refer to the numerical set up from literature [  The Kalthoff-Winkler experiment demonstrates the correctness of the peridynamic program and the contact model. So this program can be utilized to model dynamic fracture of brittle materials. In this numerical validation, we use the modified regular discretization S2 to model the single-particle crushing. Material properties are mentioned in The MCF has been discussed in Zhu and Zhao's work [ This example compares the discretization schemes S1, S2, S3, and S4 with material point numbers 9093, 8217, 7168, and 8068, respectively. To compare the breakage patterns, the force-displacement curves are plotted in As a spherical particle, the realistic geometry has infinite planes of symmetry. But for the convenience of numerical simulation, the body discretized into a certain number of material points. The arrangement of the material points cannot satisfy the symmetry property of a sphere. Applying the modified regular grid discretization scheme to the spherical particle, we obtain nine planes of symmetry. So a rotation of the spherical particle is necessary to investigate the symmetry influence on the particle breakage pattern. See The force-displacement curves are plotted in From this numerical example, the discretization schemes S1 and S2 seem more suitable in the modeling of particle breakage due to the more stable results in fragment distribution, while the discretization schemes S3 and S4 make the breakage pattern change via the rotation of the particle. So in the granular breakage simulation, when the external force reaches a critical one, the last two discretization schemes may fall to different breakage patterns without bringing the initial randomly distributed defects, e.g., the Weibull distribution. The literature showed that the number of material points might have an impact on the final breakage patterns. In this example, we present the four discretization schemes with various material point numbers. We keep the m-value a constant as 3, and the rotation of particle stays 0°, 15°(the discretization scheme S2 should be examined with more material points). The material points are selected near the number 4000, 8000, 12,000 and 16,000 for all the four discretization schemes.  The volume distribution of fragments is shown in It must be noticed that by increasing the material point number to a certain large value, we may finally obtain an 'isotropic' sphere with S1, S3, or S4 discretization scheme. But this may be computational expensive. The m-value difference may reduce the crack direction dependency on the discretization scheme as given in [ This work discussed the discretization influence on the breakage patterns of a single spherical particle under a unidirectional compressive load using the bond-based peridynamics (the PMB model). Four discretization schemes are presented and compared under different circumstances that may cause the breakage pattern diverse. The simulation results show that the single spherical particle breakage pattern differs with discretization schemes. The modified regular discretization scheme leads to a robust breakage pattern with the material point number more than 12,000 and m-value 3 regardless of the particle rotations. While the hexahedral discretization and the random packing discretization results in a changeable breakage pattern caused by the diversity of the particle rotation, the particle material point number, which indicates that the same geometry (sphere, in this work) may introduce plenty of breakage patterns, which cannot be allowed if a particular distribution of defects is not imported to the model. In this work, the m-value should not be too large, an m-value of 3 is appropriate. To sum up, the adequately placed material points can help reduce the discretization dependency, like the modified regular grid presented here, is more suitable to simulate the single spherical particle breakage phenomena and provides the correct breakage patterns under a certain external load for the FRM in solving granular breakage problems of the granular assemblies. The author declares no competing financial interests. The authors are pleased to acknowledge the support of this work by the