A wet belt permanent high gradient magnetic separator (referred here as WBHGMS) was developed on the principle of HGMS in an inclined slurry flow of several centimeters thick. In this investigation, a pilot-scale WBHGMS separator was introduced and used to purify a quartz ore, to study the effect of key variables such as belt rotation speed and belt inclination angle on the separation performance. The results of investigation indicate that changes in the rotation speed and inclination angle as well as the rinsing water consumption have significant influences on the performance, and an increase in these variables increases the Fe2O3 grade but decreases the iron removal rate of non-magnetic product. When they are respectively optimized at 5r/min, 5° and 8.3L/min, it produced a non-magnetic product assaying 0.0166% Fe2O3 at an iron removal rate of 43.97% (nearly 95% for magnetic minerals) from the ore assaying 0.0359% Fe2O3; such a separation performance correlates well with the industrial operation of full-scale WBHGMS separators in purifying the ore. This pilot-scale separator also produced a non-magnetic product assaying 0.041% Fe2O3 at an iron removal rate of 58.70% (nearly 96% for magnetic minerals) from a feldspar ore assaying 0.068% Fe2O3. It was concluded that this HGMS separator has provided an effective method for the removal of magnetic impurities from non-metallic ores.The presence of colored impurities such as iron and titanium oxides reduces the whiteness and transparency of a large amount of non-metallic ores such as quartz, feldspar and kaolin, and thus degrades their commercial values ( Physical and chemical methods such as magnetic and gravity separations ( Pulsating high gradient magnetic separation (HGMS) is now applied to remove magnetic minerals from non-metallic ores ( For this purpose, a wet belt permanent high gradient magnetic separator (WBHGMS) was developed on the principle of HGMS in an inclined slurry flow; and in recent years, it is successfully applied for purification of non-metallic ores such as quartz, feldspar and garnet. In this investigation, a pilot-scale WBHGMS separator was introduced and used to purify a quartz ore, to study the effect of key variables such as belt rotation speed and belt inclination angle on the separation performance of the separator. Moreover, its performance in purifying a feldspar ore and the application of full-scale WBHGMS separators in purifying the quartz ore are briefly introduced in the investigation. A PBC-0210 (magnet width The belt is 1.5–2.0 When the separator is operated, the slurry enters through feed box onto the U-shaped belt, and flows downward at a uniform thickness of several centimeters. Magnetic particles in the flow are captured onto the belt and carried upward by the bulged strips. When they are carried to the rinsing area under the rinsing water trough, magnetic deposits are fully scattered due to the direct impinging of rinsing water onto the deposits, and entrained non-magnetic particles are rinsed out of the deposits. Then, magnetic particles are further carried to the corner of belt, where they are flushed into the magnetic product launder by water sprays. Non-magnetic particles flow downward with the slurry to become a non-magnetic product. The main technical parameters of this pilot-scale separator are specified in It is derivable that in a WBHGMS process, the required magnetic force for capture of a magnetic particle on the belt surface is related to the property of particles such as permeability and density, the operating parameters of belt such as rotation speed and inclination angle, and the characteristics of slurry such as flow velocity on the belt. The quartz ore used for the investigation was obtained from a quartz processing plant in Hubei province of China. It has a controlled particle size distribution from 0.13 to 0.85 The feldspar ore used for the investigation essays 0.068% Fe For all the investigations, the quartz and feldspar ores were prepared at a predetermined 10% solid content in a stir tank of 6 Mass weight ( The length of magnet, as an important design parameter, determines the separation time of magnetic particles on the belt of the WBHGMS separator, while the other operating conditions such as feed velocity and belt rotation speed are fixed; thus, it would produce an effect on the separation performance of the separator. In this investigation, the effect of magnet length on the performance was initially investigated at two different belt inclination angles of 5° and 8°, as shown in From When the length was set too short, most of the magnetic particles, except for the coarse strongly magnetic ones, are not captured by the magnet, due to their insufficiency in separation time on the belt surface, which results in the low iron removal rate and high Fe In the WBHGMS separator, the rinsing water is used to release the entrained non-magnetic particles from the magnetic deposits captured onto the belt. But, for a given belt inclination angle, its consumption together with the feed flow rate determines the velocity of slurry flow in the U-shaped belt and the hydrodynamic resistance acting onto particles in the slurry, thus producing an influence on the separation performance of the separator, as shown in It can be seen from With increase in the water consumption, the separation selectivity of magnetic force to magnetic particles on belt surface improves and more entrained particles are released from the magnetic deposits; these particles go into the non-magnetic product and improve its mass weight, as shown in As shown in It is easy to understand that such an inclination angle is also related to the other operating parameters of the separator, such as belt rotation speed and magnet length. The effect of belt rotation speed on the performance of the separator was studied under the optimum conditions determined in the above investigations, i.e., at a full magnet length of 1.0 In practice, belt rotation speed is a key parameter in the operation of a WBHGMS separator, while the belt inclination angle of the separator is usually fixed. It is clear that an increase in the rotation speed increases the velocity of belt, thereby generating an enhanced hydrodynamic resistance onto particles in the inclined slurry flow. In such a case, the capture ability of magnetic force to fine magnetic particles is weakened, as the magnetic force  This pilot-scale WBHGMS separator was also attempted for purification of a feldspar ore from Sichuan province of China, with its optimum separation results as illustrated in  The WBHGMS separator, which was developed on the principle of HGMS in an inclined slurry flow of several centimeters thick, presents an innovative HGMS method and is effective in purifying the quartz and feldspar ores. The belt in the WBHGMS separator is uniquely designed into a shallow U-shaped chute, wherein slurry flows downward. Magnetic particles in the slurry are captured onto belt by narrow magnetic poles under the belt, and then are retained and carried upward by bulged strips arranged on the belt to achieve a WBHGMS process. The key parameters of the separator such as belt rotation speed and belt inclination angle determine the hydrodynamic resistance acting onto particles in the inclined slurry flow, thus producing significant effects on the separation performance of the separator. The WBHGMS separator is developed by Kunming Gauss-Tesla Technology Co., Ltd. and the present research work was supported by the