Geological events such as thin beds and channels cannot be easily revealed on seismic sections due to the interference of reflections from the top and bottom of the layer. Buried channel is one of the hydrocarbon traps, which is important in oil and gas exploration. Spectral decomposition can be used to indicate subtle changes in channel thickness. In using the Fourier transform only the frequency content of the changes is displayed; hence, the exact onset of the changes is missed. Time-frequency distributions are suitable approaches to display and interpret information embedded in non-stationary signals such as seismic signals. Spectral decomposition can be used for seismic attributes calculation, which is used for imaging of thin beds. The conventional spectral decompositions such as Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) and Wigner–Ville Distribution (WVD) have limitations in terms of Heisenberg uncertainty principle and cross-terms artefacts, respectively. In this paper, we used the Reduced Interference Distribution (RID) for buried channel identification to overcome the mentioned limitations. We compared the obtained results of RID with those of Smoothed Pseudo WVD. The real seismic data is selected from one of the western oil fields of Iran. Our results indicate that a better resolution is achieved by RID in both vertical and lateral stratigraphic features.Seismic waves are mechanical waves that travel through the Earth's layers or along its surface. Seismic signals propagate into the Earth and reflect from boundary separating rocks with different properties Fourier transform is not a suitable tool to analyze non-stationary signals. It cannot show the frequency variations of seismic signals over time. Time-frequency analysis is more appropriate for seismic data due to their non-stationary nature. Spectral decomposition has been widely used in seismic data processing and interpretation. We can explore stratigraphic settings, thin beds and buried channels using spectral decomposition of seismic sections There are several methods in literature for spectral decomposition, such as short time Fourier transform (STFT) Analysis of thin-bed tuning on seismic reflectivity has been studied extensively In this section first we explained one of the effective time-frequency distributions and also a way in which to improve them. We then illustrated the nature of seismic data and the characteristics of thin layer on seismic sections, and proposed some useful seismic attributes to reveal buried channels. Resolution of time and frequency in STFT is limited by the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. One of the advantages of WVD over the STFT is to distribute energy density in time-frequency plane without losing time or frequency resolution. The WVD of signal By substitution of Eq. Eq. Because of bilinear characteristic, cross-terms interference is emerged for multi-component signals. For a signal composed of two components The two last terms in right hand of Eq. They are found midway between the interacting components; They oscillate proportionally to the inter-components' time-frequency distance; They have a direction of oscillation orthogonal to the straight line connecting the components. PWVD and SPWVD are two well-known distributions with less cross-term compared with WVD. In these distributions, the cross-terms are reduced by smoothing the time-frequency representation due to their oscillation property. The smoothing reduces the cross-terms, but with the cost of reduction of resolution in time-frequency representation. Here we exploit the RID method for reducing cross-terms which has the least impact on the resolution of the time-frequency representation. This distribution belongs to the general Cohen class of distributions. Cohen's distribution of a signal To study the efficiency of the WVD, PWVD, SPWVD and RID, we tested them on a synthetic signal. The synthetic signal is composed of the sum of two sweep signals that have been repeated twice with total time of 4 s and sampling interval of 0.004 s. Two sweep signals have the bandwidth frequency of 10 to 40 Hz and 60 to 80 Hz respectively. The synthetic signal is shown in The obtained time-frequency distributions using the aforementioned methods (WVD, PWVD, SPWVD and RID) are shown in Reflection seismology is a method of exploration geophysics that uses the principles of seismology to estimate the properties of the Earth's subsurface from reflected seismic waves Generally, the seismic data can be recorded in two and three dimensions. Due to various economic and scientific reasons, 3D recording of reflection seismic data is much better than 2D recording Seismic resolution is a key to extract stratigraphical details from seismic data. The resolution is defined as the ability to distinguish between two near interface (i.e. events) under the surface. The relationship between the layer thickness, the signal wavelength and the resolution of top and bottom horizon of the thin bed was first studied by Ricker In this regard, a synthetic 2D seismic model of a thin layer with 30 Hz Ricker wavelet is designed. In Seismic attribute is a quantity extracted or derived from seismic data that leads to a better geological or geophysical interpretation of the data In exploration seismology, a buried channel can be considered as a thin layer. Impulse response of a thin bed shown in The transfer function This condition occurs when the velocity of the channel infills is larger than surrounding formation. In this case, destructive interference occurs at the edges of channels, so the minimum amplitude can be expected. Due to reduction of the destructive interference while moving toward the center of the channel, the amplitude increases If the velocity of the channel infills is larger than the upper layer and smaller than the bottom layer, then In this case, unlike the previous case, constructive interference occurs at the edges of channels, so the maximum amplitude can be expected. Due to increasing of the destructive interference while moving toward the center of the channel, the amplitude decreases. In both cases, the reflected waves from the top and base of the channel interfere with each other in such a way that the dominant frequency will be maximum at the edge of channel. Also, dominant frequency decreases while moving toward the center of the channel. Due to the high sensitivity of the seismic data frequency to channel thickness, we used seismic time-frequency attributes to reveal the buried channels which are one of the important oil traps. Amplitude of instantaneous centroid frequency, amplitude of instantaneous bandwidth frequency, amplitude of RMS frequency, peak frequency and peak amplitude are effective time-frequency attributes to highlight stratigraphic features such as channels. These kinds of attributes reveal the variation of frequency content of seismic data. Therefore, the thickness of different parts of a channel can be simply detected. The instantaneous center frequency, instantaneous bandwidth frequency and RMS frequency are defined as Eq. To show the location of buried channel, we must apply time-frequency decomposition on seismic data and extract the aforementioned attributes. First, we applied the RID and SPWVD methods to each trace of 3D seismic data and computed considered attributes. Secondly, we located the resulting attributes in the same place of the considered trace; we repeated this action for the rest of traces. Therefore, we obtained 3D data of seismic attributes of the same size as the original 3D seismic data. Thirdly, we extracted time slices of a target horizon of 3D seismic attributes, which show the spread of channel. The related flow chart is illustrated in To show the efficiency of this method, we produced a synthetic sand-filled channel which is embedded in shale. The ratio of the reflection coefficients of top and bottom of the channel is considered as Real seismic data is used to recognize the efficiency of RID to identify hidden channels by the above mentioned seismic time-frequency attributes. The real 3D seismic data is taken from one of the oil fields in the south–west of Iran with 400 inline and 600 crossline traces, with time sampling interval 0.004 s, which contains a channel at the 1.8 s (time sample 10) time slice based on previous study We calculated the peak amplitude and peak frequency 3D seismic attributes using RID which are shown in Frequency content of seismic signals carries valuable information of subtle changes, so analysis of this information is an effective way to survey subsurface structures. A spectral decomposition is a powerful tool in this field. Seismic signals are non-stationary multi-component signals and by employing conventional methods such as WVD, PWVD and SPWVD, some problems such as Heisenberg uncertainty principle and cross-terms emerged. In this paper, we introduced the Reduced Interference Distribution to overcome the restrictions of the aforementioned methods. The RID keeps almost all the desirable properties of the WVD, but reduces considerably the interference cross-terms. We used this method of spectral decomposition to calculate the instantaneous central frequency, instantaneous bandwidth frequency, RMS frequency, peak frequency and peak amplitude attributes, which are used for imaging of the buried channel which is one of the oil traps. Actually, we wanted to improve the results of these attributes by RID. We tested this method of buried channel imaging on a synthetic and a real seismic data. We saw a reasonably good correlation between the channel's thickness in time and the mentioned seismic attributes. Therefore, these attributes can clearly delineate spreading channels vertically and horizontally, and correlate well with channel thickness.