Heterogeneous precipitation of boehmite in Bayer liquor under digestion conditions can be reduced by the presence of a few ppm soluble titanium.
                  In order for the Ti to be effective, it must be added as a solid phase – anatase or ilmenite – which gradually dissolves to some extent. If a Ti solution is added to the liquor, it forms an insoluble hydroxide which cannot affect boehmite precipitation.
                  It is suggested that the soluble titanium species act by adsorbing on growth sites on the boehmite. A sodium titanate gel which precipitates may also block available nucleation sites on the seed material.Earlier studies ( This work reports on the investigation of this possibility and on the inhibiting ability of different sources of Ti species. Boehmite precipitation experiments were carried out in gas-fired, inconel® pressure vessels with synthetic Bayer liquor. High A/TC liquors were prepared and seeded and precipitation was allowed to occur at temperatures for which the liquors were under-saturated relative to gibbsite solubility, to prevent gibbsite precipitation. Synthetic liquor was freshly prepared before each run and was generally A/TC 0.760, TC 200, and TA 240. Note that in the Bayer Industry, A refers to the aluminium concentration expressed as g/L Al For a ‘standard’ experiment, digestions were carried out at 150 ‘Start’ and ‘end’ (15 or 60 TEM was carried out at the Centre for Electron Microscopy at the University of Western Australia. The surface areas were measured using a Tristar BET instrument with N Ti solution: a) 1000 Solids: Goethite (Diggers), Boehmite (synthesised hydrothermally, in house), Anatase (Sigma-Aldrich), Rutile, Ilmenite and Leucoxene (TiWEST). In the present work, boehmite precipitated on the seed material, with precipitation being accompanied by a drop in the A/TC of the liquor. The yield of boehmite, expressed as g/L Al It was found that the presence of titanium species may reduce the precipitation of boehmite by up to 48.6% over the time of these experiments ( The effectiveness of the inhibitor depended, in the first instance, on whether the inhibitor was added to the system as a solid phase or as a solution. In the latter case, boehmite precipitation was not reduced; most probably addition of the Ti solution resulted in immediate formation of an insoluble precipitate (possibly titanium hydroxide); the measurable Ti after 15 and 60 Different solid phases, namely, anatase (surface area Most work was carried out with anatase. The same amount of anatase caused a smaller drop in precipitation when the system was seeded with boehmite than with goethite. As both seeds had similar surface areas (10.4 and 13 When a titanium mineral was added to the seeded system, 2 It is suggested that, as the titanium phase dissolves, the Ti species released are adsorbed on the precipitating boehmite. This hypothesis is compatible with other evidence that titanium species can adsorb on boehmite (  The unexpectedly high levels of stabilised slurry liquor Ti found after digestions in the presence of anatase and a boehmite seed solid may be at least partly associated with the addition of a stabiliser (mannitol) just before filtration of the digested solids. The mannitol may have solubilised the Ti species which had adsorbed on the growth sites of the freshly precipitated boehmite, or the Ti in the reprecipitated gel. As we found, when we tried adding Ti solution to Bayer liquor, it is difficult to hold more than 2 The variation in the level of soluble Ti in the other systems cannot be accounted for without further investigation. At present, these questions await further investigation. Heterogeneous precipitation of boehmite in Bayer liquor under digestion conditions can be reduced by the presence of a few ppm soluble titanium. In order for the Ti to be effective, it must be added as a solid phase – such as anatase, which gradually dissolves to some extent over 60 It seems probable that the initial titanium mineral dissolves to some extent and re-precipitates as sodium titanate. Whether this material then dissolves has not been conclusively established. It is suggested that the soluble titanium species act by adsorbing on growth sites on the boehmite. The sodium titanate gel which precipitates may also block available nucleation sites on the seed material. The extent of contribution of these two mechanisms awaits further investigation. Acknowledgement is due to Professor M. Saunders of the Centre for Microscopy, University of Western Australia for assistance with the transmission electron microscopy. The referees are also thanked for helpful suggestions, leading to improvements to this paper.