Permeability is a key parameter to describe fluid transport properties of porous medium; however, the permeability measurement is extremely difficult for tight porous medium, e.g. fine-grained rock or dense soil. In this paper, three methods for gas permeability measurement, i.e. steady state method, pulse decay method (PDM) and pressure oscillation method (POM), are first reviewed and then their advantages and drawbacks are discussed. Both analytical and numerical solutions of gas permeability are presented for the tight porous medium. The results show that the analytical method is relatively simple but only valid under certain conditions, whilst the numerical method is more robust and generic, which can take into account several factors such as porosity, saturation, gas leakage, and unconventional boundary conditions. The influence of the effective porosity on the permeability determination is further analyzed using the proposed numerical method. In this study, new pressure data interpretation procedures for PDM and POM are proposed, and the obtained results can serve as a guidance to define a proper method for permeability measurement of the tight porous medium.Permeability measurement is a challenging issue with respect to the fluid transport properties of geomaterials; and its measurement is frequently observed in many fields, e.g. civil engineering, petroleum engineering, and mining engineering ( Amongst the methods of permeability measurements, the steady state method is widely used for high permeability measurement as it merely requires a stable fluid flow in the tested sample ( In order to reduce experimental duration and get insight into pore structures of low permeability materials, numerous transient flow tests have been performed. Interpretation of these transient flow tests is helpful for understanding the permeability and pore structure. In these tests, two different methods, i.e. pulse decay method (PDM) and pressure oscillation method (POM), are commonly used. As the controlling equations of transient flow are highly nonlinear, some assumptions must be made in order to obtain a closed-form analytical solution. The analytical solution of PDM is valid for a narrow range of permeability measurements due to its limitations. The major limitation is that the ratio between sample and reservoir volumes should be small enough to ensure the validation of the assumption for the analytical solution. Also, the analytical solution does not consider fluid leakage amendment and parameters-pressure coupling. These limitations result in a restricted application of the analytical solution. To overcome these limitations, a general numerical solution is proposed, which is valid for both PDM and POM. The general numerical solution can also take into account the porosity, saturation, and inhomogeneity to extend its applicability in permeability measurement. The determined permeability by means of this numerical method covers a large range, which cannot be obtained through the analytical solution. The aim of this study is to give a comprehensive assessment of permeability measurement methods and reveal the real gas flow process instead of the analytical one. The aspects of the different measurement methods include (i) comparison of analytical and numerical solutions, (ii) influence of effective porosity on pressure evolution of reservoirs, and (iii) time consumptions. In this paper, we focus on gas permeability measurement for tight porous medium with low permeability. Gas is chosen as it can shorten testing time and mitigate the interaction with solid material ( Permeability strongly depends on the porosity of geomaterial. Some empirical formulae describing the relationship between intrinsic permeability and porosity for different geomaterials have been proposed. Carman–Kozeny equation is widely used for the granular material to provide a rough estimation of intrinsic permeability, and it has been corrected to include fine solid particles (clay content) ( Yang–Aplin equation was proposed to estimate the intrinsic permeability from the porosity and clay content for mudstones ( It should be noted that the porosity in the Carman–Kozeny equation is the interconnected porosity while that in the Yang–Aplin equation is the total porosity. Here a factor In the literature, total porosity is often used and it can be divided into interconnected and closed porosities. Since the closed porosity has no effect on gas flow phenomenon inside the porous medium, this paper will exclude the closed porosity and focus on the interconnected porosity (porosity The permeability predicted by using the porosity is a rough estimation although numerous permeability measurement methods can give more accurate estimations of permeability. Since the porosity is of significant importance in gas flow process, it is incorporated in the deduction in the following sections and its influence is discussed in more detail in Section Pressure-driven volume flow method is often employed to measure gas permeability. The pressure is typically generated by compressed air or other gases or by electrical and magnetic fields. Darcy's law is a kind of pressure-driven volume flow model, in which the gas flow velocity is linearly proportional to pressure gradient. Based on the Darcy's law, the flow governing equation is expressed as In case of gas flowing in porous medium under relatively low pressure and moderate temperature, it is assumed that the ideal gas law applies ( Based on the above-mentioned laws and mass conservation law, the gas transport equation can be derived. Considering a representative element with volume d Considering the porosity Since d Simplifying Eq. Substituting Eqs. Based on the above equations, different test methods can be adopted to measure permeability. The steady state method for permeability measurement is based on the constant pressure gradient and gas flow velocity. In case of steady state flow, since By solving Eq. Substituting Eq. Eq. The principle of PDM is to impose an incremental pressure suddenly into the upstream or downstream reservoir and induce the pressure-time response on one side or both sides of the sample. Based on this response, the apparent permeability Defining Based on gas mass conservation, the boundary conditions are derived, in which the gas change on the upstream reservoir-sample interface is expressed as Similarly, the downstream boundary condition is given by It can be seen from Eqs. POM is a new method for permeability measurement, as shown in The gas pressure In this study, the periodic pressure is applied to the upstream reservoir in a sinusoidal form, thus the upstream boundary condition of POM is described as The downstream boundary of POM is a fixed volume reservoir (i.e. zero-flux boundary) subjected to pressure propagation from the upstream as follows: Eq. Three kinds of PDMs are considered in this paper, as shown in The analytical solution can be obtained by combining Eqs. As It should be noted that 1/ Analytical solutions of PDM-I and PDM-II can be deduced as special cases of PDM-III. As for PDM-I, assuming that In this case, permeability is determined only from the downstream pressure evolution. Special attention should be paid to the pulse pressure Δ As mentioned above, porosity and saturation are ignored in the analytical solutions, but they can still be approximated using the pressure distribution from Eq. Defining the sample volume as Besides, the effective porosity It is worth noting that the effective porosity As the pressure propagates through the sample, the downstream reservoir gradually receives a similar sinusoidal pressure. Combining Eqs. The analytical solution to determining the apparent permeability from Here ( Comparisons of these parameters ( Combining Eqs. Then the solution of ( Eq. It is noteworthy that this analytical solution is originally derived from incompressible fluid flow process. However, some researchers have applied it to compressible gas with modifications ( As Eq. The discretization scheme is shown in Finite difference forms to calculate differentials are classified based on element locations. There are three kinds of elements including reservoir elements, boundary elements and inner elements. For the upstream reservoir element, For the downstream reservoir element, For the upstream boundary element, Similarly, for the downstream boundary element, The incremental pressure for the inner elements ( Since this numerical simulation involves discretization of location and time, the discretization size should be determined carefully to locate a trade-off between computation efficiency and accuracy. On one hand, the discretization of location is determined before running the simulation and the element width should not be too small for the sake of numerical stability. On the other hand, the time-step size is determined dynamically in order to keep an accurate calculation of the pressure Different gases are considered to measure permeability of materials. The geometric parameters including sample size and reservoir volume are considered in this study. The diameter of the sample is Cases 1-1 to 1-5 (see PDM-III In this study, samples are assumed to have a permeability of 1 × 10 The results of cases 1-1 to 1-5 are shown in The results in Based on the above analysis, a new procedure to acquire a precise permeability without defining the effective porosity of a sample in advance is suggested. Firstly, the effective porosity is calculated from the recorded pressure using Eq. PDM-I In addition to PDM-III, PDM-I and POM are also used to investigate the influence of effective porosity in order to describe the characteristics of each method. Parameters for case studies in For PDM-I, a dramatic increase in time consumption is found from POM POM simulations are also carried out to evaluate the influence of effective porosity, but its test procedure is very different from those of PDM-I and PDM-III. In POM, the upstream boundary is subjected to a defined periodic pressure controlled by As can be seen from The frequencies of upstream and downstream periodic pressures of all the cases are shown in The downstream pressure curves of POM can be depicted by two parts (see As the analytical solution of POM is validated, a method to measure permeability and effective porosity using POM is proposed. First, it is advised to calculate the phase shift Several methods for permeability measurement have been derived, solved and discussed using the analytical and numerical solutions, and a comprehensive assessment of their characteristics is carried out by investigating the influence of effective porosity on the permeability measurement. The comparison of results shows that POM is the most time-effective, followed by the PDM-III and PDM-I, while PDM-III is more sensitive to the effective pore space. The larger effective pore space results in a greater change in pressure evolution and longer duration for tests. Moreover, as the effective pore space increases, the analytical solution becomes invalid. The comparison between the analytical and numerical solutions indicates that the universal numerical solution is more robust to simulate gas transportation and calculate permeability. Particularly, the universal numerical solution overcomes the limitations between low and high permeability tests where the effective pore space should be considered with the porosity and water saturation. New interpretation procedures for pressure data using PDM-III and POM are proposed, which can be used to calculate the permeability and effective porosity directly. For more accurate estimation of permeability, it is recommended to use the numerical solution to take the effective porosity into account. For more complicated test conditions, a flexible numerical solution for PDM-I, PDM-II, PDM-III and POM is proposed, and it can take into account the porosity, saturation, inhomogeneity, and unconventional boundary conditions for permeability optimization. This paper can serve as guidance for choosing a proper permeability measurement method. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work is financially supported by the