Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) seem to play a pivotal role in bioleaching—the winning of precious metals as well as acid rock drainage. For a better control of both processes structure and function of extracellular polymeric substances from leaching bacteria are of crucial importance. Our research focussed on Acidithibacillus ferrooxidans, the composition of its extracellular polymeric substances and further deduction of their function. The extracellular polymeric substances of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans consist mainly of neutral sugars and lipids. The functions of the extracellular polymeric substances of this leaching bacterium seem to be (i) to mediate attachment to a (metal) sulfide surface, (ii) to concentrate iron(III) ions by complexation through uronic acids or other residues at the mineral surface and, thus, allowing for an oxidative attack on the sulfide. Consequently, dissolution of the metal sulfide is enhanced, which may result in an acceleration of 20- to 100-fold over chemical leaching. Experiments were performed to elucidate the importance of the iron(III) ions complexed by extracellular polymeric substances for strain-specific differences in oxidative activity for pyrite. The preliminary data indicate that strains of Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, with a high amount of iron(III) ions in their extracellular polymeric substances, possess a higher oxidation activity than those with less iron(III) ions. These data provide new insight into the function of extracellular polymeric substances and the consequent advantage conferred to bacteria involved in bioleaching.The acidophilic iron(II) ion-oxidizing bacterium  Mass cultures of After mass cultivation, with iron(II) sulfate as energy source, the cells were cultivated in washing solution ( According to The crude EPS were analyzed for phosphorus (according to DIN 38405-D11-2), nitrogen The attachment of the strains R1, C-52, and SPIII/3 to plane pyrite surfaces (approximately 15×15×1 mm) was visualized by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a NanoScope III device (Digital Instruments, USA) operated in contact mode. Pyrite cubes were obtained as museum grade specimens. They were washed with acetone, sterilized in 70% ethanol and rinsed with sterile deionized water. Three pyrite cubes were incubated in 50 mL washing solution ( Four strains of Generally, the EPS of cells of Attachment experiments using an AFM-technique for quantification demonstrated that the rate of attachment is strain specific and correlates with the pyrite oxidation activity of the cells of EPS of In the cases reported here the amount of EPS obtained from the bacteria is significantly below the values reported by Pogliani et al. (1999) and The total iron(III) ion content of the EPS is significantly higher for the more active strains R1 and C-52 than for the less active strains R7 and SPIII/3 The results unequivocally show that the EPS containing complexed iron(III) ions are the relevant agents in the dissolution process of pyrite. Consequently, the composition of the EPS deserves considerable attention in order to be able to optimize bioleaching processes or to inhibit acid rock drainage. This study was partly supported by grants from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and the Deutsches Zentrum für Luft-und Raumfahrt e.V. (DLR).