Conductive LaNiO3 (LNO) thin films were prepared on Si(001) by pulsed laser deposition and their microstructures were investigated using synchrotron X-ray scattering and atomic force microscopy. We observed that the surface morphology of the LNO thin films was extremely smooth with typically a 1.0-nm root-mean-squared roughness for films up to 360 nm in thickness and the film strain increased monotonically with the film thickness, suggesting that the LNO/Si(001) films be grown with a layer-like growth mode. Grown with the (00l) preferred orientation, the LNO films showed a significant anisotropic structural order; the coherence length of the out-of-plane stacking order was one order of magnitude larger than that of the in-plane atomic order.Ferroelectric thin films have been receiving great attention because of their many potential applications in various functional devices. Preparation of electrodes is a crucial step for integrating them into devices. Therefore, many attempts have been made to develop a much more reliable electrode since its quality largely affects the functions of devices. Pt has been commonly used as an electrode material for ferroelectric thin film devices due to its low resistivity and chemical stability There have been many studies to develop more stable electrodes at high temperatures in ambient oxygen. Among them, LaNiO Up to the present significant understandings on the LNO films have been achieved by several studies LNO thin films were prepared on commercial Si(001) substrates using PLD. A pulsed KrF excimer laser (248 nm, 30 ns duration) operated at 10 Hz was line-focused onto an LNO target rotating at 8 rev./min. The laser beam energy was typically set at 100 mJ/pulse (approx. 2 J/cm To examine the microstructure of the films, we performed synchrotron X-ray scattering measurements at Beamline 5C2 at Pohang Light Source (PLS) in Korea. The incident X-rays were vertically focused by a mirror, and monochromatized to the wavelength of 1.618 Å by a double bounce Si(111) monochromator. The monochromator also focused the X-rays in the horizontal direction. The momentum transfer resolution was controlled by two pairs of slits on the detector arm, and it was set at 0.001 Å The surface morphologies of the LNO films were observed by AFM, as displayed in Conventional powder diffraction scans (θ–2θ scans) were performed by varying momentum transfer The lattice spacing of the LNO films in the out-of-plane direction, which is directly related to film strain, was simply estimated from the position of the (002) Bragg reflection, The mosaic distribution of the LNO films improved gradually with the film thickness. This was estimated from the rocking curves for the LNO(002) reflections, which were obtained by measuring the scattered intensity as the samples were rocked with the detector fixed to the corresponding Bragg angles. As shown in The atomic layer positions in the out-of-plane direction were relatively well ordered. To study the out-of-plane atomic stacking order, we investigated the powder diffraction profiles of the LNO(002) peaks of In contrast to the well-defined atomic layering in the out-of-plane direction, the atomic positions within a layer were quite disordered. To study the in-plane atomic order, we investigated the diffraction pattern in the non-specular LNO〈111〉 direction in reciprocal space, which is 54.7 To test our oriented LNO films as a bottom electrode layer, we deposited a PZT (110-nm-thick) film on an LNO (50-nm-thick)/Si(001) substrate using PLD under the same conditions used in this study. We could confirm through various synchrotron X-ray studies and electrical measurements that the PZT film was fully oriented and showed substantial ferroelectric properties applicable to devices, demonstrating the LNO film can be a good bottom electrode LNO thin films with three different thicknesses (50 nm, 230 nm, and 360 nm) were grown on Si(001) using pulsed laser deposition. Their microstructures were investigated using synchrotron X-ray scattering measurements and AFM. The films were found to grow with the preferred (00 One of us (S. Kim) acknowledges the main financial support provided by the Research Foundation of Sunchon National University in the program year of 2000. J.H. Je also acknowledges support in part from the Korean Ministry of Education through the Research Fund for the Brain Korea 21 program and from the Ministry of Science and Technology through the Research Fund for the National Laboratory.