Slurry suspension in holding tanks and transport through pipelines are essential elements in the modern mining and mineral processing industry. This paper presents methods to improve the energy efficiency of solids suspension in tanks and slurry transport through pipelines for low viscosity Newtonian slurries. Research has been conducted using laboratory experiments and analysis using established equations. It is shown that there are many similarities between these two traditionally separated research areas. It is concluded that energy per unit solids mass generally varies with solids concentration for both systems. The specific energy can be minimised by operating at a suitable solids concentration, for example in the range of 20–30% (v/v) for the slurry properties considered in this paper. It is also concluded that the specific energy generally decreases with the size of equipment, i.e. tank diameter or pipe diameter, although this effect tends to plateau at large sizes. It was found that when a slurry pipeline is used as a reactor, it generally requires more power to suspend solids per unit solids mass than a mixing tank. Great energy saving can be achieved by operating a slurry tank with baffles removed, if off-bottom solids suspension is the limiting factor. Basic equations for specific energy consumption (SEC) are included.solids volume concentration (v/v) particle size (mm) impeller diameter (m) pump input energy consumption per unit solids mass (J/kg) liquid level (m) settled bed height (m) pipe length (m) impeller speed (rev/s, rpm) just-off-bottom solids suspension speed (rpm) solids mass (kg) solids mass rate (kg/s) flow rate (m power (W) agitator power for just-off-bottom solids suspension (W) specific energy consumption per unit pipe length (W/kg time period (s) tank diameter (m) tank volume (m just off-bottom solids suspension velocity, or deposition velocity (m/s) vertical distance (m) total energy increase per unit solids mass (m) pressure loss (Pa) distance (m) agitator power per unit solids mass at the just-off-bottom solids suspension condition (W/kg) density (kg/m solids density (kg/m pump efficiency (–) Slurry suspension in stirred tanks and transport through pipelines are essential to the modern mining and mineral processing industry. In the context of the increasingly urgent need to reduce carbon emissions, it is highly desirable to investigate options to reduce power consumption in handling slurry in the mining and mineral operations. Whilst there are many synergies in the basic fluid dynamics underlining the operations of both slurry tanks and slurry pipelines, traditionally the two areas have been studied by separate researchers often with little linkages. Energy efficiency of agitation for solids suspension has been well studied in the mixing research community. It has been generally accepted that radial turbines are less energy efficient with regard to solids suspension than axial and mixed flow impellers, and that the energy efficiency for off-bottom solids suspension is sensitive to the impeller off-bottom clearance and impeller diameter, as reviewed by Similar to slurry mixing tanks, slurry transport in pipelines is an established technology in the mining and mineral processing industry. There is a wealth of literature on slurry transport, dating back to the 1960s. Most researchers ( To a large extent, the pressure gradient data reported in most literature (   The objectives of this paper are to investigate methods to minimise energy consumption in handling slurry from a system point of view ( The mixing rigs (refer to The liquid/solids flow in the tank bottom was studied visually through the transparent tank walls and through the tank floor. Traditionally, the just-off-bottom suspension condition has been defined as no solids remain stationary at the bottom for more than 1–2 A pipe loop research facility described by Glass particles and sand particles were used as the solid phase and tap water was used as the liquid phase. Refer to Energy per solids mass, referred to as specific energy, is the parameter of ultimate interest for the energy efficiency topic. The specific power data are frequently referred to in this paper for solids suspension in tanks, in pipe reactors. The specific energy can be calculated from the specific power data by multiplying with a time scale, i.e. specific energy (J/kg) is equal to A key parameter to describe the energy efficiency for solids suspension in tanks is defined below: Tests were conducted in the 0.390  Refer to In passing, it is worth mentioning that axial flow impellers are usually considered more energy efficient for suspending solids than radial flow impellers, in a “normal” solids concentration range, e.g.  With a variation to the definition in Eq.  It is worthwhile to study the effect of solids concentration at a defined velocity condition. For purpose of comparison, the condition, denoted as “  For purpose of cross checking the trends of It is also noted that predictions with limited experimental data in Sometimes, pipelines are used not only for transporting solids but also as reactors, for instance for digestion in the alumina industry or extraction in the oil-sands industry. When a slurry pipeline is used as a reactor, it is necessary to keep solids in suspension in the pipeline over a required residence time. It is of interest to determine the power required per unit mass of solids suspended in the pipeline. Similar to Eq. At the just deposition condition (denoted as “  In addition to the decreasing trend of specific energy or power consumption with increases in pipe diameter and reduction in particle size mentioned previously, it is interesting to compare the The power input at a pump includes energy loss through the pipeline, and the energy gain between the pump inlet and the pipeline exit point (including the elevation change), and energy loss in the pump: Refer to In passing, it maybe useful to upgrade Eq. Solids suspension in tanks and solids suspension in pipelines are traditionally two separated research areas, developed and studied by two different schools of academia, scientists and engineers. It is therefore not surprising that different terminologies (e.g. just off-bottom suspension speed vs. deposition velocity) have been used. Since the fluid dynamics principle underling the flow of solids/liquids in both systems is identical, there are many similarities as demonstrated in this paper. It is interesting to see that the specific energy required to suspend solids in both systems vary with the solids concentration; and the specific energy reaches a minimum (refer to Since solids holding in tanks and transport through pipelines are used extensively in the mining and minerals processing industry, it is critical to evaluate options to minimise the specific energy/power consumption, given the importance to minimise the energy usage in the mineral industry to reduce the carbon emission. As demonstrated in this paper that there are plenty of options to make energy efficiency improvements, since the specific energy/power consumption varies with many parameters, i.e. solids concentration, size of tanks or pipes. The results in this paper also suggest that it is generally more energy efficient to use a small number of larger equipment (tanks or pipes) to keep solids in suspension or transport them, than using a larger number of smaller equipment to transport or suspend solids. It is thought that this behaviour is related to the fact that a dominant proportion of energy loss occurs at the flow/equipment contacting surface (e.g. pipe walls, tank surface), where the shear stresses are the highest. This energy loss per unit volume decreases with increase in the scale, since the ratio of surface/volume reduces as the scale increases. It is suggested that due to the same reason of reduced ratio of the surface/volume for a typical industrial-sized mixing tanks (e.g. 1–5 On passing, it should be pointed out that the rate of reduction in SEC tends to decreases as dimension increases (for both tanks and pipes). Thus, there is a tendency of a diminishing return for improvement in the energy efficiency with an increase in the size at very larger dimensions. For example, The energy efficiency in suspending solids in a mixing tank can be improved by optimising impeller design and many other methods ( Our on-going research shows that the energy efficiency in suspending solids in mixing tank is also affected by the type of impeller, particle size and density and a few other parameters. The results will be presented in a coming paper. The results and conclusions developed in this paper are limited to low viscosity Newtonian slurries. The effect of viscous non-Newtonian rheology on specific energy consumptions is yet to be investigated. The conditions used to compare specific energy/power consumption are related to the just off-bottom solids suspension or just deposition point in this work. This definition is used only for low viscosity Newtonian slurries, where settling occurs at low velocities. Clearly, slurry tanks or pipelines will have to be operated with sufficient safety margin above the just suspension condition, say 10% above the minimum agitator speed or deposition velocity. Additional data and calculations (not presented in this paper) suggests that the conclusions presented in this paper still stand at other velocity conditions, e.g. 10% or higher than the deposition velocity. Energy efficiency of solids suspension in tanks and solids transport through pipelines is studied in this paper for low viscosity Newtonian slurries. It is shown that there are many similarities with these two traditionally separated areas. It is concluded that power or energy per unit solids mass generally varies with solids concentration for both systems. The specific energy can be minimised by operating at a suitable solids concentration, for example in the range of 20–30% (v/v) for the slurry properties concerned in this paper. It is also concluded that specific power or energy generally decreases with the size of an equipment, i.e. tank diameter or pipe diameter for both slurry systems. It was found that when a slurry pipeline is used as a reactor, it generally requires more power to suspend solids per unit solids mass, than a mixing tank.