Gamma titanium aluminum (γ-TiAl) based alloys have been of much interest in recent years as light-weight structural materials for high temperature aerospace applications, due to their lightness in weight and their high melting point Nickel (Ni) can be coated on metallic as well as non-metallic surfaces by electroless deposition that gives a uniform coating with excellent chemical and physical properties Elemental powders of commercial pure Ti (<75 μm) and Al (<45 μm) were used for coating with Ni. Where mixed powders were used, a Ti-to-Al ratio of 80:20 was maintained. A pretreatment was given to make the surface of the elemental powders active. The composition of the pretreatment bath is shown in The bath composition used for the electroless coating of the elemental powders is also shown in The coated powders were tested for Ni using dimethyl glyoxime dissolved in methanol. A purple precipitate revealed the presence of Ni. The presence of the coating was further analyzed with the help of SEM, TEM and vibration sample magnetometer (VSM) analysis. For the SEM studies (JSM 5300, JEOL) the particles were sprayed on an epoxy matrix and subsequently gold sputtered. These particles were sprayed on the epoxy matrix and polished using diamond particles of 0.25 μm to get a fine surface finish of the substrate. The particles were tilted at an angle to see the thickness clearly. For the TEM studies, (Phillips M12 equipped with Phillips EDAX) the particles were dispersed in acetone and sprayed on carbon coated copper grids of 300 mesh size. The increase in Ni content was analyzed from the magnetization change using a VSM (PAR 155 vibration sample magnetometer (VSM)). The coated particles were loaded in a quartz crucible and mounted in the VSM, the tests were conducted at room temperature. The maximum applied magnetic field was maintained at 12×10 The coated and uncoated powders are shown in Specimens prepared by dispersing the coated particles in acetone and spraying on the carbon coated copper grids of 300-mesh size were viewed by TEM (see A magnetization test to determine the increase the coating thickness of Ni of the coated particles, conducted at room temperature, has been utilized in a novel way. The magnetic property of the Ni coatings depends on the solution composition and the coating thickness. It increases with thickness and attains a constant value This paper discusses the preparation of Ti, Al, Ni composite powders by coating Ni on Ti and Al elemental powders. The pretreatment given to the elemental powders also plays an important role in increasing the coating thickness. The increase in the amount of Ni can be indirectly measured by the magnetic moment test. This is the only method to incorporate the P in the alloy by the P/M process. These composite powders can be used to prepare γ-TiAl alloys and can subsequently be used as a matrix material to prepare γ-TiAl alloy composites to improve their oxidation resistance, toughness and wear resistance. Research upon this topic is in progress. Addition of Ni to this alloy is expected to improve the oxidation resistance by replacing the Ti in the sublattice site instead of Al