Objectives
                  To compare a simplified method to a conventional protocol for complete denture fabrication regarding masticatory performance and ability.
               
                  Methods
                  A sample was formed by edentulous patients requesting treatment with maxillary and mandibular complete dentures. Participants were randomly divided into two groups: Group S, which received dentures fabricated by a simplified method, and Group C (n
                     =21 each), which received conventionally fabricated dentures. After three months following insertion, masticatory performance was evaluated by a colorimetric assay based on chewing two capsules as test food during twenty and forty cycles. Masticatory ability was assessed by a questionnaire with binary answers and a single question answered by means of a 0–10 scale. A third group (DN) formed by seventeen dentate volunteers served as an external comparator. Groups were compared by statistical tests suitable for data distribution (α
                     =0.05).
               
                  Results
                  Thirty-nine participants were assessed for three months (twenty from Group C and nineteen from Group S). Groups C and S presented similar masticatory performance which corresponded to approximately 30% of Group DN. Results for masticatory ability showed similarity between S and C, regardless of the assessment method, although an isolate questionnaire item showed more favourable results for the first group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The simplified method for complete denture fabrication is able to restore masticatory function to a level comparable to a conventional protocol, both physiologically and according to patient's perceptions.
               
                  Clinical significance
                  Although masticatory function is impaired by the loss of natural teeth and dentures can restore only a fraction of such function, patients can benefit from a simplified protocol for complete denture fabrication to the same extent they would by conventional techniques.Complete edentulism is an important public health problem, mainly among the elderly. Complete dentures are the most common treatment for edentulous patients, Conventional protocols for complete denture fabrication as accepted in regions such as North America Owen Despite the existence of the above mentioned studies, the comparative evidence regarding denture fabrication methods is still scarce, There are two main approaches for the assessment of mastication i.e. by clinically measuring the comminution of test food (masticatory performance and efficiency) or by inquiring the patient perception of his/her own chewing (masticatory ability). Simplified protocols for denture fabrication should not further impair mastication when compared with conventional methods. Although no denture fabrication method can reach the masticatory performance found in dentate subjects, This paper reports part of the results from a randomised trial with two parallel arms comparing a simplified protocol for complete denture fabrication to a conventional method (ClinicalTrials.gov identifier: Trial participants were edentulous patients who requested treatment at the clinics of Ribeirão Preto Dental School and were enrolled from October 2010 to April 2011. Inclusion criteria comprised: (a) age over forty-five years; (b) complete edentulism for at least one year; (c) desire to receive a pair of new conventional complete dentures; (d) mental receptiveness; and (e) good understanding of spoken Portuguese. Exclusion criteria comprised: (a) disorders of the masticatory system disorders; (b) pathological changes of residual ridges; and (c) debilitating systemic diseases. We enrolled dentate participants (Group DN) among the staff of Ribeirão Preto Dental School, according to the following inclusion criteria: (a) age over forty-five years; (b) complete natural dentition, except for restorations or missing third molars; (c) no previous orthodontic treatment; (d) not using any medication that affects muscular activity; and (e) good understanding of spoken Portuguese. Specific exclusion criteria were: (a) signs or symptoms of temporomandibular disorders; (b) occlusal trauma; and (c) periodontal disease. After informed consent, participants provided information regarding demographic aspects. Moreover, each edentulous participant received a score according to the classification system for complete edentulism of the American College of Prosthodontists (ACP). Edentulous participants were randomly allocated to two groups and received new complete dentures fabricated according to a simplified (Group S) or conventional method (Group C). In summary, differences between the tested interventions involved the impression technique, use of a facebow and denture try-in stage. Group C participants received dentures fabricated according to clinical and laboratory procedures similar to those used in previous studies. Group S participants underwent a single impression appointment, during which a pair of irreversible hydrocolloid impressions was obtained as described for Group C. Definitive casts were obtained from such impressions, and record bases fabricated according to anatomic landmarks. Two dentists performed the clinical procedures on denture fabrication for both groups. The same professionals conducted laboratory steps under supervision of a dental technician. Edentulous participants were allocated according to a sequence of computer-generated random numbers (allocation ratio: 1:1). A researcher who was not involved with other parts of the trial prepared and secured the sequence code, which was transferred to sealed, opaque envelopes. An envelope was opened for each participant only after the first appointment, i.e. after obtaining a first pair of casts. This was done in order to ensure that the first series of impressions would be similar for Groups C and S. Masticatory performance was assessed by a colorimetric method based on an artificial test food. The test food consists of a rectangular polyvinyl acetate capsule containing fuchsine beads (250 Participants sat upright in a chair with their feet on the ground for testing purpose. A preliminary step was chewing a hyperboloid silicone-based test food for thirty seconds, in order to get the participants adapted to the test protocol ( Chewed capsules were opened and their content was dissolved in distilled water. The resulting solution was filtered and the fuchsine concentration (μg/mL) was quantified by a spectrophotometer. Such concentration corresponds to the masticatory performance. We employed two approaches in order to assess the masticatory ability. An assessment was performed by a five-question instrument (MA questionnaire) that considered participants’ daily experience with feeding without changing his/her habits due to problems with dentures and difficulties to chew hard foods. The second assessment approach for masticatory ability consisted of asking participants to grade their ability to chew food according to a 0–10 numeric scale (from “not at all satisfied” to “totally satisfied”). A grade higher than seven was considered as an indication of favourable masticatory ability. The concentration of fuchsine released within the capsules (μg/mL) according to groups and number of cycles was evaluated by the generalised estimating equations method (GEE) with an identity link function. An exchangeable working correlation was assumed and generalised score statistics was used instead of Wald tests. Groups and cycles were inserted as categorical variables and multiple comparisons done by the Bonferroni test. Each of the five items of the MA questionnaire generated a binary outcome, which was compared by means of We considered the assessment of complete cases when participants were lost due to reasons that were obviously independent of the study protocol. When there was doubt about such independence or withdrawals and losses clearly associated with the protocol, we performed the worst-case scenario analysis described by Jadad and Enkin. All statistical tests were performed by the SPSS Statistics software (v.17; SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). The level of significance for most test was set at a 0.05, whereas multiple comparisons employed Bonferroni correction ( Seventy-two patients of Ribeirão Preto Dental School were screened for possible enrolment. Among the forty-two randomised patients, two were lost before the three months follow-up (both in Group S) and one from Group C abandoned the protocol before receiving post-insertion adjustments. The latter participant was considered for worst-case scenario analysis. All remaining participants (   The analysis of complete cases by GEE confirmed that masticatory performance shows significant influence from different study groups ( Estimated mean fuchsine concentration and respective 95% confidence intervals (CI) according to groups and regardless of the cycle number were: C Regardless of the groups, mean fuchsine concentrations (CI) were 0.48 (0.41–0.55) and 0.68 (0.61–0.76) for twenty and forty chewing cycles, respectively. Such significant difference shows that forty cycles result in higher mean values for the three tested groups.  Nearly half of the edentulous participants treated conventionally pointed out some difficulty with feeding (Q1), whereas a significantly lower number was found for Group S. This suggests that simplified dentures were able to help easier feeding than a conventional treatment protocol. Such differences were not found for other questions though. At any rate, none of the groups of denture wearers presented 100% satisfactory answers for each of the MA questionnaire items ( Two participants from Group S and eight from Group C presented unsatisfactory masticatory ability according to the MA questionnaire ( When considering the withdrawn participant,  This study found that edentulous patients treated by simplified or conventional methods had similar masticatory performance. The similarity between groups on the tested clinician-reported outcome shows that simplified denture fabrication does not lead to further masticatory impairment. It has been widely stated that adequate impression procedures are critical for oral function, denture retention and health of supporting tissues. As expected, dentate participants presented better masticatory performance The number of chewing cycles influenced results of masticatory performance for the three groups, with better comminution after forty cycles. Complete denture wearers may achieve improved masticatory performance if instructed to chew for longer periods as for dentate subjects. Present results confirm that denture wearers need more cycles in order to comminute food, since their performance after forty cycles was still lower than that for dentate subjects at twenty cycles. In terms of masticatory ability, both trial arms presented similar results regardless the method. Most edentulous patients evaluated their mastication favourably, in clear contrast with their low masticatory performance. Patient self-evaluation tends to be optimistic compared with the assessment made by a clinician, as commonly found for complete denture wearers. Only one among the MA questionnaire items showed differences between trial arms, with better feeding reported by Group S. Such an unexpected finding reflects the influence of different fabrication methods. A possible reason for that is the use of a zinc oxide–eugenol paste, which was previously reported to be associated with lower patient satisfaction when compared with other final impression materials. We excluded dentate subjects from the comparison on the MA questionnaire due to the remarkable roof effect found. Despite this important limitation, the MA questionnaire was able to achieve its goal in this study – to compare different groups and observe differences when applicable. This was highlighted by the difference between Groups S and C detected for the first item. Nonetheless, the 0–10 scale was not able to discriminate results among the three tested groups. Such finding was not expected due to the well established difference between dentate subjects and denture wearers for masticatory function. The scale was therefore considered as inadequate to discriminate among different clinical conditions but that limitation was overcome using the MA questionnaire. A significant limitation in this study is well represented by the possibility of biases when comparing groups. This is unlikely significant for the comparison between Groups C and S, which are arms of a randomised trial and underwent an adequate, concealed allocation sequence and blinding whenever applicable. That can be reinforced by the balance found regarding every demographic and clinical characteristics of such groups. On the other hand, the same was impossible when comparing Group DN with the edentulous participant. Another noteworthy issue is the possibility of withdrawals and losses that could lead to erroneous conclusions. This study found a relatively small incidence of such participants and no evidence of bias by a sensitivity analysis. Certain imbalance between dentate participants and denture wearers on some demographic characteristics was present and deserves comment. We found no difference for gender on the three groups, which is a major predictor of masticatory performance. Although this report provides relevant data regarding the clinical performance of simplified complete dentures compared with conventionally fabricated prostheses, some outcomes still need to be reported. In future papers, we intend to present results regarding oral health-related quality of life, patient satisfaction, costs and denture quality as reported by a clinician. Future studies on use of simplified methods for fabrication of implant-retained prostheses or partial dentures may also help to establish minimum protocols able to improve patient access to oral healthcare. Complete dentures fabricated by a simplified protocol restore masticatory performance of edentulous patients to the same extent found after using a conventional protocol. Both tested protocols resulted in a similar masticatory ability, with a slightly better result for the simplified method for easy feeding. Masticatory performance was much lower and complaints more frequent following both interventions when compared with dentate subjects though. In summary, a simplified method for complete denture fabrication can restore masticatory function at least as well as the conventional protocol tested, from both clinician and patient viewpoints. This trial was supported by There is no conflict of interest associated with this study. The authors thank our staff members Dorival Gaspar for his support with masticatory performance assessment, Julio Cesar da Matta for his assistance with denture fabrication, and Viviane de Cassia Oliveira for professional help throughout the study phases.