The current study presents a novel processing approach for the separation of the iron oxide from Red Mud (RM), based on the gentle reduction by hydrogen in static conditions followed by wet magnetic separation. The conversion degree of hematite, initially contained in RM, to magnetite was investigated in relation to reduction time, temperature, and the H2 supply. The maximum achieved conversion reached 87% at 480°C. The phase transformations during the thermal reduction were investigated via X-ray diffractometry, Mössbauer spectroscopy, electron microscopy, and magnetic measurements. After reduction at the optimal conditions, the reduced RM sample was subjected to magnetic separation and a magnetic fraction with over 54wt% magnetite concentration was obtained. Such magnetic fractions could be used as a feed in the pig iron industry, while the non-magnetic fraction could be further treated in order to recover the rare earths or to be used as a raw material for building materials.Red mud (RM) is the main aluminum industry slurry waste generated during the treatment of bauxitic ores by sodium hydroxide (Bayer process) for the production of alumina. Producing one ton of alumina results in 1–1.5 Experimental tests at laboratory and pilot scale have shown that the recovery of individual metals from the bauxite residue is possible. However the resulting generation of high volumes of solid or/and liquid residues can render the process uneconomical at an industrial scale. There are a number of metallurgical processes which illustrate this. For example, the reductive smelting of RM produces a high slag volume while the pig iron contains a high carbon content ( The current study presents an alternative processing pathway for the separation of iron phases from RM and the total valorization of the residue via reduction by hydrogen followed by magnetic separation. The high cost of the hydrogen reducing agent can be counterbalanced by a number of approaches such as; (a) processing at low temperature to reduce energy consumption, (b) avoidance of sintering and agglomeration of the residue, (c) avoiding carbon contamination of the reduced residue in cases of carbothermal reduction. The reduction of RM by hydrogen at high temperatures has been described in a recent study ( The current study aims at the controlled reduction of the hematite, initially present in RM, to magnetite, which possesses a high magnetic susceptibility. The reduction progress is studied via XRD-Rietveld, Mössbauer spectroscopy, electron microscopy (SEM, TEM), and magnetic measurements. Additionally, the magnetic separation of the reduced RM was investigated. The reduction of red mud was performed in a quartz tube (length: 1 The wet magnetic separation was performed in a laboratory Carpco separator (model MWL 3465) by applying a strong magnetic field created by two current-carrying coils to a container containing iron balls. The reduced RM sample slurry (80 The sample of red mud used in the present study was provided by the Greek aluminum producer “Aluminum of Greece S.A”. Laser light scattering analysis (performed with a Mastersizer Microplus) showed it to be a relatively fine-grained material, with 97 The microstructure of the reduced RM was examined by SEM/EDS using a JEOL_ JSM-type scanning electron microscope. Information about the sub-micron structure of the iron oxides was obtained by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) using a JEOL 2100HR (200 The reduction behavior of the RM residue was examined in relation to a number of different reducing conditions in the temperature range between 300 and 480  However it should be stressed that the hematite phase is not totally eliminated and its peak is still observed after processing at 450 The phase transformations taking place during the reduction were further investigated using Mössbauer spectroscopy. The conversion degree of the oxides is calculated as Fe The conversion degree as a function of the reduction duration and the hydrogen excess supply at 400 The microstructure of a reduced RM sample at 400 The variation of the magnetisation of the unprocessed red mud sample and the optimally reduced sample (480 The comparison of the magnetic properties of the raw and reduced red mud indicates that the magnetic separation process will be considerably more effective for the reduced sample due to its significantly higher magnetization. The reduced RM sample was submitted to wet magnetic separation. The intensity of the magnetic field between the magnet poles was measured by a gaussmeter. Taking into account the maximum measured H value (116 The reduction and separation of iron oxide phases from red mud was investigated. The residue was reduced by hydrogen at gentle and controlled heating conditions (temperature range between 300 and 480