In this work, the effect of process parameters such as stabilizer concentrations and plating bath temperature of the electroless Ni–P on efficiency and crystallinity are investigated. Both the nickel recovery and coating efficiencies are defined, quantified and analyzed by varying the above stated basic input process parameters. The integral breadth, crystallite size, microstrain and the relative proportions of amorphous and crystalline phases present in the coating are obtained using the X-ray diffraction technique and analysed.Electroless nickel (EN) coatings are produced by the catalytic reduction of nickel ions employing sodium hypophosphite as the reducing agent An electroless nickel plating bath may decompose spontaneously during the deposition process. Bath decomposition is usually preceded by an increase in the volume of hydrogen gas evolved The crystallite size of the coatings and microstrains present in them are the important parameters determining the quality of coatings. The crystallite size decreases with increasing phosphorous content The objective of this work is to study the efficiency, crystallinity microstrain and crystallite size of the deposits produced by electroless nickel plating process and establish their relationship with the stabilizer content and the temperature of the bath. Mild steel specimens of 20 X-ray diffraction results were obtained from experiments using a computer controlled Phillips vertical diffractometer using Iron radiation with a graphite monochromator. The X-ray tube was operated at 30 Studies on crystallinity of the deposits were based on X-ray diffraction data. A typical X-ray diffractogram obtained from an electroless Ni–P deposit in the as coated condition is shown in Integrated intensity is defined as the area under the relevant intensity profile. In this investigation, the ratio ( Full width at half maximum (FWHM) is defined as the width of the relevant diffraction profile at half of the total peak intensity (height). Integral breadth is defined as the breadth of the rectangle having equal height and area as that of the diffraction profile. For all the deposits, single line profile analysis, employing pseudo-voigt profile function was carried out. To deconvolute the overlapped reflections from different phases (with reasonable accuracy and reproducibility), PRO-FIT software package In the present investigation, two types of efficiencies are considered: ‘Efficiency of nickel recovery’ or nickel recovery efficiency, Ni ‘Efficiency of coating’, Ni The second one namely the ‘efficiency of coating’ is commercially more significant since a high value of nickel recovery efficiency as defined above does not necessarily imply better and adherent deposition on the specimen. Both the above efficiencies were estimated by allowing the coating to proceed for a period of 1 The stabilizer (sodium citrate) plays an important role during deposition of electroless nickel. If the stabilizer content is too low, then the bath becomes unstable accompanied by the onset of homogeneous chemical reaction over the entire bulk of the solution rather than the controlled autocatalytic reaction over the specimen surface. On the other hand, too high a stabilizer concentration results in the reaction getting inhibited. Variation of the nickel recovery efficiency as a function of the stabilizer (sodium citrate) concentration is presented in The variation of nickel recovery efficiency with plating bath temperature is shown in The increase in the coating efficiency is gradual upto 87 In order to study the effect of stabilizer (sodium citrate), bath temperature was maintained at 85 Variation in the ratio of integrated intensity of crystalline to that of amorphous phase ( In order to study the effect of bath temperature, the amount of stabilizer was maintained at 25 The ratios of the integrated intensity of the diffraction profiles of amorphous and crystalline phases are indicative of the relative proportion of these phases present in the coating. The variation of this ratio as a function of the temperature of the coating bath is shown in With reference to electroless Ni–P deposits, some of the factors influencing the coating and Nickel recovery efficiency have been identified. Based on the experimental results and analysis, the following conclusions have been drawn which clearly indicate the possibility of a significant improvement of the overall coating process: Nickel recovery efficiency is inversely proportional to the amount of stabilizer and is directly proportional to the bath temperature. The stabilizer content does not have much influence on the coating efficiency. The lustre of the deposits improves on increasing the bath temperature beyond 83 The stabilizer promotes formation of amorphous phase and resulting in an increase in microstrain and a reduction in the crystallite size of the crystalline material. Increasing the bath temperature beyond 87 Based on the above observations, a compromise/balance between deposition rate and decomposition of the bath could be noticed when the quantity of the stabilizer and the bath temperature were maintained at around 25