The refining of an anhydrous hazelnut and cocoa paste in a pilot stirred ball mill was characterized by using a design of experiments approach. Data from a central composite design analyzed by response surface models allowed to assess that the main effects on the fineness (f) of the product refined for a preset time were negative for the shaft rotational speed (N) and grinding medium mass (S) and positive for the grinding medium diameter (D). A further analysis of the data allowed to develop an empirical model relating the fineness to the group D/(NCP), where CP is the ratio between S and the mass of refining paste (P), and time which was used successfully to predict the behavior of three industrial refiners. The product solids behaved as weak materials since the grinding rate was mainly affected by the number of collisions between the medium beads, proportional to the abovementioned group.Nut creams can be defined as complex systems made up of different solid particles (sugar, cocoa powder, milk whey, milk powder, nuts, etc.) dispersed in a continuous fluid (oil) ( Stirred ball mills were introduced at the beginning of the 20th century in the refining of paintings and were later applied to the mining and powder industries ( All the experiments reported in this work were carried out in an Italian confectionery factory using pilot and industrial plants. The following formulation with reference to 100 The screening and characterization experiments were carried out using a pilot stirred ball mill whose characteristics are reported in Data of paste refining in industrial scale refiners were collected from the production lines in the factory. These were composed of a mixer, a holding tank, several ball mills in parallel and a tank to store the refined paste. Data refer to three industrial stirred ball refiners of different productivity. They consisted of jacketed cylindrical tanks containing 9.5 The inner diameter of the three refiners varied in the range 0.60–0.71 The power (P The specific energy (e) absorbed by the motor of the ball mill as a function of time (t) can be obtained by integrating the power over time and dividing by the mass of paste. Such definite integral was approximated by using the rectangle method thus yielding Eq. The micrometer method was used to measure the particle size of the refining cream. Samples of the refining cream were withdrawn from the ball mill and analyzed immediately in five replicates by a digital micrometer with a range of 0–25 The experimental strategy adopted consisted of three phases: screening, characterization and validation. The screening phase aimed at studying factors with uncertain effects on the response, in order to decide whether to include them in the characterization phase of the study or to set their level at an appropriate value. The characterization phase aimed at developing an accurate statistical model for the description of the process including only factors of proven effect. The validation phase was set up to assess if the developed model was accurate for the description of the process at different process scales. Design and analysis of all the experiments were carried out by using JMP statistical software version 13.0.0 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC, USA). An analysis of the few papers published in the literature in which stirred ball mill refining was either studied ( Based on the above set points for the factors of interest and considering the physical and technological constraints of the pilot stirred ball mill described in Two responses, the product fineness (f) and the specific milling energy (e) were considered to be the most important in the characterization of the refined product. Among the responses considered by other authors to characterize the refining of a food product, Among the five factors identified for the experimentation, the refining temperature (T) and the recycle flow rate (F) were considered of doubt effect. Thus, they were kept aside from the other factors which from process knowledge were known to affect the responses, and tested in a non-replicated 2 To characterize the effect of N, D and S on the refining kinetics and on the energy consumption ( The aim of this part of the work was to collect data on paste refining in the industrial stirred ball mills described in  The time course of fineness and specific energy for all the experiments of the face centered central composite design are reported in With the aim of studying the effect of the three factors on the refining process it was decided to analyze the responses reported in Each response variable, f  The surface plots with associated contours of the specific energy reported in By analyzing the fineness data measured at 90 and 120 From the analysis of The response surface models developed for the prediction of fineness as a function of N, D and S for the pilot refiner are very useful to describe how the system is affected by its key factors. However, they do not apply directly to ball refiners of different size or operating under different conditions. In fact, while the ball diameter may be the same or in the range tested in the experiments, the tank diameter and height, the mass of balls, the rotational speed and the mass of product to refine can be quite different in the different scales. On the other hand, trying to build a regression model of the fineness as a function of the investigated parameters expressed in engineering units (not in coded units) could lead to possible simplification based on the underlying mechanism ( In the field of paints and pigments, By using tailings of ore mining industry as grinding material in a stirred ball mill, Intuitively, the power transmitted from the balls agitated at a given rotational speed to the refining paste mass is proportional to the mass of balls. Thus, the specific power, that is the power transmitted to one kg of paste, is proportional to the ratio (C It can be noted that Eq. Eq. The data point obtained at 90 The plot in The three industrial refiners R1–R3 were characterized with distinct D/NC The fact that the product fineness obtained at a given time depends solely on the group D/(NC The maximum kinetic energy of the grinding medium beads in the mill can be taken as SE: Hennart et al. (2011) reported the following expression for the stress number (SN): For weak materials, low values of the SE are already sufficient to break all particles ( The present investigation allowed firstly to characterize the refining process of an anhydrous cocoa and hazelnut based paste in a pilot stirred ball mill by developing response surface models for the achieved fineness and the corresponding milling energy as a function of some process and design parameters, namely the recycle flow rate (F), the temperature (T), the shaft rotational speed (N), the grinding media diameter (D), and the grinding media mass (S). Furthermore, it was found that the group parameter D/(NC