Measurements of the coal fines production and the impact of these fines on the permeability of two coals from the Bowen Basin, Australia, were performed at different flow conditions (single-phase water or gas, two-phase water and gas) and pressure conditions. The fines collected from each coal samples ranged in size from 1 μm to 14 μm. For both coal samples, during the first 50 h, the permeability decreases from 0.005 mD and 0.048 mD by 60.9% and 85%, respectively, followed by gradual decline with fluctuations. By the end of water injection, the permeability drops by 88% and 89%, respectively. This phenomenon is attributed to the counteraction between formation damage (cleats plugging and coal fines settlement) and breakthrough of coal fines from the samples (widened cleats). It was found that coal fines volumetric production is proportional to the third power of flow velocity once the flow paths for coal fines are established. The critical flow velocities of coal fines production for both samples were also obtained. For hydrophobic coal, water-drive-gas two-phase flow introduces abrupt permeability loss due to coal fines generation and migration. Furthermore, pauses (well shut-in) in the experiments cause slight permeability drops. A comparison between the two samples indicates that narrower and less connected cleating system results in more frequent coal fines generation and migration, resulting in significant permeability fluctuations with general decreasing trend. Tortuosity of the cleats can enhance the deterioration in permeability by coal fines behaviours. This study delivers fundamental understandings of coal fines generation and migration during the CSG production process, and useful guidelines are suggested to be implemented in the field to minimize production loss induced by coal fines behaviours.Coal fines are produced from coal seam gas (CSG) reservoirs throughout the CSG production process. The size of coal fines collected in CSG wells varies from a few nanometres diameter to hundreds of microns. These fines have detrimental impacts on CSG production, such as formation damage and pump failures ( Mathematical models using force and stress balance analysis have been used in several studies ( In our previous paper (  From the field trials from 12 CSG wells, The impact of production parameters (e.g. water flow velocity and production pressure) on coal fines generation and permeability has been reported by researchers. However, the relationship between the characteristics of coal fines behaviours and permeability variations for different CSG production scenarios has not been comprehensively investigated. This relationship offers a vital knowledge for addressing the coal fines issues. Besides, the effects of gravity and cleat structure on such relationship have not been accounted for in previous research ( In this study, laboratory experiments will be performed using two samples to examine coal permeability changes due to coal fines generation and migration at various production scenarios, including single-phase flow, two-phase flow and well shut-in. The correlation between the characteristics of coal fines and permeability variations will be established and the implications for managing coal fines challenges in the field will be discussed in detail. The effects of gravity and cleat structure on the fines-permeability relationship will also be investigated. Two 3 cm cubes were cut from a piece of coal collected from a coal mine in the Bowen Basin (Australia), as shown in The sample characterization includes Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) to visualize the cleating system; X-ray Diffraction (XRD) to examine the mineral contents; Mercury Intrusion Porosimetry (MIP) to quantify the initial porosity; and flooding test to obtain the initial permeability. The former three types of characterization were obtained using the debris from the two coal samples. Since the debris came off from different spots of the samples, we would say the characterization obtained was representative of the whole samples. The JEOL 7800 SEM was used to take images focusing on the cleat aperture and connectivity for both coal samples. We looked at three fragments from each coal sample, and all of them exhibited similar characteristics for each sample. Therefore, we chose one from them to illustrate the representative characteristics, as shown in The X-ray Powder Diffraction (XRD) tests were performed using the Bruker D8 Advance Powder X-ray diffractometer, and the results are demonstrated in The initial porosity of the samples was evaluated by Mercury Intrusion Porosimetry (MIP) using the Micromeritics AutoPore IV9520, and the initial permeability was obtained at the beginning of the flow tests. The tested values are listed in The ISCO 500D syringe pump was used to inject water and helium vertically through the assembled samples at constant differential pressures (i.e. The permeability of water and gas were calculated using Eq The experiment scenarios are illustrated in In addition to the above scenarios, some more cases were conducted on Sample 2, including water-drive-gas two-phase flow, horizontal water flooding (to investigate the gravitational effect on coal fines behaviours) and backflow test (to prove coal fines behaviours are the cause for permeability change). Please be noted that for 1.3 MPa, 1.4 MPa and 1.5 MPa of water flooding, the experiment was paused for 15 h between two effluent samples were collected at one pressure, before proceeding to the next injection scenario in order to evaluate the impact of well shut-in on coal fines production. During the measurements, the effluent from the sample was collected continuously, and the particle size distribution of fines in every 5 mL collected was analysed in the Multisizer™ 4 Particle Analyser (Coulter Counter). Three particle size distribution analyses were measured on each sample to test at least 100,000 particles, and the mean particle size distribution was computed from the three runs, after subtraction of the background particle count measured in the injection water. In this section, three key aspects will be discussed, namely the volume of the produced coal fines, the distribution of the size of coal fines, and the permeability evolution induced by coal fines generation and migration. The total volume of coal fines production for every mL effluent for both coal samples was estimated and plotted in Sample 1 witnessed the peak yield of coal fines at 0.8 MPa, with the coal fines output at a comparable level for other subsequent scenarios. Since the coal fines production was high at the very first run (0.8 MPa), it can be deduced that such pressure different enables the sample to offer clear migration pathways for coal fines. Whereas coal fines did not gain flow paths for Sample 2 until the differential pressure reached 1.0 MPa, since the volume of coal fines in the effluent before 1.0 MPa was similar to that of the injection water. It can be inferred that there exists a threshold pressure, above which the passages for coal fines will be established. To be more specific, Sample 1 possesses a threshold pressure below 0.8 MPa; while the threshold for Sample 2 is around 1.0 MPa. The reason for a higher threshold for Sample 2 is the tortuosity of the cleats, greater tortuosity makes it more difficult for the fines to move, requiring a higher pressure for breakthrough. In addition, the outputs of coal fines from Sample 2 vary significantly during water flooding under various differential pressures, as illustrated in  After Sample 2 being flooded by gas, water was then injected to displace gas to simulate the water-drive-gas two-phase flow scenario. Furthermore, a comparison between the two samples suggested that coal with higher initial permeability tended to yield more coal fines, because under the same pressure difference, greater permeability gave rise to higher flow velocity. The particle size distribution of coal fines was measured for the effluents collected from each differential pressure using Coulter Counter. The cumulative percentage of volume for each pressure step was plotted as a function of particle size distribution in For both samples, the sizes of the coal fine particles mainly range from 1 μm to 14 μm. The value of cumulative percentage of volume increases more rapidly for most curves at lower range, and gradually levels off with increasing particle sizes. This can be explained by (1) smaller coal fines require lower flow velocity to be mobilised, and can be flushed out of the sample more easily compared with larger fines; and (2) the cleat aperture limits the size of coal fines that can pass through these channels. In this study, the particle size at which the curvature experienced sudden change (i.e. the slope of the curve became less than 30) was defined as the critical particle size. No clear correlation between critical particle size and differential pressure was found, as illustrated in The evolutions of coal permeability for both samples are illustrated in It can be seen that for both coal samples, during the water flooding process, the permeability dropped significantly (by 60.9% and 85%, respectively for Sample 1 and Sample 2 in the first 50 h), followed by gradually decline with time, even if the differential pressure was increased. The variations in coal permeability can be explained by the counteraction of four phenomena: (1) the deposition and/or plugging of coal fines in cleats, damaging the permeability (i.e. entrapped coal fines); (2) the dilation of coal cleats by increased pore pressure (or decreased effective stress), resulting in permeability enhancement; (3) the discharge of coal fines widened the cleats, causing gradual permeability growth (i.e. coal fines production, data shown in Sample 1 witnesses more dramatic permeability fluctuations than Sample 2 resulted by coal fines behaviours. The explanation is that Sample 1 has narrower cleats with less connectivity compared with Sample 2 as evidenced by the SEM images ( Sample 2 produced greater coal fines, in terms of both volume and size. It also experienced more severe permeability damage during the same period. For instance, in the first 50 h, the permeability dropped by 60.9% and 85% respectively for Sample 1 and Sample 2, and in the first 100 h (shut-in periods for Sample 2 were accounted for), the permeability declined 79.1% and 88.2% for the two samples, respectively. However, in the CSG reservoirs, those with lower permeability are often facing with more severe coal fines problems. The possible reason is that the cleats in Sample 2 ( Moreover, the impact of well shut-in on coal fines generation and migration was also simulated for Sample 2. A slight permeability loss was observed for every shut-in, which indicated that well shut-in has detrimental effects on coal permeability, as illustrated in the black dashed rectangle in When gas was first introduced to both coal samples after the “1.5 MPa water” injection scenario, a sudden drop in the effective permeability ratio (i.e. from 0.119 to 0.056 for Sample 1, and from 0.121 to 0.048) is observed due to capillary resistance related to gas-drive-water two-phase flow, followed by effective permeability recovery after most water was expelled from the samples, as indicated by the red circles in However, for the “1.5 MPa after gas” scenario of Sample 2, the permeability ratio dropped significantly (from 0.118 to 0.085) without noticeable bouncing back, as shown in the green circle in Regarding the scenarios after gas injection, by reducing the pressure difference, the permeability experienced step-like drop due to the reverse procedure of phenomenon (2), which was the closure of cleats. When the flow direction was reversed, a surge in permeability ratio is observed (from 0.034 to 0.043), as indicated by the yellow arrow in Although theoretically the discharge of coal fines from the coal samples can bring up the permeability, according to the coal fines production data and the permeability evolution, more volume of coal fines production did not necessarily result in permeability improvement; on the contrary, more fines output was often associated with permeability declines. This was because with more coal fines production, the phenomenon of fines entrapment was also a matter of concern, which took the dominant role as explained earlier in this section. A self-designed core flooding experimental rig was built to examine the coal fines induced permeability variations. Two cubic coal samples were tested under different pressures and flow regimes and the corresponding analysis was conducted on coal fines production (total volume and particle size distribution) and the corresponding permeability variations. The following main conclusions were drawn: Coal fines generation and migration are the dominant cause for the rapid reduction of coal permeability. The deposition and plugging of coal fines result in permeability loss; the removal of coal fines from the samples contributes to slight permeability enhancement; while the redistribution of coal fines give rise to permeability fluctuations. The coal fines volumetric production is proportional to the third power of flow velocity once the flow paths for coal fines are well established. The critical size coincides very well with the total volume of coal fines. Primary water flushing witnesses the most severe permeability damage due to coal fines generation and migration, the transition from single-phase gas flow to water-drive-gas flow lead to abrupt permeability loss, and pauses in the experiments introduce permeability drop because of coal fines settlement. It was also observed that the coal fines behaviours become negligible in single-phase gas flow. The coal sample with narrower and less connected cleating system causes more coal fines behaviours (i.e. entrapment, detachment and redistribution). This results in significant permeability fluctuations with general decreasing trend. Tortuosity of cleats can enhance the deterioration in permeability by coal fines behaviours. These experimental results suggest that surfactant can be added to the reservoir through fracturing fluids to disperse coal fines, which makes it easier for water to flush small coal fines out, alleviating deposition and clogging induced permeability drop. During the early dewatering stage, the BHP should be properly controlled to reduce the drop speed of the dynamic fluid level. On the contrary, during the stable gas production phase, when only single-phase gas flow takes place, the BHP can be lowered rapidly to achieve higher gas productivity. Moreover, refraining from frequent well shut-in can ease coal fines damage towards the permeability as well. This work was partially supported by the top-up scholarship from