The present investigation is a prospective study comparing the use of locked plates and classic double plates for the repair of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. Eighty-four patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures were treated with plate fixation by either a locked plate (Less Invasive Stabilization System, LISS) or classic double plates (DP). All patients were followed for a minimum of 24 months. Outcomes were assessed by recording the surgical experience with each approach, post-operative complications and improvements in knee function as measured by the Hospital for Special Surgery (HSS) score. For all patients, no differences in the mechanisms of injury, fracture type, open fracture grade, mean age, gender distribution, associated medical conditions, pre-surgical stay, surgical time, bony union rate or radiographic healing times were observed between the two groups. Also, the HSS score and incidences of infection, seroma, hematoma, deep venous thrombosis, loss of reduction, loss of alignment, hardware failure and overall post-operative complications were all similar in both groups (P
                     >0.05). Wound size and blood loss were significantly less in the LISS group than in the DP group (both P
                     <0.05). A significantly higher incidence of post-operative malalignment of the proximal tibia (P
                     =0.041) and a trend toward significance of a higher incidence of symptomatic hardware irritation (P
                     =0.057) were observed in the LISS group compared to the DP group. In conclusion, LISS provides an alternative treatment for bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, but it may not replace the conventional two-incision double plating technique as the standard of care.The operative treatment of bicondylar fractures of tibial plateau remains a challenge to even the most experienced surgeons. The management of patients with tibial plateau fractures is complicated by metaphyseal and articular comminution and the frequent occurrence of associated soft tissue injuries This prospective study was designed to compare the clinical outcomes of DP and LISS for the repair of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. From April 2003 to April 2005, 138 consecutive patients with bicondylar tibial plateau fractures (AO/OTA type C) were operatively treated in our orthopaedic department. Inclusion criteria for this study were: (1) acute and unilateral fractures; (2) patients with the ability to walk without any assistance before injury. Exclusion criteria for this study were: (1) old fractures (definitive surgery more than 3 weeks after the injury) and pathological fractures; (2) severe open fractures (Gustilo IIIB and IIIC); (3) concomitant ipsilateral femoral fractures; (4) patients requiring intensive care or requiring transfer to other departments for treatment. Ninety-six patients who met these criteria were randomly divided into two groups, based on the method of treatment. Twelve patients were subsequently excluded for various reasons (1 death, 3 co-morbid psychological disorders and 8 losts to follow-up). After patients were cleared for admission into the study, the objectives of the study and the randomisation were explained to them and an informed consent was signed. No patient refused randomization, which was accomplished with use of computer-generated random numbers. All patients were treated by the same team of surgeons who had no preference for one particular method of fixation. Patients with open wounds underwent surgical debridement within 8 h of injury, subsequently received tetanus prophylaxis and intravenous antibiotics. All patients were managed with transcalcaneal skeletal traction for adequate time to allow compromised soft tissue healing. Patients in the DP group were treated with dual plate fixation (an anterolateral T or L-shaped buttress plate plus a posteromedial limited contact dynamic compression plate) (Wujin Medical Limited, Changzhou City, PR China) through two surgical exposures (an anterolateral exposure plus a separate posteromedial exposure). The remaining patients were treated with single LISS (five or nine holes, Synthes, Shanghai) through an anterolateral exposure according to the standard procedure described by AO/ASIF. All patients had a similar post-operative regimen and follow-up was obtained at regular intervals for at least 24 months. Range-of-motion exercises and use of a continuous-passive-motion device were started with the supervision of a physical therapist once the incisions were sealed and dry. A hinged brace was used for 12–16 weeks if the ACL was injured. The patients were instructed to remain non-weight-bearing for a minimum of 12 weeks. During the follow-up period, fracture healing time and post-operative complications were recorded. Plain films during the immediate post-operative and subsequent follow-up period were reviewed for all patients. Knee function evaluation was performed at 12 months and 24 months according to HSS scores In this study, malreduction of articular surface was defined as an intra-articular step-off of at least 2 mm measured on scaled radiographs. Alignment of the proximal tibia was determined by measuring the TPA (tibial plateau angle, the medial angle between the tangential line and anatomical axis of the tibia) on anteroposterior radiographs and the PSA (posterior slope angle, the angle between the tangential line of medial plateau and the perpendicular line of the anterior tibial cortex) on lateral radiographs. TPA A prestudy power analysis suggested that, to have an 80% chance of detecting a 25% difference between the HSS scores in the groups (with an alpha value of 0.05), approximately forty patients would be required in each group. A chi-squared test was used for categorical variables between the two groups, such as gender, complication rate, etc. A traditional Pearson chi-squared test was used when statistical conditions were met. A Student's Both groups were similar in the mechanisms of injury, fracture type, open fracture grade, mean age, gender distribution and associated medical conditions ( There was no statistically significant difference in pre-surgical stay or surgical time between the two groups ( Complications encountered in the post-operative period are listed in At 1 and 2 years post-operatively, there were no statistically significant differences in HSS scores between the two groups ( The goals of operative treatment for bicondylar tibial plateau fractures are to reconstruct the congruity of the articular surface, restore normal alignment of the lower extremity and provide stable fixation to allow for early range of motion of the knee joint Soft tissue complications are a major concern in the treatment of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures with plates. The surgical approach and number of incisions are reported to have an effect on the incidence of soft tissue complications following repair of tibial plateau fractures Anatomic reduction of the articular surface and restoration of alignment of the proximal tibia during repair of bicondylar tibial plateau fractures is operatively demanding. Achievement of these goals was not as consistently reproducible as we would have hoped. Malreduction and malalignment are commonly seen clinically. With LISS fixation the overall incidence of malreduction and malalignment is reported to range from 0 In this series, the average time to radiographic healing was similar with these two techniques. Although the theoretical advantages of LISS fixation may benefit fracture healing, we did not find a statistically significant shortened healing time with LISS fixation as compared with DP fixation. We have no exact explanation for this result. Also, adequate fixation stability was achieved with both techniques, with a high rate of bony union and an acceptable rate of loss of reduction and alignment observed in both groups. The laterally applied LISS plate offers the ability to neutralize the metadiaphyseal component without the need for additional medial fixation, thereby minimizing the tendency toward late varus deformity. However, Gosling et al. Due to the large profile of LISS, there is a trend for those treated with LISS to have more problems with symptomatic irritations caused by hardware, although this trend is not statistically significant. Therefore, careful placement of LISS into optimal position should be of particular significance. Despite its randomized and prospective nature, our study has several limitations. The limited number of patients in our study is a weakness regarding statistical power. In addition, because of the participating surgeons who had little previous experience with LISS fixation, results probably were biased in favor of DP fixation. Besides, the final follow-up evaluation was only twenty-four months after the operation. It is possible that, with time, many of these patients may have posttraumatic arthritic change develop in the knee, especially since the articular reduction and alignment restoration were imperfect in some of them. It is possible, even probable, that the prevalence of degenerative change may increase with time. In conclusion, both techniques provide high union rates, acceptable complications rates as well as satisfactory knee functional recovery for bicondylar tibial plateau fractures. As an alternative treatment for bicondylar tibial plateau fractures, LISS fixation can theoretically benefit fracture healing, but this study, its advantages over traditional two-incision double plating were not as significant as we would have expected. This technique also had its inherent shortcomings which may have adverse effects on the efficacy of the treatment. Therefore, it may not replace the conventional two-incision double plating technique as the standard of care.