Previous work from our group has shown that the quality of coupling of the treatment cushion of dry head lithotripters can significantly impact the delivery of shock wave (SW) energy and stone breakage (J. Urol. 176:2706, 2006). Most dry head lithotripters have a focal distance (cushion to SW focus) designed to accommodate adult size individuals. With an adult, when fully inflated the treatment cushion is in contact with the flank of the patient. A survey of the literature indicates that a growing number of children and infants are being treated with shock wave lithotripsy. Because of the smaller size and abdominal wall thickness of these young patients the treatment cushion may not make contact with their flank when the stone being treated is in the focus of the lithotripter. Anecdotal information suggests that two approaches have been used to bridge this coupling gap in small patients: filling the gap with excess coupling gel or inserting a saline infusion bag between the cushion and patient. We tested both approaches to determine how stone comminution would be affected. U-30 model stones were placed at the focus of a Dornier Compact S in a holder with 2-mm mesh openings in a water tank. 200 SWs were then administered to each stone using PL=3 at 60 SWs/min. All large stone fragments (≥ 2-mm) retained in the holder were collected, dried and weighed to determine percent of stone breakage. Coupling conditions tested included, 1) good coupling with a thin layer of Lithoclear gel, 2) coupling with a 1 cm thick layer of Lithoclear or 3) coupling with a 1 L standard saline bag inserted in the SW path with Lithoclear gel on both surfaces. Stone fracturing was significantly reduced when coupling deviated from a thin gel layer. Average stone breakage fell by 41% when the Lithoclear layer was thick (P < 0.0001 vs standard coupling). Stone breakage fell by 51% when a saline bag was in the SW path (P < 0.0001). Stone breakage is dramatically poorer when coupling is altered to accommodate large gaps in cushion to target distance. Further research is warranted to determine why and how these offset coupling maneuvers impact SW strength.