The fabrication of mesoporous bimetallic alloys has attracted significant attention in recent years due to their higher catalytic activity and stability compared to monometallic mesoporous metals. In this work, we have utilized the soft-templated electrochemical deposition procedure by electrochemically reducing Au and Ni precursors in the presence of block copolymer micelles to form mesoporous bimetallic Au-Ni films at the appropriate applied potential. The as-prepared mesoporous Au-Ni films exhibit uniform mesopores throughout the entirety of the films without any visible cracks and good distribution of the composing elements. The Au and Ni contents in the mesoporous Au-Ni films can be conveniently controlled by adjusting the compositions of the Au and Ni precursors in the initial precursor solution, respectively. When employed as electrocatalysts for MOR, the mesoporous bimetallic Au-Ni films exhibit significantly enhanced electrocatalytic activity compared to the pure mesoporous Au film due to the synergistic effects arising from the multimetallic component and improved accessibility to the active sites as a result of the mesostructure. These findings highlight the promising potential of the as-prepared mesoporous bimetallic Au-Ni films for practical applications in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs).The electrocatalytic activity of metal-based nanocatalysts is strongly dependent on their size and morphology and these parameters can be tuned to optimize their electrocatalytic performance [ Since the discovery of the high catalytic activity of unsupported gold (Au) nanoparticles for CO oxidation, gold-based nanocatalysts have emerged as a new class of highly active catalysts [ The soft-templated electrochemical deposition method provides an effective approach for preparing uniform mesoporous bimetallic films owing to the easy control over the dimensional aspects ( Gold(III) chloride In a typical procedure, the precursor (electrolyte) was initially prepared by dissolving 5 mg of PS- Top-surface and cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were captured by using a Hitachi HR-SEM SU8000 microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental mapping was used to determine the compositions of Au and Ni in the as-deposited films. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed by employing a JEOL JEM-2100F microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The wide-angle XRD patterns of mesoporous Au-Ni films were obtained by employing a Rigaku SmartLab XRD with Cu K All electrochemical measurements were carried out by using a CHI 660EZ electrochemical workstation (CHI instruments, USA). The three-electrode system was employed in all electrochemical measurements with Pt wire as the counter electrode, Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, and the mesoporous AuNi film deposited on the Au-coated silicon (Si) substrate as the working electrode. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted in a 0.5 M H The morphological observations of the as-prepared films were performed by SEM. As shown in SEM was also employed to characterize the cross-sectional morphology of the as-synthesized mesoporous bimetallic Au-Ni films. As shown in The compositions of the mesoporous bimetallic Au-Ni films were further analyzed by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) elemental mapping. The results of EDX analysis for the mesoporous Au-Ni films are given in  Although nanostructured bimetallic Au-Ni alloys have been reported by several approaches [ The increasing global concerns regarding environmental and economic problems associated with the combustion of fossil fuels has motivated the search for clean alternative energy sources. Fuel cells, such as DMFCs have shown promise as alternative energy sources since they generate low emissions while providing high conversion efficiency [ First, CV measurements were conducted in a 0.5 M H The electrocatalytic activities of the mesoporous Au-Ni alloy films toward MOR were tested by using CV in 0.5 M KOH and 2 M CH In summary, we have successfully fabricated mesoporous bimetallic Au-Ni films with different compositions of Au and Ni through electrochemically-driven polymeric assembly approach. In this strategy, an applied potential of -0.7 V is used to drive the co-reduction of Au and Ni metal precursors and the simultaneous polymeric micelles assembly of PS- The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is supplementary data to this article: