The potential use of flotation as a remediation technique for heavy metal contaminated sediments and soils is discussed. In general, the flotation process is much less selective for heavy metals in sediments and soils compared to the results obtained in common mineral ore flotation practice. The following factors could be isolated as responsible for this different behaviour: the metal distribution over the different geochemical phases (metal partitioning), the metal distribution over the different size fractions (metal fractionation) and the presence of organic matter (humic substances). These controlling factors were illustrated by performing Denver flotation experiments on a natural canal sediment and column flotation tests on synthetic sediments.
                  It is emphasised that sequential extraction techniques can be used as a tool for determining the original metal partitioning in sediments and soils and as a result helps to select the most appropriate procedure of flotation (e.g. a phase-specific collector). A chemical pre-treatment step (e.g. sulphidisation, hydroxylation) prior to the flotation of sediments and soils can be beneficial depending on the in-situ metal partitioning and serves to transfer heavy metals, which are associated with different speciation sources (oxides, sulphides, clay minerals, organic matter, etc.), into one unique-good floatable-chemical speciation form (e.g. oxides, sulphides). The selective flotation of metal-bearing particles from fine-textured sediments and soils is very difficult and therefore a major challenge for future research is to tackle the problems related with the flotation of these fines. Organic matter, which is rather selectively flotated, has an adverse effect on the metal (sulphide) flotation selectivity due to its adsorption onto mineral surfaces.In their recent literature reviews, In this paper, we will only focuss on the (potential) use of flotation techniques to remove heavy metals from contaminated dredged sediments and excavated soils. Flotation is a physico-chemical separation technique, which introduces air bubbles in a suspension, and is widely used in mineral ore processing to separate minerals, which are commonly present in one specific chemical form (e.g. sulphide), from the tailings. The selectivity of the separation is based upon differences in the wettability between the particles in the suspension. If the natural differences in the wettability between the particles are not sufficient for their selective separation, the suspension has to be conditioned by flotation reagents that influence the hydrophobicity of the particles’ surfaces. The most important flotation reagents are (a) collectors, which adsorb on mineral surfaces, rendering them hydrophobic and facilitate bubble attachment and (b) depressants, which adsorb on mineral surfaces, rendering them hydrophilic and induce bubble detachment ( The aim of this paper is to give an overview of the use of flotation techniques in the remediation of heavy metal contaminated sediments and soils and to discuss in detail the major factors influencing the flotation selectivity of heavy metals. However, the authors are aware of the fact that (a) not all flotation practice in relation to remediation of heavy-metal contaminated sediments and soils is published in the open literature and (b) a lot of the published work is poorly described and explained. New Denver flotation experiments on a natural canal sediment and column flotation tests on synthetic sediments were performed to illustrate the most important factors controlling the metal flotation selectivity. Denver flotation experiments were made with a Denver D12 laboratory-scale flotation machine on sludge from the Gent–Terneuzen Canal (Belgium). The general characteristics of the sediment are given in A straight column with an internal diameter of 5 cm and a height of 32 cm was filled with the flotation suspension. Nitrogen gas was blown into the suspension through a glass frit in order to obtain finely dispersed gas bubbles, which migrate upward to the surface. The froth at the top of the column flowed over the edge and was collected. The froth and the rest fractions were filtered over a 0.45 μm Gelman filter prior to overnight drying at 105 °C. The metal content (Cu, Pb, Zn) in both fractions was determined by AAS (Varian, AAS-20) after acid digestion in a microwave (Milestone, MLS-1200-MEGA) ( The influence of humic acid (Aldrich) on the ZnS flotation efficiency was tested at pH 8, 9 and 10. The HA was purified with HF to extract all inorganic impurities following the procedure of The influence of purified HA (Aldrich) on the flotation selectivity of a mixture of ZnS, PbS and CuS was also tested but only at pH 8. To obtain small metal sulphide particles, 20 g of a metal sulphide was weighed inside an anoxic glove box (N Synthetic sediments were prepared by weighing 25 g of fine-grained illite clay (Silver Hill Montana, 0–50 μm) and 25 g of fine-grained sea sand (VEL, 0–200 μm) in 250 ml centrifuge cups together with 0.5 g of fine-grained ZnS (sphalerite, Cerac 99.99%), 0.5 g of fine-grained PbS (galena, Cerac 99.9%), 0.5 g of fine-grained CuS (covellite, Cerac 99.5%), 0.5 g of fine-grained FeS (pyrrhotite, Cerac 99.9%) and occasionally 0.250 g purified HA (Aldrich) was added. 200 ml of a deoxygenated solution containing 10 Samples of 0.100 g ZnS (wurtzite, Aldrich 99.99%) were weighed into centrifuge tubes and 20 ml of a deoxygenated solution containing 10 Approximately 15 g Tienen soil was weighed in a centrifuge-tube and 240 ml of a deoxygenated sodium sulphide solution (1.3394 g Na After pipetting the supernatant inside an anoxic glove box (N Heavy metals present in sediments may be distributed over different chemical forms: e.g. oxides, sulphides, adsorbed onto various solids. As a result the use of flotation techniques to remove heavy metals from contaminated sediments, is expected to be a low selective process. According to the patent of In the framework of the Development Programme for Treatment Processes for Contaminated Sediments in the Netherlands (POSW), flotation tests with finely grained sediments contaminated with heavy metals and PAH have been conducted at several levels of scale. On a laboratory scale, fractionation studies indicated that the target metals did not occur in one specific chemical form, nor were they linked to one specific grain size in the Stein harbour sediment and therefore metals were removed by a leaching-sulphide precipitation–flotation method ( A more detailed study of the different factors influencing the flotation selectivity of heavy metals from contaminated sediments is given in the work of The Denver flotation experiments were performed in similar conditioning and flotation conditions as in the work of From a comparison of As shown in Surprisingly, also a good correspondence of the heavy metal concentrating factors with the concentrating factor of the organic matter (Walkley–Black) was obtained ( Since the organic matter was only a minor sink for Cd, Cu, Pb and Zn in the sediment according to a partitioning study based on sequential extraction procedures in anoxic conditions ( The lowering in the ZnS flotation selectivity can be ascribed to the adsorption of humic acid onto ZnS (wurtzite). This is withdrawn from the results of a separate humic acid adsorption study onto ZnS, which indicate that, at a gift of 1% Aldrich HA, HA adsorption is significant in the pH range between 7 and 10. The HA adsorption onto ZnS has its lowest value at pH 10 ( Further column flotation tests using kerosene collector or sulphide-specific xanthate collectors (potassium ethyl xanthate and sodium isopropyl xanthate) were performed at low background electrolyte concentrations on synthetic sediments (pH 8) containing 0.5% HA. In comparison with the former column flotation experiments with ZnS (wurtzite), a mixture of sphalerite (ZnS), galena (PbS) and covellite (CuS) was used. All metal concentrating factors decreased in the presence of HA independent of the used collector ( According to    A measurement for the selectivity of the flotation process studied by In order to circumvent the problem of zinc partitioning over different soil geochemical phases, Upon sulphidisation prior to flotation, only in a few flotation conditions, an enhancement of the zinc flotation selectivity (higher slope) was obtained compared to absence of pre-treatment. The best flotation result after sulphidisation pre-treatment (slope: 4.68) is indicated by a triangle in  The flotation behaviour of the sulphidised soil was investigated at pH 8–9 in a laboratory-scale Denver flotation cell using kerosene or potassium ethyl xanthate as collecting agents at a high background electrolyte concentration of 0.1 M NaHCO Recent experiments based on soil fractionation after sulphidisation pre-treatment of the soil may shed some light on the third reason for the observed low selectivity in The potential use of flotation as a remediation technique for heavy metal contaminated sediments and soils has been discussed. In general, the flotation process is much less selective for heavy metals in sediments and soils compared to the results obtained in common mineral ore flotation practice. The following factors could be isolated as responsible for this different behaviour: the metal partitioning over the different geochemical phases (metal partitioning), the metal distribution over the different size fractions (metal fractionation). It is emphasised in this overview paper that sequential extraction techniques can be used as a tool for determining the original metal partitioning in sediments and soils and as a result helps to select the most appropriate procedure of flotation. For example, for cases where the metals are mainly present as metal sulphides (e.g. sulphidic sediments) or associated with the oxidic and/or organic fraction (soils), a choice of a phase-specific collecting agent is necessary. A chemical pre-treatment step prior to flotation of sediments and soils can be beneficial depending on the in-situ metal partitioning and serves to transfer heavy metals, which are associated with different speciation sources (oxides, clay minerals, organic matter, etc.), into one unique-good floatable-chemical speciation form (e.g. oxides, sulphides). The selective flotation of metal-bearing particles from the particle size fraction <10 μm causes problem in the most frequently used mechanical flotation cells due to phenomena like entrainment and entrapment but also due to the large surface areas of the fine hydrophilic gangue particles, which lead to excessive reagent adsorption ( When flotation is the only remediation technique, a major factor influencing the floatability of metal sulphides in sulphidic sediments is the presence of large amounts of organic matter (cf. column flotation tests on synthetic sediments). In the case of non-sulphidic sediments and soils, it is also expected that the presence of organic matter (even in small amounts in soils) will have an adverse effect due to its adsorption on oxides. Therefore, in the future, it would be interesting to investigate in detail the influence of a preliminary elimination of the organic matter fraction (e.g. by scrubbing and gravity concentration, by pre-flotation) on the flotation selectivity of metal-bearing particles like metal sulphides and metal oxides. In full-scale applications, flotation is mostly combined with other physical separation techniques like hydrocyclones, screens and gravity concentrators in soil washing plants. Here, flotation is used as a refinement step for the smaller sand fraction. M. Vanthuyne thanks the IWT-Vlaanderen for awarding a research grant.