Degradation of steelmaking materials during handling causes a significant economic impact, given the higher prices achieved by lump ore in comparison to finer products. It is relevant to model the amenability of ores to degradation, since it may be used to simulate the response of ores to different sequences of handling and transportation events from mine to port. The paper presents a mechanistic model to describe degradation caused by transfers and drops of particulate materials. The model is based on damage mechanics and the distribution of fracture energies of the original particles, using data collected in impact load cell and tumbling tests. This model, which is capable of predicting the proportion of particles broken and the entire size distribution resulting from any sequence of drops, has been validated at a preliminary level using data from drop tests of a Brazilian iron ore.Ores undergo significant degradation during mining as a result of blasting, mechanical handling by shovels and crushing in order to produce a size distribution that is capable of meeting specifications that are set by customers and the market. Such degradation is particularly relevant in the case of steelmaking materials. Degradation of lump ores, such as coal, iron and manganese ores into fines is often undesirable because lumps have premium prices when compared to fines. However, the relationship between the proportion of lump ore and fines that is produced in a given processing plant is co-determined by the ore's mechanical strength and the nature of the crushing and handling processes ( A number of experimental studies have been conducted to investigate ore degradation during handling. Some of the conclusions of these studies may be summarized as: Degradation during handling results predominantly from impact from drops and, to a minor extent, also from abrasion due to gravity flow through bins ( Degradation varies with particle size, with coarser particles suffering a greater degradation effect than finer ones ( Greater fines generation is associated to handling weaker ores than tougher ones ( Impact surface influences the level of degradation upon impact, and a cushioning effect occurs as the percentage of initial fines increases (  Degradation is significantly reduced by using drop heights below about 1 to 3 Prediction of the amenability of ores to degradation is relevant, since it can be used to investigate the response of ores to different sequences of handling and transportation events from mine to port. This can be a useful tool to assess the effectiveness of measures taken to minimize degradation during handling. A number of attempts have been made in the last couple of decades to describe quantitatively this phenomenon ( The paper presents a simulation procedure that describes degradation caused by transfers and drops of the particulate material. It is based on data collected from drop weight, impact load cell tests and tumbling tests, a model from damage mechanics and the distribution of strengths in the original material. When a particle is dropped during a transfer, it may break or not. Whenever the particle does not break catastrophically (body breakage), its surface will be abraded (surface breakage) and it may accumulate crack-like damage, so that it may eventually break as the result of an impact of a comparatively low magnitude in a future drop. Modeling weakening that the particle undergoes after repeated impacts is of major importance to describe degradation during handling, and a model has been proposed to describe it using elements from damage mechanics ( The damage variable Assuming that both the particle orientation and the model parameters The initial distribution of particle fracture energies can be generally well described using the log-normal distribution ( Results of experiments used to determine the parameter In order to simulate degradation during handling, it is necessary to predict the complete size distribution of the solids after the drops, not only the proportion of material broken. This is given from a mass balance of each size fraction after an individual drop of all the particles, which is given by  The fraction of the impact energy that is captured by a particle when it drops, hitting a target, depends both on the characteristics of the particles and of the target surface. It may be estimated on the basis of Hertz contact theory considering a perfectly elastic impact, which gives ( The body breakage function The entire single-particle breakage function is then calculated on the basis of interpolating data on After each impact, the distribution of mass-specific fracture energies of the particles contained in each size class In Eq. As presented, the model is fully predictive and does not require fitting parameters to calculate the response from multiple drops. It relies on data from carefully conducted experiments in the impact load cell and also from a single drop test at different numbers of drops, besides a tumbling test. These data are obtained as follows. A sample of iron ore (itabirite) from Brazil was collected. Sample preparation consisted of sieving particles into several narrow size ranges. These size fractions were subjected to single-particle impact-breakage tests in the impact load cell and tumbling tests in order to determine the material-specific body breakage parameters required for simulation, and then to drop tests for model validation. The impact load cell consists of a long rod onto which solid-state strain gauges are attached ( Surface breakage parameters ( A summary of model parameters of the iron ore studied, determined from single-particle impact-breakage and tumbling tests, is shown in Drop tests used for model validation were conducted by dropping, individually and by hand, batches of 30 particles contained in size range 125 The effect of number of drops has been investigated from drop tests of the iron ore sample.  It has been recognized by a number of authors ( The influence of drop height on degradation is investigated in greater detail in Some authors ( A fundamental model of degradation of ores as a result of drops and transfers has been developed. It is based on principles of continuum damage mechanics and measurements of single-particle fracture energies. The model has been validated using data from repeated drops of 125–63 This model, which can be used to predict the response of different ore types within a mineral deposit to handling, requires fitting a number of material-specific parameters. However, these parameters can be fitted to data collected from controlled testing on single particles using the impact load cell and tumbling tests. Further, these same parameters are not system-specific, so that they can be used not only to simulate degradation due to handling, but also comminution in crushers and mills using state-of-the-art mechanistic models under development in the authors' laboratory. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the