Ammonium jarosite (NH4Fe3(OH)6(SO4)2) was produced by forced hydrolysis of a NH4Fe(SO4)2 solution. Upon heating of ammonium jarosite at 400°C, the IR band at 1426cm−1 corresponding to ν(N–H) vibrations almost disappeared, thus indicating decomposition of the 
                        
                           
                              
                                 NH
                              
                              4
                              +
                           
                        
                      ion. The IR bands at 1197, 1081 and 1003cm−1 can be assigned to sulphate groups in ammonium jarosite. Upon heating of ammonium jarosite at 400°C the IR bands showed positions at 1200, 1092 and 1011cm−1, with a shoulder at 1026cm−1. The FT-IR spectrum did not change by heating ammonium jarosite at 500°C. Assignations of IR bands are given. The changes in the FT-IR spectra recorded for the samples produced up to 500°C were not sufficient for the phase analysis of these samples. 57Fe Mössbauer spectroscopy was very sensitive to the phase changes in the thermal decomposition products of ammonium jarosite. Upon heating of ammonium jarosite at 400°C, the corresponding Mössbauer spectrum was deconvoluted into two doublets which were assigned to Fe(OH)SO4 and Fe2O(SO4)2. The Mössbauer spectrum recorded for the sample produced by heating of ammonium jarosite at 500°C, was deconvoluted into three doublets which were assigned to Fe2(SO4)3, Fe(OH)SO4 and Fe2O(SO4)2. Hematite (α-Fe2O3) was produced upon heating of ammonium jarosite at 600°C, as found by Mössbauer and FT-IR spectroscopies. Quantitative data obtained by deconvolution of the Mössbauer spectra are summarized.Hematite (α-Fe Precipitation of iron in the chemical form of jarosite is widely used in hydrometallurgy Tozawa and Sasaki The removal of iron by jarosite precipitation is an elegant hydrometallurgical process; however, this is not cheap technology. With a view to compensate the high cost of iron removal by jarosite precipitation, researchers and engineers focused on the utilization of jarosite precipitates as a raw material in the production of pigments. Šolc et al. In the present investigation we have focused on the monitoring of solid products formed by thermal decomposition of ammonium jarosite, in order to obtain more data about the nature of this process. The present investigation was undertaken because our preliminary findings showed that the formation of the solid products by thermal decomposition of ammonium jarosite is a process more complex than described in the literature. NH Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were recorded at room temperature (RT) using the Perkin-Elmer spectrometer (model 2000). The FT-IR spectrometer was coupled with IRDM (IR Data Manager) program to process the recorded spectra. The specimens were pressed into small discs using a spectroscopically pure KBr matrix.  Electron microscopic monitoring of the particles were performed using the Morgagni 268 and TESCAN instruments.   In order to obtain more data about the thermal decomposition products of ammonium jarosite, specifically of those which form up to 500 The results of Mössbauer analysis also shed more light on the origin of the IR band at 1003 The thermal treatment of ammonium jarosite at 600  Precipitated ammonium jarosite (NH Ammonium jarosite showed characteristic IR bands at 1426  We wish to thank Prof. N. Ljubešić and Prof. V. Bermanec for their valuable assistance in the electron microscopic work.