Aluminum–matrix composites (AMCs) have the potential to offer desirable properties suitable for numerous applications in aerospace, automobile, and military industries. In this work, Al6061/Al2O3 nanocomposites with different Al2O3 weight percentage 0.5, 1 and 1.5wt% were fabricated by the developed stir-casting process. The nanocomposites were then extruded at 550°C. Mechanical test results indicated that in as-cast state, tensile and compression strength increased while ductility decreased with increasing particle content. The extrusion process effectively caused the improvement of mechanical properties and ductility especially in the nanocomposites with high percentage of reinforcement. Moreover, fracture surface results showed that in as-cast state, composites represent interdendritic fracture mode while in extruded condition they represent a mixed mode including ductile and brittle fracture.Metal–matrix composites show enhanced mechanical properties such as hardness, Young׳s modulus, yield strength and ultimate tensile strength in comparison to their base alloy In metal–matrix composites, the extrusion process is usually used as the secondary processing. The process can lead to the breakup of particle (or whisker) agglomerates, to the reduction of porosity, and to bonding improvement between the reinforcement and matrix. All of them contribute to improving the mechanical properties of MMCs The stir-casting process is a liquid-state method for the fabrication of metal–matrix composites, in which ceramic particles (reinforcement) are mixed with a molten metal (matrix) by means of mechanical stirring In order to improve the wettability and distribution of nano-sized Al For fabrication of A6061/Al Composite specimens were fabricated by the developed stir-casting method using mechanical milling of nano-Al Before extrusion, solution heat treatment was performed on the cast bars, which were carried out at 550 To study the mechanical behavior of the composites, tension and compression tests were carried out using a Zwick 760 testing machine according to ASTM: B557M – 10 and ASTM: E9-89a, respectively. The crosshead speed was set at 3 Microscopic examination of the samples was carried out by optical and scanning electron microscopy (Models: FESEM 6300F and 7600F) and transmission electron microscopy (Model: JEM 2010). Thin foil TEM samples were prepared by cutting the longitudinal section of the deformed specimen and then cut into 3 Fractography samples were prepared by cutting the fractured section of the specimens after tensile tests. Then fracture surfaces were cleaned by ethanol solution and they were studied by SEM. The tensile test results of Al6061 and the nanocomposites in the as-cast state and in the extruded condition are shown in    Study of fracture surface in order to define the fracture mechanisms (fractography) in materials is one of the best methods for better understanding of the mechanical properties of materials. Fractography is a part of materials science describing the topography of a fractured surface formed during breakage of a material. Descriptions of characteristic features of fractures are very important for establishing the dependence between decohesion mechanism (dependent on physical and mechanical properties) and material microstructure (determined by chemical composition and production technology)  After extrusion, the fracture surface of Al6061 and the composites represent a mixed mode of fracture. In other words, while in some regions fine dimples are present indicating ductile fracture, other regions show cleaved facets representing brittle fracture ( In the extruded samples, propagation of fracture takes place by rupture mixed mode including (i) dimple rupture, (ii) inter-granular cracks and (iii) trans-granular cleavage. The same observations have been reported by other reaserchers Trans-granular cleavage fracture is usually associated with defects such as cracks, porosities, inclusions and/or second phase particles. Stress is concentrated in front of these defects causing the initiation of cracks in inclusions (Fig. It is interesting that in mixed mode fracture in nanocomposites (ductile and brittle fracture) when the crack reaches grain boundaries it stops. Then a new crack nucleus is formed in the neighboring grain. The initiated cracks propagate into grains. After a certain yielding, grains are separated and trans-granular cracking occurs (  In as-cast state, the presence of agglomerated nano-particles and porosities leads to the lowering of tensile strength and ductility ( The compression stress–strain curves and the compressive strength values of the nanocomposites in as-cast state and in extruded condition are shown in   Application of the extrusion process causes increase in strain hardening of the matrix. The strain hardening is due to the hardening of the matrix during plastic flow. It is expected that the phenomenon is influenced by dislocation density, dislocation–dislocation and dislocation-particle interaction which constrain plastic flow Al6061–Al Existence of nano-particles and application of extrusion process effectively improved the tensile properties of A6061 aluminum alloy. The main mechanism of failure of Al6061 and nanocomposites in as-cast state was interdendritic cracking. Fracture surface of extruded samples represent a mixed mode of fracture including dimples and cleavage facets. The compressive strength of both as-cast and extruded composites increased with increasing of nano-particles content.