Kimberlite commonly contains smectite minerals (such as montmorillonite and saponite), which cause fragmentation or degradation of the rock when it is exposed to water or aqueous solutions. Smectites exhibit the property of interlayer cation exchange, which influences the mechanical behaviour of the kimberlite. An investigation of the influence of K+ and Cu2+ cations on kimberlite revealed that K+ acts as a swelling clay stabilizer to limit breakdown of the kimberlite. In contrast, Cu2+ increases the extent of swelling of kimberlite and causes rapid breakdown of the rock. The kinetics of the cation exchange reactions with these two cations was investigated. Na+ is the most readily replaced cation from the kimberlite followed by Ca2+ and K+ or Mg2+ at higher cation concentrations.Kimberlite has been shown to fragment when exposed to water and aqueous solutions, if the kimberlite contains a significant amount of smectite ( The identities of the interlayer cations affect the smectite swelling behaviour: The work reported here studied the extent of cation exchange when kimberlite was exposed to aqueous solutions initially containing a single major cation. Two cations were considered, namely K The present work investigated whether cupric and potassium ions affect the swelling behaviour of the smectite within kimberlite, whether differences in kimberlite fragmentation are observed for exposure to cupric and potassium ions, respectively, and whether there are differences in the rate and equilibrium of cation exchange between kimberlite and the cation solutions. Dutoitspan and Venetia Red kimberlite samples were obtained for test work (the names refer to two different mines in South Africa). XRD and XRF (X-ray fluorescence) analyses of the samples are reported in In all cases, the kimberlite was crushed and screened to a narrow size range (−16 Cu K For potassium, 250 All X-ray diffraction measurements were performed on air-dried samples under ambient conditions, with a relative humidity of approximately 35%. As in the previously reported work ( The rate and extent of cation exchange were studied by exposing crushed kimberlite to aqueous solutions containing either Cu X-ray diffraction confirmed the strong effect of cation identity on smectite swelling. In The observed effect of potassium ions to stabilise the smectite in the mono-hydrated condition, in contrast with cupric ions causing swelling to the bi-hydrated condition, was also reflected clearly in the effects of these cations on the fragmentation behaviour of Dutoitspan kimberlite. The size distribution curves for material from the fragmentation tests, for exposure to solutions containing either of these two cations, are shown in The measured changes in solution composition during cation exchange are given in The following simple The integrated form of this equation, assuming The curve fits were used to calculate the values of Finally, the fitted values of Experimental results confirm that substantial cation exchange occurs between smectite-containing kimberlite and aqueous solutions, for solutions containing respectively potassium and cupric ions; sodium is the first cation to be replaced from the kimberlite in both cases. This exchange behaviour has a direct effect on fragmentation of the kimberlite under immersed conditions. The effect of potassium to limit kimberlite breakdown has potential application in stabilisation of mine tunnels, whereas the strong degradation effect of copper could perhaps be used to break down kimberlite without crushing. We are grateful to the De Beers mines that supplied various kimberlite ores for test work, and acknowledge De Beers for supporting this research work and for allowing publication, and Serkan Saydam and Leon Krüger for their contributions. We thank Mintek and the University of Pretoria for XRD work.