As trying to match materials to requirements becomes ever more difficult in a world where innovation is the name of the game, an Australian website offers the designer's dream…The owners of a materials information website launched in Australia just two years ago celebrated in July when AZoM served up its two millionth visitor session since its September 2001 launch (See Currently averaging more than 250 000 visitor sessions per month, AZoM is thought by many sector commentators to be the most significant materials destination on the web, providing materials information coupled with a global supplier and expert network. Asked to what he attributed AZoM.com's success, CEO Ian Birkby said: “We have simply developed a high-quality on-line materials knowledgebase that is easy to use and remains free to access.” “We provide a vast information source of materials information from our industry partners and place thousands of buyers of materials in direct contact with materials manufacturers, contract service suppliers, publishers, conference, exhibition and course organisers,” he said.  “As former materials manufacturers we are heartened to see from the reviews that many commentators view AZoM as “Comprehensive, yet easy to use, search tools are vital. Features such as ‘Ask AzoM’, our natural language search facility have also proved extremely successful, helping site visitors to find the information they need quickly and easily as if they are talking to an expert.” If an “Ask AzoM” question is not answered directly by the AZoM knowledge management system, he added, AZoM consultants ensure that and answer is found.  “We now have thousands of examples of where we have placed buyers in contact with sellers of materials and related services. We also have a greater than 97 per cent retention rate, year on year, from our customer base of materials suppliers and service providers. This is confirmation that AZoM.com delivers bottom line business benefits to the materials community.”  The first version of AZoM was put together in Sydney, Australia in April 2000. It was launched on the web in September 2001 as “the A to Z of Materials”. Ian Birkby, a materials expert and entrepreneur formerly based in the UK, and a group of materials specialists and industrialists, founded the business. The site provides free access to a wide range of materials information including metals, ceramics, polymers, composites and coatings. It has been designed specifically to suit the requirements of designers, engineers and other materials users. Cesar Molins Snr., father of the European Powder Metallurgy Association's current President — also Cesar Molins — died in Barcelona on August 11, aged 85. He was founder and President of the AMES Group of companies. Born a farmer in the Catalan Pyrenean Mountains, Snr Molins graduated as an engineer while working for an electrical utility. He went on to found Electra Molins and AMES, along with his brother Salvador and a good friend. He presided over both companies for more than 50 years. He was one of the pioneers of powder metallurgy in Spain and was awarded the EPMA's Distinguished Service Award at the Granada 1998 PM World Congress. The companies continue under the management of Cesar Molins and other members of his family who have been involved in the companies for over 20 years. Finnish — UK collaboration has resulted in the development of a laser-diffraction-based on-stream particle analyser for use in slurry applications and ideal for minerals applications. The PSI 500 developed jointly by Malvern Process Systems and Outokumpu Technology of Espoo, Finland, uses Malvern's established Insitec real-time on-line particle sizing platform, incorporated into a system that allows automatic sampling direct from the minerals processing line every 10 to 30 seconds. It includes a fully automated and highly sophisticated diluter unit that ensures delivery of appropriate sample concentrations to the optical sensor. It will be marketed exclusively by Outokumpu.