This paper describes the role of hydrophobicity and surface tension on the shear flocculation and oil agglomeration of magnesite mineral. The experimental results have demonstrated that these processes were closely correlated with the particle hydrophobicity; however, they were not lowered by increasing the surface charge due to sodium oleate adsorption. Also, higher degrees of hydrophobicity were required to achieve the maximum aggregation in the oil agglomeration of magnesite fines in comparison to its shear flocculation. On the other hand, these aggregation processes decreased depending on the decrease in the contact angle with decreasing surface tension. Eventually the shear flocculation and oil agglomeration of fine particles in the suspension did not take place below a particular value of surface tension, corresponding the critical surface tension of wetting (γ
                     c) and the critical solution surface tension (γ
                     c-a) values, respectively.Shear flocculation and oil agglomeration techniques are the two major physicochemical processes in fine particle processing. The shear flocculation is the aggregation of fine particles in a convenient stirring regime after hydrophobization by the adsorption of surfactants Similar to the flotation process, the shear flocculation and oil agglomeration techniques also utilize differences in wettability of minerals. That is, these processes are correlated with the hydrophobicity or wettability of particle surfaces In this study, the shear flocculation and oil agglomeration behaviors of magnesite mineral were investigated depending on the contact angle, surface tension and zeta potential, and the reached findings were presented comparatively. The critical surface tension of wetting ( The shear flocculation and oil agglomeration experiments were carried out using high purity magnesite (MgCO The shear flocculation experiments were carried out in a 400 The experimental procedure of the oil agglomeration experiments was similar to that of the shear flocculation tests. As different from shear flocculation tests, 5 Methanol–water solutions of different concentrations (%, by weight) were prepared and the surface tensions ( The contact angles were determined using a KSV CAM 101 contact angle goniometer. After the shear flocculation experiments, the supernatant was siphoned off and then the settled flocs were taken out by filtration and dried. Thereafter, the obtained samples were prepared as pellets with a hydraulic press. A drop of liquid was formed on the pellet surface by means of a special syringe and the resulting contact angle was determined by the goniometer. The surface tensions (  The variation of the shear flocculation and oil agglomeration of magnesite with stirring speed is shown in The shear flocculation behavior of magnesite as a function of surface tension (  The variations of shear flocculation, oil agglomeration and contact angle of magnesite in the presence of 15 The critical surface tension of wetting ( The shear flocculation and oil agglomeration of magnesite mineral have been found to closely correlate with the particle hydrophobicity or the contact angle. These processes increased with improving the hydrophobicity depending on the increase in the oleate concentration despite a simultaneous increase in the negative zeta potential of magnesite, indicating that hydrophobic interaction between the particles increased much more strongly than electrical double layer repulsion from the adsorption of the oleate ions. On the other hand, both the shear flocculation and oil agglomeration of magnesite suspension are strongly influenced by the surface tension of the suspension. The aggregation degrees in these processes decrease depending on the decrease in the contact angle with decreasing surface tension. Eventually, the shear flocculation and oil agglomeration of magnesite mineral do not take place below a particular value of surface tension, corresponding the The authors acknowledge the financial support of this study provided by Selcuk University Scientific Research Project Fund for project no. 08101010.