The non-stoichiometric sulfide mineral pyrrhotite (Fe1-xS) occurs almost ubiquitously inter-grown with the principal nickel mineral, pentlandite ((Fe,Ni)9S8). During Ni processing, pyrrhotite is generally rejected to the tailings stream by flotation to produce a low tonnage, high grade (Ni) smelter feed and reduce SO2 emissions. In this study, the effect of different pyrrhotite flotation rejection strategies (artificial oxidation and TETA: SMBS addition) are evaluated on a magnetic (Ore A) and non-magnetic (Ore B) pyrrhotite ore to determine if either may effectively depress and potentially passivate the pyrrhotite surface during flotation to produce benign tailings without compromising pentlandite recovery. For both ores, the best pyrrhotite rejection (pentlandite/pyrrhotite recovery) was obtained using TETA: SMBS. Differences in the flotation performance of the two ores are considered more a function of BMS content, liberation and ore handling rather than a difference in sulfide passivation from the inherent pyrrhotite mineralogy (magnetic vs non-magnetic pyrrhotite). Pyrrhotite passivation could possibly provide a means of rendering the tailings non-reactive and thus mitigate acid rock drainage (ARD) formation.Pyrrhotite is a sulfide mineral found in a number of ore deposits; lead–zinc, nickel–copper and platinum group elements (PGE). It has a non-stiochiometric composition, Fe In many nickel processing operations, pyrrhotite is rejected to the tailings stream by flotation. This is due to the fact that in most magmatic nickel sulfide deposits, pyrrhotite is significantly more enriched than pentlandite. Hence sending low grade Ni concentrates through to the smelter results in the inefficient use of smelter capacity and energy. Of even greater importance though is the fact that sending unwanted pyrrhotite to the smelter results in undesirable SO Due to the reactive nature of pyrrhotite, its surface is oxidized rapidly upon exposure to air ( Metal ions activate the surface of the pyrrhotite by forming complexes with the xanthate sulfide collector, thereby enhancing pyrrhotite flotation ( Apart from generating a concentrate with a higher pentlandite grade, the above-mentioned pyrrhotite depression mechanisms also have the potential of reducing any acid rock drainage (ARD) risks associated with the land disposal of the sulfide-rich tailings stream. Acid rock drainage (ARD), also referred to as acid mine drainage (AMD), is generated when sulfide minerals, such as pyrrhotite and pyrite, are oxidized on exposure to oxygen, water and sulfide oxidizing bacteria. Passivation of sulfide minerals by surface coatings, which prevent direct contact with oxygen and bacteria, has been identified as a possible means of mitigating ARD ( In this specific study, the effect of the two different pyrrhotite flotation rejection techniques, viz. artificial oxidation and TETA: SMBS addition, have been applied to both a magnetic and non-magnetic pyrrhotite-bearing nickel ore with a view to evaluating and comparing the potential for effectively depressing pyrrhotite without compromising pentlandite recovery. Two nickel sulfide (pentlandite) ores were used in this study, one containing dominantly magnetic pyrrhotite (Ore A) and the other non-magnetic pyrrhotite (Ore B). The bulk ore samples were crushed to 100% passing 3 The 1 Standard baseline flotation tests in which no depressant was added. These tests used sodium isobutyl xanthate (SBIX) as a sulfide collector at dosages of 50 Flotation tests using oxygen as a depressant. In these tests the ore slurry was sparged with air at a rate of 7 Flotation tests using TETA and SMBS, at a mass ratio of 1:4, as a depressant. Tests were carried at three different depressant dosages, viz. 125 Sub-samples of concentrate were collected after flotation periods of 2, 6, 12 and 20 Reactivity measurements were conducted prior to flotation, using a technique adapted from Photomicrographs of Ore A ( The mineralogical compositions of pyrrhotite-bearing nickel sulfide Ores A and B are summarized in Analysis of the pyrrhotite liberation and association ( The reactivity numbers obtained for Ores A and B in this study are compared with those of other nickel sulfide ores in In this study though, the focus is rather on the change in reactivity number as a result of the method of pyrrhotite depression and passivation. A comparison of reactivity numbers before and after pre-treatment with oxygen and SMBS (  In the absence of any active pyrrhotite depression, 66% pentlandite recovery was obtained for the Ore A, with 70% of the pyrrhotite rejected to the tailings ( The better recovery of pentlandite and poorer rejection of pyrrhotite in Ore B relative to Ore A could be a result of numerous factors, such as: the better sulfide liberation achieved in ore B to ore A ( In general, pyrrhotite depression with oxygen improved pentlandite recovery and pyrrhotite rejection, and hence the pentlandite–pyrrhotite separation efficiencies for both ores investigated. The rate of oxygen reduction, which is a cathodic reaction, is faster on a pentlandite surface compared to pyrrhotite ( The effectiveness of this passivation technique, particularly in terms of pyrrhotite rejection and pentlandite: pyrrhotite separation was, however, found to be highly dependent on both the oxidation (depression) and flotation periods. In the case of Ore A, an oxidation period of 5 Similarly to the results using pre-oxidation, the extent of pyrrhotite rejection increased after treatment with TETA and SMBS, particularly for the magnetic pyrrhotite-bearing ore (Ore A). The use of TETA and SMBS as pyrrhotite depressants, however, also tended to reduce pentlandite recoveries, with the relative effects on the recoveries and separation of the sulfide minerals being highly dependent on depressant dosage. TETA selectively removes nickel or copper ions which cause activation on the surface of pyrrhotite leaving hydrophilic ferric species which promote depression of pyrrhotite ( In the case of Ore A, the extent of pyrrhotite rejection was significant at all depressant dosages (⩾78%), but decreased on increasing the TETA and SMBS dosages from 125 to 350 In contrast to Ore A, using TETA and SMBS for pyrrhotite rejection and passivation of ore B (non-magnetic pyrrhotite) had a significant effect on pentlandite recovery, particularly at the lower depressant dosages. For this ore, both the recovery of pentlandite and rejection of pyrrhotite, and hence the separation of pentlandite from pyrrhotite, increased as the dosages of TETA and SMBS increased from 125 to 350 The results of this study have shown that the rejection of pyrrhotite to the tailings during flotation of nickel sulfide ores is enhanced by pre-treatment using either oxygen as a depressant or TETA and SMBS. The total pentlandite recovery and pyrrhotite rejection varied significantly for the two ores investigated and were dependent on both the conditions used for rejection (such as oxidation period and dosages of TETA and SMBS) and flotation periods. In the case of the magnetic pyrrhotite-bearing ore (Ore A), the best pyrrhotite rejection (96–100%) and selectivity (pentlandite/pyrrhotite recovery It is recommended that the degree of passivation of the pyrrhotite surfaces using artificial oxidation or TETA: SMBS addition be further investigated with a focus on the acid generating potential of the pyrrhotite-enriched flotation tailings. Recommended tests include: the standard laboratory-scale static methodologies, such as ABA and NAG tests, as well as the novel biokinetic shake flask test recently developed at the University of Cape Town ( This work is based on research supported by the South African Research Chairs Initiative (SARChI Chair in Minerals Beneficiation held by JPF) of the Department of Science and Technology and the National Research Foundation of South Africa, and by Vale INCO. Any opinion, finding, conclusion or recommendation expressed in this material is that of the authors and the NRF does not accept any liability in this regard.