In Canadian oil sands mining operations, bitumen is extracted from oil sands using the hot water extraction process, which produces tremendous amounts of tailings. Currently, these tailings are disposed of in large ponds, in which coarse particles settle out relatively quickly and fine particles remain suspended in water and settle very slowly. After years of settling, the fine particles form a stable suspension in water known as mature fine tailings (MFTs). Long-term storage of the MFT is costly and poses a major environmental liability.
                  Oil sands companies are now actively investigating different approaches to replace or reduce the use of oil sands tailings ponds. Filtration of the tailings to produce “dry tailings” for stacking is now being investigated as an alternative by a number of companies. Fast water drainage is a critical step for the filtration process. In this paper, we use simple laboratory-scale filtration tests to evaluate the filterability of the oil sands tailings and to generate a parameter that can be used in filtration scale-up. It was found that the filterability of the original coarse oil sands tailings was relatively low. However, after the fines are flocculated with the coarse particles to form uniform flocs the filterability was improved by several orders of magnitude. The results demonstrate that filtration of the flocculated coarse tailings to produce the “dry” stackable tailings may be viable.intercept from the plot of filter area (m slope from the plot of the fictitious equivalent thickness of the filter medium (kg/m the pressure applied on the top of the filter cake (Pa) specific resistance to filtration of the filter cake (m/kg) compressibility coefficient of filter cake filtration time (s) the volume of the filtrate (m the fractional solids content per unit volume of filtrate liquid, or the mass of solids cake formed per unit filtrate volume passing through (kg/m viscosity of filtrate (Pa The oil sands reserves in Northern Alberta, Canada are playing an increasingly important role in maintaining the oil supply for Canada and North America. It has been estimated that there are about 1.7 trillion barrels of bitumen in these deposits ( Significant efforts have been devoted to finding alternatives to tailings ponds. In the last decade, a number of bench-scale and pilot-scale tests were conducted to implement paste technology. In this approach, synthetic polymers were used to flocculate the fines (defined as solid particles smaller than 44 In order to find other alternatives to current methods of tailings disposal, oil sands companies are investigating for methods of dry and stackable tailings disposal. This is becoming more urgent for new oil sands mines due to increasing regulatory restrictions on building new tailings ponds and limits on pond space. Another important consideration for dry tailings disposal is related to water shortage. Water consumption is becoming a more serious issue, and therefore, maximizing the water recovery from tailings brings great benefit. One of the methods for achieving dry tailings is filtration. Filtration is one of the most traditional methods for solid–liquid separation. It has been widely used in other industries. In the mid-1990s, pilot-scale tests were conducted on a different bitumen extraction process known to Alberta's oil sands industry as the In order to investigate the feasibility of oil sands tailings filtration, we conducted a series of bench-scale filtration tests. The objective of this study was to investigate the filterability of the tailings and the effect of various factors, such as tailings composition (fines content) and flocculant addition, on filtration performance. The data generated will provide a useful reference for future pilot-scale tests and commercial implementation of the filtration technique. The filtration tests were conducted using a bench-scale pressure filtration unit. The filtration pressure was constant through the entire filtration period. Filtration models have been widely used in industry. Detailed derivation of the filtration equations can be found in many publications or chemical engineering text books ( In the denominator on the right side of Eq. At constant pressure, integration of Eq. Eq. Eq. The specific resistance to filtration, The specific resistance to filtration measures the filterability of the slurry as determined by the characteristics of the slurry. For the incompressible cake the specific resistance to filtration is independent of the pressure. This parameter has been used to assess the filterability and the filtration rate in other industries such as mining and waste treatment ( Once With calculated values of Tailings samples were obtained from the batch extraction of an oil sands ore from a Northern Alberta deposit. Bitumen was first extracted from the ore by a warm water batch extraction. In this process, the oil sands ore samples were mixed with hot water and the bitumen liberated from the sands was floated to the top by injected air bubbles. After the bitumen was removed, the tailings were allowed to settle for 2 Particle-size distributions (PSDs) of the two tailings fractions were first measured by the sieving method, using different sizes of sieves for the coarse fractions (>45 The flocculant used in this work was an anionic, high-molecular weight, polyacrylamide-based polymer. Some preliminary tests indicated that at the appropriate dosage the tailings could be flocculated effectively, producing the supernatant with less than 0.2 The polymer was supplied by commercial flocculant suppliers as dry granular particles. The polymer solution was prepared as 0.05% solution. 100 The tailings were flocculated in a 1000-cm Pressure filtration tests were conducted using a pressure filtration apparatus supplied by Micro Filtration Systems. It consists of a stainless-steel cylinder (10 The specific resistance to filtration is a measure of the resistance of the formation cake to the flow of the filtrate, and therefore, it is a measure of the filterability. The higher the resistance, the lower the filterability. It is believed that the specific resistance is inversely related to the permeability of the filter cake ( A series of oil sands tailings with different fines contents was prepared by blending the coarse tailings fraction (with 11.8% fines) and the fine tailings fraction (with 83% fines) according to the solids and fines contents of each fraction. Since the original coarse tailings and the fine tailings contained 66.7 and 8.7 It was observed that for samples with high fines contents, the filtration process was very slow; water drained out continuously through the entire filtration period. For the tailings with low fines contents (coarse tailings) the filtration was much quicker. Most water released initially in a short time period. After that, only a small fraction of water dripped out. A typical filtration curve for the tailings (with 11.8% fines) is shown in The plot of specific resistance for different tailings samples as a function of fines content in the tailings is given in The pH of the original tailings was 8.4. The filtration tests were also conducted for tailings samples at adjusted pH of 7.0 or 7.5. The values for the specific resistance for all samples are reported in The filtration rate is directly determined by the specific resistance. When investigating the filterability of the conditioned sewage sludge, It is believed that fine particles in tailings blind the filter medium and block void space in filter cake to generate high resistance to filtration. When the fine particles are flocculated or coagulated to form large flocs (aggregates) the filterability is significantly improved. Adding flocculant or filtration aid has been practiced in industry for decades. We have conducted flocculation tests for oil sands tailings at both bench and pilot scales and have generated a significant amount of information on flocculation of these tailings ( A series of flocculation and filtration tests was conducted on the tailings with various fines contents. All the filtration tests were conducted at a pressure of 150 It should be noted that typical tailings from commercial operation still contained a small fraction of bitumen. The fine tailings and coarse solids used in this work contained 0.72 and 0.24% bitumen, respectively. The residue bitumen may have some adverse effect on the filtration by blinding the filter cloth and blocking the filtration channels in cake if they are allowed to flow freely with water. However, it was observed that the residual bitumen remained in the tailings was flocculated with solids and became part of the flocs. We did not observe bitumen coating on the filter paper. The results reported here are for the tailings with such a small fraction of bitumen. The effect of higher residual bitumen content in the tailings on the filtration performance will be further studied in more detail. The calculation of specific resistance to filtration using Eq. In this work we also conducted the pressure filtration tests for selected flocculated coarse tailings samples at three different pressures, 50, 100, and 150 Moisture content (or solids content) in filter cake is another important parameter to consider for filtration operation. In order to achieve dry disposal of oil sands tailings, the filter cake must meet a certain criteria (including strength, moisture content, etc.) before the solids can be stacked up. The minimum moisture content required for disposable filter cake is also dependent on the fines content in the solids because at the same moisture content the higher the fines and clay contents in the solids the higher the yield stress they possess. The solids contents in the filter cakes from all filtration experiments were measured. As shown in  As discussed earlier, addition of flocculant to the tailings affects the filterability significantly. It is well known that the dosage of flocculant impacts the flocculation process and the properties of the formed flocs. For synthetic flocculants the optimum dosage usually exists for a specific suspension sample, which is the maximum amount of polymer that the solids need for flocculation. When more than adequate flocculant is added the polymer is not completely adsorbed, larger flocs are formed with more entrapped water within the flocs, resulting in lower settling rate and sediment density. Consequently, the polymer dosage might have considerable effect on the filtration behaviour, including filtration resistance and moisture content of the cake. We selected a specific coarse tailings sample (18% fines) to study the dosage effect on filtration performance. The dosages ranged from 0 to 90 We also conducted some trial tests to investigate the function of other chemical additives on the filterability. In one of the tests with 18%-fines tailings we found that by adding 50 As discussed earlier, Eq. The earlier results already demonstrated the significant impact of the flocculation on the filtration of coarse tailings. We will demonstrate the filtration rate for two selected tailings with fines contents of 11.8 and 18%, respectively. The sample with 11.8% fines corresponds to the coarse tailings from a gravity settling vessel such as PSV. The tailings were flocculated to produce the conditioned filtration feed with about 65–70 The second tailings sample contains about 18% fines and is similar to the total oil sands tailings. For a typical average-grade oil sands the fines content in the tailings solids is about 15–20%. Based on the results obtained in this work, the total tailings could be flocculated at optimal dosage to produce the sediment (filtration feed) with about 65 The discussion above is based on an average-grade oil sands containing 15–20% fines. However, the low-grade oil sands ores typically contain above 30% or more fines in the mineral solids. It would be more challenging to filter the total tailings. Other means to process part of the fine solids separately should be considered.  Specific resistance to filtration is a useful parameter for measuring the filterability of oil sands tailings. The higher the specific resistance the lower the filterability. Fines content plays a critical role in filtering the oil sands tailings. It is impractical to filter original tailings with more than 4% fines. Only for very coarse tailings like sand (<4% fines) can the filtration be applicable. Flocculation of tailings improves the filterability significantly. For tailings with low fines content (10–20% fines) the filtration resistance is reduced three orders of magnitude by adding flocculant. Flocculation also reduces the moisture content of the filter cake. Polymer dosage was also found to have an effect on the filtration resistance and filter cake moisture content. An optimal dosage was observed. For the tailings with about 12% fines, which correspond to the sediment underflow from gravity settler such as PSV, after flocculation, the filtration resistance becomes very low and filtering for a few minutes produces a filter cake (7-cm thickness) containing about 94% solids. The filtration rate is about 5 For the tailings with 18% fines, which correspond to the total tailings from an average oil sands ore, the filtration resistance for flocculated tailings is sufficiently low so that filtration of the flocculated tailings is possible. Filtering at 50 Filtration of the coarse tailings may provide an alternative to the oil sands industry for oil sands tailings disposal. Disposal of dry stackable tailings seems achievable. The authors thank Dr. Randy Mikula's group for preparing the bulk oil sands tailings samples, Yunyin Zhu for assistance in performing the laboratory filtration tests, Michele Morin for particle size distribution measurements.