Preliminary mechanical activation of titanium, carbon black, high speed steel (HSS) and high chromium cast iron (HCCI) powder mixtures were held. These powders were used for self-propagating high temperature synthesis in wave combustion mode. It was shown, that the preliminary MA makes possible to initiate SHS in reaction mixtures with a HSS binder content up to 60 vol%. However, the MA effect is sufficiently lower, than expected, especially with HCCI. The unefficiency of MA on SHS is assumed to be connected with different binder’s mechanical properties and behaviors in milling processes.Iron binder metal matrix composites (MMC) are of great interest as functional and coating materials. Main advantages of Fe-based coatings are their relatively lower costs as well as their good environmental behavior compared to other protective coatings The most time-productive and efficient method to produce MMCs is refer to self-propagating high temperature synthesis (SHS). High enthalpy of TiC formation Powder mixtures of titanium (TPP-8 Russian trademark, <160 μm), carbon black (P-803, 0.3 μm), high-speed steel (HSS, <56 μm), high chromium cast iron (HCCI, PG-C27 Russian trademark, <56 μm) were used. The HSS powder was obtained by melt spraying method and had a specific spherical particles shape ( The HCCI powder ( The titanium powder ( The carbon black powder ( The content of titanium and carbon in the reaction mixtures corresponded to the equiatomic composition of titanium carbide as 4:1 wt%. Powder mixtures were prepared by dry mixing for 4 h. The mechanical activation of powder mixtures was carried out in a planetary mill “Activator − 2S” with a 20/1 ball/powder mass ratio or 300 g of balls to 15 g of powder mixture. The ball diameter was 6 mm. The planetary disk rotation speed was varied to receive different intensities of mechanical activation: high (960 rpm − 88g) and medium (720 rpm − 49g) load. To prevent oxidation during MA, the activator vials were filled with argon at 1–1.5 bar excess pressure. The mechanically activated powder was placed in a cylinder-shape paper container Ø 2.5 cm. The average height of the samples was 2.5 cm, and the porosity was about 60%. Synthesis were carried out in air-tight reactor in argon gas medium under 0.5 bar excess pressure. The ignition was initiated by molybdenum coil heated by electric current. WRe20-WRe5 thermocouple was placed in a hole pierced at about half the sample height. The combustion temperature was calculated as the average of 4–5 experiments. Structural studies of powders were carried out at NANOTECH Common Use Center of ISPMS SB RAS by XRD (DRON-7 diffractometer, ASTM X-ray diffraction database, PDWIN program) and scanning electron microscopy (LEO EVO 50, Zeiss, Germany). An EDX mapping was performed on powder mixtures and MA powders. The powders screen analysis was held on automatic device with accordance to ISO4497-83. Before MA of powder mixtures steel and cast iron powders were treated in planetary ball mill to compare their crushing abilities. 125–80 μm starting fractions were milled with different modes and time. The results are shown in Milling regimes for steel and cast iron powders were different. Balls and vials coating effect by HSS powder appear in high energy milling mode (88 g). So only medium milling mode (49 g) was used for HSS. There was no balls and vials coating effect with the HCCI powder. 70 wt% of HCCI powder were <25 μm after 3 min of intense MA. HSS powder with that conditions have only 10 wt% with that dispersity and reach size of∼80 μm after 5 min MA (49 g). Such a tendencies are strongly connected with powders mechanical characteristics. So, it is well known, that HCCI structure contains a lot of (Cr, Fe) MA of titanium, HSS and HCCI powder mixtures with carbon black was carried out further. As a result, the mechanocomposite granules were formed ( According to the EDX mapping results, after 4 h dry mixing a relatively fine carbon, steel and cast iron particles covered the Ti particles surface. After MA an uniform distribution of Ti, Fe and C on the particles surface occured. Mechanically activated powder mixtures were used for SHS. Powder mixture with 60 vol% HSS did not ignite without MA, and also after MA at the medium energy mode (15 min., 49 g). At high energy mode MA (10 min, 88 g), a wave combustion front stopped in the middle part of the sample. Temperatures recorded in this case differed greatly from sample to sample. Synthesis reaction of 50 vol% HSS mixture without MA was unstable. However, after medium mode MA the combustion stability was achieved and the temperature was measured with sufficient accuracy. This positive effect is referred to intensive mixing of the reaction components in MA process and simultaneous comminution of the metal powder. The both investigated mixture compositions with cast iron powder ( The preliminary MA makes possible to initiate SHS in wave combustion mode in reaction mixtures with a high metal binder content. However, it is necessary to take into account the binder powders behavior during MA process. The excessive processing of reaction mixtures (as shown at Ti + C + HCCI mixtures) with a brittle binder leads to chemical reaction inhibition. Probably, the large number of small cast iron particles in mechanocomposite, as well as the formation of TiC barrier layers after MA have negative effect on SHS. On the other hand, high-energy mode MA of titanium, carbon and HSS powders with the formation of relatively coarse mechanocomposite granules shows a noticeable positive effect due to reactive surface area increase. Thus, the MA of titanium, carbon, HSS and HCCI reaction powder mixtures allows to increase the thermally inert binder content in SHS composites up to 60 vol%, however, this effect for high content of inert additives is much weaker than expected and strongly depends on the binder mechanical properties.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The work was carried out within the framework of the