The extraction of molybdenum from high-impurity ferromolybdenum by roasting with Na2CO3 and CaO and leaching with water was studied. The results indicated that the process was an effective method to extract molybdenum from high-impurity ferromolybdenum. Under the optimum experimental conditions (CaO/Na2CO3 mole ratio of 0.76; Na2CO3 and CaO added total mole number of 0.57/100g ferromolybdenum powder; oxidation roasting at 700°C for 2h; water leaching for 2h at 98°C with liquid/solid ratio of 3:1), the extraction of molybdenum was 97.5%, and the leached rate of impurities phosphorus, arsenic and silicon were only 16.2%, 18.1% and 41.2% respectively. The addition of CaO can effectively hold back the dissolution of the impurities in the leaching, which is due to the formation of Ca3(PO4)2, Ca3(AsO4)2 and CaSiO3.Molybdenum is one of rare metals, which is widely used in metallurgical industry, petrochemical industry and so on. The principal raw material for the production of ammonium molybdate is molybdenite. In recent years, with the ceaseless exploitation of molybdenum resources and the soaring of international molybdenum prices ( The ferromolybdenum contains 8–20 The motivation for this study was the need to reduce the production costs and minimize the calcinate sticking on the furnace during the roasting. The present work investigated the oxidation roasting with Na The high-impurity ferromolybdenum used in this study was obtained from Qinghe Huanqiu Chemical Plant, of which the mesh size ranges from 10 The concentration of molybdenum was determined with ammonium thiocyanate colorimetry by spectrophotometer. Vanadium was titrated with ammonium ferrous sulfate, and sulphur was titrated with barium chloride ( A pre-determined weight of CaO and Na In the high-impurity ferromolybdenum powder, the molybdenum, iron and nickel occur as sulphides, phosphides and nickel–molybdenum alloy, in which the molybdenum cannot be leached in aqueous solution unless it is converted into oxide or molybdates. Therefore, the purpose of oxidation roasting was to turn the ferromolybdenum into oxides, sodium salts and calcium salts. To determine the consumption of alkali in the roasting, a pre-determined weight of Na The fusing point of the calcinate decreased obviously when the addition of Na To increase the calcinate softening point, keeping alkali consumption steadiness, some of the Na Thermodynamic analysis shows that the free energy changes ∆G In Moreover, the addition of CaO can affect not only the extraction of molybdenum but also the leach of the impurities phosphorus, arsenic and silicon. In order to study the role of roasting time on the extraction of molybdenum, the time was varied from 1 The effect of roasting temperature on the extraction of molybdenum was studied from 600  After oxidation roasting under optimum conditions, the formed molybdate is easily leached with water in an agitated flask. The effects of leaching time, leaching temperature and liquid/solid ratio on molybdenum extraction were then studied.  The effect of leaching temperature on molybdenum extraction is illustrated in The effect of liquid/solid ratio (mass/volume) on molybdenum extraction during water leaching was examined at 98 Under the optimum conditions, the extraction of molybdenum and vanadium was 97.5% and 70.1%, and the leaching rates of impurities phosphorus, arsenic and silicon were only 16.2%, 18.1% and 41.2% respectively, see The treatment of the high-impurity ferromolybdenum for the extraction of molybdenum can be performed in a two-step procedure consisting of an oxidation roasting and water leaching. It is proved from the experiments that it is an effective method used to extract molybdenum from high-impurity ferromolybdenum. During the oxidation roasting, all the elements containing in the ferromolybdenum turned into sodium salts, calcium salts and oxides. The Na