This study presents the applicability of differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) technique to carry out in-depth research of electro-Fenton process. To this end, the degradation of the ionic liquid p-xylene-bis(n-pyridinium bromide) was performed, and the main parameters that influence this process were also evaluated. DPV allowed monitoring the evolution of Fe(III) reduction as redox probe, enabling to examine the degradation of ionic liquid and the effect of the potential as well as main intermediates formed throughout the process. By using DPV tool, application of sequential current intensities along the electro-Fenton process was evaluated as alternative to reduce the energy consumption keeping the same efficiency. Based on the profile of the voltammetric curves and the determination of hydroxyl radicals, currents of 50 and 600 mA were chosen for testing a bi-electrical current system. Thus, a current of 600 mA was applied for 30 min followed by 50 mA for 60 min (600, 50), and vice versa (50, 600). Both trials achieved a total organic carbon (TOC) abatement around 60%, being the system (600, 50) less energy consuming (0.24 kWh g−1 TOC) than the other system (50, 600) (5.90 kWh g−1 TOC). Furthermore, chromatographic analyses of inorganic ions allowed validating the attained results. Finally, the feasibility of this bi-electrical current process to a real matrix was successfully carried out, achieving the same TOC abatement when working with synthetic solution. This fact demonstrated the potential of the bi-electrical current electro-Fenton system and its suitability for more complex matrix, as well as the potential of DPV technique to deeply study the electro-Fenton process.In recent times, the application of advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) to water/wastewater treatment has attracted great interest and popularity among the scientific community and industrial sector. AOPs constitute an interesting option to replace conventional methods, since they are versatile, possess an eco-friendly character and are amenable to automation Electrode material and current intensity are two parameters which play a key role in the effectiveness of electro-Fenton process. On the one hand, the cathode material governs the yield of H Over the years, several materials have been used as anodes for degrading organic pollutants, like boron-doped diamond (BDD) Besides that, another key parameter which influences the effectiveness of the process is the current applied, since the greater generation of HO Several procedures have been employed in this study to monitor electro-Fenton degradation, such as UV-vis spectroscopy and different chromatographic techniques (IC, GC and HPLC) in several cases in combination with mass spectrometry (MS). The main problem of all these techniques is the high analysis time and the requirement of sample pre-treatment. Conversely, electroanalytical techniques can be a good alternative to these conventional methods. These tools present various advantages, such as high sensitivity and selectivity, short analysis times and reduction in sample volume Based on previous works of our group Ionic liquid DPX and p-xylene ( Electro-Fenton experiments were performed with an initial DPX concentration of 60 µM. Before the tests, Na CV and DPV measurements were accomplished through AUTOLAB PGSTAT 30 potentiostat/galvanostat managed by the software NOVA 2.0. The electrochemical configuration was a screen-printed carbon electrode (SPCE, provided by Metrohm-DropSens), both unmodified carbon working electrode (DRP C110) and modified carbon working electrode with carboxyl functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes (DRP C110-MWCNT) with a 4 mm diameter, an Ag- With the aim of activating the electrode surface and eliminating any impurity from it, an activation and cleaning step was done before the measurements. To do this, 5 cycles by CV in 0.05 M H The electroactive compounds produced during the degradation process of DPX were followed through DPV, using Fe(III) as redox probe. The working potential window was established from + 0.8 V to – 0.6 V DPX removal was monitored by a Dionex Ultimate 300 UHPLC with a DAD detector equipped with an Accucore Benzoic acid was followed by a Merck-Hitachi HPLC fitted with a DAD detector and a Purospher RP-18 (250 × 4.6 mm, 5µm) column. A mixture of water (80%) and methanol (20%) pumped at 0.4 mL min The generation of inorganic ions produced along the electro-Fenton process was monitored by an IC chromatograph (Metrohm 792 Basic) fitted with a Metrosep A sup 4 (250 × 4 mm; Metrohm) column, a conductivity detector and an injection valve (Rheodyne). The loop was set at 20 µL. The mobile phase was a mix of 1.8 mM Na The mineralization rate of DPX was determined by TOC abatement of the solution and the measurements were made with a Shimadzu V Moreover, specific energy consumption (EC The amount of HO The effectiveness of electro-Fenton process is influenced by various parameters, including anode material and its geometry, and current applied. These parameters influence the formation of HO The trials were conducted with two different anodes, BDD and Pt, at a range of currents from 50 to 600 mA. The initial concentration of DPX was 60 µM, whereas 50 mM Na Once the removal of DPX was evaluated, it was necessary to study the effect of these parameters regarding its mineralization. The results obtained with both anodes were illustrated in Once the current applied and the anodic material affecting the electro-Fenton process have been evaluated, the next step to propose adequate analysis strategy was monitoring the DPX degradation, its intermediates and by-products. For that purpose, DPV technique was selected instead HPLC technique, since needs small volume of sample, only 50 µL, no treatment of these samples are required before analysis and improves the sensivity by discrimination of capacitive current in contrast with linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) Therefore, preliminary experiments were conducted to characterize the system by DPV. With the aim of monitoring the evolution of DPX and the possible intermediates during electro-Fenton process, the redox probe Fe Afterward, a more complete study was carried out by evaluating the effect of current through application of three currents (50, 200 and 600 mA) in the electro-Fenton process. At 50 mA, DPX was completely degraded at 120 min ( To understand the differences found in the DP voltammograms of electro-Fenton at currents mentioned above, the concentration of HO Furthermore, the absolute rate constant for the reaction between DPX and HO Based on these previous results, two bi-electrical current systems were proposed in order to save energy by selecting two currents and applying a fixed time for each one: 600 mA, 30 min + 50 mA, 60 min (600, 50) and 50 mA, 60 min + 600 mA, 30 min (50, 600). Regarding DPX ( As an example of a reaction intermediate, these systems were applied to xylene. The initial concentration tested was 60 µM, since the ratio is mol of xylene to mol of DPX once the DPX is degraded and the bonds N-C from DPX are broken (see also For a better understanding of the evolution of voltammetry curves during DPX bi-electrical current systems, the application of the treatment to oxalic acid in the presence and absence of Br Afterwards, the electro-Fenton process was applied to oxidation of oxalic acid in order to clarify what happens with the peak of this acid along the treatment. For that, the trials were carried out at 600 mA and at 50 mA. As can be seen in As Br Besides, DPX molecule has two nitrogen, so the eventually formation and evolution of the anions NO The results obtained in the monitoring of Br Finally, DPX removal by electro-Fenton process in the bi-electrical current system (600, 50) was carried out in a real matrix spiked with a known amount of DPX, in particular, tap water from Chemistry Faculty of Vigo University. In this work, DPX degradation was investigated by electro-Fenton process, as well as the DPV technique was applied to better understand this process by using modified MWCNT-SPCE as sensors. With the help of this tool and the goal of saving energy and reducing the testing time, a strategy of changing the current along the electro-Fenton process was evaluated. The following conclusions can be drawn: DPX was completely degraded and almost total mineralization was achieved by electro-Fenton process. Superior effectiveness of BDD anode than Pt anode have been demonstrated. DPV enabled the monitoring of Fe(III) reduction and its evolution along the time as redox probe, as well as the monitoring of intermediate products such as xylene and oxalic acid, accomplishing a more in-depth study of what happens over the electro-Fenton process. Based on this data and the production rate of HO It was proved the feasibility of the bi-electrical current system proposed in a real matrix, such as tap water, as well as the direct and rapid follow-up of the electro-Fenton treatment at these conditions by DPV. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research has been financially supported by the Spanish Ministry of Economy and Competitiveness (MINECO) (Projet CTM2017-87326-R), Xunta de Galicia and European Regional Development Fund (ED431C 2017/47) and ReGaLiS (ED431D 2017/06). María Arellano is grateful to Xunta de Galicia and European Social Fund (ESF) for her mobility and PhD grants.