To investigate the coseismic frictional temperature in seismogenic fault zones, we examine the characteristics of clays in the Chelungpu-fault zones with isothermal heating experiments, scanning electron microscope coupled to an energy dispersive spectrometer (SEM/EDX), and thermogravimetry analysis (TGA). In the TCDP case (Taiwan Chelungpu fault Drilling Project), three fault zones of the Chelungpu-fault system were identified at the depth of 1111m, 1153m, and 1222m (described as FZ1111, FZ1153, and FZ1222 hereafter), respectively. The clay mineral assemblages of FZ1111 show evidence of melting, and the temperature in a ~2cm band within the black gouge zone is estimated to be from 900°C to 1100°C by comparing the SEM images of in situ natural samples with those of heated materials, and the finding of no recrystallization of kaolinite-amorphous aluminosilicates-spinel in the fault samples. The clay mineral assemblages of FZ1153 suggested that kaolinite has been broken down by the thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation but chlorite has not. The clay characteristics and results of SEM/EDX and TGA constrain the faulting temperature from 500°C to 900°C, with a spatial distribution up to ~1.3m. The clay characteristics of FZ1222 indicated that clays were changed by experiencing high temperature acid fluids, instead of thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation processes, and that the temperature is localized in ~2cm and ranges from 350°C to 500°C, the lowest temperature among three fault zones. The estimates of temperature ranges, and thermal anomaly intervals among three fault zones provide important information and constraints on the physical and chemical processes, coseismic dynamic weakening mechanism, and earthquake energy budget in the future.The Chelungpu thrust fault is an active fault which slipped on 21st September 1999 with Mw7.6 near Chi-Chi in central Taiwan ( After the Chi-Chi earthquake, two shallow drillings across the Chelungpu-fault were carried out at Fengyuan (northern site; the depth of borehole is 455 In order to obtain more advanced and comprehensive physical and chemical details of the Chelungpu-fault zone, the Taiwan Chelungpu-fault Drilling Project (TCDP) was conducted in 2005. Two holes, named Hole-A and Hole-B with side-track coring, were drilled 6 Temperature plays an essential role in manipulating earthquake faulting. With frictional heating, the fault strength could be dramatically reduced because of various proposed slip weakening mechanisms, such as frictional melting ( In this study we performed isothermal heating experiments and examined some specific characteristics of clay minerals to place a better constraint on the temperature range of the Chelungpu-fault zones. We also utilize the TGA results of chlorite and kaolinite, and discuss the reactions such as thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation and spinel recrystallization to define the possible temperature range of faulting. This study is intended to provide a better understanding of the faulting temperatures of these three fault zones of the Chelungpu-fault, and also offers important information to investigate the faulting mechanism and to calculate the energy budget. A brittle fault zone can be divided into three major components: fault core, damage zone, and host rock ( Because shale- and clay-rich fault zones are weathered easily, they are typically not well preserved. On the contrary, the Taiwan Chelungpu-fault Drilling Project collects fresh materials that escaped surficial weathering for examinations of the characteristics of the PSZ of shale-rich fault ( In our study, a PANalytical X'Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer was used under the conditions of filtered CuKα (1.540 To estimate the peak temperature and melting texture during the Chi-Chi earthquake, we conducted the isothermal heating experiments (static heating steps in an oven) on the host rock and shale of the Chelungpu-fault. The shale we used is at the depth of 1015.9 Thermogravimetry analysis (TGA) of the clay samples was undertaken by using a METTLER TOLEDO (TGA/SDTA851) thermogravimetry analyzer. The initial TGA temperature for all the samples was 25 To identify the major chemical composition of chlorite, we used SEM/EDX quantitative analysis with FEI QUANTA 200 Previous XRD studies of PSZ clay minerals have suggested that the frictional temperature achieved in the Chi-Chi earthquake was at least 800 The major mineral assemblages via XRD analysis were identified as quartz, feldspar, phyllosilicate minerals, such as illite, smectite, chlorite, and kaolinite ( To understand the mineral assemblages and the average clay contents of FZ1153, fourteen powdered samples extracted from each part of fault components were examined by XRD analysis ( The XRD patterns of ethylene-glycol samples indicate that no illite/smectite minerals exist throughout the FZ1153 ( The mineral assemblages of FZ1222 were examined by XRD analysis ( Clay minerals (< In comparison with the relative clay content of the Chinshui shale, the characteristics of clay minerals in three fault zones are briefly summarized as follows: the 2 Here we cannot perform the experiments at a heating rate (e.g., 200 Our XRD results of the isothermal heating experiments are shown in Besides, the XRD patterns of heated samples in We could estimate the possible temperature of faulting through SEM observations of microstructures of heated materials, and comparing them with the natural PSZ samples. Thermogravimetry determines the temperature at which thermal reactions take place in an object when it is heated continuously to an elevated temperature, and the intensity and general characteristics of such reactions. To clearly observe the curves of thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation of clays, we used clay samples, instead of whole rocks, for identification with XRD. Of four clay samples used in this TGA study, three were American Clay Mineral Society Source Clay, The TGA results of clays illustrate characteristics of thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation with high heating rates. In the case of the clay minerals, simultaneous differential thermal analyses (SDTA) show characteristic endothermic reactions due to dehydration or thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation and to loss of crystal structure, and exothermic reactions usually due to the formation of new phases at elevated temperatures ( The thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation temperature of chlorite is dependent on crystallinity, grain size, and the most important, chemical compositions (the Fe/Mg ratio) ( Aggregates of clay minerals are present in our clay sample extracted from shale ( The SEM images described in the previous section suggest that clay minerals within ~ The various surface textures of heated material at different experimental temperatures can be used as a reference to which in situ materials of fault zones can be compared. The appearance of vesicles on the surface of heated samples is important for identifying melting occurrence via increasing temperatures. The original host rocks contain flake-shaped minerals, such as phyllosilicates, and granular-shaped minerals, such as quartz ( It is interesting to compare our results with previous studies. The results of clay mineral of Hole-B were interpreted in terms of dehydroxylation of kaolinite and dehydration of interlayer water, dehydroxylation, and illitization of smectite occurred during coseismic frictional heating ( On the other hand, it seems that the illitization of smectite did not occur in Hole-A of TCDP. The reaction of smectite to illite in sedimentary basins is well documented and considered a classic reaction of clastic diagenesis ( The clay results of XRD show that the disappearance of kaolinite was located in a relatively wider interval ~ Additionally, we discuss more details about chlorite with our results of SEM/EDX, TGA, and several previous studies to estimate the temperature range of thermal dehydroxylation of chlorite in the fault zone. Moreover, analysis of individual and collective reflections of chlorite XRD pattern as shown by Thermal decomposition/dehydroxylation of kaolinite and chlorite mentioned above were all conducted at 1 Furthermore, the XRD results of isothermal heating experiments are showing that total thermal dehydroxylation of chlorite occurs at T In contrast to FZ1111 and FZ1153, FZ1222 seems to have no obvious clay anomalies of lower clay mineral percentage and clay dehydroxylation driven by large frictional heat ( In this study, we utilize the breakdown temperature of clay minerals to estimate the peak temperature in coseismic events. However, the fault surfaces were not only heated, but they are also rubbed and grinded during frictional sliding in the same time. Rubbing induces tribochemical reactions which include mechanically and thermally activated reactions. Tribochemical reactions result in the formation of new compounds and trigger dehydroxylation and dehydration reactions in the case of clays, and they also induce different reaction mechanisms. It suggests that tribochemical reactions may occur at lower activation energies (and thus their kinetics is more efficient at a given temperature) than thermo-chemical reactions ( The temperatures among three fault zones of the Chelungpu-fault estimated from the characteristics of clay minerals and implications are provided, and they are summarized as follow: (1) temperature range of FZ1111 was from 900 We thank two anonymous reviewers for their many positive and constructive comments, and we also thank Chief Editor Hans Thybo for editing this paper and giving valuable comments. We thank the working group of TCDP, including the drilling company FangYu and WanDa, the on-site assistants and participating students from NTU and NCU. We also thank M.C. Liu for English polishing. We thank H. C. Shiao for offering XRD standard data. This research was supported by the