Purpose
                  Reduction and fixation in femoral neck fracture in young patients have a problem of nonunion, requiring additional procedures like valgus osteotomy; but fixation devices are technically difficult for inexperienced surgeons. We aims to assess the results of valgus osteotomy in femoral neck fracture in our setup.
               
                  Methods
                  We reported a series of 20 patients of higher Pauwel's angled fracture of femoral neck fracture presenting late wherein valgus osteotomy was added to reduction fixation which was secured with a commonly available 135° dynamic hip screw and plate.
               
                  Results
                  Femoral neck fractures united in 16 patients (80%). Excellent to good results (Harris hip score >80) were seen in 70% patients. Angle of correction of preoperative Pauwels has been changed from 68.3 to 34.3.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The 135° dynamic hip screw and plate provides rigid internal fixation after valgus osteotomy and being a more familiar fixation device simplifies the procedure with good results.Femoral neck fracture continues to be regarded as the “unsolved fracture”. Fixed angle DHS (used for intertrochanteric fractures) is a commonly used implant and familiar to all practising orthopod. We planned the osteotomy fixation using this readily available implant in our study. We share the outcomes of our valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy and fixation by DHS & plate in late presenting femoral neck fracture. Ours is a pilot project as part of large study in order to assess the results of valgus osteotomy in femoral neck fracture in our setup. This study was carried out at a tertiary teaching hospital from June 2010 to June 2012. The study was approved by the ethical committee of our institution, and all patients gave informed consent. Patients with intra capsular femoral neck fracture >3 weeks old, Garden type III/IV fractures, Pauwels type II/III fracture line and those with acceptable reduction (closed/open) on fracture table were selected for the procedure. Elderly patients (age >60), patients having preexisting diseases in same/opposite hip or having medical co-morbidities, those failing to get acceptable reduction and those having signs of avascularity on X-ray were excluded from the study. A detailed history was taken. Assessment of the patient's pre-injury ambulatory status and cognitive function was done. The degree of shortening and deformity of lower extremity was noted. An anteroposterior radiograph of the pelvis with 20° internal rotation at hips and a lateral view of the involved side were taken to assess angulations, displacement of fragments, to note posterior comminution and avascularity of femur head. All fractures were classified based on fracture location, Pauwels and Garden's classification. The inclination of fracture line to horizontal (line touching the roofs of acetabulum) is the Pauwels' angle or “shear angle”. Pauwels' optimal angle is usually between 20° and 25° which is the angle where the compressive force will be at a right angle. Thus the goal of osteotomy was to achieve a final Pauwels angle of 20° to 25° ( Under spinal anesthesia patient was laid supine on orthopedic fracture. An attempt of closed reduction of fracture tried by Whitman's method or Leadbetter's method was made failing which a formal open reduction through Watson Jones approach was done. Under fluoroscopy DHS guide wire was inserted at predetermined angle approximately 2 cm above the proposed osteotomy level aiming the centre or infero-medial quadrant of femoral head. A 6.5 cancellous screw was inserted over another wire placed superiorly in the femoral head after placement of first guide wire for hip screw. Appropriate DHS was inserted. The side plate now stands away from the femoral shaft, making an angle equal to the desired osteotomy. A lateral closed wedge osteotomy is performed. The upper cut of the osteotomy is transverse 2 cm below the hip screw ( Quadriceps drill & ankle pump exercises were initiated as soon as patients tolerated. Patients were allowed to sit up and gradual mobilization as partial weight bearing begun. Full weight bearing was allowed after complete union of osteotomy site. Functions were evaluated using modified Harris hip score four weeks, 3 months, 6 months and final at 12 months. Union, viability of the head and implant cut-out was studied in the radiographs. Union was defined as trabeculations across fracture or osteotomy site. We got 20 patients, of which there were 15 males and 5 female. Out of the 20 patients, there were 2 sub-capitals, 13 trans-cervical and 5 basal neck fractures. Pauwels III was measured in 9 patients (45%) and II in 11 (55%). The average time interval between trauma and operation was 12.2 weeks with a minimum of 6 weeks and maximum of 20 weeks (<10 weeks in 6, 10–15 weeks in 9 and 15–20 weeks in 5 patients). 17 (85%) were operated within 2 h and only 3 (15%) took more than 2 h for surgery. Fracture union was achieved in all but 4 patients (80%). Time to fracture union ranged from 16 to 28 weeks with mean of 19.94 weeks. Healing of the osteotomy site was also complete (100%) from 8 to 12 weeks with mean of 10.35 weeks without any significant correlation between them (spearman's RHO value 0.484). The average correction of Pauwels changed was from 68.3 to 34.3. Limb length was regained in 15 patients (75%) and 5 had more than 1 cm of shortening. Functional outcome was good to excellent (Harris hip score >80) were seen in 70% patients. We got 4 nonunions, mild knee pain in 2 and persistent limp in 5 patients. However there was no case of screw cut-outs. One patient of the nonunion and 2 other patients post-union developed avascular necrosis (15%) and all six patients (30%) were scheduled for total hip arthroplasty at later date. We had no case of screw migration into the joint or implant cut-out. Nonunion of femoral neck fractures particularly in the younger age group has always been challenging to manage. The most common cause for nonunion remains a high shearing Pauwels angle at the fracture site and Pauwel recognized that nonunion of femoral neck fracture would consolidate within few months if shearing force acting on fracture site was transformed into compression forces. In the developing countries like ours late presentation is common as the fracture often remains untreated, sometimes patient's unwillingness to seek treatment but mainly due to treatment primarily by osteopaths. Some authors namely Pauwel, Muller and Sharma used the Y-shaped wedge-closing/open osteotomy In most of the case series reported in the literature on valgus osteotomy, blade plate fixation has been used, which is more technically demanding. When blade plate is compared to the DHS, there is a theoretical risk of greater chances of avascular necrosis with DHS as there is thermal necrosis and rotatory motion during reaming and intraosseous vascularity disruption due to large screw placement. The rate of fracture union (80%) in our patients is comparable to rates achieved by others by vulgarization osteotomy using the conventional double angled blade plates. Avascular necrosis (AVN) and nonunion are the most notorious complications in the late neck fractures, and although great efforts have been made in past decades, the real prognosis of the young femoral neck fractures has not been improved dramatically. Valgusization osteotomy does not increase the chances of nonunion or AVN and there are enough studies that prove it is the temporary instability after fracture which is more detrimental for vascularity of head. The limitations of this study are small sample size and short term follow-up. We have not done MRI preoperatively to access the vascularity of femoral head in planning but excluded avascularity on X-ray. Comparing studies with blade plate fixation may be helpful in finding out any significant outcome differences. In conclusion, the results are encouraging for the use of universally available simple DHS for valgus intertrochanteric osteotomy fixation in femoral neck fractures with high Pauwels angle in relatively young adult patients. Nil. The study was approved by the ethical committee of our institution, and all patients gave informed consent. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.