Over recent years, nanofiltration (NF) has been considered as an effective way to improve processing steps in metallurgical and hydrometallurgy applications dealing with mixtures of metal ions in sulphuric-acid-dominated solutions. The principal advantage of NF membranes over reverse osmosis (RO) membranes is their ability to allow for a practically free passage of acid, while metallic species, especially multi-charged species, are efficiently rejected. In general, these sulphuric solutions cover a range from strongly acidic solutions with pH below 1 up to moderately acidic solutions of pH 3. Over this range, changes in the feed acidity influence both the aqueous electrolyte solution speciation (
                        
                           S
                        
                        
                           
                              O
                           
                           
                              4
                           
                           
                              2
                              −
                           
                        
                        
                           /
                        
                        
                           HS
                        
                        
                           
                              O
                           
                           
                              4
                           
                           
                              −
                           
                        
                        
                           /
                        
                        
                           
                              H
                           
                           
                              +
                           
                        
                     ) and the membrane acid–base properties (protonation of carboxylic and amine groups). However, few studies have been published on the trans-membrane transport of inorganic species coupled to changes in their speciation as well as to the properties of the membrane phase.
                  In this study, experimental data on the sulphuric acid rejection for pH values from 1 to 3 have been obtained with an aromatic poly(piperazine)amide membrane (NF270) at various trans-membrane pressures. The results were modelled by a novel version of the Solution-Electro-Diffusion model taking into account equilibrium reactions, and a general (quasi)analytical solution was obtained for the transport of weak electrolytes of arbitrary valence type. The equilibrium weak acid reaction made the total sulphate (SO4
                     2−/HSO4
                     −) rejection decrease strongly as the fraction of single-charged hydrogen sulphate (HSO4
                     −) in the feed increased. From the modelling procedure, permeances to H+, HSO4
                     − and SO4
                     2− over the studied pH range were determined.Concentration of component i inside the membrane Concentration of component i in permeate side Ion flux Trans-membrane volume flow Membrane thickness Membrane permeability to ion i Membrane permeance to ion i Acidity constant Dimensionless position in the membrane Ion charge Equilibrium dissociation constant Dimensionless electric potential in the membrane Sulphuric acid is one of the most produced chemicals worldwide. In the past the scale of its production was even used as an indicator of industrial strength. Nowadays, sulphuric acid is still widely used in a large number of applications (e.g. mineral processing, hydrometallurgy and for pH control). In the mining industry, it is used as a leaching agent to dissolve minerals for metal extraction The use of NF for removing metal ions from acidic solutions has been previously studied Modelling of ion rejection in NF is useful for the process optimisation and scale-up. Ion transport through NF membranes has been widely described by either non-equilibrium thermodynamic models Another objective of this work is to extending the validation of the Solution-Electro-Diffusion model towards the transport of reacting species via comparison with experiment. A wide pH range was used in order to explore the effect of changes in the acid–base equilibrium of the membrane functional groups, and to evaluate the effect of incomplete acid dissociation. The experiments were carried out using an NF270 membrane in a cross-flow experimental set-up. The results of these measurements have been interpreted in terms of ionic permeances of the membrane to HSO The ion fluxes are described according to the Solution-Electro-Diffusion model. One of the assumptions of this model is that there is no coupling between solute and solvent flows inside the membrane or, in other words, reflection coefficients are assumed to be equal to one for all species. The model uses ‘virtual’ concentrations, which are defined as those in a solution that could be in thermodynamic equilibrium with an infinitely small volume inside the membrane. ‘Virtual’ concentrations satisfy the chemical-equilibrium condition with the bulk association constant. The partitioning coefficients, which quantify the ratios between the real and virtual species concentrations in the membrane (and possible changes of association constant there) are included in the ion permeances The transport of ions is: Subjected to the zero-current condition defined by Eq. Subjected to the electro-neutrality condition in the virtual solution defined by Eq. Virtual ion concentrations are not independent but related by a chemical equilibrium condition at a given constant temperature and ionic strength (  It should be stressed that the chemical reaction is subjected to charge conservation ( By using Eqs. From the chemical equilibrium condition, a relationship can be obtained between the derivatives of logarithms of concentrations of the species described by Eq. By combining the chemical equilibrium and electro-neutrality conditions (in the virtual solution) this could be obtained: Due to the chemical reaction, the trans-membrane ion fluxes of all three components are not conservative (they change across the membrane). However, owing to the reaction stoichiometry, exactly the same amount of species ‘1’ and ‘2’ is consumed (produced) at a given point inside the membrane. Therefore, the difference in their fluxes is constant and equal to the product of trans-membrane volume fluxes and difference of their concentrations in the permeate. By using this, as well as Eqs. This general expression (Eq. In principle, the integral in Eq. It is easy to see that Eqs. If it is further assumed that One can see that initially the rejection decreases strongly with increasing product of feed concentration and chemical equilibrium dissociation constant. However, starting from In this study, NF rejections of sulphuric acid at various feed acidities (concentrations) using a semi-aromatic polyamide NF membrane (NF270) were investigated experimentally. The observable rejections (R Eq. The integral in the right-hand side of Eq. The objective function (OF) (Eq. An NF membrane with active layer of semi-aromatic poly(piperazine) amide (NF270, Dow Chemical) was used. Its chemical structure is shown in Aromatic polyamide active layers prepared via interfacial polymerisation as in NF90 or ESNANF membranes (similarly to NF270) have been characterised in terms of concentration of ionisable functional groups (carboxylic (RCOOH/R–COO The experiments were carried out using sulphuric acid supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (95–97 The experimental setup was previously described Feed working solutions were kept at constant temperature (21 ± 2 Prior to the measurements, the membranes were held in deionised water overnight to remove conservation products. Then, the membrane was compacted with deionised water at 22 The system is equipped with flow meters, pressure meters, a conductivity meter (Crison GLP 31 EC), a pH meter (Crison GLP 21) and a temperature sensor, to monitor the hydrodynamic and chemical parameters. Furthermore, a data acquisition system programmed in LABVIEW® version 8.6 (Laboratory Virtual Instrumentation Engineering Workbench) was developed. Sensor calibrations were performed under the hydrodynamic conditions used in the experimental work. Aqueous solutions of H As can be seen in Total concentration of sulphuric acid in the feed solutions varied between 0.5 and 50 The trans-membrane volume flow Measured total sulphate concentrations [SO From the general expression (Eq.   The rejections of total sulphate species (SO Ion rejections can be expected to be dependent on the membrane properties, especially effective fixed charges, and on solution composition. The dependence on membrane properties is related to the ion interactions with the polymer matrix (e.g. sorption or solution of the ions into the polymer matrix) and to free functional groups (e.g. adsorption and complexation of counter-ions to the fixed charge sites of the polymer membrane matrix, which diminishes the effective fixed charge). NF270 has an isoelectric point around 3 Among various mechanisms invoked to describe the ion rejection by NF membranes, dielectric exclusion should be taken into account. It is caused by the interactions of ions with bound electric charges induced by ions at interfaces between media of different dielectric constants (aqueous solution/polymer matrix). Initially, it was common to believe that the main rejection mechanism in NF was the Donnan exclusion caused by fixed electric charges. That conclusion was based, in fact, on the only observation that double-charge anions were rejected essentially to a greater extent than were single-charge ones. However, that is characteristic of dielectric exclusion, too, and is essentially even more pronounced because the ion-exclusion free energy is proportional to the square of the ion charge (while the Donnan exclusion is linear to it). As a result, for a 1:1 (e.g. HSO Rejection values ranged from (slightly) negative up to ca. 40% for all the membranes. Generally, increase in the feed acid concentration resulted in a reduction of the rejection, as demonstrated by Diallo et al. In Both studies reveal similar behaviour, and the total sulphate/sulphuric rejection was approximately constant in the pH range from 0 (with HSO Finally, from the measured trans-membrane volume flow values (J The membrane hydraulic permeability showed a decrease with the increase of sulphuric concentration (pH decrease). Permeability value is also shown for Na The model parameters were membrane ion permeances: equal to the ion permeabilities divided by the active-layer thickness, P The ion permeance for HSO No published studies on the modelling of NF of sulphuric acid solutions at low pH values with the same membrane (NF270) could be found, so our results are compared with sulphate electrolytes in pH-neutral solutions. Permeances to sulphate for two types of strong sulphate electrolytes (Na In addition, just a few studies to determine ion permeances in NF membranes considering reactive transport have been carried out. Niewersch et al. According to the reported values, membrane permeances to ion showed a trend in the values of membrane permeances for H This experimental study of transport of sulphuric solutions within a pH range covering the ratios between The experimental data could be quantitatively interpreted by means of the Solution-Electro-Diffusion model extended to account for an equilibrium chemical reaction between the species. An analytical solution of this problem was obtained for the first time. Although information on the membrane permeances to ions has remained empirical in this study, it can, in principle, be used further for the verification of self-consistency of various mechanistic models. The availability of three ‘measurable’ quantities: the membrane permeances to these two species ( This research was supported by the Waste2Product project ( Model development included the following steps: Step 1) Formulation of the gradient potential from the zero-current flow condition ( where t Step 2) Combination of electro-neutrality condition ( Step 3) Definition of the logarithmic concentration gradient of each species in solution (Eqs. Considering the equilibrium condition Considering the electro-neutrality condition: Step 4) Definition of ion flux of component 1 and 2 (Eqs. Step 5) Taking into account that the difference of ion fluxes of 1 and 2 is conservative, a new equation is obtained (Eq.  By substituting Eq.