Al2TiO5 has been obtained by reaction sintering of precursor powders synthesized by three powder processing methods. A field activated sintering technique has been used for the process, with 100 °C/min heating rate and short holding plateaus (minutes) at the maximum temperature. SEM, XRD, and density measurements were performed after sintering.Development in the ceramic materials field has required continuous efforts to improve precursor preparation methods to yield better final products. When choosing a certain preparation method, one has always to balance the advantages and drawbacks of each precursor powder for purity, reactivity, composition control, particle size and economic aspects Its low thermal expansion properties, high thermal shock resistance and high melting point make aluminum titanate (tialite) an interesting ceramic material Among solution methods, ion flotation, or precipitate flotation (co-precipitation) and its variants (adsorption colloid flotation, electrocoagulation-flotation) One of the intrinsic problems with aluminum titanate is that its anisotropic thermal expansion on the three axes leads to high internal stresses and microcracking. It has been proved that a reduced grain size (0.5–1 μm) helped reduce the microcracking problem The use of high heating rates (typically 100–600 °C/min) in the field assisted sintering technique (FAST), with an electrical field applied have proved to have beneficial effects on synthesis and densification of this material The present work reports the results got by FAST sintering of three types of powders: (a) co-gelified alumina–titania powders, (b) mechanical mixtures of alumina and titania individual sol–gel powders, and (c) alumina–titania powders synthesized by co-precipitation. Sol–gel synthesis of co-gelified alumina–titania mixtures has been conducted from aluminum and titanium alkoxides and has been described in detail elsewhere A co-precipitation procedure (dissolved air flotation variant––DAF) was applied for poly-component systems of M Powders a, b and c were densified by FAST at maximum temperatures of 1100, 1200, and 1300 °C. The same sintering conditions, including a heating rate of 100 °C/min, and a holding time of 10 min at the maximum temperature were used for all three powders. The loose powders have been loaded and pre-pressed in a graphite punch-die set-up, which was used to hold the sample in the sintering device. The FAST experiments were done with a Spark Plasma Sintering machine (Sumitomo, Japan), working in a 3 Pa vacuum atmosphere. An electric current was applied to the punch-die assembly as a pulsed voltage (up to 6 V) and in 12/2 ms on/off cycles, with mechanical pressure of 45 MPa. The electric current heats up the graphite punch-die set by Joule heating, and heat is then transferred to the sample. The XRD analysis of the sintered ceramic samples was performed using a Scintag diffractometer XDS 200 with Cu-Kα radiation ( The grain size and general microstructure of the sintered ceramic samples were evaluated from the fracture surface of the samples, by scanning electron microscopy, performed with a field emission gun scanning electron microscope type Phillips XL FEG/SFEG.  Representative SEM micrographs of the samples sintered at 1100 °C samples ( Fine grain size in aluminum titanate has been proved to be critical in reducing the microcracking present during aluminum titanate formation. The literature reports that there is a critical grain size of 0.5–1 μm for microcracks to occur in Al Rapid heating rates (100–600 °C/min for FAST sintering) favor densification rather than grain growth in systems where the driving force for densification is lower than for grain growth, as in the case of ZnO or α-Al The small particle size of the sol–gel powders a and b (50 nm) was expected to provide an advantage for the densification behavior, because of larger surface energy, which would enhance the neck formation in the initial sintering stage. The results show that the mechanical mixing of sol–gel oxides (powder b) leads to low density aluminum titanate, despite the small particle size, 50 nm, of the starting powder. The densification process is enhanced for samples a and c. The highest final density was achieved for the field sintering of powder a, which combines the advantage of a small particle size (50 nm) with the high homogeneity offered by molecular mixing. The XRD results show complete formation of the Al The results show that reacting together aluminum and titanium precursors by the sol–gel method (powder a) allows formation, under field assisted processing, of dense, fully transformed, aluminum titanate materials at temperatures lower than 1280 °C. The mechanical mixture of sol–gel powders (powder b) does not provide enough reaction sites to enable the reaction sintering to take place at low temperatures. The influence of precursor powder on the reaction-sintering of aluminum titanate (Al Sintering precursor powder made by co-gelation that has nanometer size particles, under an applied electric field, lowered the formation temperature of Al