Using waste oil as renewable collector, flotation method was proposed to recover metal from waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs). The flotation mechanism was revealed by functional group composition, which was analyzed by infrared spectrometer (FT-IR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). Elemental analysis shows that Cu and Fe in WPCBs are mainly concentrated in 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm respectively with ideal dissociation, which is verified by SEM + EDS analysis. Waste oil from kitchen waste was purified and used as flotation collector to realize the separation of metal particles and non-metal particles. The effect of collector dosage on the flotation behavior of 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm was analyzed respectively. Flotation results show that metal content in concentrate increases with the increase of collector dosage, which is accompanied by recovery decrease. For 1–0.5 mm, concentrate with 47.77% Cu and 91.15% recovery was obtained with 8 kg/t collector. For −0.5 mm, Fe and Cu content achieved 40.01% and 8.03% respectively, with recovery of 71.99% and 91.61% when the collector dosage was 1 kg/t. The functional group composition was determined by FT-IR and the carbon-based functional group content was tested by XPS, which illustrates the adsorption of the collector on the particle surface. The physical methods proposed in this study contribute to the cleanliness of the metal recovery process and realize the resource utilization of two kinds of waste.Advances in technology have driven the development of human civilization ( The separation process of dissociated particles of WPCBs can be realized by utilizing physical properties differences between particles, which have proven to be efficient. Gravity separation ( In previous studies, the feasibility of recovering metals from WPCBs by flotation was verified. However, many scientific issues require further research, such as the floatability of 1–0.5 mm particles, the adsorption mechanism of collector and particles, and the more environmentally friendly collector. Therefore, this study was conducted on the above three issues. In order to realize the cleanliness flotation of WPCBs and reduce the dependence on traditional non-regenerative collectors, a kind of renewable collector obtained from kitchen waste was prepared and the adaptability of waste oil to flotation process of WPCBs was studied. The effect of collector dosage on flotation behavior was verified by flotation tests. In addition, functional group composition of samples was detected by FT-IT and XPS to reveal the flotation mechanism. Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are broken to dissociate different components through impact crusher and shear crusher. Meanwhile, waste oil from kitchen waste was collected and purified by precipitation, decolorization and dehydration treatment. Purified product was used as collector in subsequent reverse flotation. The design of the experiment is shown in As shown in In order to analyze the elemental distribution of different size fractions, the broken products were divided into narrow size fractions by screening tests. The aperture sizes of the sieve were 2, 1, 0.5, 0.25, 0.125, 0.074 and 0.045 mm. The element composition of each size fractions was analyzed by X-ray fluorescence spectrometry (XRF, Axios, Panalytical, Netherlands). Thus, the elements distribution can be obtained. The dissociation degree is the prerequisite for the subsequent efficient sorting. Therefore, the dissociation characteristics of the valuable components at different size fractions were analyzed by the combined application of scanning electron microscopy and spectrometers (SEM + EDS, APREO, FEI, USA). The detection process was carried out at room temperature in high vacuum mode, and WPCBs powder to be detected was sprayed with gold to improve conductivity. In order to analyze the functional groups composition of the broken products of WPCBs, FT-IR spectrums of 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm were detected. Samples to be detected were crushed to −200 meshes and dried at 90 °C for 24 h. The samples were pressed with potassium bromide (analytically pure) at 10 MPa with 1 min. Infrared spectrometer Nicolet 380 (Thermo, America) was used in this test and the spectrum was obtained between 400 cm The interface property is the decisive factor of the interaction between collector and WPCBs particles. Composition of carbon-based functional groups in WPCBs powders was analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo, USA). Binding energy was corrected by setting the C1 s peak. The content of hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups was quantitatively analyzed. In order to recover the metal from the nonmetal, flotation technology was used. The 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm of the dissociated products were respectively subjected to flotation. Lab-used single XFD Images and elemental compositions of screening products, 2–1, 1–0.5, 0.5–0.25, 0.25–0.125, 0.125–0.074, 0.074–0.045, −0.045 mm, are shown in As shown in The results of The morphology and elemental section distribution of 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm are shown in  The SEM and EDS analysis results presents in Infrared spectrum analysis results of 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm are shown in The results presented in Edible oil is a lipid substance, which contains a long carbon chain, mainly C–H, C–C bonds, and also contains C–O and C Carbon-based functional groups are caused by organic matter, including adhesives and curing agents, which can significantly change the hydrophobicity of particles. As shown in The macroscopic flotation behavior of 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm is shown in As shown in For −0.5 mm, the macroscopic flotation behavior shown in The effect of collector dosage on concentrate grade and recovery rate is shown in As shown in The effect of collector dosage on concentrate grade and recovery rate of −0.5 mm is shown in The result shown in Recovery technology of metals in WPCBs is necessary to make WPCBs a resource rather than an environmental threat. This study proposes a physical sorting technology, namely flotation approach, for metal recovery. Further, the renewable collector prepared from waste oil makes the flotation process more environmentally friendly. Elemental distribution shows effective dissociation can be achieved when the WPCBs are broken to −1 mm. Cu is mainly concentrated in 1–0.5 mm and Fe is mainly concentrated in −0.5 mm. The effect of regenerated collector dosage on flotation performance of 1–0.5 mm and −0.5 mm was analyzed. The metal content in concentrate increases with the increase of collector dosage, which is accompanied by a decrease in recovery. For 1–0.5 mm, the Cu, Si, and Fe contents in concentrate can be obtained at 47.77%, 20.91% and 3.24% with recovery of 91.15%, 48.53% and 74.67% respectively when 10 kg/t collector is used. For −0.5 mm, the concentrate with 40.01% Fe, 8.03% Cu and 9.86% Si is achieved, corresponding with 71.99%, 91.61% and 14.04% recovery when the collector dosage is 1 kg/t. The flotation mechanism was revealed by FT-IR and XPS detection. The results of functional group analysis showes that the main hydrophobic group on the particle surface is C–C/C–H, and the hydrophilic group is C–O and C  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by