Microfluidic technology reports many advantages to be used in solvent extraction, namely reduced volume of the receptor phase, ease control of the fluidynamics of both liquid phases and thus, improved process performance. This work reports the theoretical, through CFD computational simulation, and experimental analysis of a microfluidic extraction process. For this purpose, the extraction of hexavalent chromium from aqueous phases has been selected as a motivating example. First, the diffusive separation in a system with two homogeneous phases, and then its carrier-mediated facilitated transport through a water-organic interface are analysed. Experimental results fit satisfactory well to model simulations with an error less than 10% demonstrating the reliability of the developed model for both scenarios. The present work reports the two-dimensional mathematical modelling by Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) of mass transport phenomena in two different scenarios: i) molecular diffusion of the target solute in aqueous homogeneous systems (Scenario I) and, ii) its facilitated transport by a selective carrier in heterogeneous systems (Scenario II). The model is based on an Eulerian approach and includes Volume of fluid (VOF) parameters. VOF formulation relies on the assumption of no interpenetrating fluids and the volume fraction of each phase is resolved to define the position and evolution of the interface where mass transport takes place. The development of an accurate and precise model allows its application to mineral processing, where solvent extraction (SX) has been particularly reliable to extract either base metals, as reported by (Zhu et al. 2017 and Ciceri et al. 2013), precious metals, as studied by (Kriel et al. 2015), rare earth elements described by (Maruyama et al. 2003) and radioisotopes as uranium IV detailed by (Hellé et al. 2014). Microextraction runs have been performed in a Y-Y shaped microchannel of The Eulerian model, which includes Multi-Fluid volume of fluid (VOF) parameters, is governed by mass and momentum equations given by  Since concentration changes with time, ANSYS uses the Fick’s Law to model mass diffusion as detailed in   In facilitated transport, based on the selective reaction between the target specie and a selective extractant, two immiscible phases are separated by a flat interface and the unidirectional mass transfer only occurred from the aqueous to the organic phase. The chemical reaction between chromium and the selective extractant Each model also includes a precisely gridded mesh with unstructured master surfaces to increase the resolution close to the channel inlet and outlet where the fluids behaviour is unpredictable due to the geometry and the angle between the microdevice branches. (  A similar methodology was employed in Scenario II using a heterogeneous system where the aqueous chromium-based stream was contacted with an organic solution containing Shellsol D-70 as solvent and Alamine 336 as the selective extractant. Since the fluids in the heterogeneous system have different viscosity, the throughput was different for each phase in order to avoid pressure drops and get a balanced interface where mass transfer takes place. CFD post-processing tool allowed obtaining chromium contours along the micro-device in the homogeneous system simulations (Scenario I).   In this work, microfluidic solvent extraction has been experimentally analysed and mathematically modelled with CFD simulation techniques that accurately and precisely describe molecular diffusion and facilitated transport kinetics both in homogeneous and heterogeneous systems. The developed model can be extended to analogous extraction processes with different metals, rare earths, radioactive isotopes or even human cells, endotoxins or bacteria as well as with other solvents or extractant agents. Furthermore, the versatility of the model is clearly shown since it can be adapted to different micro-device geometry according to the target objective of every potential application.