The effect of grinding on the solubility of fluorapatite from the Burenkhaan deposit, Mongolia, has been studied. Mechanical activation distorts the crystalline structure and reduces the particle size, but did not result in the observation of any new crystalline phases. Mechanical treatment increases the solubility of the fluorapatite in citric acid solution from 6% to 17%, suggested to be due mainly to amorphisation of the apatite.Fluorapatite Ca The reactivity of minerals is known to be improved by grinding, the process being termed “mechanical activation”. The mechanical activation of phosphate ores can be utilized in the production of phosphorite fertilizer (  Broadening of the X-ray diffraction lines of mechanically activated phosphorite makes very difficult to detect the appearance of small amounts of tricalcium phosphate and fluorite. Therefore, in order to elucidate the mechanism by which the reactivity of mechanically activated phosphorite is increased, we have heat-treated the samples to release the stress in the crystal lattice. It is well known that most phosphate ores are insoluble in the humic acids present in soil. The agronomic effectiveness of an apatite rock depends strongly on its reactivity and the acidity of the soil, its performance being better in more acidic soils. The reactivity of apatite rocks can be expressed as their solubility in 2 Apatite (7.6 XRD measurements were carried out with monochromated Cu K    This result may reflect the agglomerated structure of the milled powders. The X-ray diffractograms of the milled samples heated at 1000 There was no evidence of the presence of tricalcium phosphate or fluorite. Since 45% of the total P The XRD patterns of the apatite sample residues after leaching with citric acid also did not show fluorite reflections (not shown here). Since fluorite, if formed, would be insoluble in citric acid, it should be present in the solid residue after leaching but was not observed. Thus, the present research suggests that the apatite is not transformed to tricalcium phosphate and fluorite by grinding and that the reason for the increased reactivity of the milled apatite is related to its amorphization. The improved reactivity of milled apatite is related to its amorphization and the resulting lattice strain. Milling may also produce an agglomerated structure. Heating the amorphized apatite results its recrystallization, but with a finer crystallite size. No transformation of the milled apatite to tricalcium phosphate and fluorite was observed in the present experiments. This research was supported by the Ministry of Agriculture and Science and Technological Foundation of Mongolia under the project “Technological investigation on the preparation of the ecologically pure activated phosphorous fertilizer from natural phosphate rock.”