Today, the fight against global warming and the coming hydrocarbon exhaustion involve a drastic increase of clean energies. These technologies resort to many minor metals which are byproduct of major metals. We will take the definition of Hagelüken and Mesker (2010, Complex Life Cycles of Precious and Special Metals. In: Edition Thomas E. Graedel, Ester van der Voet (Eds.), Strüngmann Forum Report, Linkages of Sustainability, MIT Press) to show precisely what minor metals are: “[they are] metals that have relatively low production or usage, which occur in low ore concentrations, are regarded as rare, or are not traded at major public exchanges”. We will analyze the byproduct status affecting almost each minor metal in order to determine if the link with the metal main product can involve a threat for clean technology development. This paper will also deal with the theory and implications of the relationship between the byproduct and the main-product and then check it with empirical data. Until now, byproduct metal production and its variations seem relatively independent from major metal production thanks to the non-saturation of potential supply. By 2050, photovoltaic solar development should not lead to the saturation of potential supply.Today, the development of clean energies in order to fight global warming and the coming hydrocarbon exhaustion lead to the use of wide range of metals. The consumption of an extended range of metals can be a good way to decrease the risk of supply disruption thanks to the diversification of raw material needs. However, it is interesting to note the huge amount of ferrous metals, base metals and minor metals ( We can distinguish two kind of production for this category of metals: The extraction of several minor metals in joint production in order to cover all the joint cost and the specific cost of each after the split point. These metals are named co-products and the valuation of each ensures the profitability of the project. It is the case with the rare earth elements (REEs) industry extraction and that the co-production of cobalt with copper and nickel metals. The extraction of one or several minor metals in parallel with major metals (the main product) ensures the project profitability. The minor metal is then called byproduct of the main product and it provides only an extra value to the mining project. While the co-product valuation partly determines the optimal quantity to produce, the byproduct valuation does not influence the optimal ore quantity produced. Accordingly, if the demands of the by product and the main product do not change in the same way or in the same order of magnitude then the byproduct will be rationed or overproduced. Until now, the relationship between a byproduct and its primary product in the mining industries has not been studied much ( In the second part, we will present how the theory can highlight the mining byproduct relationship to its primary product. We will see that the byproduct status depends on both metal economic valuation and its concentration in deposits. Mining producers vary the optimal joint production by following the ratio between the price and the concentration of byproduct and primary product. Next, we will assess in a third part the presence of the empirical link between different byproducts and their primary products by performing various statistical tests. A strong link would involve that the byproduct constraint is saturated and thus the minor metal availability could be endangered if its demand was to increase too quickly. On the contrary, if the byproduct production evolves with no obvious relationship with the primary production, it could indicate the presence of a production margin. Finally, we will estimate in a fourth part this potential production margin and verify if the development of thin photovoltaic panel could take up this supplementary margin and come up against the byproduct constraint. Then, we will draw our conclusions in the fifth and last part. A link between mining byproduct and its primary product implies that the byproduct production evolves depending on the needs of primary product demand. As illustrated in Obviously, the byproduct nature of a metal can change if its price was to increase too much. At a certain threshold, the price of the metal can allow the producer to extract it in co-product or primary product patterns and consequently the metal can recover positive price elasticity. Indeed, if we suppose a constraint between It is possible to have a relative decoupling of byproduct production metal and the primary production metal thanks to the recycling of scraps from previous production. These residues are also sold and exported to third-party companies which want to valorize the byproduct metal contained in them. According to However, the presence of a metal as a byproduct in the production of a major metal does not systematically lead to its valuation. There are many causes for this absence of valuation. First, most of the time, metal byproducts are not valorized and producers consider them mainly as impurities. The presence of these minor metals complicates the process of recovery of the major metal. Therefore, producers prefer to eliminate these impurities upstream or to select ores with lowest quantities of impurities. Second and on the whole, it is simply the technology and the absence of metal treatment infrastructures that prevent the recovery of minor metals ( Anyway, the observation of the past productions for byproduct and primary metals leads us to think that the availability of most minor metals is not threatened. Although the byproduct minor metals demand and production grow faster than the demand and production of primary metals, we cannot observe a drastic increase in byproduct prices. The gallium and indium productions increased by 9% and 11% per year between 1990 and 2000 and by 7% and 6% per year between 2000 and 2010. In comparison, aluminum and zinc production rose by only 2% per year between 1990 and 2000 and by 5% and 3% per year between 2000 and 2010. We are convinced that this decoupling of byproduct production from the primary production is only possible because it remains largely below the limit of potential supply. The potential supply is the quantity of byproduct metal got by the total extraction of the byproduct metal per ton of primary product metal. As for tellurium, three studies ( Until the total quantity of potential supply is saturated, the actual byproduct metal production can vary with no direct link with the primary metal production ( It remains that the availability of minor metals can be influenced – excluding their byproduct nature – by various factors like market power, booms and economics recessions, labor strikes, climatic events, political events during a short or a long period as suggested by Tilton in several of his papers ( The aim of this part is to assess the possible coordinate relationship between different primary products and their byproducts. The absence or presence of this relationship could allow us to favor either the assumption of saturated byproduct constraint or the existence of production margin. We should however note the limit of our data before starting to analyze them. Minor metals have not been studied a lot because of the absence of official stock exchange dealing with their (except for molybdenum) like the London Metal Exchange. Therefore prices of minor metals are derived mainly from over-the-counter contract between producers and consumers (industrials) and consequently opacity relative to these metal prices prevails. However, the United States Geological Survey (USGS) provides annual productions and prices for many minor metals which are approximations. We will consider the link between six byproduct primary product production relationships. The six minor metals: germanium, indium, gallium, tellurium, selenium and molybdenum are involved in several clean technologies. A first preliminary test, the sign test, ( We can also highlight this link trough the estimation of a cointegration vector by the two step method of We used the Augmented Dickey Fuller (ADF) test in order to check the order of integration of the variables. The ADF can be performed with three specifications: Deterministic trend, constant, and a unit root. Constant and unit root. A unit root. All the metal production series is stationary (see Next, we have to check the stationarity of residuals got from the regression between the byproduct production logarithm ( Coefficient We will exclude one of the two specifications possible for ECM model because we suppose that there only a one way causality, going from primary metal production to byproduct metal production. In the two cases, we can accept a cointegration relationship between the byproduct production and the primary production because the values of beta 2 are significantly different from zero and must be negative while beta 1 is also significant ( Nonetheless, given the spread of our time period, we cannot exclude structural change. The cointegration test of The Gregory–Hensen test offers the opportunity to integrate a level break in the cointegration vector between two variables. We can postulate two types of break, a break of the level constant only (a) thus a change in the level Formally, And the model with a change in the level and the slope: The second advantage of the Gregory–Hensen methodology is based on the resoluteness of the date break in an endogenous way. We do not have to suppose a break date At the end of these tests, only the molybdenum–copper and selenium–copper productions seem to vary at the same time. The other relationships do not validate this linear link, but we cannot exclude a more complex relationship between them. As for example, it could be interesting for the producers to store and destock minor metals. Once again, the nature of the data and the limited numbers of observations force us to take these outcomes with caution. Even in the situation where the byproduct metal production follows the variations of primary metal production, it has never explained more than a quarter of the byproduct production variations. This decoupling allows us to suggest that most of minor metal markets correspond to a situation where there is an actual supply lower than the potential supply. The byproduct constraint is still playing a minor role although the demand Given the importance of the potential supply, we have to assess it for each byproduct metal in order to establish whether the future demand evolution could lead us to fear a saturation of byproduct constraint and surges in their prices. The assessment of this potential supply is based on studies and reports in order to approximate an order of magnitude of the quantity of the three minor metals (tellurium, gallium, and indium). As for tellurium we took the figures provided by Next, according to Despite an extreme variability of estimation for indium concentration in zinc deposits, we will take the figures from the USGS study of However, we must remember that this reasoning is achieved with average concentrations ( The metal quantities required to produce one MW peak (MWp) of photovoltaic panel ( We have taken also several other factors to correctly assess the dynamic of future consumption of the resource and the eventual byproduct constraint ( At last, several photovoltaic technologies are available now and we can classify them into three generations. The first generation (crystalline silicone) is based on silicon and dominates today with a market share of 80% (see We will consider two scenarios (resumed in Finally, even in the worst use scenario, the growth of the photovoltaic sector should not lead to the saturation of the potential supply. Indeed, this growth should monopolize less than 40% ( To begin and when dealing with risks, we must remember that we consider the growth of one sector only and independently of what could happen in other sectors using minor metals (electronic, transportation, …). The integration of the growing needs of these other sectors could radically change the outcome. Moreover, as said previously, the analysis of past events emphasizes the growing position of China both as producer and consumer. The slowing China growth and in the same way of the slowing base metals demand could induce a significant decrease on the potential supply of minor metals On the contrary, other factors could overcome the threat of potential minor metals supply saturation. Minor metals are used in several other sectors. For example, laser diodes and Smartphones have a widespread use of gallium ( The byproduct nature of minor metals can be seen also as an opportunity because it provides the possibility for a minor metal to be produced in the cost-effective manner while ensuring an environmental balance less unfavorable. From the point of view of the producer, the co-production allows him to make economies of scope on a portion of the cost However, we may fear an escalation of minor metal prices without significant supply reaction if the recycling and the use efficiency of minor metals do not meet the demand surge. This scenario, as unlikely as it is, could occur next to the introduction of a new product, a new technology, or a policy more in favor of green technologies. In all cases, the market mechanisms should lead to high price increases due to low elasticity of the supply and demand for minor metals. We have shown that the supply is not able to react in a significant proportion due to mining inertia and byproduct constraint. The substitution effect of the demand may run but weakly because of its low price elasticity. This can be explained by the small part of the minor metal cost in the final product. We should add that the substitution of these minor metals is possible but with significant losses in the technical characteristics of the final product while the main substitution possibility for a minor metal is often another minor metal. Therefore, the price pressure on a specific minor metal market may lead to a move of demand sector on other minor metal markets allowing similar physicochemical properties. Next to such event, the geographically concentration of minor metals with a high part of China strengthens the assumption of a resource saving use for their national industries with implementation of export quotas. Faced with that, governments can play a preventive role by providing technology watch linked to this minor metals in order to forecast some eventual burst in demand. Encouragement of the collect and recycling of end-of-life product and mining wastes incorporating minor metals with economical or legal tools must also be a priority. Lastly, the research and development activities toward the use efficiency or a base metal substitution as advocated by As a conclusion, empirical facts seem to indicate a low constrained relationship between major metals and their metal byproducts (minor metals). It may be explained for a large part by the presence of a byproduct production margin and the opportunity to exploit old mining tailing. Given the available information on the potential growth of the photovoltaic sector, it should not come up against the byproduct constraint of the minor metals used. Nonetheless, this simulation scenario should not hide all economical, technical and geopolitical limits related to this issue. The minor metals economy plays on certain opacity and incomplete information is the rule (no public information, no organized market). This lack of information also underlines the interest of data production and studies carried on both minor metal changing uses and the economic mechanisms governing them. Our study brings a modest contribution to this effort. The role of the economist may consist in highlighting these mechanisms in order to limit uncertainty. On this point, modern economics have already emphasized the impact and the cost of uncertainty on economic agents. Moreover, benefits tied to minor metal economic prospective could surpass the strict interest of their sector and bring out the potential energetic dead-end in which commit countries wishing to fight global warming are committed. I would like to thank F. Lantz, C. Baumont, M-C Pichery, M-M. Quemere, F. Catier, A. Ansart, D. Le Boulch, K. Ahmoud, D. Bertin, P. Pourouchottamin, C. Pham Van Cang and D. Manceau for their helpful comments. I also appreciate the help provided by the reviewers for their suggestions.