Background
                  Total elbow arthroplasty is a treatment for unreconstructable distal humeral fractures; however, longevity of the implant remains a concern in younger, more active patients. Distal humeral hemiarthroplasty (DHH) offers an alternative with multiple advantages.
               
                  Methods
                  This is a retrospective study of 10 patients who underwent DHH for distal humeral fractures during a 4-year period (2008-2012) by a single surgeon. Patients underwent testing of range of motion, Mayo Elbow Performance Score, Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand, visual analog scale, Single Assessment Numeric Evaluation, and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons scores. Average patent age at surgery was 71.9 years (range, 56-81 years); average follow-up was 73.2 months (range, 36-96 months).
               
                  Results
                  Patients maintained improvements in Mayo Elbow Performance Scores (mean, 89.23; range, 75-100) and Disabilities of Arm, Shoulder and Hand scores (mean, 33.71; range 11.2-55.1), along with no significant decrease in range of motion compared with 1 year after surgery. Mean visual analog scale was 2.43 (range, 0-5), Single Assessment Numeric Evaluation was 74.14 (range, 50-100), and American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons score was 72.14 (range, 48.33-100). Participants had an average flexion of 128.7° (range, 95°-142°), extension deficit of 27.1° (range, 0°-45°), supination of 79.1° (range, 45°-90°), and pronation of 73.3° (range, 50°-90°). No heterotopic ossification, elbow dislocations, or subluxations were observed. Complications included 1 fracture and 1 complaint of prominent hardware. Two patients died, and 1 patient was lost to follow-up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This midterm review suggests that DHH may be an effective treatment for certain distal humeral fractures. The data suggest that elbow range of motion and functional use are maintained from comparison with short-term studies. Additional studies must be conducted to further define the role of DHH for complex fractures of the distal humerus.Distal humeral fractures are often a challenging condition to treat. The preferred method of treatment for reconstructable fractures is open reduction and internal fixation, whereas in unreconstructable fractures where there is significant fracture comminution or joint instability, total elbow arthroplasty (TEA)has been the gold standard. Distal humeral hemiarthroplasty (DHH) has existed since 1947, when Mellen and Phalen DHH has multiple potential benefits over TEA, especially in younger and more active patients. Because there is no ulnar component or polyethylene, the risk of component loosening is decreased. Despite the potential advantages of DHH over TEA, the indications for DHH are limited. Anatomic requirements for DHH include an intact and stable or reconstructable radial head and coronoid, intact or reconstructable columns, stable or reconstructable collateral ligaments, and the absence of ulnohumeral degenerative changes or trauma. A potential disadvantage of DHH is that the construction is considered unlinked, so placement of the implant must be at the correct level and orientation to restore stable joint kinematics. This study evaluated the midterm clinical outcomes of 10 patients who underwent DHH for comminuted intra-articular distal humeral fractures that were deemed unreconstructable. Our previous short-term study examined outcomes at 1 year from surgery and revealed improvements in range of motion, Mayo Elbow Performance Scores (MEPSs), and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores. This is a retrospective study of 10 patients who underwent DHH for distal humeral fractures over a 4-year period (2008-2012) by a single surgeon (J.M.I.) with fellowship training in shoulder and elbow surgery. Patients at the time of surgery underwent DHH as a US FDA off-label use. Inclusion criteria for DHH included low distal humeral fractures with comminution and poor bone quality that were deemed unreconstructable by the senior surgeon. All fractures had been classified as AO C2 or C3, based on the Orthopaedic Trauma Association Classification system, at the time of surgery. All fractures demonstrated an intact radial head and coronoid process, intact sigmoid notch cartilage, intact or reconstructable medial or lateral columns, or both, intact or repairable collateral ligaments, and an intact elbow extensor mechanism. All patients were skeletally mature and had no history of pathologic fracture or polytrauma at the time of surgery. A standard posterior approach to the elbow was used in all patients. The ulnar nerve was identified and transposed anteriorly and subcutaneously. All patients underwent olecranon osteotomy, the senior author's preferred exposure for visualization of the fracture and for preservation of the collateral ligaments. Other exposure options include the triceps-spring Bryan-Morrey approach and the triceps-split, often used with the extended lateral-sided Köcher approach. The olecranon osteotomy is indicated in the case of a substantial bone defect or acute fracture, where distal fragments may necessitate resection. The Bryan-Morrey approach provides excellent joint exposure and protects the extensor mechanism, yet is associated with the risk of lateral subluxation and weakness of the triceps. The triceps-split approach provides similar exposure quality to the Bryan-Morrey approach but risks muscular weakness due to difficulty in repairing the medial half of the triceps. One patient required bicolumnar reconstruction, which was achieved using precontoured anatomic parallel locking plates (Acumed, LLC, Hillsboro, OR, USA). The medial and lateral epicondyles were preserved to protect the origin of the collateral ligaments. DHH was performed using the Tornier Latitude system (Tornier North America, Stafford, TX, USA), with implant placement focused on recreating the flexion-extension axis and radiocapitellar relationship. The insertion of the collateral ligaments and the condyles were used to determine adequate position. The olecranon osteotomy was fixed using a 6.5-mm cannulated screw (Acumed, LLC; Patients were started on gentle range of motion exercises (active-assist) at 2 weeks postoperatively, with gentle strengthening at 6 weeks. No weight bearing restrictions were placed on the patients once strengthening was completed. According to the surgeon's preference, no routine prophylaxis against heterotopic ossification was deemed necessary. Patients were contacted retrospectively and evaluated clinically during routine follow-up. Range of motion was measured using a goniometer, and elbow strength was measured using standard clinical examination and manual muscle testing. Clinical performance was calculated by using scores on the DASH, visual analog scale (VAS), Single Assessment Numeric Evaluation (SANE), American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons (ASES) Elbow Assessment, and MEPS. Anteroposterior and lateral elbow radiographic reviews were performed at the time of follow-up to correlate radiographic results with clinical outcome. The 10 patients in the study were an average age of 71.9 years (range, 56-81 years) at time of surgery. Mean follow-up was 73.2 months (range 36-96 months). At the final follow-up, the patients maintained improvements in MEPS (mean, 89.23; range, 75-100) and DASH scores (mean, 33.71; range, 11.2-55.1), along with no significant decrease in range of motion compared with testing done at 1 year after surgery (MEPS,77.2; DASH score, 35.1; Participants had an average flexion of 128.7° (range, 95°-142°), extension deficit of 27.1° (range, 0°-45°), supination to 79.1° (range, 45°-90°), and pronation to 73.3° (range, 50°-90°), with an average total flexion-extension arc of 97°. At 1 year of follow-up, patients had an average flexion of 121°, extension deficit of 22°, pronation to 64°, and supination to 69°, with an average flexion-extension arc of 102°. All patients were nonsmokers, and all but 1 patient stated that they would have the surgery again in hindsight. All fractures were considered healed based on clinical examination, with absence of tenderness to palpation, and via radiographs. No radiographic lucencies or areas of osteolysis were visible surrounding the prosthesis, and there were no clinical or radiographic signs of superficial or deep infection or signs of chondrolysis on the radial or ulnar sides of the elbow joints. Complications were uncommon. None of the patients experienced postoperative elbow dislocation or subluxation. No heterotopic ossification was observed. Complications included 1 fracture and 1 complaint of prominent olecranon hardware. The patient with fracture sustained an intraoperative olecranon fracture that occurred during the olecranon osteotomy. This fracture was treated with a precontoured anatomic plate fixation, and the patient recovered with no sequelae from injury or treatment and no loss of range of motion. The patient with prominent olecranon hardware underwent hardware removal at 1 year from the index procedure, with no complaints thereafter. Two patients died during the follow-up period, and 1 patient was lost to follow-up. When modern DHH first came into use, there was a lack of data comparing these implants with TEA for the treatment of unreconstructable elbow fractures. Since that time, multiple recent studies have emerged suggesting that DHH may confer many advantages to TEA. A recent meta-analysis performed by Dunn et al The results of this study are consistent with current literature on DHH. Hohman et al Another recent short-term study by Werthel et al When considering elderly patients, a recent study by Burkhart et al All patients in this series but 1 were enthusiastic about their outcomes and would have had surgery again in hindsight. Interestingly, the patient who stated that she would not have had surgery in hindsight had minimal complaints of pain and had one of the best range of motion results of the cohort. Her dissatisfaction with the procedure was with the perception that she should restrict lifting to prolong the life of her prosthesis. Both patients who sustained complications from surgery reported being content with their results. The best indication for TEA remains rheumatoid arthritis. Multiple studies report on longevity of more than 15 years in patients who have undergone TEA for end-stage rheumatoid disease in the elbow. Aldridge et al Despite sustained longevity in patients who undergo TEA for rheumatoid arthritis, caution must be taken in applying these results to distal humeral fractures. Prasad et al A limitation of this study is its retrospective nature with a small cohort in a single-surgeon series, with no control group or TEA comparison group. In addition, longer-term clinical outcomes cannot be extrapolated from the current study. and no prospective study is possible currently because the prosthesis that was used in DHH is no longer available for use. This midterm review suggests that DHH may be an effective treatment for certain distal humeral fractures. The data suggest that elbow range of motion and functional use of the elbow are maintained from comparison with short-term studies. DHH provides an option with multiple advantages over TEA for patients with unreconstructable distal humeral fractures. More long-term or prospective comparative research contrasting TEA with DHH, as well as analyzing for radiographic evidence of progressive ulnar notch arthrosis, could be helpful in determining a continued role for distal humerus hemiarthroplasty. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.