Froth flotation and selective agglomeration are two techniques, which can be employed for the recovery of fine coals. Short chain volatile fatty acids (VFAs) contained in landfill-derived liquids are similar in structure to many of the organic chemicals employed in both processes. The results from laboratory investigations, based on flotation and selective agglomeration techniques, have demonstrated that VFAs can substitute for some, or all, of the commercial reagents currently used. The results of these investigations, using VFAs and landfill gas condensates, are presented, along with discussion of their potential application to fine coal recovery.In modern coal preparation practice up to 25% of the mined material may report to the −0.5 The University of Nottingham has patented the innovative concept of substituting chemical additions employed in the recovery of coal and minerals with landfill-derived liquids. Hall Selective oil agglomeration may be used as an alternative to flotation, being efficient in the formation of low ash coal agglomerates from fine coal-coating slurries. The process involves the addition of oil to a coal slurry in a high shear mixer, which promotes the formation of coal-rich agglomerates. These may then be separated from the remaining shale suspension by thickening, followed by screening. It is generally accepted that the mechanism by which this works is that the oil first becomes emulsified by the mixing action. After more prolonged mixing, collisions between coal particles and oil droplets lead to the adsorption of oil onto the coal. The oil may then bridge between coal particles, causing them to coalesce and form coal rich agglomerates The simplicity of operation and low capital cost of equipment is a major attraction of the process, but the requirement of high doses of volatile oils (such as kerosene; typically 20–30 Fatty acids are prevalent in the flotation of non-sulphide ores, while xanthates are extensively employed in the recovery of metallic sulphides Disposal of domestic waste to landfill is a long established practice. One of the problems arising from this is the discharge and subsequent treatment, of landfill-derived liquids, leachates and gas condensates. The generation of these effluents occurs as a result of infiltration of rainfall and surface waters into a landfill, coupled with the biochemical and physical breakdown of wastes. Leachate composition varies according to the stage of waste decomposition from which it is produced. Typically, leachates derived from the acetogenic stage of decomposition (1–3 years) possess a low pH and contain relatively high concentrations of volatile fatty acids. It also yields high values of biochemical oxygen demand (BOD), chemical oxygen demand (COD) and concentrations of metals. In contrast, leachate from the later methanogenic stage of decomposition (2 years) contains lower concentrations of volatile fatty acids, and metals, in addition to lower values of BOD and COD. A high concentration of ammoniacal-N is, however, present. Current options for dealing with this problem include disposal to ‘foul’ sewers depending on availability and with appropriate payment to the local water company. Leachates may also be transported by tanker to a sewage treatment works, where they may be accepted. This method entails payment of both transport and treatment costs. Alternatively, they may be treated on site, which itself incurs capital and operating costs, or subject to a combination of any of the three options Landfill gas production is another problem generated by the waste degradation process. The uncontrolled release of gas poses risks through its explosive, asphyxiant, and ‘greenhouse gas’ characteristics. The installation of gas abstraction systems at some sites gives rise to landfill gas condensate, which comprises of moisture and volatile compounds from the landfill gas stream. The vapour condenses out, either in cooler sections of pipelines being used to transmit the gas, or within a purpose built ‘chiller unit’, installed in order to dry the gas. Landfill gas condensate may be disposed of by recycling into landfill wastes, by separate treatment, or by mixing with leachate streams Landfill gas condensate is inherently variable in composition. Knox These tests were conducted utilising a glass flotation cell operating on a similar principle to the Hallimond Tube. The cell is based on the design of that by Partridge and Smith Initial tests were conducted using caproic (C6) and pelargonic acids (C9) emulsified at 0.05% v/v, on 1 A commercial coal flotation reagent, ‘Nontoxol 500’ (a blend of alcohol frother and oil collector), was also used for comparison purposes. In addition, a sample of landfill gas condensate was substituted for VFAs and commercial reagents, in order to demonstrate that this was capable of recovering coal by flotation. The apparatus used for the experiments was a 5-l Denver laboratory cell, operated at 1500 The facility of fatty acids for the promotion of fine coal agglomerates was investigated by their controlled addition to a slurry (at 7 In addition, a sample of landfill gas condensate (LGCRO), concentrated by reverse osmosis, was also tested. The analysis of the LGCRO is detailed in Results are shown in With an addition of caproic acid of 0.03% v/v (equivalent to 30 The addition of only 0.005% v/v (equivalent to 5 The effect of landfill gas condensate on flotation of the +250–500 The results of this investigation are shown in While butyric acid (C4) was found to have some effect as a flotation collector, the dose required was high (7–8 Oleic acid (C18) commonly used in mineral froth flotation, often as the impure grade tall oil, has a melting point of 14°C, lowered by its double bond. Oleic acid gave 53 For comparison, a combination of The results with kerosene alone, appeared to plateau between doses of 4 and 20 Small additions of short chain fatty acids lead to a significant increase in coal yield by oil agglomeration. The addition of 2–4 In comparison caproic and pelargonic acids ( Results with butyric, caproic and pelargonic acid proved to be similar suggesting that the mechanism of the oil agglomeration process was relatively insensitive to fatty acid chain length unlike that of froth flotation.  A very high yield was recorded at 2 Good correlation was found between tailings ash and concentrate yield as is shown in The 0.05% v/v addition of froth oil used in the small-scale flotation, was equivalent to 50kg/tonne, being much higher than the commercial addition at plant-scale. This may be due to the type of system being used. The concentrations of caproic (0.03% v/v) and pelargonic (0.005% v/v) represent 50kg/tonne and 5kg/tonne, respectively. Overall, the results suggest that the performance of the VFAs is significantly better than that of the froth oil in this test apparatus, particularly in the recovery of coarser particles. Coal particle recovery by flotation could be achieved with landfill gas condensate only, though at an addition of 10% by volume. The landfill gas condensate representing a dilute source of mixed volatile fatty acids and other organic compounds was capable of providing both collecting and frothing actions. Caproic acid exhibits similar dosage requirements to the conventional coal flotation reagents A reduction in the reagent requirement was observed with increasing carbon chain length up to C10 (capric acid). Performance in terms of reagent dose requirement appeared to peak at C10 chain length with lauric acid (C12) performing marginally worse. Oleic acid (C18), which is commonly used in mineral froth flotation performed significantly worse, with yields between those of valeric (C5) and caproic (C6) acids. This demonstrates an increase in reagent demand with chain length beyond the C10 optimum. The addition of fatty acids led to a significant reduction in the dose of kerosene required to achieve acceptable coal recovery from 30 Fatty acid compounds offer the coal producer an alternative chemical reagent for fine coal recovery, either as a flotation reagent or additive in selective agglomeration. Landfill-derived liquids, including landfill gas condensate could provide a source of reagent for fine coal recovery. Environmental concerns over the use of traditional reagents or their cost might lead coal producers to consider alternatives. While some of the intermediate chain length fatty acids (e.g. pelargonic) can successfully recover fine coal in flotation at lower action, they are currently more expensive. They can also suffer shortages of availability. However, the lower dosage required means that they are about equivalent cost in terms of per tonne of coal treated. The fatty acid compounds are biodegradable and can be of vegetable origin, making their use, environmentally acceptable and production sustainable. Landfill-liquid effluents (leachates and gas condensates) and other industrial effluent, especially those from food wastes, might provide a novel and low-cost source of short chain fatty acids (e.g. <C8).  Short chain volatile fatty acids are capable of floating fine coal. The optimum chain length for fatty acids used in froth flotation of the coal sample used in this study was C10 (capric acid). This gave optimal yields at around 100 The kerosene dose required for the recovery of low-ash coal agglomerates at high yield in the agglomeration process can be reduced by the addition of short chain fatty acids. In oil agglomeration there appears to be less sensitivity to chain length than in froth flotation. Butyric, caproic and pelargonic acids all gave good coal yields. Landfill-derived liquids, including landfill gas condensate, could provide a source of reagent for fine coal recovery.