Recently, microalgal cultivation in liquid foams has been developed. Compared to the traditional systems, this concept is expected to offer advantages such as increased mass transfer and reduced biomass harvesting costs and water consumption. However, there is limited information, thus far, on the microalgal performance in foam-bed photobioreactors. Therefore, this study was aimed at comparing the foaming properties of six algal strains to identify the criteria that could be broadly employed for assessing the microalgal potential for cultivation in a foam-bed photobioreactor. The microalgal strains investigated were selected based on their different nature and potential uses. All the microalgal strains could not naturally produce stable foam, thus necessitating the use of a surfactant. To investigate the differences in the foaming properties of the selected microalgae, the natural surfactant, bovine serum albumin, was employed. Factors such as culture age, algal hydrophobicity, and biomass concentration differently influenced the key foaming properties (foamability, microalgal partitioning, and foam stability) depending on the microalgal strain. In conclusion, the assessment of the foaming properties of microalgal strains together with their inherent growth characteristics revealed large differences in the potentiality of microalgae to be cultivated in a foam-bed photobioreactor. In particular, among the microalgal strains tested, the commercial strains Chlorella sorokiniana, Nannochloropsis gaditana, and Scenedesmus obliquus showed the highest potentiality for cultivation in foam.
                  Overall, the following criteria could be broadly applied to select suitable microalgae for cultivation in a foam-bed photobioreactor: high or moderate foamability of the microalga-surfactant suspension, and microalgal partitioning, stability of the foam formed, and robustness and fast growth of the strains.To make microalgae-based production processes economically feasible, a variety of cultivation systems have been studied, including traditional raceway ponds and closed photobioreactors, in which algal cells are suspended in the liquid broth; and biofilm-based photobioreactors, where algal cells grow attached to a solid surface [ In a foam-bed photobioreactor, a variety of factors may impact the efficiency of the microalgal biomass cultivation process, which can be classified into the following two main groups: (i) factors related to the foam system configuration and operational parameters, and (ii) the characteristics of the microalgal strain used, and if needed, the properties of the surfactant employed and its interactions with the algal cells. Regarding the foam-bed photobioreactor configuration, foam production and foam break-up systems have been recently found to be essential for an optimal reactor performance to ensure a sufficient CO Microalgae have the ability to produce natural surfactants that might facilitate their cultivation in foam-bed photobioreactors; however, their production and effectiveness vary considerably among species [ Surfactants contain hydrophilic and hydrophobic groups, which interact with the generally negatively charged microalgal surface and gas bubbles, respectively. For a microalgal cell to migrate from the liquid suspension to the foam phase, it has to collide with a bubble and attach to it. However, the collision probability strongly depends on the particle size; and the algal hydrophobicity is a crucial factor for the attachment of the cells to the bubbles [ Another factor affecting the algal flotation efficiency is the culture age. The charge density of algal cell surfaces, which can influence their interactions with the surfactant, varies significantly throughout the growth phases [ Ionic strength is another key parameter that influences foam flotation processes. High salinity prevents bubble coalescence [ Cell concentration may also play a role in the culture foaming properties. For traditional photobioreactors, the viscosity increment due to biomass concentration increase is considered insignificant in terms of the fluid mechanics [ Although most of the principles that may affect the foaming properties of algal suspensions are partially understood, the specific characteristics of different algal strains are expected to influence algal-enriched foam formation and its characteristics. Therefore, this study was aimed at defining the criteria to clearly assess the suitability of a given microalgal species to be cultivated in foam. Hence, the following parameters were proposed to be considered: microalgal foamability (natural and mediated by a surfactant), algal partitioning, foam stability, and microalgal growth characteristics. Several microalgal strains (particularly different and most of them of commercial importance) were used to compare the identified parameters. Moreover, microalgal cell surface hydrophobicity was studied along the different growth phases and was correlated to the microalgal partitioning. The effect of medium salinity, culture age and biomass concentration on foaming properties was also investigated because they could influence the formation of algal-enriched, stable foam.  Natural foamability was assessed for all the six algal strains in their corresponding culture media using culture samples from linear and stationary phase cultures. Moreover, BSA-mediated foamability of different culture media without microalgae was tested at different BSA concentrations, ranging from 0.02 to 0.1 g L The foam production system consisted of a one-liter glass graduated cylinder with 2 air stone diffusers placed at the bottom. The corresponding suspension (200 mL; algal broth, culture media supplemented with BSA, or three-fold concentrated algal broth supplemented with BSA) was sparged with small air bubbles at an air flow of 0.9 L min Microalgal partitioning refers to the distribution of the algal biomass between the liquid and foam phases when the foam is produced by sparging a liquid culture sample. The samples were taken in linear phase and assessed at different biomass concentrations (1.5–2 g L The microalgal hydrophobicity was measured using a previously reported modified adherence-to-hydrocarbon method [ Culture samples were collected along the growth curve for all the microalgae, including the lag, linear and stationary phases, and at a minimum of six different time points. The initial optical density of the samples at 680 nm was adjusted to 1.2 by dilution with the corresponding culture medium, and the pH was adjusted to 7.0. Moreover, for linear phase samples, BSA-added samples were also tested to determine the effect of this surfactant on the algal hydrophobicity. To avoid the interference of BSA turbidity, the values for BSA-added samples were corrected with the corresponding cell-free culture media controls. All the samples were vigorously mixed with hexane for 1 min, and subsequently, the two phases were separated during a settling time of 2 min. The algal hydrophobicity (H) was calculated as the extractability of hexane according to Eq. Foam lifetime t The highly concentrated algal samples (8–10 g L For BSA-mediated foamability, microalgal partitioning, and foam stability tests, lyophilized BSA powder (bovine albumin fraction V, Sigma Chemical CO, A7030) was used as the surfactant. BSA was used at a concentration of 0.1 g L Some of the microalgae investigated were colony-forming strains, therefore cell counting was not possible and biomass concentration was measured in terms of dry weight and optical density at 680 nm (UV-Vis spectrophotometer, Evolution 201, Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). For the dry weight determination, the microalgal samples were filtered through pre-washed, pre-dried, and pre-weighed filters (glass microfiber filters with a pore size of 0.7 μm; Filter Lab MFV5, Filtros Anoia S.L., Spain). The filters were then dried at 80 °C for at least 16 h and cooled in a desiccator for at least 2 h. The filter weight was determined using a 0.01-mg precision balance (Sartorius CP225D, Sartorius AG, Germany). The dry weight concentration, expressed as g L The experimental assays were performed in triplicate. Unless otherwise indicated, the results show the average values and their corresponding standard deviation. Several parameters were expected to influence the foaming properties of different microalgal strains. However, little is known about it as the cultivation of microalgae in foam is a novel concept, which still requires a better understanding. To critically assess the potentiality of a given microalga for cultivation in foam, it is imperative to define the criteria related to the influence of these parameters. Hence, the following parameters were analyzed in few microalgal strain suspensions (particularly different and most of them of commercial importance): natural and BSA-mediated foamability, algal partitioning, and foam stability. The joint analysis of the aforementioned parameters together with the inherent growth characteristics of the different algal strains is hereby proposed as the criteria to determine the algae potentiality to be cultivated in foam. The following six strains were used in this study: Microalgae from diverse aquatic habitats, marine, and freshwater were included with the aim of using culture media with different ionic strengths. The increases in salinity lead to the production of smaller bubbles possibly because salts prevent coalescence by inhibiting the merger of the bubbles [ Likewise, this study included single cell cultures and the colony-forming strains The influence of salinity and cell size (including cell aggregation) on the applicability of the different strains to be cultivated in a foam-bed photobioreactor was indirectly considered. More specifically, the effects of all these aspects on the different foaming properties of the studied algal strains are discussed below in the corresponding subsections. Natural foamability of the microalgal strains was assessed to determine whether such ability possibly minimizes or negates the need for surfactant addition in microalgal cultivation in foam. The natural foam production by an algal culture depends primarily on the production and excretion of surfactant-like molecules that possess foamability behavior. Because some of the key surfactant-like molecules are produced at the late linear phase and during the stationary phase, late phases of growth could enhance foaming [ Natural foamability was calculated as per the method described in The obtained foaming speeds were low compared to the reported data from foam flotation experiments based on the natural foaming capacity of different microalgal suspensions [ Overall, despite the differences found among the foam production speeds for the studied microalgal strains, the natural foam produced was not very large or stable to potentially fill a foam-bed photobioreactor of foam. Therefore, to properly study the foamability of the microalgal strains, the addition of a surfactant was deemed necessary; and it was considered a pre-requisite for the potential cultivation of these algal strains in foam. To further compare the foaming properties of different algal suspensions, BSA was used as a surfactant because it has good foamability [ Since different marine and freshwater microalgal strains were investigated, the culture media used for their growth had varying NaCl concentrations. However, it was unknown whether the salinity of culture medium exerts any effect on the BSA-mediated foamability of microalgal samples. Therefore, to determine the optimal BSA concentration for these tests, varying BSA concentrations up to 5 g L At BSA concentrations of <0.1 g L Furthermore, when BSA concentrations up to 5 g L Subsequently, the BSA-mediated foaming speeds were determined for each microalga as a function of biomass concentration and the growth phase at which the samples were collected ( To evaluate the foaming speed of 3-fold concentrated samples, the algal suspensions were pre-concentrated by centrifugation as described in  Of the microalgal strains tested in this study for a rapid BSA-mediated foam production, One of the main critical requirements for microalgal cultivation in a foam-bed photobioreactor is algal partitioning. It is the ability of the cells to pass from the liquid suspension to the foam phase. Algal partitioning may depend on various factors such as algal cell size, cell surface hydrophobicity, cell concentration, culture age, and surfactant-like molecules production, which are key factors in microalgae flotation studies for algal harvesting [ The samples were taken from linear growth phase cultures. To study the effect of cell concentration, algal partitioning was tested at two biomass concentrations (1.5–2 g L As seen in Among the parameters that influence the partitioning of a surfactant-added algal suspension, hydrophobicity and cell size are inherent to each algal strain. Cell surface hydrophobicity may change depending on the algal growth phase [ Microalgal partitioning and cell hydrophobicity values with and without the addition of BSA for all the strains studied in linear growth phase are presented in In this study, neither the natural nor the BSA-mediated algal hydrophobicity showed a strong correlation with algal partitioning for the different microalgal strains investigated. The microalgal hydrophobicity and partitioning values were largely different and contrary for both the strains of Foam stability was evaluated by comparing the foam lifetime values (t Regarding the foam collapse speeds, the colony forming strains ( In addition to cell size and cell hydrophobicity, the shape of the particle is an important factor that affects foam stability. Our results indicated that small round single cell of strains such as The potential of the microalgal candidates to be cultivated in a foam-bed photobioreactor was assessed based on the analysis of the following parameters that were collectively evaluated: (i) foamability of the alga-surfactant suspension, (ii) microalgal partitioning, and (iii) stability of the foam formed. In addition, growth characteristics inherent to each microalgal strain were important. The potential of the six microalgal candidates to be cultivated in a foam-bed photobioreactor, according to the above-mentioned foaming properties and their growth characteristics, is summarized in A surfactant was required for the cultivation of the six microalgal candidates studied in a foam-bed photobioreactor due to their low natural foamability. Therefore, the BSA-mediated foam production was used in this study as the parameter to compare the foamability of the suspensions for the different microalgal strains. Our results showed that the presence of microalgal cells had a negative impact on foam production compared with the cell-free culture media. However, this reduction in foamability varied with the algal strain and the growth phase of the culture ( The microalgal partitioning of the algal cells was the second foaming property investigated. In a foam-bed photobioreactor, the foam is produced by bubbling a liquid algal suspension that contains a surfactant. The high algal partitioning allows for the production of foams that are highly enriched with algal cells, which in turn exposes the elevated cell fraction to illumination. In contrast, the low algal partitioning produces foams with poor algal content, which in turn decreases the reactor productivity. Our results showed that for a given surfactant and system, the algal enrichment of the foam formed differs significantly with the algal strain used ( After determining the foaming capacity and microalgal partitioning, the stability of foams enriched with the different microalgal strains could be considered as a criterion for the determination of the potential of a microalga to be cultivated in foam. A high stability of the algal-enriched foam leads to the reduction of the surfactant dosage needed for the cultivation process. Due to the low foam stability of In addition to the above-mentioned foaming properties, algal growth characteristics possibly play a role in the potential cultivation of a particular strain in foam. Robust strains such as In brief, an algal strain would suit cultivation in a foam-bed photobioreactor if it exhibits the following criteria: high foamability and foam stability to avoid/reduce the addition of a surfactant; high/moderate algal partitioning to enhance biomass transfer from the liquid to the foam phase of the reactor; and high robustness and fast growth to tolerate and favor the cultivation in foam process, respectively. According to the abovementioned criteria, In this study, a major influence of each specific algal species on the production of stable, algal-enriched foam for a given surfactant has been proven and exemplified for several microalgal species of different nature and with known or potential commercial applications by analyzing of the following parameters: (i) foamability, (ii) microalgal partitioning, and (iii) foam stability. Moreover, the inherent growth characteristics of each microalgal strain were also considered for the final evaluation of the potential of the different strains to be cultivated in a foam-bed photobioreactor. The natural foamability of the six selected microalgal strains was insufficient for sustaining continuous and stable foam production; hence, a surfactant was added. The specific assessment of the abovementioned parameters for different microalgal strains helped in defining of the following criteria to evaluate the potential of a microalgal strain to be cultivated in algal-enriched stabilized foams: high/moderate foamability, algal partitioning and foam stabilization by the algal suspensions, and high robustness and fast growth of the algal cells. These criteria might have a broad range of applications. To the best of knowledge, these are the first guidelines that aid in selecting microalgal species suitable for their cultivation in foam bed-photobioreactors. This novel microalgal cultivation concept might boost the microalgal industry further. This work was performed in the framework of the MIRACLES project which is supported by the The experiments were performed by María Vázquez, Juan L. Fuentes and Adriana Hincapié, who also collected, analyzed and interpreted the data together with María Cuaresma. Inés Garbayo provided technical advices and logistic support. The paper was written by María Vázquez, under the critical revisions of Carlos Vílchez and María Cuaresma, who gave the final approval for its submission. María Vázquez, Carlos Vílchez and María Cuaresma take responsibility for the integrity of the work as a whole, from inception to finished article. None. No conflicts, informed consent, human or animal rights applicable.