The combination of tendon and ligament ruptures with fracture of the talus is very rare. We demonstrate our experience in the acceptable management of a 34-year-old male referred with a closed comminuted fracture of the talar body after falling 7 meters. During the surgery, complete rupture of the peroneus brevis tendon, partial rupture of the peroneus longus tendon, and an avulsed superficial deltoid ligament from medial malleolus were found. Twelve months after open reduction and internal fixation of the talar body fracture and repair of the peroneal tendons and superficial deltoid ligament, the patient was satisfied, without any talar dome collapse, sclerosis, or arthritic changes. It is recommended to take care of possible tendon or ligament ruptures during fixation of talar fractures in cases of high-energy trauma.Fracture of the talus is an unusual injury, with a prevalence of ∼0.3% among all fractures and an incidence of 3.2 per 100,000 population ( A healthy 34-year-old male was transferred to the emergency department after falling 7 meters. On arrival, he had severe pain and swelling of the right ankle joint without any other associated injuries. Physical examination demonstrated no evidence of laceration indicative of open injury, with a wide area of ecchymosis around the ankle joint. The neurovascular status of the foot and ankle was normal. Plain radiographs revealed a comminuted talar body fracture with displaced fragments in the anterior aspect of the ankle joint ( The patient was transferred to the operating room in an emergency setup. Upon performing an anteromedial approach to the right ankle joint, avulsion of the superficial deltoid ligament without any bony fragments was seen ( Postoperatively, according to our institutional protocol, a non-weightbearing short leg cast was applied for 6 weeks followed by a short leg walking splint to initiate range of motion of the ankle for 6 more weeks. No Hawkins sign was seen during the follow-up period. At 12 months postoperatively, the patient was completely satisfied, with return to preinjury levels of activity. On examination, active range of ankle motion was 10° dorsiflexion and 35° plantarflexion, without motion in the subtalar joint ( Fractures of the talar body or neck may have significant morbidities. Besides osteonecrosis, malunion, and nonunion, only a little incongruity in surrounding joints may result in rapid arthritic changes with severe pain and disability. It is strongly recommended to achieve perfect anatomic reduction using dual anteromedial and anterolateral approaches with rigid fixation ( Ruptures of ligaments or tendons around the ankle joint, especially Achilles and posterior tibial tendons, in association with a closed ankle fracture have been reported rarely ( Peroneal tendon ruptures, commonly of the peroneus brevis tendon, are usually seen after repetitive ankle sprains. They may result in significant lateral ankle pain and swelling. Because peroneal tendon ruptures can lead to reduction in activities of daily living, prompt diagnosis and treatment are crucial. Acute nondegenerative peroneal tendon ruptures should be repaired end to end, as in the presented case. If primary repair is not feasible, in peroneal tendon ruptures with <50% of the cross-sectional area of the tendon involvement, debridement and tubularization are recommended. If >50% cross-sectional area of the tendon is involved, tenodesis, tendon graft, or tendon transfer should be considered ( In conclusion, the presented case is unique not only for both peroneal tendon ruptures, but also for superficial deltoid ligament avulsion in a closed fracture of the talus. Based on the high-energy mechanism of injury, falling from 7 meters on the right lower limb, it would be expected that a high volume of energy was released, with significant displacement of fractured fragments in the scene of injury. According to the radiographs and CT scans, severe comminution with displaced fragments, especially in the lateral side below the tip of the fibula, should be considered a sign of possible peroneal tendon ruptures. We do not recommend magnetic resonance imaging to diagnose possible peroneal tendon injuries, but we suggest careful dissection during anterolateral and anteromedial approaches to the talar neck or body reduction and fixation.