The presence of enargite in porphyry-copper deposits is an important matter as this sulfosalt displays good floatability in the presence of the collectors which are usually used in the flotation of copper sulfides, thus it readily floats and contaminate the copper concentrates. Scarcity of water resources is a relevant problem in the Chilean mining industry and the use of seawater in the mineral processing plants is today a feasible solution. The flotation behaviors of copper sulfides and molybdenite in seawater was studied to some extent, but the enargite behavior in this aqueous medium has seldom been investigated. The objective of this work was to study the flotation behavior of enargite in seawater under different pulp electrochemical potentials (Eh) and pH. The independent effects of calcium and magnesium were also evaluated. The experimental results show that enargite flotation in seawater is depressed at both reducing and oxidizing conditions at pH = 9. At pH = 10.5 enargite is strongly depressed to values even below 20% at the whole range of Eh studied which may be explained by the adhesion of magnesium hydroxo-complexes to the enargite surfaces rendering it hydrophilic. The depressing effect of calcium on enargite flotation is stronger than the depressing effect of magnesium, although calcium concentration in seawater is lower. This conclusion may be related to the presence of highly stable compounds such as hydrophilic calcium arsenates on the enargite surface.The presence of arsenic-containing minerals in the Chilean porphyry-copper deposits is currently more common due to the depletion of mining resources, thus minerals such as enargite (Cu The surface properties of enargite and its flotation response in conventional water was previously investigated by several researchers who used pure mineral samples ( The selective separation of enargite and copper sulfides was also studied using real ores with the aim of getting a better understanding of the effect of mineralogy on this selective flotation ( Water scarcity is a relevant problem in many mining areas such as northern Chile, for which the use of seawater has become a real solution. Since the presence of enargite in porphyry-type deposits is more frequent, the study of the behavior of this mineral in the flotation in seawater is a relevant topic. The objective of this work is to study the flotation behavior of enargite in seawater under different E The enargite sample used in this work was obtained from the Quiruvilca mine in Peru as hand size specimens which were initially crushed to −2 + 1.41 mm, and then concentrated by manually removing gangue particles. The chalcopyrite sample was obtained from Ward‘s Natural Science Establishment and was also crushed to −2 + 1.41 mm and manually concentrated. Then, purification of both minerals samples was done using magnetic separation to remove magnetic impurities, and a desliming stage was applied to remove ultra-fines. XRD analyses using a Bruker®D4 Endeavor equipment operated with Cu radiation and Ni Kβ radiation filter indicated that the enargite and chalcopyrite samples had a purity of 99.8 and 99.0% respectively. Low amounts of tennantite, and chalcopyrite were also detected in the enargite sample, and of pyrite and quartz in chalcopyrite. The concentrations of Cu, As, and S in the enargite sample measured by atomic absorption were 47.8, 18.7, and 32.6% respectively, while the concentrations of Cu, Fe, and S in the chalcopyrite sample were 34.3, 30.4, and 35.2% respectively. Potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) obtained from Solvay, previously purified with ether and acetone, was used as collector, and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) obtained from Merck was used as frother. Milli-Q water of a resistivity of 18.4 MΩ∙cm at 25 °C was used in all the experiments. pH was adjusted using sodium hydroxide of analytical grade obtained from Merck in all the tests. Seawater was obtained from the coast of Concepcion, Chile. Hydrogen peroxide and sodium hydrosulfide were used to adjust E Microflotation tests were done following the procedure described in Firstly, 3 g of a −2 + 1.41 mm sample of enargite/chalcopyrite were ground to a P80 of 74 µm at a solids content of 25% by weight, using a laboratory carbon steel ball mill (7 cm diameter and 12 cm length) charged with 270 g of carbon steel balls (12 balls of 13 mm diameter; 8 balls of 17 mm diameter). It has to be noted that the procedures followed in the experiments were planned to simulate as good as possible the industrial flotation process in which minerals are wet ground using steel balls. The grinding product was then split into 3 aliquots (1 g of mineral each) which were poured in 3 beakers (for 3 microflotation tests) and then solution (e.g., seawater, others) was added to complete 150 cm Then the redox conditions were adjusted using hydrogen peroxide (oxidizing conditions) or sodium hydrosulfide (reducing conditions) and the pulp was conditioned for 10 min by controlling E After this, PAX and MIBC were added and conditioned for additional 3 min which was done under strict control of E Finally, the pulp was placed in a 150 cm It is well known that the electrochemical reactions that take place on the surfaces of metal sulfides, which can lead to surface oxidation, have a strong effect on the flotation efficiency ( Scanning Electron Microscopy with Energy Dispersive X-Ray (SEM-EDS) was used to characterize the enargite surface at different E       The results presented in this work show that the flotation behavior of enargite in seawater displays some differences with respect to what was previously reported on the flotation behavior of other metal sulfides such as molybdenite and chalcopyrite. Molybdenite flotation in seawater for example was shown to depend on the presence of magnesium that can strongly depress molybdenite at pH > 9.5 ( However, the effect of important seawater cations such as calcium and magnesium on the flotation behavior of enargite seems to add another adsorption mechanism. Enargite is a copper tetra-thioarseniate for which the reactions that take place on the mineral surface involve formation of arsenate, thioarseniate and oxo-thioarseniates compounds ( Arsenic occurs in nature in three oxidation states ±3, and +5, of which trivalent As The concentration and distribution of arsenic species in solution strongly depends on the presence of alkali metals such as calcium and magnesium. Chemical species such as Ca The results presented in It is also interesting to analyze the differences in the recovery results of enargite and chalcopyrite obtained in seawater and in solutions of calcium and magnesium. Enargite recovery was lower in seawater than in solutions of calcium and magnesium ( It should be kept in mind though that, as shown in Eqs. It is also interesting to discuss the results presented in Another interesting result to analyze has to do with the differences in chalcopyrite and enargite flotation recoveries observed in The experimental results obtained at pH = 9 showed that enargite flotation in seawater is depressed at both reducing and oxidizing conditions which differs with the observed results obtained in a pH = 10 buffer solution. Enargite recovery at pH = 10.5 is strongly depressed to values even below 20% at the whole range of pulp redox potential studied which may be explained by the adhesion of magnesium hydroxo-complexes to the enargite surfaces rendering it hydrophilic. Enargite recovery at pH = 9 is strongly depressed under oxidizing conditions in seawater, and the depressing effect of calcium is stronger than the depressing effect of magnesium, although calcium concentration was lower. The experimental results obtained under oxidizing conditions in seawater at pH = 9 may be explained by the presence of hydrophilic arsenates of calcium/magnesium such as Ca  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the financial support of the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: