High temperature behavior of 2205 duplex stainless steel was studied by considering behavior of each constituent phase. The specimens were subjected to hot compression tests at temperatures of 800–1100°C and strain rates ranging from 0.001 to 1s−1 at intervals of an order of magnitude. The flow stress analysis showed that hot working empirical constants are different at low and high temperatures. The strain rate sensitivity m was determined and found to change from 0.12 to 0.21 for a temperature rise from 800°C to 1100°C. The apparent activation energy Q was calculated as 554 and 310kJ/mol for low and high temperature, respectively. The validity of constitutive equation of hyperbolic sine function was studied and stress exponent, n, was assessed to be 4.2. Assuming the hyperbolic sine function for determination of strain rate and application of the rule of mixture, the interaction coefficients of δ-ferrite, P, and austenite, R, were estimated at different hot working regimes. It was found that the interaction coefficients are functions of Zener–Hollomon parameter Z and obey the formulas P
                     =1.4Z
                     −0.08 and R
                     =0.76Z
                     0.005. Therefore, it was concluded that at low Z values δ-ferrite almost accommodates strain and dynamic recovery is the prominent restoration process which may even inhibit dynamic recrystallization in austenite. Otherwise, at high Z, austenite controls the deformation mechanism of material and dynamic recrystallization leads in finer microstructure.The need for high corrosion resistance as well as desired strength characteristics has made duplex stainless steels (DSS) deserving alternatives to single phase austenitic and ferritic grades and good choices for different industries Many researchers have investigated the hot working behavior of duplex stainless steels from different aspects In duplex stainless steels, δ-ferrite and austenite make a composite material consisted of almost comparable amounts of these phases. The dynamic restoration behavior of both phases seems to be rather similar to their restoration behavior in the single-phase materials, where δ-ferrite softens by DRV and austenite by DRX. Coexistence of hard austenite and soft δ-ferrite at high temperatures is found to result in a strain partitioning at the early stages of deformation, when strain is mostly accommodated by the δ-ferrite phase Modeling of strain partitioning has been attempted by several researchers The aim of this work is to study the high-temperature behavior of a DSS under hot compression tests, using the analysis of flow curves as well as hot-working response of each constituent phase. Chemical composition of the DSS 2205 used in the present study is shown in Cylindrical compression samples of 15 In order to model the hot deformation behavior of the duplex steel used in the present work, composition of each phase was analyzed by an Electron Probe Microanalyzer. To obtain accurate results diverge beam was employed to avoid any interaction effect from atomic elements in the surrounding matrix. Based on the obtained results for the composition of each constituent, two grades of ferritic and austenitic steels were produced using a vacuum induction furnace. The composition of the produced steels was controlled by a precise steel making procedure. The chemical compositions of δ-ferrite and austenite phases in the studied DSS together with those of the produced single phase ferritic and austenitic steels are shown in True stress–strain curves at different temperatures and strain rates are shown in It has well understood that the characteristic points of flow curve and their relationship with processing variables are of great importance in studying hot deformation behavior of alloys. In this respect, the peak point of flow curve and the point corresponding to the onset of steady state flow should be noticed. The strain rate, It is well understood that for a given strain, flow stress and strain rate can be related as follows Combining the obtained values of m and the average slop, A useful relationship which is particularly correlating flow stress, The validity of hyperbolic sine function for hot working of 2205 DSS is indicated in The experimental data obtained in a similar way for single-phase ferritic and austenitic steels with compositions equal to those of constituents of the studied DSS, The strain imposed on the dual phase structure of a DSS in hot-working conditions may be correlated to strain of each constituent as follows: By Solving the Eqs. The calculated amounts of At a given deformation regime, higher strain coefficient indicates that the corresponding phase accommodates more strain. In this way, the dominant restoration mechanism can be predicted. For example, if The obtained results show that The dependence of At low temperatures, high values of The major consequences obtained from this investigation are listed below. The values of experimentally assessed constants such as strain rate sensitivity, The value of The value of It was found that the experimentally determined materials constants, i.e. Assuming the hyperbolic sine function for determination of strain rate at DSS and constituents and application of rule of mixture the interaction coefficients of δ-ferrite,