Calcium carbonate (CaCO3) crystals with different phases were obtained on the basis of one-dimensional Ca-deoxycholate fibers (Ca-DC fibers) under ambient conditions. Ca-DC fibers were prepared by the combination of Ca2+ ions and sodium deoxycholate (SDC) before the addition of sodium bicarbonate. Vaterite dominated mixtures could be easily obtained in the presence of Ca-DC fibers in the aqueous system at 10°C. As the temperature was increased to 30 and 120°C, pure vaterite and aragonite with novel morphologies were obtained, respectively. The framework formed by one-dimensional Ca-DC fibers was demonstrated to be the key role in mediating the crystallization and assembling behaviors of calcium carbonate. In this study, Ca-DC fibers, prepared as a novel insoluble organic polymorph controller, could even play an important role in the industrial production of CaCO3 with different polymorphs in future and other similar Ca-organic fibers are believed to have same functions as well.Biomineralization provides us a good breakthrough point to simulate the living organisms for controlling the nucleation and growth habits of inorganic materials. Nacre, as a representative biomineral with unique hierarchical architecture built from regular arrangement of alternating aragonite platelets separated by interlamellar layers of organic matrix, possesses perfect mechanical properties that admired by functional material experts Unlike soluble organic matrix, insoluble matrices (chitin, silk fibroin, etc.) are biomacromolecules, which form a three-dimensional framework for promoting the nucleation of CaCO In the simulation of the growth of CaCO Also there have been a number of the attempts to combine coordination chemistry with crystallization of CaCO Here, we first used the insoluble Ca-organic fibers as the template for growth of CaCO All chemicals are of analytical grade. Calcium acetate monohydrate, sodium deoxycholate, sodium bicarbonate and ethanol were all purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Company Limited. All reagents were used as received without further purification. In a typical synthesis, sodium deoxycholate was first dissolved in distilled water (1.25 We also conducted all of the above experiments without using sodium deoxycholate under same conditions for comparison. The products were characterized by X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD) recorded on a Rigaku D/max-2400 powder X-ray diffractometer with Cu KR radiation (40 Calcium ion could combine with carboxyl group of SDC forming one-dimensional metal-organic fibers ( Qiao et al. Crystallization processes of CaCO In order to further prove the role of SDC, we did the comparative experiments without using SDC under the same conditions at 10 We can still found the remains of SDC on the crystallization of CaCO To investigate the details of the mineralization process of CaCO X-ray diffraction patterns of the CaCO Wafer-like vaterite crystals with different diameters of 1 More information could be further provided by TEM images of the spindly aragonite crystals ( Supporting Information To understand the formation process of such wafer-like vaterite crystals ( CaCO It had been proved that the temperature had a great role in the process of the crystal growth of the CaCO In this study, the possible formation process of CaCO The reactions about the growth of crystals as followings: The novel morphologies of vaterite and aragonite crystals from 10 to 120 In summary, it has been demonstrated that polymorphs of calcium carbonate (calcite, aragonite, and vaterite) could be selectively synthesized in water or water/ethanol mixed solutions on the basis of Ca-DC fibers. Vaterite dominated mixture could be obtained with the aid of a suitable concentration of SDC. Pure vaterite could be obtained when the reaction temperature was increased to 30–50 This work was financially supported by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 