The gross energy in ethanol using wheat as a feedstock in Ireland is 66GJ/ha/a. The net energy production is 25GJ/ha/a. A model is proposed, whereby the ethanol production process is combined with combustion of straw, and digestion of stillage, resulting in two transport fuels; ethanol and biomethane. In the proposed system stillage is not dried, reducing the thermal demand by 35%. A quarter of the straw associated with the wheat grain is sufficient, when combusted, to satisfy the reduced thermal demands. Stillage is digested wet; the biogas is scrubbed, compressed and utilised as a transport fuel. The net energy now is 72GJ/ha/a. The production cost of biomethane is two thirds that of ethanol.255,766 98,372 157,395 Assuming thermal efficiency of 85% As a percentage of ethanol product As a percentage of parasitic demand As a percentage of thermal demand Various papers have been published on analysis of ethanol facilities Of concern to energy engineers is the energy balance, particularly, in the process of converting the feedstock to ethanol. The process is energy intensive. With reference to The initial liquefaction stage involves milling of the grain, addition of water (4 The fermentation stage is facilitated at a temperature of 38 Fractional distillation is employed to effect a solution of 96% ethanol and 4% water. At least three distillation columns are needed for the purification of ethanol: a column for the removal of (solids/mash); a column for the rectification (upgrading the ethanol solution to 96% ethanol) of the ethanol; and a column for the separation of fusel oils (higher alcohol products that are less volatile than ethanol). Typically 46% of the thermal parasitic demand occurs during the distillation stage. The final stage for the ethanol product is purification. If ethanol is to be utilised as a transport fuel a purity of 99.5–99.9% is required. The most widely used purification method is a physical absorption process using molecular sieves. Water molecules are small enough to be adsorbed through the sieves, while larger molecules such as ethanol are not. Stillage is a “residue” of the distillation stage. It may be termed distillers grain and solubles (DGS) and in turn wet stillage is known as (WDGS). It contains about a quarter of the dry solids contained in the grain feedstock. However this stillage, when wet, contains about 88% water. It is a very suitable feedstock for livestock when wet but does not have a long shelf life; thus it is typically dried to about 91% solids content, which lengthens its shelf life and greatly reduces transport costs. Dry stillage may be termed dry distillers grain and solubles (DDGS). The drying of the stillage involves separation into whole stillage and thin stillage in a decanter. The whole stillage is dried; water is also evaporated off the thin stillage. The processing of the stillage from 88% water to 9% water is very energy intensive; typically 2.88 Surveys of ethanol facilities by Power et al. 0.222 The total electricity requirement equates to 0.32 The total thermal requirement equates to 2.4 4.07 Typically ethanol facilities are constructed at a size of 150 Much work is recorded in the literature describing biogas generated through digestion of biomass type 1 (residues) The system proposed here will involve anaerobic digestion of the whole stillage or WDGS from the distillation column in a reactor for a period of 30 days or so. The reactor will be mixed and held at a temperature of 37 70% of the solids in WDGS are volatile. Destruction of 65% of volatile solids are effected in the digestion process. Ethanol from sugar cane is perceived as more sustainable with an associated lower specific greenhouse gas emission than ethanol from wheat or corn In the developed world, a typical bio-fuel facility, including ethanol facilities, plugs into the electricity grid to satisfy parasitic electrical energy demands. Similarly parasitic thermal demands are satisfied using fossil fuels, natural gas if available, or kerosene. This analysis is concerned with the process, the biofuel facility, the factory; it does not contain an analysis of agricultural processes or a full life cycle analysis of fertiliser. The “Cradle” is the gate to the facility. Similarly the analysis does not concern itself with the life cycle of the residues that leave the facility; the “Grave” is the fuel leaving the factory. This is a specific study of the production of ethanol in a facility. We may estimate the thermal energy in evaporating water from the stillage. Initially after decanting, the stillage is assumed to have a solids concentration of 35% dry solids. With reference to The dewatering/decanting facility dewaters from 12% dry solids to 35% dry solids. The electrical energy used is 14.8 The initial primary parasitic energy demand of 62% is reduced to 41.8% by removing the decanter, evaporator and dryer. The remaining parasitic demands are as below: Thermal demand of 1,000,880 Electrical demand of 330,680 The parasitic thermal demand is now of the order of 1,000,880 The transportation of straw is limited by volume and not by weight. Typically a large square bale has dimensions 1.2 A further source of energy in the form of transport fuel may be generated through digestion of WDGS. With reference to  The gross energy production is 17.8 There is no parasitic thermal demand as the WDGS leave the distillation columns warm. The primary electrical demand allowing for 40% electrical generation efficiency equates to 4.68 The net energy production thus equates to 13.14 It may be argued strongly that this by-product is best used as an energy source rather than as a feedstock. The improvements in the energy balance of the ethanol system may be noted with reference to By not drying the stillage the net energy improves by 53.2% over the base system. Furthermore by also combusting 24% of straw associated with the wheat a net energy improvement over the base system of 137% is effected. By then digesting the stillage, scrubbing the biogas to biomethane and compressing to 200 The biofuels directive At present the media perception of biofuels tends to worry significantly about the land take associated with the feedstock Power et al. In terms of petrol displaced (30 In an analysis by Power et al. A simple economic cost model was generated by Murphy and McCarthy    Further costs include: Capital cost of scrubber Operating cost of scrubber Cost of electricity €0.1/kW A large biogas system would use 150 A contingency figure of 10% of total capital investment (TCI) to allow for the lean first few years (where capacity factors of 40% and 60% are expected for years 1 and 2). Use of a risk premium of 7% in lieu of 5% which is used in the analysis of ethanol production by Power et al. The analysis would suggest that the production cost of the fuel is The same authors generated a cost of biomethane produced from grass as WDGS has no gate fee associated with it; it is a free feedstock as opposed to grass/silage which added WDGS are warm, no thermal demand is required. Using grass as a feedstock, the thermal demand is either fed by the biogas produced, thus reducing the fuel which may be sold, or thermal energy is purchased; both of which increase the production cost of the biofuel. Economies of scale are significant. The analysis for the grass feedstock is based on 41,000 The technology employed when the solids content of the feedstock exceeds 12% dry solids (grass/silage is at 18% DS) is different and more expensive than when treating feedstock with a solids content less than 12%. It requires pre-treatment of feedstock, through comminution (maceration) and pumping is more difficult. A continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) is employed in this analysis on WDGS. This is a cheap, proven, durable technology. The analysis for the biomethane from grass included distribution costs and a number of service stations. This WDGS analysis is based solely on the production cost in the facility.  The gross energy production when generating ethanol from wheat is 66 The process is energy intensive; as a result the net energy production when utilising fossil fuel to provide for parasitic demands is 25 Drying of DGS is responsible for 32% of the parasitic energy demand of the process. If DGS are not dried, and 24% of the straw associated with the wheat grain is combusted to satisfy reduced thermal demands, and the DGS are digested with associated upgrading of biogas to compressed biomethane, then the net energy production per hectare rises to 72 The gross energy in the biomethane equates to 27% of the gross energy contained in the ethanol. The cost of drying DGS is more than the asset value associated with the DDGS; thus a developer of an ethanol facility would, if informed, give the WDGS away for free to reduce the cost of ethanol production. The cost of the produced biomethane is €0.022/MJ which is less than two thirds that of the cost of ethanol (€0.036/MJ). The produced biomethane is very competitive with petrol on a €/MJ basis. If distribution and mark-up are ignored, then the fuel can sell for €0.82/l petrol on an energy basis.