This paper demonstrates the effects of both collector surface coverage and surface roughness on the work of particle-bubble adhesion and the probability of particle detachment from an air bubble. The work of adhesion and the probability of particle-bubble detachment change as a result of either surface coverage fraction or roughness ratio change or their combination.
                  A modified Yoon-Luttrel model for a flotation rate constant has been introduced with respect to surface heterogeneity and roughness. The work of particle-bubble adhesion is calculated using variable surface coverage of collector on mineral surface and its roughness ratio and the probability of particle detachment from the air bubble has been estimated. These simulations have been made for galena and fluorite particles.Froth flotation is a widely used process to separate valuable minerals from gangue and valuable minerals from each other. It is based on the difference in physico-chemical surface properties of the particles. In general, flotation processes can be described by means of three sub-processes: particle–bubble collision, particle–bubble attachment and particle–bubble detachment ( In the present work, a modified Yoon-Luttrel equation for a flotation rate constant has been introduced with respect to surface heterogeneity and roughness. The work of particle-bubble adhesion is calculated using variable surface coverage of collector on mineral surface (galena and fluorite) and its roughness ratio and the probability of particle detachment from the air bubble has been estimated. Collector dosage in flotation pulp results in adsorption of ions or molecules of the collector on the mineral surface and relates to mineral flotation. Adsorption of collector on mineral particles reduces wettability of the surface ( It is generally accepted there are two types of adsorption: chemical and physical adsorption. Physical adsorption occurs when molecules physically interact with a surface through Van der Waals or electrostatic forces, which are long-range, therefore the adsorbed molecules retain their identities. Chemically adsorbed molecules are linked to active sites of the mineral surface and the adsorption occurs to a monolayer and can be characterized by collector surface coverage that is expressed as a surface fraction: The surface coverage depends on many factors and tends to be different in various flotation conditions (zeta potential, reagent dosage, pH, pulp potential, etc.) Flotation is a three phase involved process (solid, liquid and gas) and when an air bubble is attached to a flat surface immersed in a liquid, Young's equation ( Young's equation describes equilibrium contact angles under ideal conditions: solid surface is flat, smooth, rigid and chemically homogeneous, non-reactive and insoluble that is rarely if the case in flotation of minerals. In flotation surfaces are generally heterogeneous ( It is generally accepted that if a solid surface is chemically heterogeneous then it can be considered as a compound surface, consisting for instance of two domains or area surface fractions. The contact angle of a heterogeneous surface is expressed by the Cassie equation ( Recently Eqs. Israelachvili and Gee ( Natural particles have defects on their surface. Mineral surface is also changed during pretreatment of mineral raw materials (e.g. crushing, grinding, mechanical activation) and acquired a specific roughness that contributes to the contact angle value and particle-bubble attachment and detachment process that affects flotation recovery. For rough surfaces, Wenzel proposed the equation ( Wenzel's equation relates the apparent contact angle to the equilibrium contact angle through a roughness ratio ( Therefore on unideal surface the deviations from ideality result in hysteresis, which is introduced as the difference between the advancing and receding contact angles ( Interpreting such contact angle values in terms of Eq. The probability of flotation is given by At low turbulence conditions in a flotation cell (Re The attachment step is generally expressed by means of energy barrier that exists between an air bubble and a particle at critical rupture thickness. According to extended DLVO theory ( If the particle overcomes the energy barrier, then it will attach to the bubble. From this, the probability of attachment can be given by an expression similar to Arrhenius' equation: And finally the particle is detached from the bubble with the probability of detachment ( The kinetic energies ( In order to take under consideration both heterogeneity and roughness issues on flotation rate constant, the Cassie and Wenzel equations are combined and a generalized equation for the contact angle on rough and heterogeneous surface can be written as follows: For a bicomponent surface Eq. Substituting Eq. Eq. Similarly, substituting Eq. Flotation rate constant can be calculated as: Hence, substituting Eqs. Two proposed models for flotation rate constant, Eq. In order to calculate the probability of particle detachment from the air bubble the energy barrier has not been taken into account. With this assumption Eq. For this purpose simulations have been made using data for surface coverage and contact angle values for galena treated by ethyl xanthate and fluorite treated by 10-undercenoic acid (data obtained from (  We can compare the work of adhesion values using different approximations for contact angles (Eq.   In order to gain a better understanding of the effects of roughness and surface coverage of collector on the work of galena and fluorite adhesion to the air bubble, the data simulation were illustrated in It can be seen that for galena the increase in coverage with xanthate and a decrease in roughness ratio resulted in the rise of In order to find out the reason for repulsive values of the work of adhesion The monotonic decrease in the work of adhesion with the decrease in surface coverage at variable roughness ration of hydrophobic surface was observed. At constant roughness ratio of hydrophilic surface Surface plots of the work of adhesion for galena particles have similar trends but there are no significant fluctuations observed. These findings might affect the probability of particle detachment from the air bubble. The simulations have been made for the following conditions: impeller of the radius  The work of adhesion significantly affects the probability of detachment of mineral particles, and it constantly decreases with an increase value of work of adhesion. Simulation shows that lower probability of detachment is obtained for fluorite covered with carboxylate than galena treated by ethyl xanthate with respect to roughness and surface coverage. The effect of surface coverage and roughness ratio on the probability of detachment of galena particles is presented in The results of simulation for the probability of detachment for fluorite particles appear in An analysis of surface plots of In mineral flotation the surface heterogeneity and roughness are invariably encountered. Roughness and surface heterogeneity can either increase or decrease the work of particle-bubble adhesion and the probability of particle detachment from the air bubble. However, non-ideal surfaces complicate interpretation of the work of particle-bubble adhesion and the probability of particle detachment from air bubble with respect to microscopic or molecular scale level of heterogeneity and roughness. The relation between the work of adhesion and contact angle depending on surface heterogeneity and roughness made it possible to calculate the probability of particle detachment from the air bubble. The effect of surface roughness and heterogeneity on the work of adhesion, the probability of particle-bubble detachment have been studied. The probability of detachment and the work of adhesion have been calculated using expressions based on modified Cassie and Israelachvili and Gee approximations and tested on galena and fluorite. The results show the difference in values of probability of detachment for roughness and heterogeneous surface at microscopic and molecular levels. However, differences in the work of adhesion and probability of detachment could be due to the scale of roughness and heterogeneity or assumed contact angles. These considerations have been used in proposed two model expressions for flotation rate constants. It is apparent that a new approach would be necessary to determine the particle roughness and heterogeneity.