Globally, the primary production of antimony is now isolated to a few countries and is dominated by China. As such it is currently deemed a critical and strategic material for modern society. The metallurgical principles utilized in antimony production are wide ranging. This paper will outline the mineral processing, pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical and electrometallurgical concepts used in the industrial primary production of antimony. As well an overview of the occurrence, reserves, end uses, production, and quality will be provided.Antimony is a silvery, white, brittle, crystalline solid that exhibits poor conductivity of electricity and heat. It has an atomic number of 51, an atomic weight of 122 and a density of 6.697 The abundance of antimony in the Earth's crust is approximately 0.2 Industrially, stibnite (Sb Antimony has been produced from ores in over 15 countries. As shown in Antimony trioxide, Sb Currently, the major conservation practice within the antimony industry is the recycling of the metal in used lead acid storage batteries, type metal and babbit. Also, antimonial lead and antimony metal are recovered from intermediate smelter products such as slags, drosses, flue dusts and residues generated at copper and lead smelters. The supply of secondary antimony substantially exceeds that from primary sources for antimonial lead applications. In other minor uses, antimony oxides are used as white pigments in paints, whereas antimony trisulfide and pentasulfide yield black, vermillion, yellow and orange pigments. Camoflauge paints contain antimony trisulfide which reflects infrared radiation. Antimony trisulfide is also used in the liners of automobile brakes as well as in safety match compositions. In the production of red rubber, antimony pentasulfide is used as a vulcanizing agent. Antimony compounds are also used in catalysts, pesticides, ammunition, and medicines. As well, a variety of compounds containing antimony as the major constituent are also used for other ammunition such as detonators, tracer bullets and armory. Also, as previously noted, antimony was widely used during the First World War as it was found to be the best lead alloy material to use for penetrating armor plate. Flame retardants continue to drive growth demand for antimony trioxide. The historic capacity of the world's major established producers as compiled by the author is listed in Overall, it is estimated that the distribution of antimony uses and consumption worldwide is flame retardants 72%, transportation including batteries 10%, chemicals 10%, ceramics and glass 4%, and other 4%. The USA, Japan and Western Europe which together account for around 70% of world demand dominate world consumption of antimony. Originally antimony was mined and hand sorted to effect concentration. Since the bulk of primary production is in China, where labor is plentiful and cheap, surprisingly, hand sorting still finds a large application. However, in recent years, many other unit operations are used in the mineral processing of antimony. These include primarily conventional crushing and grinding followed by combined gravity concentration and flotation. First, as stibnite is the predominant mineral and China is the predominant producer, the industrial mineral processing of a typical Chinese stibnite ore will be elucidated. As well, the historical flotation operation of a long term industrial North American silver bearing antimony tetrahedrite mining operation will also be discussed. A typical stibnite deposit may contain the antimony sulfide along with pyrite and a gangue consisting of quartz, calcite, barite, kaolin and gypsum. The ore grading about 2.7% Sb is put to a combined treatment by hand-sorting, heavy medium separation and flotation ( In the United States, the last primary producer of antimony was Sunshine Mining & Refining Company. The antimony bearing mineral in the mine was argentiferous tetrahedrite, or freibergite (Cu,Ag) Under these conditions, a 40,000 The Sunshine mill saw its last major modification in the mid 1950s with added floor space and the incorporation of 30 new Fagergren 56 cells and 12 Galigher Agitair 36 cells which replaced old Denver cells. Additionally, a Denver regrind mill was installed. The purpose of these changes was to enhance production, whereby two concentrates would be produced. From the mid 1950s the Sunshine mill produced these two concentrates from the flotation process; the high-grade, 40,000 During the period between 1953 and early 1989, a bulk sulfide concentrate was produced in the first circuit utilizing Aerofloat 242 as the primary collector. Ninety-five percent of the silver bearing antimony tetrahedrite ore was recovered in this step. The recleaning of the first circuit cleaner concentrates as accomplished through the addition of zinc sulfate and sodium sulfite as a pyrite and galena depressant followed by flotation to a high-grade product at controlled conditions. Aero 3477 was used in the second circuit which scavenged any remaining recoverable silver mineral. Additionally, the tailings from the retreatment circuit and the second circuit cleaner concentrates reported to the regrind mill and were reground to passing 95% −325 mesh. This material was classified through a Krebs cyclone. The lower grade underflow was subjected to roughing and cleaning. The higher grade overflow reported to the pyrite cleaner concentrates. Tailings from the pyrite roughers and pyrite cleaner cells reported to the second circuit roughers. During early 1995, lead mineralization as galena and as antimony bearing bournonite began to show up in abundance in the mill feed. Hence, tetrahedrite concentrate dilution with lead became a growing problem. With zinc sulfate and sodium sulfite in use to depress pyrite and galena in the retreatment circuit, the galena would report to the regrind mill and was recycled as before. Galena and bournonite then refloated as a recirculating load in this arrangement and reported back to the first circuit to be recovered again in the first circuit cleaner concentrates. So, the recirculation of lead in the first, second, and retreatment circuits provided overloaded conditions as well as diluted the silver grade of our single concentrate. The bank of four Agitair 36 cells removed from pyrite cleaning service during the initial single concentrate modification were brought back on line to serve as an intermediate process for the reground product (namely retreatment tails and second circuit cleaner concentrates), which had previously been split between the first and second circuit roughers. The Krebs cyclone used to split the reground product between the first and second circuit roughers was left in service with the higher grade overflow continuing to report to the first circuit roughers. The cyclone underflow became feed to these four Agitair flotation cells. Tailings from this new modification were directed to the new third circuit rougher head box. The disc filter which had previously been removed from service was placed on line. As lead values of concentrate produced rose to an acceptable level it was directed to this filter. The lead concentrates produced by this method proved to be an acceptable product for marketing. The referenced literature provides detailed flowsheets and process descriptions ( For primary production, the antimony content of the ore has traditionally determined the pyrometallurgical method of recovery. In general the lowest grades of sulfide ores containing 5–25% antimony are volatilized to antimony trioxide: 25–40% antimony ores are smelted in a blast furnace: and 45–60% antimony ores are treated by liquation or iron precipitation. A description of each of these as well as oxide reduction follows (      Flowsheets and detailed process descriptions for a primary pyrometallurgical production May be found in the literature referenced ( Hydrometallurgical methods can be employed for simple antimony materials as well as complex ones containing any number of metals. Normal industrial antimony hydrometallurgical practices call for a two step process of leaching followed by electrodeposition. In reality, there are only two solvent systems utilized in antimony hydrometallurgy. These are the alkaline sulfide system and the acidic chloride system and the alkaline sulfide system predominates. The alkaline sulfide system has been employed industrially in the former Soviet Union, China, Australia and the United States ( However, dissolution of elemental sulfur in sodium hydroxide is also used as a lixiviant for alkaline sulfide leaching of antimony. The combination of sodium hydroxide and elemental sulfur results in the formation of species other than just sulfide (S Due to the oxidizing power of polysulfide on sodium thioantimonite, the major species in solution is normally sodium thioantimonate (Na The electrodeposition of the antimony from the alkaline sulfide solution to cathode metal is normally carried out via electrowinning in either diaphragm or non-diaphragm cells. The primary anode reactions are; The primary cathode reaction is; The cathodic metal antimony product may attain a grade over 99.5% pure after washing. This industrial alkaline sulfide hydrometallurgical plant ran successfully for about 60 The other methodology for antimony hydrometallurgy is the acidic chloride system. While the alkaline sulfide system predominates, much research and pilot scale work has been undertaken to utilize chloride-based technology ( In the acidic chloride hydrometallurgical antimony system, hydrochloric acid, HCl, often in conjunction with ferric chloride, FeCl In the aqueous solution, FeCl In cases where the antimony is already oxidized, it may be leached directly with HCl without the need for FeCl As with the alkaline sulfide system, the solubilized antimony chloride can be produced by electrowinning from solution in diaphragm cells. This produces cathode antimony metal. The primary cathode reaction is; The primary anode reactions are; Alternatively, the antimony chloride solution can be treated by hydrolysis precipitation of the antimony from solution as a solid oxychloride. Then, the precipitated solid is treated with ammonia to produce a pure antimony oxide. This is illustrated as; In summary, there are two predominant hydrometallurgical systems for antimony. Alkaline sulfide technology is by far the most utilized because of its inherent antimony selectivity and its ease of full scale application due to minimal corrosion issues that are associated with the chloride system. However, the chloride system is being applied with a greater degree of success and confidence. In ancient times, in extracting antimony from sulfide ore by the addition of iron, a starlike fern shaped crystalline pattern appeared during the course of solidification. This was dubbed the “Philosopher's Signet Star” in 1610 and until recently the shape of these stars had commonly served to indicate the grade of the metallic antimony. Indeed, when antimony metal contains impurities like sulfur, arsenic, lead or iron to any appreciable extent, its surface shows the presence of these foreign elements by specks, by a leaden appearance or by a poorly defined appearance of the crystalline pattern. This ‘starring’ phenomenon is also produced by cooling antimony metal, or so called ‘regulus’ under cover of a layer of a properly prepared starring mixture, or coverture ( Globally, the primary production of antimony is now isolated to a few countries and is dominated by China. As such antimony is currently deemed a critical and strategic material for modern society. The metallurgical principles utilized in production are wide ranging. This paper outlined the primary mineral processing, pyrometallurgical, hydrometallurgical and electrometallurgical concepts used in the industrial primary production of antimony. As well, an overview of the occurrence, reserves, end uses, production, and quality was provided.