In hydrocyclone separation, fluctuating solids contents and size distributions in the feed cause instationarities. Under these conditions, the stationary concentration equilibrium in the apparatus and the separation are affected. Control mechanisms are demanded for stabilization of the separation effect. Designing the control system, knowledge on hydrocyclone dynamics and the transitional behaviour is necessary. To simulate hydrocyclone dynamics, the transport balance considering slip velocity and turbulent particle diffusivity was used. The transitional behaviour of a 40mm hydrocyclone at special operating conditions has been computed numerically. The following scenario was simulated: a water hydrocyclone at t
                     =0 is suddenly fed with a 200g/l-suspension. The transitional period until the concentration equilibrium of all fractions is reached, takes about 2.5s. Partition curves simulated inside the transitional period indicate a maximum. The major objective of hydrocyclone modelling is estimation of the separation in form of the partition curve. The physics of separation is highly complex because of the turbulent multiphase flow in the apparatus. Basis of modelling is the description of cyclone flow with the Navier–Stokes equations for a suspension and the calculation of the separation with the transport equation. For modelling simplifications are necessary without neglecting the essential physics. Experience show that the separation result tolerates more simplification of the flow model as of the particle transport model.There are different types of models which are subject of numerous publications: two-dimensional and three-dimensional models, Eulerian and Lagrange models. Nowadays, modern computers seem to favour three-dimensional and Lagrangian models ( Choosing the model type one should less look at computational elegance. On the contrary, the major dilemma is the appropriate model for the problem. Hydrocyclone separation demands thinking in categories of process engineering, such as balancing phases and disperse size- or density-fractions. Actually, single particle trajectories are less relevant than concentrations at given points and times in the apparatus. Therefore, model considerations of The flow model is based on the momentum and mass conservation equations of the suspension. The Eulerian approach (also called mixture model) treats the particle phases as a pseudo-continuum and solves the transport equation for phase concentrations and phase momentum It is assumed that the solids concentration of the suspension with the viscosity, Different turbulence models were tested for hydrocyclone swirl flow. As noted by Turbulent energy, The boundary conditions at the hydrocyclone inlet can only be described correctly when a 3-D model is used. To reduce the numerical effort, a 2-D model was applied with simplifying assumptions for the inlet flow. Instead of considering the actual inlet flow injected tangentially through the feed nozzle, the suspension is assumed to be fed through the entire top section of the hydrocyclone. The radial component of the velocity corresponds to the total radial flux due to a given flow rate. The elliptic type of the equations requires specifying the conditions at the outlets. This task is not trivial within the framework of the problem to be solved. The following conditions were fixed at the apex outlet Strictly speaking, the flow conditions at the hydrocyclone outlet should be matched with the flow conditions in the outlet nozzles. After the Reynolds averaging ( Eq. As suggested by To calculate the velocity amplitude, Eq. The momentum transfer of the disperse phases is described in accordance with The combination of stationary Eqs. The drag coefficient, Increased density and viscosity of the suspension. Entrainment effect considering fine particle acceleration in the surrounding of larger settling particles. Counter current due to fluid displacement of settling particles. Computer experiments have been carried out for a hydrocyclone with dimensions shown in The calculations were restricted to10 particle size classes which are characterized by their mean sizes, As mentioned above, under stationary conditions in Eqs. As can be seen, the fine particles are more equally distributed in the hydrocyclone volume because turbulent diffusion predominates. On the other side, coarser particles are increasingly influenced by the centrifugal force and collected at the hydrocyclone wall. These results agree well with the idea, developed in the simplified turbulent diffusion model of  Based on stationary concentration distributions the fluxes of all size fractions, which are discharged through overflow and underflow can be balanced. This results in the partition curve of the hydrocyclone (percentage of every size fraction leaving the apparatus through the underflow). Instationary states of hydrocyclone separation are observed in case of variations of solids content and particle size distribution in the feed. In this case, the stationary concentration distributions of every size class are disturbed. Instantaneous local concentrations can be estimated on the basis of the above described separation model. The transition behaviour of a 40 The stationary state of the fine fraction finally shows an equi-distribution. Already at the beginning, fines are immediately discharged to the overflow. This could be expected, considering the decisive influence of turbulent transport. At the beginning, the complete coarse fraction is transported to the wall. Subsequently, relatively late, due to increasing accumulation of particles in the cone, a partial upward transport to the overflow can be observed. The coarse particles show higher residence times in comparison with the fine ones. This information on the transitional period is important when planning a hydrocyclone control system. Simulated hydrocyclone separation curves during the transitional period, starting after the feed concentration step, are shown in For describing the complex flow in a hydrocyclone and considering interactions in a polydisperse suspension with high solids content, simplifying assumptions have to be assumed. The turbulence terms of the Navier–Stokes equations are formulated on the basis of a The modelling results confirm mainly the ideas about the equilibrium between sedimentation and turbulent diffusion fluxes in the hydrocyclone. By fluctuation of feed solids concentration the establishment of equilibrium for the coarse fractions is reached more slowly than for the fine fractions.