Fermented meat products have been subjected to the action of microorganisms or tissue enzymes so that they are modified significantly in a desirable fashion. They are subdivided into fermented sausages (products made from comminuted meat stuffed into casings) and fermented unground meats. This article provides basic information on the manufacture of fermented meat products and on the factors affecting their safety and quality. Fermented sausages are manufactured from comminuted lean and fatty tissue, mixed with salt, spices, sugar, and, in most cases, curing agents (nitrite, nitrate, ascorbate). Particularly in commercial production, starter cultures are also added. The mix is then filled into casings and subjected to a microbial fermentation. Many, but not all varieties of fermented sausages are subsequently aged to dry them and to develop the desired sensory properties. Another criterion for the classification of fermented sausages is the surface treatment (e.g., smoking, mold growth). An official classification of fermented sausages is important to avoid misleading the consumer and unfair competition between manufacturers. Different parameters are used in different countries; however, they are all more or less related to the degree of drying and the percentage of high-quality raw material (lean muscle tissue) in the formulation. For example, the German Code of Practice (Leitsätze) specifies the minimum content of collagen-free lean meat for different sausage varieties while key parameters in France are the ratio between collagen and protein, the fat content and the percentage of moisture, based on fat-free dry matter. To produce aged hams and related raw cured meats, salt is added by rubbing it on to the meat surface or by immersing the cut into a brine or by injecting brine into the tissue. Then, cuts are kept at low temperatures (10 The microbiological quality of the raw material (lean and fatty tissue) should be controlled by continuously monitoring the temperature during meat handling and transport, by visual inspection of shipments, and by selecting suppliers following good hygienic practice in slaughtering and butchering. For the manufacture of fermented sausages, the pH of the raw material should be 5.8 or lower because higher pH values favor the growth of undesired or hazardous acid-sensitive bacteria. Initial pH values of the sausage mix between 5.8 and 6.0 may still be tolerated if a rapid onset and a sufficient rate and extent of lactic acid formation are ascertained. To obtain products of good sensory quality and shelf-life, the fatty tissue used should be low in polyunsaturated fatty acids and peroxides. To minimize fat deterioration, the material is usually chilled or frozen in order to keep the temperature during comminution below 2 By removal of oxygen and addition of salt, the normal spoilage flora of aerobically stored fresh meat (mainly pseudomonads) is suppressed. With few exceptions, the target water activity ( For most semidry fermented sausages, nitrite is used as curing agent at input levels between 100 and 150 Carbohydrates are added to the mix to provide an energy source for lactic acid bacteria. Addition of 0.3% glucose or another rapidly fermentable mono- or disaccharide will enable the lactic acid bacteria to lower the pH from 5.8 to 5.3 or below, which is normally sufficient for microbiological safety. If the initial pH of the mix is higher (5.8–6.0) and/or a lower final pH is desired, the input of rapidly fermentable sugar is increased to 0.5–0.8%. The acidulant glucono-δ-lactone (GdL) is only used for products with a short shelf-life because many strains of lactic acid bacteria ferment this compound to lactic and acetic acid, and acetic acid interferes with reactions leading to and stabilizing desired sensory properties. Also, use of excessive amounts of fermentable sugars, in conjunction with insufficient drying and elevated aging and/or storage temperature, results in high levels of lactic and acetic acids, sometimes even in pore formation and swollen packs due to CO In addition to their effects on aroma and flavor, some spices contain antioxidative compounds and may, by means of their manganese content, increase the rate of acid production during sausage fermentation. During the 1970s and 1980s, it became common practice to use starter cultures in industrial sausage fermentations. Most commercial preparations contain a combination of lactic acid bacteria with nonpathogenic catalase-positive cocci. Such cultures have also been shown to be useful for the manufacture of a wide spectrum of traditional indigenous sausage varieties on a small scale, and also replaced, to a large extent, so-called back-slopping methods where a fermented sausage from the previous batch is used to inoculate the following batch. The disadvantage of the latter method is that desired catalase-positive cocci will tend to become diluted out, and strains with undesirable metabolic properties may be selected. Suitable starter bacteria must be sufficiently active in the Use of lactic acid bacteria is important for the safe production of rapidly fermented semidry sausages, whereas at low ripening temperatures their effect is small. Of the species of lactic acid bacteria that are commercially available, Starters containing catalase-positive cocci are of most benefit to products prepared with nitrate, and products to have a long shelf-life. Adding sufficiently high levels (10 Fermentation temperatures between 20 and 25 Early after stuffing, residual oxygen is consumed by meat enzymes, and oxygenated myoglobin is turned into brownish metmyoglobin. Nitrite accelerates metmyoglobin formation but slows down the former process. Subsequently, acid formation starts, and catalase-positive cocci reduce nitrate to nitrite. Acid favors the reaction of nitrite with metmyoglobin to give rise to pink nitric oxide myoglobin. Residual nitrite is reduced by the sausage microflora. As acid formation continues, the pH drops to about 5.3. At this pH, growth of acid-sensitive bacteria, including catalase-positive cocci, are inhibited, and the water-binding capacity of the mix becomes minimal. Then, fermentation is usually slowed down by adjusting the temperature to about 15 After fermentation, most sausages produced in central and northern Europe are smoked. This leads to inhibition of microbial growth on the surface and to a delay of oxidative changes. On unsmoked products common in France and Italy, but also in Spain and Switzerland, a surface bloom develops, mainly consisting of salt-tolerant yeasts (e.g., Sausages are usually aged at 12–15 During aging, the flavor and aroma characteristics for fermented sausages are formed and stabilized. Lipids are precursors of many unbranched aldehydes, 2-alkanones, and short-chain unbranched fatty acids. The process involves tissue lipases, autoxidation reactions, and the transformation of the reaction products by microorganisms. Use of nitrite results in partial inhibition of oxidative changes of lipids, and in a shift in the reaction products. Tissue proteases split proteins into peptides that are subsequently transformed by microorganisms into amino acids and branched-chain volatile fatty acids. Ethyl esters also contribute to sausage aroma. Sufficient activity of catalase-positive cocci is important for the development and stabilization of the desired sensory properties. To obtain a sausage with full aroma and flavor, it is therefore important to limit rate and extent of acid formation and to age the product for a minimum of several weeks. If undesired mold growth is prevented, oxidative changes in the lipid fraction (rancidity) limit the shelf-life of most semidry or dry sausages. Hazards to be controlled during manufacture of fermented sausages are listed in  The critical limits given have been validated by commercial practice. However, they do not cover the whole range of types of fermented sausages. Lowering one hurdle (e.g., addition of less salt or curing agents) must be compensated for by fortifying another hurdle (e.g., by increasing the rate of acid formation). Experience shows that incriminated products have been either fermented at too high temperatures without starters and with nitrate rather than nitrite, or have been eaten after a very short fermentation with little, if any, drying. In contrast to Protein degradation by tissue enzymes during prolonged storage of raw meat, in conjunction with growth of psychrotrophic lactic acid bacteria capable of histidine decarboxylation (in particular, certain strains of Mold growth on fermented sausages may be inhibited by appropriate control of temperature and RH during aging, storage, and distribution, by excluding oxygen from the packages, and/or by surface treatment with smoke, permitted antifungal agents, or waxes. Products to be mold-ripened should be inoculated with a suitable nontoxic mold strain and dried at temperatures below 15 Viruses already present in livestock at the time of slaughter normally do not affect humans. However, since these viruses are, as a rule, only slowly inactivated during sausage ripening, fermented meats should, like unprocessed meats, not be exported from areas where viral diseases of meat animals prevail. Viruses pathogenic for humans also retain their infectivity during sausage fermentation, and, as in all cases where food is handled, contamination of the food by human feces must be avoided by proper personal hygiene. Parasites (protozoa, nematodes, tapeworms) that may occasionally escape detection during inspection of the animals and their meat at the slaughterhouse are inactivated by low For the manufacture of raw hams and comparable products, it is very important to select cuts of normal pH (≤ In contrast to fermented sausages, changes in lipids are of little significance, and the microbiology and sensory characteristics of raw ham are little affected by nitrite. Hence, many aged products with long shelf-life are made with nitrate rather than nitrite, or with no curing agent at all. The method of salting depends on the type of product and on local tradition. Injection of brine is uncommon in the manufacture of products to be aged and dried. Dry salting proceeds only slowly, but is preferred for most high-quality, expensive products. The meat is salted until sufficient salt has diffused into its core. During this period and the following equilibration time, the temperature must be low (≤ After salting and equilibration, excessive salt and moisture are removed from the surface. To prevent growth of 