cohesion uniaxial compressive strength for a rock mass described by the Mohr–Coulomb criterion thickness of the plastic zone geological strength index coefficient of lateral pressure Hoek–Brown constant for the rock mass Hoek–Brown constant for intact rock radial stress at the outer boundary of the plastic zone field stress radius of underground opening Hoek–Brown constant for the rock mass radial displacement at the periphery of the excavation uniaxial compressive strength of the intact rock uniaxial compressive strength for a rock mass described by the Hoek–Brown criterion angle of internal friction slope of the Mohr–Coulomb envelope drawn in terms of principal stresses the rock mass strength satisfies the Mohr–Coulomb criterion with parameters derived from the Hoek–Brown criterion by applying a constant range fitness procedure the rock mass strength satisfies the Hoek–Brown criterion the rock mass satisfies the Mohr–Coulomb criterion the stress or pressure is normalized with the rock mass strength satisfies the Mohr–Coulomb criterion with parameters derived from the Hoek–Brown criterion by applying a varying range fitness procedure Many computer codes, when used to evaluate the mechanical response of tunnels, employ the Mohr–Coulomb strength criterion, is a linear function of the major and minor principal stresses. However, the strength of the rock mass is usually expressed in a better way by a parabolic function of these stresses. The parabolic Hoek–Brown strength criterion may fit well the real data, and tables, which provide values for rock mass parameters according to the type of rock and its quality, are available. Therefore, the question usually arises as to whether the parameters of the latter criterion are known, how those for the former may be obtained. The Mohr–Coulomb criterion depends on the parameters However, the question arises as to which are the equivalent Mohr–Coulomb strength parameters for given Hoek–Brown parameters that are applicable for the design of a tunnel. Hoek and Brown Let the rock mass uniaxial compressive strength corresponding to the Mohr–Coulomb and Hoek–Brown criteria be defined as For an unsupported tunnel, a larger than zero In order to evaluate the equivalent, to the Hoek–Brown, Mohr–Coulomb rock mass strength parameters, Hoek and Brown The lower limit of the minor principal stress for an unsupported tunnel is equal to zero. The upper limit of the minor principal stress, within the plastic zone, is at its outer boundary. Therefore, any pertinent fitness procedure has to be applied in the range of the normalized minor principal stress from zero to A series of calculations is carried out by using the code RockSupport In For the case of a supported tunnel the radial principal stress at the walls is the support pressure Then, as in For validation, a quite small arbitrary value of 0.2 Similar improvements are computed by applying a larger inside pressure equal to 1 As a last step it was decided to validate the procedure by applying it for the analysis of a circular tunnel, 10 In this study, a method is suggested to evaluate the equivalent Mohr–Coulomb strength parameters Initially, formulas are derived which evaluate the lower bound pairs of values for the Mohr–Coulomb strength parameters. However, these parameters underestimate the mechanical response of the tunnel. In the next stage, the equivalent Mohr–Coulomb strength parameters of the rock mass surrounding an opening are evaluated by applying a best fit procedure in the range of the existing minor principal stresses. The application of these equivalent parameters is found to provide values for the thickness of the plastic zone and the radial displacements of the opening which are very close to those obtained for the original Hoek–Brown rock mass. This approximation is an improvement to the previously employed method which applied a constant range fitness procedure. This improvement still holds for a rock mass subjected to a non-hydrostatic natural stress field. The elegance of the constant range fitness procedure applied almost exclusively until now has to be acknowledged. Among its other advantages, it allows for the construction of graphs that are independent of the natural stress field, which directly provide the equivalent parameters. However, this procedure provides in many cases Mohr–Coulomb rock mass strength parameters, which are not satisfactory for the simulation of a Hoek–Brown rock mass. In applying the varying range fitness procedure, the upper limit for the minor principal stress, which depends on the strength of the rock mass and the natural stress field, may be directly evaluated from the given formulae in the provided spreadsheet. The lower limit of the confining stress then has to be estimated from the capacity of the supporting system or from initial trial analyses. The response of the rock mass around tunnels, with equivalent Mohr–Coulomb