In this work, we investigated the effects of orthophenylene diamine (OPD) and sodium lignin sulfonate (at a range of 3–10 ppm) in industrial zinc sulfate electrolyte on the current efficiency, the energy consumption of zinc electrowinning, and the physical characteristics of zinc deposits. The electrowinning experiments were conducted using a laboratory-scale apparatus, at a plating time of 80 min, a current density of 500 A m−2, and a temperature of 38 °C. Industrial zinc sulfate electrolyte having zinc and H2SO4 concentrations of 62 and 170 g L−1, respectively, was employed. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to characterize the zinc deposits with respect to surface morphology.
                  The results clearly showed that OPD had a very negative (catastrophic) effect on the current efficiency and, consequently, the power consumption of zinc electrowinning. Current efficiency dropped from about 90% at no addition to less than 60% at only 3 ppm addition level. On the other hand, the addition of up to 10 ppm sodium lignin sulfonate had no negative impact on the zinc electrowinning process, nor on the quality of the zinc deposits.Surfactants are typically added during pressure leach of sulfide minerals to improve the wetting characteristics and thus enhance the kinetics of the leaching reactions. This is particularly true for pressure leaching of zinc sulfide minerals. Although most of the added surfactant is consumed in the process, it is possible that some unreacted residual amounts could end up in downstream processes, such as the electrowinning cell house. It should be noted that most of the surfactants should react and the residual product might not be the same as the original cold surfactant added to the pressure leaching. For zinc pressure leaching, lignin sulfonates are the most common surfactants employed. There are some indications in literature that orthophenylene diamine (OPD) might be a more suitable surfactant for this purpose Orthophenylene diamine belongs to the aromatic amine family In general, electrolytic operations are found to be very sensitive to the presence of both inorganic and organic impurities The main objective of this investigation was to study the effects of OPD and sodium lignin sulfonate on zinc electrowinning from industrial acidic sulfate electrolyte. It is believed that this information would be useful for those currently using or contemplating the use of these surfactants in pressure leaching of zinc concentrates. The electrowinning apparatus consisted of three water-jacketed cylindrical cells, which were constructed from 1/4-in.-thick Lexan™ materials and had dimensions of 43 cm (height)×11.5 cm (diameter). Two lead anodes and a central aluminum cathode were used at a cathode–anode spacing of 2.5 cm. The electrodes had dimensions of 2 cm (width)×40 cm (length), of which only 28 cm was active. The electrolyte was circulated within the cell at a rate of about 10 mL/min with a peristaltic pump (Cole-Palmer Masterflex). This rate ensured sufficient electrolyte mixing in the cell. One pump motor with three heads was used for the three cells in order to obtain the same circulation rate. Each cell required about 3 L of electrolyte in a test. The cell electrolyte was maintained at the desired temperature (38 °C) by circulating heated water through the water jackets. A Haake water heater was employed to heat, control and circulate the water through the cells in series. The three cells were connected in series to a constant power supply (HP model 6267A), which can supply up to 36 V and 10 A. The electrowinning tests were conducted for 80 min and in the batch mode, i.e. there was no continuous addition of fresh neutral solution or additives. It should be noted that the results of this study are based on tests performed for 80 min, and that different results could be obtained at longer plating times. The acid and zinc concentrations were maintained at 190 and 62 g L After each test, the zinc deposits were mechanically stripped from the aluminum cathode, washed with tap water, air-dried and then weighed for current efficiency calculations. Sections of the deposits were cut (where possible), and analyzed by SEM to determine the influence of the surfactants on surface morphology. A Hitachi model S-2300 SEM equipped with a Quartz X-one EDX system was used for this purpose. One of the most important performance parameters in electrowinning is current efficiency. In this study, the current efficiency for zinc deposition was determined from the weight of the deposit according to: The effect of OPD and sodium lignin sulfonate on current efficiency was considered in the range of 0–10 ppm. The change in current efficiency as a function of reagent concentration in the cell electrolyte, for both OPD and sodium lignin sulfonate, is shown in On the other hand, sodium lignin sulfonate had virtually no effect on current efficiency in the concentration range considered in this study. Current efficiency remained unchanged at about 90% over the entire concentration range of 0–10 ppm. It is therefore concluded that sodium lignin sulfonate does not influence the overpotential of the hydrogen evolution reaction under the present experimental conditions It is evident from the above results that the use of OPD in pressure leaching of zinc concentrates should be considered with the greatest caution. If even trace amounts of OPD end up in the cellhouse (which is a real possibility in plant conditions), this would cause a catastrophic impact on the electrowinning operation. Another major electrowinning parameter that was monitored is cell voltage. Cell voltage was continuously measured over the entire plating time, using a computer data acquisition system. Manual measurements were also performed to double check the data acquired by the computer and in case of malfunction of the computer.  The effects of OPD and sodium lignin sulfonate on energy consumption of zinc electrowinning are shown in Scanning electron microscopy was used to analyze the surface morphology of the zinc deposits.  The effects of OPD and sodium lignin sulfonate on zinc electrowinning from sulfate-based industrial electrolyte have been evaluated. The primary characteristics studied included current efficiency, power consumption and deposit morphology and microstructure. The presence of OPD in the electrolyte had a major negative impact on current efficiency and deposit microstructure and surface morphology. The current efficiency of zinc electrowinning dropped significantly from 90% without OPD in the electrolyte to less that 60% at 3 ppm OPD. At 5 ppm concentration of OPD in the electrolyte, the current efficiency was less than 20%. At 10 ppm OPD, the current efficiency dropped further to less than 10%. In addition, the deposit surface morphology was also affected by the presence of OPD. The deposits had some pits (pin holes), and had a basal platelet-like morphology with higher degree of zinc dissolution as typical of deposits obtained at low current efficiency. If OPD is used in zinc pressure leaching, extreme caution should be taken to prevent OPD from entering the zinc electrowinning cellhouse. In the case of sodium lignin sulfonate, current efficiency remained unchanged at about 90% over the entire concentration range of 0–10 ppm. This was attributed to the suggestion that sodium lignin sulfonate does not influence the overpotential of the hydrogen evolution reaction under the present experimental conditions. Furthermore, the zinc deposits produced with the presence of sodium lignin sulfonate in the electrolyte showed similar microstructure and surface morphology as those produced without it. Based on these results, it can be concluded that if sodium lignin sulfonate is used in the pressure leaching of zinc concentrates, and it finds its way to the cell house in its cold form, it would not adversely impact the electrowinning process. It should be noted that this study investigated the effects of the primary surfactant components, and not the effect of secondary (residual) surfactant components, on zinc electrowinning. The latter could be the subject of a future study. Another subject for future research is to study the effect of the surfactants in the presence of additives commonly used in zinc electrowinning (i.e., glue, gelatin, etc.). The authors thank Falconbridge for providing the financial support, and supplying the materials. Thanks are also due to Mr. Robin Kalanchey for performing some of the experiments.