This article reports on a study of copper removal from ammoniacal aqueous solution (1.0kgm−3 Cu, pH 9.5) by liquid–liquid extraction using a pulsed sieve-plate column. The extractant tested was the hydroxyoxime LIX 84-I (2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime) in the aliphatic diluent Shellsol D-70. The results of the pilot plant experiments demonstrated the feasibility of operating the extraction process in this type of column, with efficiencies of copper removal in the range of 90.5–99.5%. Several effects on the column performance were examined, namely the aqueous and organic flow rates and the pulse velocity. The axial dispersion model was applied to simulate the concentration profiles, which reasonably predicted the experimental data. The overall mass transfer coefficient was evaluated from the experimental data and was found to be between 9×10−6 and 1.2×10−5
                     ms−1. These data were compared with the ones obtained from the resistances in series model, which indicated that the resistance due to chemical reaction was 84–91% of the overall resistance to mass transfer. The extraction using a hollow fiber contactor was also carried out to compare the membrane process performance with the one of conventional process.specific interfacial area, m pulse amplitude, m concentration, kmol molecular diffusivity, m Sauter mean diameter of the dispersed phase drops, m column diameter, m hole diameter, m pitch of holes on plate, m continuous phase axial mixing coefficient at zero flow rate, m axial mixing coefficient, m pulse frequency, Hz acceleration due to gravity (9.8), m plate spacing, m extractant generic designation overall height of transfer unit based on the continuous phase, m overall mass transfer coefficient based on the aqueous phase, m overall mass transfer coefficient based on the continuous phase, m local mass transfer coefficient, m column length, m distribution ratio volumetric flow rate, m resistance to mass transfer, m cross-sectional column area, m superficial velocity slip velocity, m axial distance, m fractional plate free area fractional resistance (relatively to the total resistance), % density difference between phases, kg mechanical power dissipation per unit mass, m dispersed phase hold-up viscosity ratio viscosity, kg density, kg interfacial tension between the organic and the aqueous phases, N initial value aqueous phase continuous phase calculated value dispersed phase equilibrium experimental value final organic phase extraction chemical reaction transition      The ammoniacal leaching of ores, concentrates, wastes, by-products and scrap, containing copper, is a process of notable interest, since this metal ion is easily solubilized through the formation of ammine complexes. Therefore, the range of copper materials that can be efficiently processed via hydrometallurgy is extended The copper present in the effluents must be recovered on account of economical and environmental reasons. In fact, there is a crescent concern about minimizing the discharge of liquid effluents containing heavy metals. The Portuguese environmental legislation defines emission limit values, ELV, for the waste waters discharge which for total copper is 1.0 With the increasing demand for non-ferrous metals owing to population growth and improvements in the standard of living in the world, under the constraint of limited availability of natural resources, it is indispensable to consider, in the near future, the sustainable development of more efficient metals production processes taking environmental concerns into account If, as referred previously, the development of modern electronic equipments gave rise to a rapid evolution of the printed circuit boards industry, it also brought on tremendous increase in electrical and electronic scrap Copper may be recovered from electronic scrap via pyrometallurgical processes Some references have been found in the literature about the application of new hydrometallurgical copper recycling processes for electronic scrap After the ammoniacal leaching, copper can be removed from the aqueous solutions by several techniques, like precipitation, adsorption and solvent extraction In the solvent extraction process, well-established copper extractants like hydroxyoximes or β-diketones are used The results described by Flett and Melling The most common type of solvent extraction equipment used in the hydrometallurgical industry is the mixer-settler arrangement. However, more recently, pulsed columns have been considered as a possible alternative to the existing technology The main advantages of pulsed columns over mixer-settlers are higher throughput and separation efficiency, lower organic entrainment and therefore lower organic loss, reduced solvent inventory and crud formation, less environmental pollution due to a closed system, less maintenance need, lower floor space requirement and reduced operating and maintenance costs Pulsed columns are contactors in which the mass transfer rate is enhanced by hydraulic or pneumatic pulsation of the liquids. The periodic pulsing of both phases up and down the column, in the presence of internals such as sieve plates, causes the required dispersed phase droplets break-up and coalescence In the literature there are several references to the application of pulsed columns to the chemical, biochemical, nuclear, petroleum and metallurgical industries, for the extraction of uranium, cobalt, nickel, zinc and copper Thus, the aim of this work was the extraction of copper from ammoniacal medium in a pulsed sieve-plate column. To the best of our knowledge, there is no data published in the literature regarding this topic. The hydroxyoxime LIX 84-I was used as an extractant, despite the LIX 54 advantages mentioned before. In fact, it was not possible to purchase this reagent from Cognis, because its production has been ceased. The performance of the selected column was studied for this extraction process. The effects of the aqueous and organic flow rates and of the pulse velocity on the mass transfer were examined. This study can provide fundamental data to the design of pulsed sieve-plate columns to be used in the processing of ammoniacal waste waters. There are two main groups of mathematical models for liquid–liquid extraction in columns The DPBM considers that the dispersed phase is discontinuous and takes into account the complex dispersed phase interactions, like coalescence, break-up, droplet rise and backmixing. So, these models predict within a good accuracy the drop size distribution, the dispersed phase hold-up and the concentration profiles in the extraction columns Besides the aforementioned approaches, it is important to refer the Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) The equations of the axial dispersion model for continuous and dispersed phases can be written as In these equations, In this expression, The convention that the aqueous phase flows from The system of differential equations was solved by the processes modelling system gPROMS To apply the presented model, in order to simulate the concentration profiles in the pulsed column, several parameters are necessary. These parameters were obtained by experimental measurements or estimated from literature correlations. The dispersed phase drops diameters to calculate The continuous phase axial mixing coefficient was estimated by the correlation obtained by Ingham et al. This technique involves operating the column with zero flow of continuous phase. Thus, in this expression, The correlation describes the effects of column diameter, The dispersed phase axial mixing coefficient was estimated by the Miyauchi and Oya To identify the limiting step on the extraction process, it was decided to compare the experimental values of the overall mass transfer coefficient for copper extraction from an aqueous to an organic phase, In these expressions,   And finally in Eq. In Eq. The feed phase was a 0.2 The organic phase contained 0.09 To determine the copper concentration in the aqueous phase in equilibrium with the organic phase ( The aqueous and the organic phases, with several volume ratios, were put into contact in an orbital shaker (Aralab Agitorb 160E) with temperature control during at least 4 The extraction experiments were performed at room temperature, between 18 and 20 The effective height of the column was 6.15 For each extraction run the column was first filled with the continuous aqueous phase. Then, the dispersed organic phase was introduced. The phases flowed countercurrently, the aqueous phase in descending direction and the organic phase in ascending direction. The column's phases inlet was made using the two stainless steel lobule pumps P1 and P2 (Tuthill Pump Group). The organic phase was introduced through a stainless steel distributor with 13 holes of 3 Pulsation was applied using compressed air and a system composed of a temporizer and a pneumatic control valve steered by a solenoid valve (SV1) installed in the top of the column. This set allows generating rectangular wave pulses with independent control of the positive and the negative semiwaves. The extraction experiments were performed using symmetrical waves at pulsation frequencies between 1.0 and 1.7 When the steady-state conditions were reached, samples of the aqueous and organic phases and hold-up were collected from taps distributed along the column. Those conditions were attained after about 2–3 To photograph the drops, plain surface perspex boxes were placed on three column zones: bottom ( Non-dispersive solvent extraction was carried out using a Liqui-Cel The concentration of copper in both phases was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer, AAnalyst 200 and 1100 models for the aqueous and the organic phases, respectively) at 324.75 The pH value of the aqueous phase was measured on a Metrohm pH meter with a combined electrode, reference 6.0232.100 (pH 0–14; 0–80 The density of the aqueous and the organic phases was determined by the pycnometer method. The viscosity of both phases was measured with an Ubbelohde viscometer. Interfacial tension data were obtained with a Krüss tensiometer, model DSA10HS-Mk2. As previously mentioned, for constant phase flow rates there are three stable regimes of pulsed sieve-plate columns operation, depending on the pulse frequency and amplitude: mixer-settler, dispersion and emulsion The column operates under the mixer-settler or the dispersion regimes when Exploratory tests were carried out to examine the hydrodynamics and flooding conditions, varying the aqueous and organic phases flow rates and the pulse frequency and amplitude. For instance, the characteristics of one of the flooding points were: aqueous and organic flow rates of 60.9 and 28.1 The hold-up data obtained for different flow rates were used to calculate the slip velocity (Eq.  The operating conditions of the mass transfer experiments carried out for modelling are listed in The objective of the axial dispersion model application was to simulate the system concentration profiles, corresponding to the influence of the experimental conditions mentioned before on the solute extraction along the column. The values of the parameters used in the modelling are presented in  In The copper concentration profiles using different organic flow rates are presented in In As stated before, having as the main objective the identification of the limiting step of extraction, it was decided to compare the experimental values of The experimental values of the overall mass transfer coefficient The results presented in In an earlier study on copper extraction from an acidic solution with ACORGA M5640 to be published elsewhere, similar results regarding the importance of the chemical kinetics on the overall process of mass transfer were obtained. The pilot tests carried out in a pulsed sieve-plate column revealed that the resistance due to chemical reaction was in the range of 85–96%. Non-dispersive solvent extraction was also carried out using a hollow fiber contactor to examine its performance and compare the results with the ones obtained with the pulsed sieve-plate column. The overall mass transfer coefficient, As shown, the concentration of solute attained in the raffinate, after 2 The relative resistances to mass transfer in the membrane process were also determined according to the same approach described in previous studies Regarding the values of the specific interfacial area using the column, they were in the range of 70–140 Despite the relatively lower volume coefficient of mass transfer exhibited in the process carried out in the column, the results were very satisfactory. In fact, if the membrane process was operated at continuous level, a large ratio of feed flow rate to volume of equipment would be allowed, but also several hollow fiber modules in series would be necessary to attain a similar efficiency of extraction as the one achieved in column experiments E2 and E5. The results of copper extraction from ammoniacal medium (1.0 The axial dispersion model allowed a very satisfactory prediction of the mass transfer in the column. The influence of several operating conditions on the efficiency of mass transfer was examined. The column performance was found to decrease with increasing aqueous flow rate and to increase with increasing organic flow rate and pulse velocity. The overall height of transfer unit based on the aqueous phase was determined to be in the range of 0.93–2.2 The experimental values of the overall mass transfer coefficient were found to be lower than the ones obtained by the conventional resistances in series model. In the operating conditions tested, the extraction was governed by the chemical reaction and also by the diffusion in the boundary aqueous layer. The relative contribution of chemical kinetics to the overall resistance to mass transfer was found to be between 84% and 91%. The extraction process was also carried out using a hollow fiber contactor. The overall volume coefficient of mass transfer was found to be slightly higher than the one obtained in the column tests. M. Lurdes F. Gameiro would like to thank “Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia” for her PhD financial support (SFRH/BD/18329/2004). Many thanks to Doctor Raquel Durana for her invaluable help in using gPROMS software. Drogas Vigo (Portugal) is also acknowledged for supplying the diluent Shellsol D-70.