Earthworms are key agents in organic matter decomposition, as they remove surface plant litter material and mix it with mineral soil. Plant litter material is comminuted in the gizzard of anecic earthworms and this is enhanced if sand particles are available. We hypothesize that this comminution of soil and litter will result in changes in the distribution of soil organic matter and soil microorganisms in the different particle-size fractions. We investigated soil organic matter content, xylanase- and microbial activity and community structure in bulk soil and particle size fractions of Lumbricus terrestris L. casts and in soil with and without the addition of beech litter.
                  Earthworm gut passage did not affect the particle-size distribution but the content of soil organic matter was decreased in the fine sand fraction in treatments without litter (−6.80%) and increased in treatments with litter (+33.23%). The soil organic matter content of the clay fraction tended to be higher in earthworm casts. Xylanase activity was at a maximum in the fine sand fraction, lower in the coarse sand fraction and at a similar minimum in the silt- and clay-sized fraction. In the coarse sand fraction of the cast and litter treatments xylanase activity was increased by 39.1% and 124.8%, respectively. In the silt-sized fraction of casts the addition of litter increased xylanase activity (+58.6%) whereas, in casts without litter it was decreased (−36.25%). In the particle size fractions of casts, the content of bacterial PLFAs was decreased in the fine sand fraction and tended to be decreased in the clay fraction compared to the respective fractions in soil. In the silt fraction the fungal-to-bacterial PLFA ratio was higher in casts than in soil.
                  We conclude that earthworms stabilize soil organic matter in cast aggregates predominantly by increasing the soil organic matter content in the clay fraction where it becomes protected against microbial attack. Organic matter in the coarse and fine sand fractions is decomposed primarily by fungi; xylanase is very active in these sand fractions and incorporation of litter into these fractions by the earthworms increased fungal biomass. Comminution of litter during passage through the earthworm gut increased the biomass and activity of fungi also in the silt fraction. The use of PLFA profiles in combination with other quantitative microbial methods improves the understanding of stabilizing and mobilizing processes in earthworm casts.Earthworms in combination with other decomposer invertebrates remove litter from the soil surface thereby affecting decomposition processes. Anecic earthworm species, such as Bacterial and fungal biomass, activity and microbial community structure in earthworm casts have been investigated by a variety of methods, including plating techniques for bacteria ( In the past, the interaction between earthworms and microorganisms was mainly studied on the scale of bulk soil, but physical separation of different size fractions allows microbiological analyses at a scale to understand mechanisms driving C- and N-turnover ( We hypothesized that the combined ingestion of sand and litter, and an associated enhanced comminution of litter materials results in changes in the soil organic matter content, microbial activity and community structure in casts of Soil samples and litter material were taken from a 130-year old beech forest on limestone near Göttingen (southern Lower Saxony, Germany), known as Göttinger Wald. The dominant soil types are For production of cast materials earthworms were incubated in planar cages consisting of two transparent PVC sheets (650 In total six planar cages were filled with forest soil and to half of them 6 For physical fractionation soil and cast samples were dispersed by low-energy sonication and the particle size fractions were separated by a combination of wet sieving and centrifuging as described by Oven-dried (65 Soil and casts samples were analysed for microbial biomass ( Xylanase activity was measured by incubating 0.5–1.0 Phospholipid fatty acids (PLFAs) were extracted and quantified from bulk and particle size fractions of the soil and cast samples by the procedure described in Data on C and N content, C-to-N ratio, basal respiration, microbial biomass, specific respiration, xylanase activity and the bacteria-to-fungi ratio from PLFA data were analysed by two-factor analysis of variance (ANOVA) with the factors substrate (soil and earthworm casts) and litter (without and with beech litter). Data were inspected for homogeneity of variance (Levene test) and log-transformed to homogenize the variances (if required). A statistical probability To compare the overall structure of the PLFA profiles between the treatments (soil and cast, with and without beech litter) and the particle size fractions (coarse and fine sand, silt, clay and bulk) multidimensional scaling (MDS) and discriminant function analysis (DFA) were used, based on a scheme proposed by The coordinates of the samples in the The combined weight of the particle size fractions was 94–106% of the bulk material, suggesting complete recovery ( Generally C Recovery of C and N in particle size fractions varied between treatments and differences among treatments were less pronounced than in bulk soil. C Basal respiration, microbial biomass and specific respiration were not affected by the treatments in the bulk soil. Overall, the sum of microbial biomass of the particle size fractions ranged between 198 and 277% of that of the bulk soil. Similarly, the sum of basal respiration of the particle size fractions significantly exceeded that in bulk soil. Basal respiration and microbial biomass calculated on the basis of soil dry weight were highest in the clay fraction followed by the fine sand, silt and coarse sand fraction ( Xylanase activity was significantly increased by the addition of litter in the bulk soil, on average by 77.4% ( The total amount of PLFAs in the bulk soil ranged between 123.0 and 183.2 Overall, DFA of the PLFAs separated the coarse sand fraction from the fine sand fraction and both of these from the silt and clay fraction ( The concentrations of the PLFAs 15:0, 17:0 and 20:5ω2 were low and they neither correlated with root 1 nor with root 2 of the DFA ( The content of PLFAs specific for bacteria (bactPLFAs) was not affected by the treatments in the bulk soil ( The fungal-to-bacterial PLFA ratio in the bulk material was low (0.03–0.05) but was significantly increased by the addition of litter ( The distribution of particle size fractions did not differ between soil and casts of In the present study, the total amount of PLFAs neither differed between casts and soil nor between treatments without or with beech litter. This is in contrast to the higher amount of PLFAs in casts of The addition of beech leaf litter also increased the fungal-to-bacterial PLFA ratio in bulk soil, which resulted mainly from increased fungal PLFA in the clay fraction. In the coarse and the fine sand fraction the fungal-to-bacterial PLFA ratio was not affected by beech litter. This was unexpected as the litter particles added mainly formed part of the coarse fractions and resulted in an increase in the xylanase activity in these fractions suggesting that fungal activity was increased ( The addition of beech leaf litter also significantly increased microbial biomass in the silt fraction. Bacterial PLFAs dominated the PLFA profiles in the silt and clay fractions while fungal PLFA and xylanase activity were low. Bacteria are known to dominate in finer fractions in contrast to fungi ( The sum of basal respiration and the sum of microbial biomass of the particle size fractions strongly exceeded that of the bulk soil. Presumably, this was due to liberation and activation of microorganisms from bulk soil aggregates and casts by ultrasonication and wet sieving. By the disruption of aggregates physically protected resources are made available for microbial attack ( In conclusion, earthworms stabilize soil organic matter in cast aggregates predominantly by increasing the soil organic matter content in the clay fraction where it becomes protected against microbial attack. Mechanical disruption of casts makes formerly physically protected soil organic matter available for microbial decay. Organic matter in the coarse and fine sand fractions is decomposed primarily by fungi associated with increased xylanase activity. Incorporation of litter into these fractions by earthworms increases fungal biomass. Comminution of litter during passage through the gut of earthworms increases the biomass and activity of fungi in the silt fraction. The combined analysis of PLFA profiles, enzyme activities and microbial respiration in bulk soil and in particle size fractions is a promising approach for improving the understanding of stabilizing and mobilizing processes in earthworm casts and other soil microhabitats. We thank Alexei V. Tiunov for valuable advice on statistical analyses, Diana Ebersberger and Sabine Rudolph for technical assistance and two anonymous referees for their helpful comments on the earlier version of the manuscript. Financial support was provided by the DFG priority program SPP 1090: soils as source and sink for CO