An analysis of the copper life cycle in the U.S. was performed to investigate the circularity of copper from 1970 to 2015. A stocks and flows model for copper was developed for the major life cycle phases by collecting extensive primary data from government and private sector sources, via available data and surveys and interviews with individuals within companies, government, and other organizations. The data were integrated into a stocks and flows model. Collection and inclusion of primary end-of-life data into the model represents a contribution of the material flow analysis presented and provides insight into specific limitations and opportunities for improving the circularity of copper. The analysis incorporates 45 years of data, providing historical context and insight into changing trends. A number of key findings emerged from of the stocks and flows analysis. First, end-of-life collection is a complicated ecosystem. The largest stock accumulation of copper is in the use phase — on the order of 72 million tons since 1970. Over half of this is in buildings and construction, an order of magnitude more than the total accumulation in any other part of the copper life cycle. The analysis also revealed that while there are losses of copper via process losses, degradation, and tailings generation, exports (much of which are unaccounted for as embedded flows) and hibernating stock are much more significant losses from the U.S. circular economy. Finally, building and construction and electric/electronic products are the two use phases where improved collection and recycling would yield the most impact to improving circularity of copper since they together comprise more than 80% of total accumulation.The concept of “sustainable mining” has been explored in the past two decades, with focus on reducing the environmental footprint of mining and processing activities ( Significant resource savings can be associated with processing recycled materials, instead of raw materials, including measurable differences in energy and water consumption as well as a reduction in land disruption due to reduced extraction demand ( To examine the current life cycle of copper in the U.S. system boundary and identify opportunities for improving circularity an evaluation was conducted of U.S. copper production, use, recovery, and disposal. The selection of copper as the focus of the analysis was based on several factors: it has a relatively high recycling rate, it has diverse uses, and therefore has more opportunities for identifying potential sources of recovery from hibernating stocks and waste streams ( The development and inclusion of primary end-of-life data in this study is a new contribution to the field. Related studies have focused on material use-phase lifetimes to estimate the end-of-life flows. One example is a recent study by The objective of this study was to identify limitations to the optimization of the circularity of copper life cycle in the context of a sustainable mining framework that includes consideration of resource extraction efficiency, rate of extraction, end-of-life collection rate, and other circularity metrics ( Within the U.S. system boundary, a complete representation of the copper life cycle was developed, from extraction through processing, refining, consumption, and then end-of-life where some copper is collected for reuse and recycling and some is lost to landfills or remains uncollected. The major life cycle phases were identified using USGS Mineral Yearbooks and Mineral Commodity Summaries ( The STAN software, developed at the University of Vienna ( Mass balance formulae were used in combination with manual input of data for known flows to identify unknown flows as well as stocks accumulations and depletions. Flows F1–F5 and F7–F38 are input based on collected data (complete datasets for the total life cycle and the use phase sub-system which is relevant to this analysis are available in the Supplemental Information). F6, Scrap Processed, is a calculated flow based on scrap collection and recovery data as well as landfilling data: Stock changes for each life cycle phase are calculated over every calendar year as follows: This flow represents and indicates the uncertainty associated with the hidden or informal flows described previously, voluntary reporting to USGS, ICSG, and author-conducted surveys. The synthesis of varying data sources leads to this imbalance in the Scrap Consumption phase where net export, and scrap consumption flows do not equal the newly collected primary data for scrap processed from different sources. A potential source of inaccuracy and uncertainty in the materials flow accounting comes from incomplete accounting of trade and sales of materials. “Hidden” flows, for example, as described by Collection of data for most major flows in A general framework for the ecosystem of the various roles of different agents in scrap copper recovery or disposal is presented in The framework of The discrete data points for copper collection were obtained from overseeing bodies like ISRI, SWANA, the USEPA as well as state environmental agencies, organizations that provide certifications and encourage sustainability and recycling like the Basel Action Network, Sustainable Electronics Recycling International, U.S. Green Building Council, as well as individual companies. The general framework for compiling these discrete data to align with the use phase framework in the copper stocks and flows model is provided in For each of the five categories shown in From USGS Data Series 140, “building construction includes electrical wire, plumbing and heating, air conditioning and commercial refrigeration, builders’ hardware, and architecture uses” ( Transportation equipment is defined as including “road (cars, trucks, and buses), rail, marine, and air and space vehicles” ( For air, rail, and marine transportation scrap, industry organizations were contacted to understand end-of-life management practices. Very little copper is recovered domestically from these uses, as essentially all ship-breaking occurs overseas, and has for decades ( From USGS Data Series 140 ( “Consumer and general products includes appliances, cord sets, military ordnance and commercial ammunition, consumer electronics, fasteners and closures, coinage, utensils and cutlery, and miscellaneous products” ( Several estimates of copper recycling as well as landfilling are performed for each year to calculate a range of values and take into account uncertainties. A minimum estimate was developed by assuming all e-waste is accounted for in the EPA publication, and that of the published “other non-ferrous” wastes, 20% of total weight is copper (based on an EPA figure stating that 68% of the “other non-ferrous” category is lead from lead acid batteries). A maximum estimate is based on the Composition studies ( The final category of use from USGS is industrial machinery, which includes a variety of equipment such as valves and fittings, off-highway vehicles, and heat exchangers. The types of materials that fit into this category are difficult to be distinguished from some of the other use phases when they are collected in the end-of-life ecosystem ( Historical data beginning in 1970 were included for major flows and a multi-year mass balance was completed to assess total accumulation and depletion. The stocks and flows model enables identification of key material circularity challenges and opportunities from the life cycle of the copper and makes it possible to quantify which of these challenges and opportunities are most significant, based upon total amount of copper involved. A significant loss or limitation to circularity with no existing means of improvement, for example, may indicate a major technological or policy gap, whereas a lack of collection from a specific flow that could be rectified by improving current recycling incentives may prove easier to address. Some metrics have been established to assess circularity, including a development from the Ellen Macarthur Foundation, the Material Circularity Indicator, on which a material is ranked from 0 to 1, with 1 being the most circular material management ( Collection of current and past data for major copper flows provides insight into trends in how the major flows have changed over the past decades. Complete data sets are available in the Supplemental Information. Trends in processing of U.S. copper scrap are explored in The concept of “dematerialization” is a polarizing subject when considering consumption trends in different economies ( Mass balance accumulation calculations were performed to estimate stocks in the life cycle of copper in the U.S. using model outputs and the time series data collected (Tables SI-1 to SI-6). Based on processing loss rates of copper refining, approximately 7 million tons of copper accumulated in tailings from 1970 to 2015. Quantification of the stock of copper in tailings is important to evaluation of tailings mining as a source of non-fuel minerals such as copper. For comparison, 13 million tons of copper scrap have been exported out of the U.S. in the same time period (Table SI-4). This scrap is not only higher quality than tailings, slag, and other processing byproducts, but it is also easier to process and therefore less costly and energy intensive ( A single-year snapshot of U.S. copper stocks and flows is shown in These stocks and flows diagrams, and the data used to produce them in the Supplemental Information, can be used to assess the similarity or difference between the result of the primary data collection effort for end-of-life management and the lifetime-based estimation method. For example, Comparison of the findings of this U.S. stocks and flows analysis to studies for other countries provides additional insights. A look at the copper life cycle in China shows a different story from the U.S. – net import reliance is over 70% currently, and only 16% of all copper consumption from 1949 has transitioned to scrap, the remaining 84% is in use stocks ( A look at the subsystem comprising the use phases for copper is shown in The lifetime of materials in building construction and electric utilities is long, but as is shown in Though end-of-life collection from consumer and general products seems to be significant, it is the largest quantity of scrap collection of the four use phases, shown in The results of this work provide context and insight into the circularity and the copper circular economy in the U.S. One example is the implication of accumulating in-use stock, and how much of this accumulation is currently providing society utility versus how much is hibernating and could be reused. This work included a collection of primary data related to end-of-life collection, landfilling, and scrap processing for copper in the U.S., enabling calculation of in-use stock accumulations, found to be 72 million tons, or 71% of all consumed copper since 1970. As was discussed in Section Estimation of how much of the calculated 72 million tons of accumulated in-use copper stock is hibernating stock is complicated, but can be estimated as the difference in how much material has theoretically reached end of life and how much is actually collected based on the primary data evaluated here, or flow F5, end of life collection, found to be 29.7 million tons. Previous stocks and flows analyses have used estimation methods to predict theoretical end-of-life collection ( Another area to assess when considering the circular economy is resource efficiency, extraction rates, and long-term availability of materials. Contextualizing the extraction and consumption rates calculated in this study encourages a circular life cycle view of mineral resources ( Additionally, the results of the several landfill composition studies considered in the calculations of end-of-life data for copper indicate that the relative presence of copper in landfills is not largely different than its naturally occurring ore grade. Though landfill mining is currently considered to be largely uneconomical, there is potential for economic feasibility, depending on available technology, regulation, population density, and other market variables ( The objective of this study was to assess and identify limitations to the circularity of copper life cycle in the U.S., and to develop a framework for the future assessment of consumption of other mineral and non-renewable resources in the U.S. This research involved collection of new data to improve quantification of copper flows in the U.S. Results indicate that there are significant limitations to the circularity of copper in the U.S. The copper use phase sees the largest accumulation of copper – on the order of 72 million tons since 1970 – and thus merits focused attention despite the lack of data. Major improvements should be made in end-of-life collection from secondary scrap in the U.S., especially from building construction and electric utilities, as they make up 65 of the total 72 million tons of accumulation in addition to typically having a higher quality of copper scrap, shown in Results from the data collection effort for copper can be verified in comparison to other materials flow analyses. Results of the study also suggest that improved collection infrastructure and processes themselves are not enough to improve copper recycling rates significantly. While there are losses of copper via process losses or tailings, exports (much of which are unaccounted for as embedded flows) and hibernating stock are much more significant losses to the circular economy for copper in the U.S. and should be prioritized for recovery. Exports of copper scrap since 1970 are twice the quantity of process losses ( The data collection process has highlighted a distinct lack of primary data from the waste and scrap industries, which would improve future studies, and continue to increase the accuracy of economy-scale stocks-and-flows analysis. Some industry groups or organizations that already perform surveys or collect data are already positioned to collect and manage this type of data, but do not pursue such data at present. The U.S. Green Building Council, for example, has a LEED credit called MR2, which is given to projects that perform materials recovery during construction and demolition projects. However, USGBC does not presently track total U.S. materials recovery from these credits and is unable to provide insight on total scale or even number of credits distributed. A focused shift on circular economies and recycling may incentivize similar groups and organizations to start doing some accounting of these types of flows, which would provide better datasets and more precise insights for copper and other materials. This work provides a framework for similar analyses of other materials and highlights the importance of more widespread accounting of end-of-life material management. Because collection is not materials centric, but product centric ( The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by a Steinbrenner Institute U.S. Environmental Sustainability Ph.D. Fellowship to Miranda Gorman. The fellowship program is supported by a grant from the The authors would like to thank Randy Castriota at Castriota Metals, Ned Eldridge at E-Loop, Phil Elbaz at Hussey Copper, Morgan Scott and Charles Visonhaler at EPRI, Kent Kiser previously with Scrap Magazine and ISRI, among others who provided useful insight and data for this work. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: