The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is promoting a new Coordinated Research Project (CRP) to elaborate on the applicability and potential of using High Temperature Reactors (HTRs) to provide process heat and/or electricity to power energy intensive mineral development processes. The CRP aims to provide a platform for cooperation between HTR-developers and mineral development processing experts. Energy intensive mineral development processes with (e.g. phosphate-, gold-, copper-, rare earth ores) or without (e.g. titanium-, aluminum ore) the possibility to recover accompanying uranium and/or thorium that could be developed and used as raw material for nuclear reactor fuel enabling “energy neutral” processing of the primary ore if the recovered uranium and/or thorium is sufficient to operate the greenhouse gas lean energy source used shall be discussed according to the participants needs. This paper specifically focuses on the aspects to be addressed by HTR-designers and developers. First requirements that should be fulfilled by the HTR-designs are highlighted together with the desired outcomes of the research project.Mineral development processes of various ores are associated with large consumption of energy to provide process heat and/or electricity. The amount of energy for processing a certain ore is to a large extent dependent on the concentration of the resource that is extracted ( In contrast energy- and environmental related issues (e.g. CO The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is promoting the idea to use High Temperature Reactors (HTRs) to provide process heat and/or electricity for mineral development processes whilst recovering and using the accompanying uranium/thorium as nuclear reactor fuel for the HTR employed and/or other Nuclear Power Plants (NPPs) ( A first approach in this direction is a new IAEA Coordinated Research Project (CRP): “Uranium – Thorium fuelled HTGR applications for energy neutral sustainable comprehensive extraction and mineral product development” – Code: T11006 within the framework of the IAEA ( In addition to phosphate ore processing with uranium recovery using HTGRs that was studied in Various studies have been performed to investigate the non-electrical applications of HTRs. These include, amongst others, district heating, water desalination and process heat applications. Whereas lower temperature steam (100–130 In the case of HTGRs the potential to participate in the larger energy market (not only electricity) has been recognized for a long time with concept designs like the German PR-500 ( The scope of past- and present research concerning process heat applications using HTRs focused and focusses to a large extend on various industrial heat/steam applications (e.g. hydrogen production, coal gasification, etc.). The CRP presented here aims to investigate whether mineral development processes could be added to the list of process heat applications that can be performed satisfactorily using a HTR as the power source. Developers of different HTR-designs are encouraged to participate in the CRP. The IAEA aims to provide a platform where mineral development process experts and HTR-developers may connect and discuss mutual interests. Although first estimates were performed using an HTGR the IAEA in accordance with its statute ( Core designers and developers of both fast- and thermal HTRs are welcome to apply for participation in the CRP. The main objective of the CRP is to study whether or not certain mineral processes can be driven by suitable HTR-designs. A first summary of requirements on HTR-designs is listed below in no particular order. The determination of the detailed end-user requirements to be met by the proposed HTR-designs is one of the major objectives of the CRP and cannot be totally foreseen at this point of time. However, the first requirements given below provide guidance on expected requirements relevant to the CRP. HTRs considered in the CRP shall be used to supply process heat and/or electricity for mineral development processes. In a first step the power demand (including load variations) of different mineral development processes that shall be considered in the CRP will be assessed, typically with load profiles. This assessment will include the amount of electricity and/or process heat (including steam) that is required for certain mineral development processes. In case of process heat applications the type of carrier as well as its technical characteristics (e.g. average and maximum -temperature, -pressure, -flow rate) will be determined. In addition, the costs for the carrier will be measured to support economic studies of the system. Since heat- and electricity shall be available for mineral processing, the HTR-designs should consider cogeneration (combined heat and electricity production) with a minimal reactor outlet temperature set at 600 HTRs will most likely be considered as a multipurpose reactor or “hybrid HTR system” ( Multipurpose reactors might be favorable for mineral development processing since processing plants are often operated far from the electricity grid and other supporting infrastructure. Energy may therefore also be needed for other processes supporting mineral processing such as water desalination. Due to environmental concerns or other reasons (e.g. water scarcity) plant-operators are often through legislation required to provide the processing plants water needs independently and not from naturally occurring reservoirs or public water supply ( The multipurpose energy production assumes that the HTR-system must be able to switch between process heat and electricity production according to the needs of the processing plant. Therefore, the extend, frequency and feedback effects of dynamic switching between process heat production for different applications and electricity generation should be incorporated as design requirement by the HTR-developers. Further power requirements that are to be assessed as part of the CRP are related to the availability and reliability of power. Mineral development processes such as phosphate rock processing usually operate “24 The CRP aims to examine the recovery of uranium and thorium during mineral development processes so that these resources can be further processed and used as nuclear reactor fuel. The recovered uranium/thorium shall be considered as supply from so-called unconventional resources and therefore further reduce the environmental impact and extend the lifetime of the nuclear reactor fleet. It may be used in commercial power reactors (light water reactors or others) and/or the HTRs used for the mineral development processing to enable “energy neutral” mineral development processing as first described by Mineral processing plants have limitations regarding the location of their plant that are mainly determined by the feedstock of raw materials and transportation of the final product to the customer. Some mineral processing plants are found close to remote mining locations and therefore have their own grid-independent energy supply. HTR-designs presented in the CRP should be able to operate independently from an electricity grid without compromising safe operation. In addition to energy supply, accessibility of large amounts of water for cooling of the HTR in potential locations desirable for mineral development processing plants will be assessed. Most mineral development processing plants are located close to waterways (rivers, seas, etc.) to allow transportation of their products or the raw materials used for processing ( Some mineral processing plants receive their raw materials from deposits that are far away from their location (e.g. Redwater phosphate rock processing plant in Canada receiving phosphate rock from North Africa, Furthermore, it should be noted that remote mineral processing locations might not be easily accessible so that transporting large reactor plant equipment might be challenging for these sites. HTRs coupled to sensitive mineral processing plants such as phosphate fertilizer plants with integrated ammonia (derived from hydrogen) production (so called “mixed fertilizer plants”, Furthermore, it shall be ensured that safety is addressed in all stages of operation considering grid-independent energy supply, limited availability of large amounts of cooling water, etc. In addition to the power requirements listed before certain mineral development processes may have certain requirements associated with for instance the quality of their final product that might need further attention from HTR-developers. The amount of radionuclides in a final product can be a first example for an additional requirement other than power. Tritium and other radionuclides build up in the coolant loops of a nuclear reactor as a result of the performed nuclear chain reaction ( Generally the CRP aims to investigate in detail whether (“energy neutral”) mineral processing using HTRs is technically and economically feasible. To do so IAEA will facilitate technical interaction between mineral development processing experts and HTR-developers and coordinate their joint research efforts. Specific case studies where both groups can study the same integrated system are encouraged. The case studies will take place under the umbrella of the IAEA CRP. They should take all mentioned requirements into account and may model the specific mass- and energy flow between the regarded coupled systems to present side specific examples where HTRs might or might not be a feasible power option. By the end of the four year project the studies will be published in an IAEA technical document. The document will provide information and guidance to IAEA member states interested in the technology and may illustrate technical- and economical-possibilities as well as limits of using HTRs for (“energy neutral”) mineral development processing. Furthermore, additional investigations that are not necessarily related to the specific case studies are also welcome in the CRP. It is assumed member states may contribute to selected areas of the CRP research scope due to non-availability of expertise in all the technical areas. This is to be expected in a multi-disciplinary CRP where different expertise, typically not to be found in one organization, is required. Licensing such a coupled plant (conventional mineral development processing plant and HTR) which may also be useful for other HTR-heat applications. Investigations regarding innovative processing techniques that are presently not considered for economical or other reasons (e.g. limited availability of power at certain remote locations) but might become feasible if a HTR is employed (e.g. thermal processing of low-grade phosphate rock). Investigations regarding innovative processing techniques concerning tailings/waste that is associated with the present and/or future processing techniques and could find new usage as a raw material for different applications (e.g. sulfuric acid production from phosphogypsum, which being an exothermic process can provide backup heat to the system). Findings of the additional investigations may be recognized in the IAEA technical document of the CRP or elsewhere. This paper specifically addresses the research to be performed by HTR-designers and -developers in the upcoming IAEA-CRP on “energy neutral” mineral development processes. A first set of requirements for HTR-designs that will be further developed within the CRP as well as the desired outcomes of the CRP are presented and briefly explained. Although requirements for HTR-designs are based on the end-user needs that will be finalized as part of the CRP this work may provide guidance and a first overview about the planned scope of the new project on mineral development processing. The paper is intended to encourage HTR-designers and -developers to apply for participation in the CRP. The authors would like to thank Gary Dyck (Section head NEFW, IAEA) and Thomas Koshy (Section head NPTDS, IAEA). Both strongly supported the idea to use HTRs for mineral development processing from the beginning and finally made the CRP possible. Furthermore, we appreciated the helpful comments from Rayman Sollychin (IAEA) and thank potential participants that already submitted their proposals to IAEA. Any remaining errors, omissions, or inconsistencies are the authors’ alone.