The rapid evolution of resistant bacteria is a huge problem in medicine because makes the treatment of infections more and more difficult. The bactericidal properties of noble metal nanoparticles could be a solution.
                  In this work silver nanoparticles were produced by using two nanosecond Nd:YVO4 lasers operating at 1064 and 532 nm respectively to ablate a silver target submerged in pure de-ionized water. Part of the resulting colloidal solution was injected as a fine stream by a compressed air system and re-irradiated one and three times with the same laser to resize and get uniform nanoparticles.
                  The obtained nanoparticles by ablation and re-irradiation consisted of crystalline Ag nanoparticles with a bimodal size distribution. The particle size has been reduced by subsequent laser re-irradiation with both laser sources, reaching a 40% of mean size reduction. Inhibitory effects on the proliferation of Staphylococcus aureus was demonstrated on silver nanoparticles obtained after re-irradiation with the infrared laser.It is estimated that by 2050, 10 million persons will die each year due to the resistance of bacteria to antibiotics During the last years, silver nanoparticles have been widely studied because of their antibacterial properties Laser ablation of solids in liquids (LASL) allows controlling the size and shape by tuning the processing parameters, but also leading to obtain pure nanoparticles with no need of any additional reagent In the present work, we report the synthesis of silver nanoparticles by LASL in water using two different laser sources and the subsequent fragmentation of the obtained solutions following a somehow similar strategy as that of Wagener and Barcikowski for producing organic NPs from powders instead of a solid target Results and formation process, including influence of wavelength are discussed. Antibacterial activity is also studied with A silver foil with 99.99% of purity was cleaned and sonicated to be used as laser ablation target. As shown in Two different laser sources working at different wavelengths were used in the process (see In all experiments, the laser beam was focused on the upper surface of the target and was kept in relative movement with respect to the metallic plate at 50 mm/s of scanning speed The processing time for the LASL was 5  min in both cases, taking place a change in the color of the solution, becoming yellowish/brown in the first minutes of the process which evidences the nanoparticle production Part of the obtained solutions from the LASL was poured and subjected to pressure to give a horizontal homogeneous and constant stream flowing from a capillary to be re-irradiated once and three times using the same laser sources with the same parameters used for the initial colloidal solution. The laser beam was perpendicularly focused on the middle point of the stream at the capillary exit ( After each experiment, samples of the obtained colloidal suspensions were dropped on carbon-coated copper micro-grids and allowed to dry for characterization with a High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy (HRTEM). Drops of each sample have been also deposited and dried repeatedly on a glass to get a film with sufficient thickness for the X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The XRD spectra of the samples were compared to that of the starting material. In order to analyze the particle size, morphology and crystalline structure of the obtained nanoparticles, HRTEM images were obtained using a JEOL-JEM 2010F FEG transmission electron microscope equipped with a slow digital camera scan, using an accelerating voltage of 200 kV and provided with an energy dispersive X-Ray Spectrometer (EDS) to reveal the qualitative elemental composition. The XRD analysis was carried out in order to corroborate the crystal structure by means of a PANanalytical X’Pert Pro X-ray diffractometer using monochromated Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54 Å) over the 30–90° 2θ range with step size of 0.02°. The UV–vis absorption spectrum of the colloidal suspensions was measured in the range from 190 to 800 nm using a Hewlett Packard HP 8452 spectrophotometer. The stability of the colloids was studied by means of the Z-Potential measurements, carried out with a Zetasizer Nano ZS ZEN3600 from Malvern Instruments. To assess the bactericidal activity of the obtained NPs, the MIC (minimum inhibitory concentration) evaluation was performed with a gram-positive bacteria,  Note that the silver nanoparticles obtained by LASL with both Green and IR lasers, exhibit rounded shape with certain tendency to agglomeration. This is due to the formation mechanism of nanoparticles and the thermal regime taking place between laser beam and the target. When the laser beam strikes on the Ag foil, the incident radiation is absorbed heating up the silver above its melting point. Because of the high power delivered in the few nanoseconds lasting the laser pulse, the energy density surpasses the ablation threshold of the material and lead to the plasma formation. In water, the plasma plume is confined and it cools down more rapidly than in air Subsequently, the nanoparticles size was reduced by laser re-irradiation. This process causes a large number of small particles as well as a wider range of sizes Note that all samples show a bimodal size distribution. In addition, the number of nanoparticles with a diameter lower than 10 nm increased with the re-irradiation times, primarily when the process is carried out with the IR laser. The influence of laser wavelength on the obtained nanoparticles size and/or concentration can be explained by penetration depth of laser beam, self- absorption, ablation efficiency, etc. It is known that absorption efficiency of the incident laser radiation represents a key parameter in the process. According to previous works, the absorption efficiency of 532 nm for producing Ag nanoparticles is higher than when 1064 nm of wavelength is used Taking into account thermal evaporation dominates the process of ns ablation In our results the fragmentation effect is more noticeable in the case IR wavelength due to its higher fluence. Similar results have been reported in previous works, showing that particle size decrease by increasing the pulse fluence The EDS performed on each obtained sample confirms that the as-ablated as well as the re-irradiated nanoparticles are pure Ag. Moreover, all the particles obtained, even the smallest ones are crystalline. This aspect can be observed in To elucidate the crystalline phases of the obtained Ag nanoparticles, the measured interplanar distances from the FFT were compared with those of metallic Ag in In order to corroborate the composition of the obtained nanoparticles, XRD were performed on the obtained nanoparticles and the precursor silver plate. The corresponding comparative diffraction patterns of the samples are depicted in As shown in Measurements of absorbance of each sample were repeated after 14 days. As shown in It is known that colloid stability depends on the interactions between its particles in suspension which in turn are the result of electrostatic repulsive forces and Van der Waals attractive forces As shown in Measurements were repeated after 14 days ( This stability is also confirmed by means of the colloids color, since after 14 days the colloidal solutions preserve their yellowish-brown tonality. This is especially significative for the initial colloids, because of the NPs are suspended by the repulsive force exerted among them, while NPs obtained by means of the re-irradiation process (with lower ZP values) tend towards agglomeration looking for a more stable equilibrium condition. This balance between the particles, is known as total interaction potential which depends among others, on the electrolyte concentration, the valence of counterions, as well as the particle size Antimicrobial activity of the obtained solutions was evaluated through standard Optical Density measurements at wavelength of 600 nm (OD600). Due to the different absorbance at 600 nm of each solution before being added to the culture medium, the relative values (to the initial absorbance value) were calculated for comparing the results. Only the 1:2 dilution showed antibacterial effects. The obtained relative absorbance of each sample is shown in Taking into account that this method measures the turbidity of bacterial suspensions by means of its absorbance, stablishing that the higher the absorbance, the more bacterial concentration Earlier studies Note that the samples with the highest bactericidal effect (b.2, b.1 y a.2), correspond to those that underwent a greater variation in their ZP values after 14 days. This results are consistent with works previously reported and demonstrate not only the influence of size, but also morphology and stability of colloidal Ag NPs in the bactericidal effects Feasibility of a small-diameter flow to reduce the size of silver nanoparticles by laser radiation is demonstrated. Crystalline Ag nanoparticles have been obtained by means of LASL and re-irradiation technique using two different nanosecond Nd:YVO Despite the fact that both wavelengths reduce the average size of the nanoparticles by means of the re-irradiation process, the number of particles with a diameter smaller than 10 nm increases considerably if the wavelength used is 1064 nm. The antibacterial study showed that This work was partially supported by the