A SrCO3 formation starting from activated SrSO4–(NH4)2CO3 mixtures as a result of dry mechanochemical treatment for 180min in a planetary ball mill of celestite together with (NH4)2CO3 was studied. The phases that formed during milling were successfully characterized by X-ray diffraction measurement (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), and chemical analysis. A novel hydrometallurgical process to convert both SrCO3 (product) and (NH4)2SO4 (by-product) from celestite via dry mechanochemical conversion with (NH4)2CO3 was developed for the first time in this work. Under optimum conditions, the conversion of SrCO3 was 98.1%. The (NH4)2SO4 leach solution was crystallized.Celestite (SrSO Celestite reacts with ammonium carbonate, giving solid strontium carbonate and soluble ammonium sulfate The ammonium sulfate (NH Recently, direct conversion of celestite to strontium carbonate by mechanochemical processes which is applied using high-energy mills has been experienced and feasibility of the process is still being investigated. Celestite and sodium hydroxide were affected mechanochemically at room temperature, and strontium hydroxide formed was converted to strontium carbonate naturally under atmospheric conditions by Zhang and Saito In this study, the production conditions of strontium carbonate and ammonium sulfate from a high-grade celestite concentrate were investigated using the combination of mechanochemical treatment followed by leaching. Natural celestite concentrate (Barit Maden Türk A.Ş., Sivas, Turkey), reagent grade anhydrous (NH The chemical composition of the celestite is 95.64% SrSO In the milling procedure, samples containing celestite and (NH The general reaction of the direct conversion is given in Eq. The mill during conversion treatments was stopped 3 The characterization of the celestite concentrate and the reaction products were examined using XRD (SHIMADZU XRD-6000), FT-IR (Bruker Tensor 27 model) and SEM (JEOL JSM-6060). A process was developed for mechanochemical conversion of celestite with (NH Celestite for different periods of time was mechanochemically treated with (NH Experiments to determine the effect of ball to grinding material mass ratio on the conversion of celestite were conducted in the ratio range of 5–40. The experimental conditions were 180 The effect of the (NH  Conversion of celestite surface to strontium carbonate was investigated by spectroscopy. Structural changes in the treated celestite could be observed in IR spectra. The spectroscopic results ( Conversion of celestite into strontium carbonate was investigated by XRD analyses [Cu Kα: 1.5405 SEM analyses were used to observe the surface morphology of the celestite concentrate, product converted after milling and product removed from sulfate. The experimental conditions were 180 In the present study, the conversion of celestite with (NH The financial support for the project under grant