In this paper, the lysozyme (LSZ) adsorption impact on the silica suspension stability was established. In other words, the stabilization/destabilization mechanism of the SiO2/LSZ system was explained based on the adsorption, electrokinetic and stability measurement results. Lysozyme adsorbs on the silica surface in the whole pH range. This process contributes to the changes in silica surface charge and zeta potential values. The lysozyme addition influences the system stability too. At pH 7.6 and 9, a large decrease in the silica suspension stability was found. It is connected with the neutralization of solid negative charge by the positively charged macromolecules. As a result, large aggregates can be formed, which is highly desirable in the silica removal procedure.Lysozyme (LSZ) is an enzymatic protein with antibacterial properties. It hydrolyses the β-1,4-glycosidic linkage between N-acetylglucosamine and N-acetylmuramine acid in the bacteria cell wall. This protein is a component of tears, saliva and other tissue fluids. LSZ is used in many industries, including the food and pharmaceutical ones ( The LSZ adsorption on the silica surface is well-documented. On the other hand, the lysozyme adsorption effect on the suspension stability as a function of pH value is scarcely described in the literature. Therefore, this paper focused on this subject. It presents the probable stabilization/destabilization mechanism of the silica suspension in the LSZ presence. The measurements were performed using a turbidimeter, which determines the system stability precisely. The explanation of the LSZ adsorption effect on the SiO Coagulation is generally the first process in the water and wastewater purification procedure. Including oxidation and sedimentation, it is the most important step in this technology. Coagulation is based on the colloidal system destabilization, which decreases the dispersion degree ( Looking for new flocculants is a significant issue due to drinking water lack in many regions. Taking this into account, this paper described lysozyme as potential agent improving flocculation. It defines the pH value, at which the aqueous silica suspension is the most destabilized after the LSZ addition. The silica removal from aqueous solutions is essential because it is a very common mineral on the Earth's sphere that occurs also in surface waters. In addition, silica is widely used in the industry (glass and construction), so its presence in the sewage is inevitable. The silica removal from aqueous solutions is examined by many researchers. Silicon(IV) dioxide (silica, SiO Lysozyme (LSZ), delivered by All measurements were performed at room temperature, i.e. 25 °C. As a supporting electrolyte 0.01 M NaCl was used. The experiments were carried out as a function of pH value (3–9). The lysozyme concentration is expressed in ‘ppm’ (parts per million), which is equivalent to ‘mg/l’ (weight concentration). Viscosity measurements were used for the hydrodynamic radius ( The hydrodynamic radius of the LSZ macromolecules was established using the formula developed by Einstein-Simha: Standard deviation of the results obtained did not exceed 5%. Potentiometric titration is a method used for the surface charge determination. In the supporting electrolyte solution, hydroxyl groups interact with the electrolyte and hydrogen ions and as a result a surface charge is formed ( The surface charge is an algebraic sum of the above group charges: The apparatus used for determination of the silica surface charge density (σ The SiO The zeta potential (ζ) of silica particles in the absence and presence of lysozyme was calculated based on the electrophoretic mobility measured by The measurements were performed based on the microelectrophoresis phenomenon. The silica particles were placed in a homogeneous electric field at the stationary level of the electrophoretic cell. Depending on the charge they moved towards the cathode or anode. When the applied voltage compensated their movement, the device read the electrophoretic mobility. The measurements were performed in the pH range from 3 to 9. This parameter was changed automatically by a titrator. The lysozyme concentration was 50 or 100 ppm. The SiO Adsorption measurements were performed by a static method. 0.0085 g SiO The single result was the average of three repetitions. The measurement error did not exceed 5%. The silica suspension stability in the absence and presence of lysozyme was measured by the turbidimetric method ( According to the literature report, the lysozyme structure does not change in the pH range from 1 to 8 ( Lysozyme adsorbs on solid surface only under strictly defined conditions, i.e. when the electrostatic repulsion between protein and particles is not present in the system ( Previously performed potentiometric titration indicated that the point of zero surface charge (pH The lysozyme adsorption affects the suspension electrokinetic properties, especially silica surface charge and electrokinetic potential. These changes are presented in The potentiometric titration results showed that there is a slight σ These equations indicate that the surface charge density in the protein presence depends, among others, on amino acid type that are the closest to the solid. The amino acid nature and sequence determine the change character in the σ In the examined system, the changes in the silica surface charge are minimal. At the pH range 3–5, the SiO Identical SiO The LSZ adsorption is also equivalent with the SiO The lack of differences in SiO It must be also noticed that, when the lysozyme is adsorbed on the silica surface, the particle zeta potential is relatively low and changes in the range from −7 to 2 mV. These values favour the mineral oxide coagulation. The silica suspension stability has been described in the literature ( The LSZ adsorption influences the suspension stability. At pH 3, no significant changes were observed (the difference in the TSI value was only 0.6). Under these conditions, the LSZ adsorption amount is low (about 0.1 mg/m Analyzing the above results, it can be concluded that lysozyme can be a potential flocculant-inducing agent in the procedure of silica removal from aqueous solutions, especially at pH 7.6 and 9. Lysozyme, as a protein of high internal stability, maintains its conformation over a wide pH range (1–8). It adsorbs on the silica surface when there are no repulsive electrostatic interactions in the system (pH range 3–9). The highest adsorption amounts were noticed at pH 7.6 and 9 (1.5 and 2 mg/m