The dissolution of chalcopyrite in acidic potassium dichromate solution has been investigated with respect to the effects of sulphuric acid and potassium dichromate concentrations, by changing stirring speed, leaching temperature and particle size. It was determined that dissolution rate increased with increasing sulphuric acid concentration, potassium dichromate concentration and temperature. A particle size below 75 μm was required to leach >80% copper in 150 min at 90 °C. The kinetic study showed that the dissolution of chalcopyrite is represented by shrinking core model with diffusion through a porous product layer of sulphur. The activation energy (E
                     a) for the dissolution reaction was calculated as 24 kJ/mol. Pyrite dissolution from the concentrate was significant in potassium dichromate solutions because of its high oxidation potential.Chalcopyrite is the most important copper sulphide mineral. It is generally associated with other sulphide minerals, such as galena (PbS), sphalerite (ZnS) and pyrite (FeS In recent years, there has been a heightened interest in the possible application of various reagents in the hydrometallurgical processing of sulphide concentrates – especially chalcopyrite concentrates. Ferric and cupric ions, oxygen and bacteria have been used as oxidative leaching agents of chalcopyrite in sulphate and chloride media, under atmospheric or pressure conditions. Leaching investigations of chalcopyrite show that this mineral is hardly reactive at moderate temperatures around 60 °C ( On the other hand, dichromate ion (Cr Oxidative dissolution of chalcopyrite by dichromate ion in sulphuric acid produces elemental sulphur or sulphate by the two reactions given as follows: The reduction of dichromate ion in acidic solutions is given by The activation energies and the kinetic models explaining the oxidative dissolution of chalcopyrite by various authors are summarised in In this study, the reaction kinetics of chalcopyrite with potassium dichromate was determined to understand the effect of strongly oxidising conditions where both sulphur or sulphate may be formed. For this purpose, the effects of variables such as stirring speed, acid and dichromate concentration, temperature, solid/liquid ratio and particle size on the reaction rate were investigated. The reactivity of pyrite that is present in the concentrate was also determined since this is usually refractory under normal leaching conditions. Chalcopyrite concentrate enriched through flotation of a CuFeS A 1-L glass leach reactor was equilibrated to a temperature of 50 to 97 °C (boiling temperature) in a water bath thermostatically controlled with ± The effect of stirring speed on the dissolution of chalcopyrite was investigated in the range of 250–700 rpm. The results in The effect of sulphuric acid concentration on chalcopyrite dissolution ( The effect of K The effect of temperature on copper extraction is given in As shown in The dissolution of chalcopyrite can be explained by a shrinking core model ( If the reaction rate is controlled by diffusion through a product layer, the integrated rate equation is as follows ( If reaction is controlled by a surface reaction, Eq. Eq. The apparent rate constants ( Using the apparent rate constants ( The dissolution of other sulphide minerals such as pyrite, sphalerite and galena during the oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate is very important to understand the leach selectivity. It is well known that the oxidative dissolution of galena produces insoluble PbSO The mineralogical composition of the − The iron ions in the leaching solution were also analysed. This occurs from both chalcopyrite and pyrite according to reactions  In this study the dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite concentrate in acidic potassium dichromate solutions was studied. It was determined that the reaction rate increased with increasing sulphuric acid and potassium dichromate concentrations and temperature, and with decreasing particle size. The optimum leaching conditions with a 10 g/L solid/liquid ratio were determined as: 0.4 mol/L H The chalcopyrite dissolution in dichromate solutions seems to be faster than other oxidative leaching reagents such as ferric and cupric ions. Pyrite dissolution also seems to be faster and its oxidation more effective. A shrinking core model can be used to describe the dissolution kinetics of chalcopyrite in acidic potassium dichromate solutions above 50 °C. The dissolution process was found to be controlled by diffusion through a porous product layer. The activation energy of the dissolution process was found to be 24 kJ/mol, which was lower than the activation energy found by This study was supported by The Research Foundation of Selcuk University under Project No. BAP-2004/088.