Marbles and limestones are widely used rocks in the construction industry for internal and external use in specific shapes or sizes. However, the mechanical properties of a material determine its limitations for structural applications where the material is required to sustain a certain load. As the microstructure of rock is known to affect its strength and deformation, understanding of the microstructure and micromechanics of failure of stones are becoming increasingly important for the prediction of durability and integrity of thin-set stone panels The uniaxial strength and deformation of stones are important parameters for architectural projects and implementations. On the other hand, when stress distribution and disturbances generate an energy imbalance in the stone slab and tile, the stone fails by propagation and coalescence of microfractures, and eventually the stone becomes damaged. Therefore, the failure and damage mechanisms of stone at different stress levels should be determined by performing triaxial tests. The friction angle and cohesion have been widely used for design purposes The aim of the work presented here is to investigate the microfractures in relationship to compressional strength tests, using petrographical techniques in polarized microscopy. To the best of the knowledge of the present authors, no study appears in the published literature that has examined this subject comparatively for marbles and limestones. In this regard, we hereby present the results of an experimental study, in which, three crystallized marbles (CM1, CM2, and CM3) and three limestones (LS1, LS2, and LS3) from Turkish Natural Stone Inventory were studied Within the scope of this study, the marble and limestone was selected as the stone samples. The marble as a metamorphic rock and limestone as a sedimentary rock were chosen due to their origins and consumption values. Upon extraction of the stone blocks from the associated quarries, relatively small amounts were cut from these blocks such that the stone samples were large enough to carry out all tests to be performed in the laboratory. These small experimental blocks were then prepared with utmost care such that the macroscopic defects are avoided upon a thorough visual inspection to provide a test specimen that is free from fractures, partings or alteration zones. All specimen preparation procedures comply in fully with ISRM suggested methods as well as ASTM standards, regarding end roughness, perpendicularity and A polarized microscope model Olympus BX41TF was used for petrographic and microfractures analyses. Grain size measurements of CM1, CM2 and CM3 were performed on over 50 calcite crystals of marble samples. However, as the studied limestones exhibit an entirely different texture (grain sizes being <5 This study refers to the capturing of images from cross-sections (24 Although it was also aimed to observe any possible effects of mass spectroscopy and physical properties on microfractures, the relatively insufficient number of rock types tested in this study has not allowed us to make any clear decision. This point has also been emphasized by the authors of the present paper Results from series tests were examined under uniaxial compression tests and triaxial compression tests in order to quantify the state of microfracturing damage. The more representative tested specimens were chosen for obtaining cross-sections. Several microfracture styles were recognized through detailed polarized microscope analyses. Microfractures were classified as intragranular, transgranular, intergranular, and nucleation. Intragranular microfracture lies within a crystal grain. Transgranular microfracture is cut across different grains. Intergranular microfracture occurs along grain boundaries. Nucleation microfracture is different from other three microfracture styles. Nucleation microfracture are the break-offs of the calcite crystals As can be seen in The micro-experimental examinations of the loaded samples indicate that the microfracture damage is affected by both loading conditions and rock types ( This study has dealt with investigating the correlation between uniaxial and triaxial compressional loading and the microfractures styles observed in some selected marbles and limestones using petrographical techniques. The following main observations and conclusions were made: Valid for the tested marbles in this study, both in uniaxial and triaxial compressional loading, the observed common microfracture types were intragranular, transgranular and intergranular. Nucleation microfractures were not observed in uniaxial loading and also in triaxial loading at relatively low confining pressure ( Under both uniaxial and triaxial loading conditions, the only microfracture type observed in limestones was the transgranular type, which could only be observed on the cross-sections of sample LS3. Concerning the widths of the microfractures, it was observed that increasing the confining pressure in triaxial loading lead to an increase in the widths of the microcracks, as well as enhancing the initiation of new microcracks. From the brief summary of the results of this study given above, it is possible to suggest that marble and limestone should be expected to behave quite differently under external loads in terms of their microfracture characteristics. Since microstructure of rock is known to affect its strength and deformation, the microfracture characteristics of marble and limestone can serve as a basis upon which to evaluate the influence of loads when they are used as a building stone in the construction industry. In this respect, it is possible to arrive to the conclusion that limestone may perform better under certain loading conditions. However, regarding the relatively insufficient number of rock types tested in this study, it should be emphasized that such a statement cannot be generalized. Thus, further studies are required in this field to arrive to a more general conclusion. As a Ph.D. thesis, this research was supported by a grant from the Investigation Fund, Dokuz Eylul University, through contracts no. 0922-01-01-46. The authors would like to thank Dr. Bilal Sarı for their help in conducting the cross-sections.