A model for the elastic-plastic deformation and damage process in rock joints and interfaces in quasi-brittle geomaterials is proposed. A close analysis of damage process in interfaces in quasi-brittle geomaterials, represented in cohesive crack models, shows that these models represent well also the damage process in rock joints. The commonly used non-linear elastic-plastic models of rock joints are completed by this damage process and extended to a general model for cohesive fractures which cover rock joints and cohesive cracks. This model reproduces well the main aspects of deformation and damage of cohesive fractures observed experimentally, namely, a non-linear elastic behavior before the stress peak, softening and decrease of the tensile and shear strengths with post-peak deformation, stiffness reduction after stress peak, general trends of irreversible relative displacements and existence of a residual stiffness in ultimate state under compression and shear. This model was fitted to several series of experimental results obtained on different geomaterials and a satisfying agreement between the model and experimental data was obtained.Rock joints and fractures have determinant effects on the stability and mechanical properties of rockmasses and their constitutive models have been investigated by many experimental or theoretical studies in recent decades. Rock joints and fractures have a highly non linear and irreversible behavior and. The non linearity of their elastic deformation under normal stress has been very early highlighted and described by empirical models However, the deformation and failure processes in rock joints involve a rich variety of phenomena which cannot be limited to the elastic-plastic framework. In particular, when non persistent fractures are present in the rockmass, theory and observations show that Despite various evidences for damage effects in the deformation process of rock joints, damage has remained insufficiently developed in their constitutive models. At a smaller scale, crack propagation in quasi-brittle materials has been modeled by using the “ A close examination shows that the concept of cohesive crack has some similarities with the rock joint elements introduced by Goodman Physically, the progressive failure of rock bridges in rock joints is the same process that the propagation of cohesive cracks. The experiments carried out on notched samples to study the propagation of cohesive cracks in quasi brittle materials would be the same that one could imagine to study the progressive failure of rock bridges in rock joints. In both cases, the crack has to propagate in a predefined plane: the rock joint plane in one case and the pre-defined plane by the notch in the sample in the other case. Besides, the non linear elastic deformation observed for cohesive cracks under cyclic loading has the same trends that for rock joints. Therefore, it seems possible, by gathering all these data and partial models, to elaborate a more complete constitutive model for elastic-plastic and damage behavior of In this paper, based on existing models for different aspects of deformation and damage of rock joints and cohesive cracks, a new complete constitutive damage-plasticity model is established. This model is verified by comparison to the available experimental results on cracking and failure of quasi-brittle materials along predefined fracture surfaces. The cohesive fracture is a very small thickness zone in the material characterized by a high deformability (small stiffness) and small strength with respect to the surrounding matrix. This narrow zone in modeled geometrically by a zero thickness surface (or a line in 2-D configuration). The displacement field can be discontinuous along this surface and its jump across the surface is represented by the relative displacement vector Damage is modeled based on the same Kachanov–Rabotnov concept of stress bearing The constitutive model of the cohesive fracture that expresses the relationship between The elastic displacement is related to the stress by the The cross isotropy is assumed here in the fracture plane. Under this assumption, the elastic stiffness However, this elastic model does not distinguish between loading and unloading paths, nor does it take into account the gradual stiffness degradation due to rock bridges breakage. This damage process which will be introduced by the damage variable According to A variety of strength models have been proposed for different types of discontinuity surfaces in quasi-brittle materials like rock joints, cohesive cracks in cementitious materials and contact surfaces in masonry structures. Many of them, beginning by the Stankowski et al. Besides, experimental results on cohesive fractures, especially direct cyclic traction tests for which the damage effects are more easily observable, show that the development of microcracks is always accompanied by irreversible or plastic deformations The focus is put in this paper on the extension of the damage criterion The parameter Criterion The plastic displacement rate is derived from a plastic potential, in the following form: The multiplier This expression satisfies also well the cross isotropy of the interface at the initial state: the plastic displacement rate under normal stress is found to remain normal to the interface plane, and, under a shear stress, parallel to the shear direction. The stress independent term Only two new parameters Then, it can be computed: And, with For the ultimate state, The parameters It can be noticed that for the Punch-Through Shear Tests performed by Backers An other interesting property of this model is to reproduce well the decrease of dilation angle under compression. This can be deduced analytically from At the ultimate state of the completely damaged cohesive fracture ( The evolution of damage variable Another limitation of the above-mentioned models is that the ultimate damage state is attained for a finite strain, whereas experimental data show that, at least for shear deformation under high compressive stresses, the shear stiffness maintains a finite residual value even after great shear displacements. These limitations can be overcome if the evolution of the damage variable, instead of the stress, is expressed by an exponential function of the relative displacement. This assumption which led to some robust models for bulk materials This evolution is governed by a constant parameter This curve has been plotted for different values of Since the damage is described by a scalar variable The damage evolution law must ensure the positivity of energy dissipation during damage process. The expression of the elastic law It can be shown that on all the points on the yield surface for every value of This consistency equation allows us to determine the function For a monotonic loading, when at the first time the damage limit is reached, we have During this loading, This equation completes the expression of It is important to note that in a numerical code, the evolution of the damage variable is deduced from the consistency equation and the damage rules Note that since the same function Criterion The fracture energy designated by If plastic strain is present in the model then its contribution to the integral The model presented in the previous sections was applied to three sets of experimental results available in the literature. The two first sets correspond to mode I deformation of cohesive fractures in concrete and include the great scale traction tests Slowik et al. Reinhardt and Cornelissen The same type of Finite Element mesh presented in Backers  Gradual breakage of rock bridges in rock joints plays an important role in deformation and failure process of rock joints and in instabilities of rock masses as shown by many field observations. This process that affects both the strength and stiffness of rock joints cannot be modeled within the framework of elastic-plastic behavior which is widely used for rock joints. At the smaller scale, cohesive crack models proposed for crack propagation in quasi brittle materials have mainly focused on the damage of interfaces. A close examination shows, however, that damage of cohesive cracks is based physically on the same process that the progressive breakage of rock bridges in rock joints. It has seemed then possible to complete the elastic-plastic models of rock joints with damage behavior and obtain a more general elastic-plastic-damage model for This model assumes that plasticity and damage occur simultaneously in quasi-brittle geomaterials. This assumption that is based on experimental observation brings great simplifications to the model by allowing to take the same criterion for both damage and plasticity. The hyperbolic expression However, this model was validated in this paper only for pure mode I or pure mode II crack propagation tests. It would be interesting to validate it for mixed propagation modes if appropriate experimental data are available. A straight forward perspective of application of this model is to the stability of rock slopes. As mentioned above, the effect of damage process has been proven by filed observations and Bémani Another interesting perspective of the present work is its extension the hydraulic fracturing. The model presented in this paper can be completed by integration of fluid pressure effects and then applied to modeling fracture propagation under hydraulic forces in porous materials. A sample containing a cohesive crack at its centre and submitted to a traction load Three cases of parameters values were tested. All the parameters are expressed in