The Bushveld Igneous Complex in South Africa is a rich source of platinum group elements (PGEs), as well as base metal sulphides. Typical beneficiation routes entail milling and flotation, smelting, matte converting and hydrometallurgical processing of converter matte to selectively recover metal values. The primary focus is on PGE recovery, with the secondary objective of base metals recovery. At the Western Platinum Pty. Ltd. Base Metals Refinery, converter matte typically contains 48% Ni, 29% Cu, 21% S and 0.6–5% Fe by weight, and the major mineral phases have compositions approaching heazlewoodite (Ni3S2), chalcocite (Cu2S) and a Ni–Cu alloy. It has been observed that the iron content of converter matte can have a significant impact on performance of the first stage atmospheric leach, in which the primary goal is to precipitate copper and PGEs from spent electrolyte (via metathesis and cementation reactions) and the secondary goal is the dissolution of nickel. In this work, laboratory scale batch leach tests were carried out with samples of converter matte with varying Fe-endpoints (0.53%, 0.83% and 5.72%), under oxygenated and non-oxygenated conditions, to improve understanding of the effect of the Fe-endpoint. X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy techniques were employed to understand mineralogical changes that take place during leaching. Matte with a higher iron content was characterised by a lower Ni–Cu alloy content than matte with a lower iron content, and the presence of relatively inert pentlandite (NiFe)9S8. Under oxygenated conditions, nickel was leached more readily from low iron matte and copper and PGEs were precipitated more readily onto low iron matte than high iron matte. Under non-oxygenated conditions, copper was precipitated more readily onto the low iron matte and more nickel was leached from a low-iron matte than high iron matte, this can probably be attributed to the presence of the alloy phase in the low iron matte, which galvanically inhibits the metathesis reaction.Platinum group elements (PGEs) are often associated with base metal sulphides and consequently produced concurrently with base metals. The Bushveld Igneous Complex (BIC) is the largest resource of primary platinum mineralisation in the world, where it is associated with other PGE minerals (alloys, sulphides, arsenides, selenides and bismuth-tellurides of palladium, rhodium, ruthenium, iridium, osmium, and gold) while economically recoverable quantities of copper, nickel, cobalt and chromium are to be found in associated major minerals. The BIC resource consists of three reefs namely, Merensky pyroxenite reef and Platreef, which have high base metal sulphide contents, and the Upper Group 2 (UG2) chromitite reef, which has a smaller base metal sulphide content and larger chromite content. Rh, Ru, Ir and Os make up a significant proportion of the PGEs derived from UG2 reef, whereas the PGEs in Merensky reef and Platreef are dominated by Pt, Pd and Au. In the typical beneficiation processes, UG2 and Merensky ores are concentrated separately by milling and flotation, after which the concentrates are blended to create a single feed for the smelter ( Granulated converter matte is a highly heterogeneous mixture of metal sulphides, alloys, and entrained oxide phases. At an iron endpoint of around 1 At Western Platinum Ltd, granulated converter matte is milled to 90% passing 100 The first stage leach consists of a cascade of five continuously stirred tanks in series, into which spent electrolyte and milled converter matte are fed. Oxygen is sparged into the first three tanks to enable nickel leaching. A number of oxidative nickel leaching reactions can be identified that could take place under air-sparged conditions. Oxidative leaching Ni from alloy Oxidative leaching of Ni-sulphides  In the Western Platinum matte leach process, the last two tanks are not air sparged, and are primarily intended to provide residence time for cementation and metathesis reactions (reactions Cementation Metathesis Copper dissolution from matte under atmospheric conditions has also been reported by a number of researchers Oxidative leaching Cu from alloy Oxidative leaching Cu sulphides The dissolution of synthetic chalcocite (Cu The dissolution of sulphide minerals proceeds through a series of intermediates, with decreasing metal:sulphur ratios. Iron and cobalt can be oxidised by either cupric ions or oxygen and sulphuric acid during leaching. The dissolved metals report with the nickel-rich solution to the NiSO Iron hydrolysis reactions are unwanted in the first stage leach, but can occur if a sufficient proportion of the free acid is consumed, causing a significant increase in solution pH towards the end of the leach train. Under oxidising conditions, ferrous ions are oxidised to ferric ions (reaction Arsenic present in the matte as arsenides, are oxidised, but are reprecipitated as scorodite (FeAsO Plant experience at the Western Platinum Ltd base metals refinery has shown that the iron endpoint influences the performance of the leaching circuit, and that it is beneficial to blow to an endpoint of between 0.6% and 1.6%. High iron endpoints (>    Experimental work was carried out with three matte samples, with distinct iron endpoints: 5.72% Fe, 0.83% Fe and 0.53% Fe. The bulk chemical compositions of the matte samples, as determined with XRF-analyses, are given in The granulated matte was wet-milled in a laboratory batch ball mill, to a size of 90 The results from four leach tests will be discussed in this work: An oxygenated test with a high iron matte (5.72% Fe); An oxygenated test with a low iron matte (0.53% Fe); A non-oxygenated test with a high iron matte (5.72% Fe); A non-oxygenated test with a low iron matte (0.83% Fe). Oxygenated tests were done to simulate conditions in the first three tanks of the atmospheric leach, where leaching and cementation reactions occur. Non-oxygenated tests were carried out to simulate conditions in the last two non-oxygenated tanks, where leaching is limited and cementation and metathesis (reactions Spent electrolyte from copper electrowinning in the Western Platinum BMR was used as leaching solution. The composition of the leach solution at the start of leach tests is given in The solution was preheated in the reactor to the desired leaching temperature of 84 Oxygen was sparged into solution during oxygenated tests and nitrogen during non-oxygenated tests. The gas was blown into the solution below the impeller, at a flow rate of 0.2 During tests, slurry samples were periodically taken with a pipette. The samples were filtered to remove particles smaller than 2 The mineralogical compositions of solid samples were determined by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD). The samples were prepared for XRD analysis using a back loading preparation method. A PANanalytical X'Pert Pro powder diffractometer, with an X'Celerator detector and variable divergence and fixed receiving slits, with Fe filtered Co-Kα radiation, was used for the analyses. The phases were identified with X'Pert Highscore Plus software. The relative phase amounts (weight%) were estimated using the Rietveld method (Autoquan programme from GE inspection technologies). The Rietveld method has been shown to be a robust quantitative analytical method ( The liquid samples were analysed to monitor the concentrations of the following elements: nickel, copper, iron, cobalt, ruthenium, iridium and rhodium. Atomic absorption spectroscopy (Varian SpectrAA-250 Plus) was used to determine nickel, copper, iron and cobalt concentrations. Rhodium and iridium concentrations were determined with ICP-MS, and ruthenium concentration with ICP-OES. The results from the oxygenated high iron and low iron tests (where ‘low iron’ and ‘high iron’ refer to the converter matte iron endpoints), are illustrated in The solid state changes that occurred during leaching were investigated. It is worthwhile to review the mechanisms operative in the low iron test, before comparing to the high iron test. The mineralogy of the matte during the low iron leach test is illustrated in In the low iron test, the Ni–Cu alloy in the matte and the cement copper react rapidly according to the following reactions, explaining the decrease in the alloy mass: Ni In Under our experimental conditions, the leaching of Ni We postulate that the decomposition of Ni From Eh–pH diagrams for Fe–S-H From above, iron appears to be always in non-hydrolysable state as Fe This will also explain the decrease in the digenite mass after 120 The high iron test was allowed to continue for 300 Limited acid utilisation in the high iron test is indicative of slow leaching reactions, which is reflected by the slow rate of nickel extraction ( The mineralogical compositions of the solids at different times during leaching, as determined from solid samples, are given in ● The Ni–Cu alloy phase, which was more abundant in the low iron matte, was easily leached. ● Nickel was leached more easily from the nickel-sulphide lattice in the low iron test than in the high iron test, as indicated by the fact that less godlevskite was formed (intermediate leach product between heazlewoodite and millerite) and more polydymite was formed (product when millerite is leached) when the low iron matte was leached. ● Pentlandite, which was relatively inert in the high iron test, was not present in the low iron matte.  The number of moles iron that was extracted was lower in the low iron test (0.03 The number of moles cobalt extracted was higher in the high iron test: after 240 In the high iron test, very little alloy was present and copper precipitation can be attributed to metathesis by reaction Copper was precipitated at a faster rate during the first 30 In plant operations, the copper concentration is taken as a leading indicator of PGE behaviour. The experimental results strongly suggest that the ability of the matte to cement PGEs is similar to its ability to cement copper. In the low iron test, where copper leaching was limited, all of the dissolved Ir, Rh and Ru were precipitated (  The solution pH in the non-oxygenated tests remained in a range between 0.3 and 0.6 and did not change significantly as leaching progressed. In the absence of oxygen, nickel is extracted due to reactions with cuprous ions (reactions Under oxygenated conditions it was noticed that pentlandite and bornite phases, which are abundant in the high iron matte, were relatively inert, and that more godlevskite was formed when leaching a high iron matte than a low iron matte. Under non-oxygenated conditions, the same observations can be made, as shown in The rate of the nickel–copper exchange reaction was significantly faster in the high iron test than in the low iron test. This might be due to galvanic inhibition of the heazlewoodite phase by the alloy phase in the low iron matte. A second reason might be that the dissolution of iron, which is distributed throughout the matte Iron extraction was much lower in the high iron test (in terms of mass%), but more moles iron were extracted in the high iron test (0.224 Cobalt extraction, in terms of moles extracted, was higher in the high iron test (0.016 During non-oxygenated leaching, the effect of the iron-endpoint differed for the precipitation of ruthenium, rhodium and iridium. This is indicated by This work has confirmed that the iron endpoint of Peirce Smith converter matte significantly impacts on the leaching characteristics of the material, under oxygenated as well as under non-oxygenated conditions. Consequently, the iron endpoint will have a significant influence on the performance and stability of subsequent leaching processes. The importance of improving control of the converting process, by means such as spectroscopic flame monitoring, has therefore been highlighted. In order to improve plant stability, it can also be considered to blend high Fe mattes with lower Fe mattes, before feeding to the BMR, thus mitigating some of the negative effects of the high iron matte. Under oxygenated conditions, it was found that nickel was leached to a lesser extent from a high iron matte (5.72% Fe), than from a low iron matte (0.53% Fe). The rate of nickel extraction is determined by the mineralogy of the matte, which is strongly linked to the iron endpoint. The high iron matte contained very little of the reactive Ni–Cu alloy (2.1%) and contained a significant percentage of inert pentlandite (9.1%). Another difference in the mineralogy of the low and high iron mattes is that nickel is leached more easily from the nickel sulphide matrix of the low iron matte to form millerite, while an intermediate product, godlevskite, was formed to a great extent when leaching at a high iron matte. There is room to establish the role that the increased ferrous ion concentration has on leaching rates, when leaching high iron mattes, since this factor was not isolated in the study. In the high iron oxygenated test, low nickel leaching rates led to an excess of acid, which was utilised for copper leaching. The excess acid also interfered with PGE precipitation. Under conditions where copper precipitation did take place, the high iron matte was more efficient at precipitating copper than the low iron matte. This was true during the initial stages of the oxygenated tests, as well as during non-oxygenated tests. Under non-oxygenated conditions, nickel extraction is a function of the metathesis and cementation reaction. The rates of these reactions were faster when using a high iron matte, so that more copper was precipitated and more nickel was extracted. A clear dependence could not be established between the iron endpoint and PGE behaviour in non-oxygenated tests. The primary goal of the Western Platinum Ltd BMR is to produce a high grade PGE concentrate with minimal losses to solution. Preference must therefore be given to conditions that promote PGE precipitation in the first stage leach. This work has shown that nickel extraction can be expected to be low if a high iron matte is leached. Previous work by The material and financial support by