Strain hardening is an important phenomenon, which is required to study the plastic deformation of any material and also it is an important parameter in the study of workability criteria of metals. The present investigation has been undertaken to evaluate the strain hardening phenomenon experienced during the cold working of sintered aluminium–iron powder metallurgy composite performs during upsetting operation under various stress state conditions namely uniaxial, plane and triaxial. Sintered performs of three different aspect ratios namely 0.44, 0.45 and 0.75 with two different per cent of iron contents (0% and 2%) and with three different iron particle sizes namely −53 to +45 μm, −76 to +63 μm and −106 to +90 μm were prepared and cold forged. The strain hardening exponent ‘n’ and the strength coefficient ‘K’ were obtained for each aspect ratio and iron particle sizes. It is found that there is a greater change in the values of ‘n’ and ‘K’ for the different addition of iron powders and also for the different iron particle sizes for different aspect ratios and for different stress state conditions.One of the predominant characteristics of the plastic deformation of metals is the fact that the shear stress required to produce slip continuously increasing shear strain. The increase in the stress required to cause slip because of previous plastic deformation is known as strain hardening, or work hardening An excellent research work on the sintered aluminium–iron composite preforms under uniaxial stress state condition was carried out by Narayanasamy and Pandey In the present work, the instantaneous strain hardening behaviour in different directions of aluminium–iron powder performs under various stress state conditions namely uniaxial, plane and triaxial were completely investigated. The plots for the strain hardening exponent ‘ The mathematical expressions used and proposed for the determination of various upsetting parameters of upsetting for various stress state conditions are discussed below: In the compression of a P/M part, under frictional conditions, the average density is increased. Friction enhances densification and at the same time decreases the height reduction at fracture. The state of stress in a homogeneous compression process is as follows: According to Abdel-Rahman et al. When the compression continues, the final diameter increases and the corresponding hoop strain, which is tensile in nature, also increases until it reaches the fracture limit. Once the fracture is initiated, the forming limit strain is the same as the effective strain. It is determined from; As an evidence of experimental investigation implying the importance of the spherical component of the stress state on fracture according to Vujovic and Shabaik This index determines the fracture limit as explained in the Reference According to Narayanasamy and Pandey Since the radial stress, The hoop strain ( According to Narayanasamy and Ponalagusamy In the above Eq. Since The effective stress can be determined from the following relation as explained elsewhere The strain hardening exponent ‘ It is assumed that the consecutive compressive loads were specified as l, Now dividing the Eq. Taking natural logarithm on both sides of the above equation, it leads to find the value of ‘ From the Eqs. Atomized aluminium and iron powders of the characterization stated in the The sintered performs were cleaned from the sand particles and the dimensional measurements made before and after each deformation. The deformation of the compact was carried out between two flat open dies hardened to Rc 50–55 and tempered to Rc 46–50 on 100 tons capacity hydraulic press. Each compacts was applied with the compressive loading in the step of 0.01 MN until the appearance of first visible cracks on the free surface. Immediately after the completion of each step of loading, the deformed height, the contact diameters, the bulged diameter and the density were measured.   The behaviour shown in    The flow stress and the axial strain value increases to higher value when alloying addition of iron is made. For the smaller aspect ratio and iron particle size of the sintered compacts, the higher axial strain is obtained before fracture. The hoop stress obtained in the triaxial stress state is always higher than that obtained for the other two stress state conditions. As the axial strain increases, the difference between the hoop stresses (according to triaxial and plane stress state conditions) increases. The hydrostatic stress in the triaxial state of stress is found to be tensile in nature and the same is found to be compressive in the plane stress state conditions. The stress state alters the nature of relationship between the instantaneous strain hardening exponent value and the relative density. The instantaneous strength coefficient value (