In the area of the advanced materials, there exists a persistent need to develop tougher, stronger and harder ceramics. In the present work, we report the microstructure and properties of hard and tough ZrO2 composites reinforced with 30vol.% ZrB2 particulates, processed using sinter-HIPing (Hot Isostatic Pressing) route. The influence of ZrO2 matrix composition (Y2O3 content) on the microstructure and mechanical properties of the sinter-HIPed composites is investigated. While the presintering was carried out in argon at 1400°C, subsequent HIPing of presintered samples was carried out at 1400°C for 1h under 110MPa argon pressure. The fully dense sinter-HIPed microstructure is characterized by the dispersion of ZrB2 particles (1–3μm) in submicron ZrO2 matrix. An important outcome of the present work is that an excellent combination of hardness (upto ∼20GPa) and toughness (upto ∼18MPa m1/2) is measured, for the first time, in ZrO2-based composites. The microstructure-property correlation is discussed with particular importance to understand the underlying microstructural reasons for the enhanced mechanical property. The measurement of fracture surface m-ZrO2 content indicates that the transformation toughening phenomenon is an active mechanism for toughness enhancement. Additionally, crack deflection toughening by ZrB2 particulates also contribute to toughening of the composite.Among the structural ceramics, ZrO Despite having excellent toughness, the poor hardness (≈10–12 In most of the published research, the hot pressing technique is widely adopted to densify the composites. However, Concanon et al. In this paper, we report the processing of ZrO In the present investigation, commercially available co-precipitated (Tosoh grade 3 As a first step towards composite production, ZrO The densification of the green samples was carried out in electrically heated graphite furnaces in inert atmosphere (argon) at a selected presintering temperature 1400 The density of all the HIPed as well as presintered samples is measured using Archimedes principle (distilled water as the medium). All the samples were smoothly polished using diamond pastes of 3 The Vickers hardness ( It should be mentioned here that the toughness of brittle materials is reported to be dependent on test technique, which are widely classified into long crack and short crack methods. Short crack techniques involve measurement of the crack lengths (radial/median) around hardness indentations, from which the toughness is computed using established formulas  XRD spectra obtained from the polished surfaces of the HIPed composites and the starting powders are shown in The mechanical properties i.e., Vickers hardness and indentation toughness of the developed composites are listed in Based on the indentation crack length measurements and assuming theoretical elastic modulus values for ZrO The investigation of indentation induced damage and associated crack patterns is of major relevance in the development of ceramic composites, as such a study also implicates the tribological potential and damage tolerance of the brittle materials. Efforts have been put forward in this research to understand the indentation damage behavior of the newly developed materials. Since the sinter-HIPed composites, presintered at 1400 In the developed ZrO Summarizing, while the transformation toughening significantly contributes to high toughness of the sinter-HIPed composite, the crack deflection is an additional toughening mechanism. Also, the sinter-HIPed composites are found to posses much higher toughness than most of the earlier developed ZrO The present investigation demonstrates that ZrO Fully dense ZrO Tetragonal ZrO Higher hardness (up to 20 The sinter-HIPed composites exhibit higher toughness up to 18 The indentation studies conducted on selected composites did not reveal any visible deformation around the Vickers indentations even up to a high indent load of 500 The authors would like to express sincere gratitude for the financial support of the Department of Science and Technology (DST), GOI. The authors also thank Dr. L. Pathak and Dr. G. C. Ray, Scientists at NML, Jamshedpur for their help in sinter–HIP experiments.