In this study, high-voltage pulse was used for crushing copper ore. The effects of operational parameters on product size, yield and enrichment rate were studied. The influence of operational parameters on the yield of unit energy consumption (δ) for crushing was investigated using orthogonal experiments. The results showed that the variation trend in the content of completely broken product was opposite to that of the average grain size. The rate of enrichment (β) of chalcopyrite first increased, and then, decreased with the increase in voltage. However, the rate of enrichment decreased with the increase in the number of pulses, and was less affected by the spacing between the electrodes. With the continuous change in operational parameters, β for the chalcopyrite gradually stabilized within the range of 1.1–1.2. The high-voltage pulse can effectively enrich chalcopyrite, while the overall variation trend of β showed a decline with the increase in grain size. However, the value of β was higher than unity. Furthermore, the value of β for −0.3 mm broken product was relatively higher, and was about 1.46. Except for the 0.3 mm and 4 mm size fractions, there was no obvious turning point in the β curve of other size fractions. Additionally, the effect of size fraction on the value of β was weak. Under the conditions of breaking the mineral, the voltage had the greatest influence on δ value, which increased with the decrease of voltage and number of pulses. At 110 kV and 55 number of pulses, the maximum value of δ was up to 1.66, which gradually declined in the direction of increasing energy consumption.The process of crushing plays an important role in mineral processing, and consumes a large amount of energy. With the increasing demand of minerals, the high-grade mineral ore reserves are gradually depleting. Due to the shortage of high-grade ore, the demand for low-grade ore has increased. Fine grinding is needed for dissociation of useful components from low-grade ores, which increases the energy consumption and reduces the overall process efficiency [ Different from the selective mechanical crushing, the high-voltage selective crushing is based upon the electrical properties of various mineral components forming the ore (such as, permittivity and conductivity of various mineral components). After applying different electrode discharge, high electrical field is generated at the junction of different mineral components. As a result, the minerals dissociate along the grain boundary of these components [ In the past years, high-voltage pulses have been used for crushing minerals. In 1980s, Beers guided the first high-voltage pulse to crush diamond minerals, and obtained undamaged diamond product [ Many scholars have studied the formation and development of electrical pulse channel in the process of crushing, and the results indicate the electrical pulse channel is formation and development near the high dielectric constant [ In present study, the mechanism of high-voltage crushing and selective breakage advantage were studied. And experiment results showed that high-voltage pulse can improve the dissociation and realize the selective breakage of minerals [ In this work, the SELFRAG LAB high-voltage pulse crusher (manufactured by SELFRAG AG, Switzerland) was used, and is shown in The copper ore was completely immersed in deionized water. One of the conditions for crushing solid minerals is that the internal fragmentation occurs during the high-voltage pulse. The condition for internal breakdown or fragmentation means that the internal field strength approaches the internal material breakdown (or fragmentation) condition, though the strength of external field would not reach the external material's breakdown (fragmentation) condition [ In order to ensure the same amount of pulse samples per unit time, a sieve-free reaction tank was used. After fragmenting each sample, the liquid medium was replaced to avoid any effect of the ionization of iron electrode in the liquid medium on the results of the experiments. After this, the size distribution and the grade of the fragmented products were further analyzed. The copper ore sample was taken from Fushun, Liaoning, China. The mineral was analyzed using X-ray fluorescence (XRF). The chemical composition of the mineral is provided in The X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis of the minerals provided information about the contents of main mineral components of the copper ore quartz. The corresponding XRD results are shown in For high-voltage pulse fragmentation, the current entered the reactor through electrode discharge. The mineral is fragmented based upon the dielectric properties of different mineral components. The location of the fragmentation is mainly the edge of the mineral components where the dielectric constants have different values [ The relative change in the concentrate yield was used to indicate the concentration of the ore. The ratio of concentrate yield to energy consumption for completely broken products is used as the concentrate yield of unit energy consumption, which is expressed by where The particle size of the raw ore was 25–40 mm, while the product with the particle size smaller than 1/10 of the feed was considered as the completely broken (fragmented) product. In these experiments, the −4 mm crushing product was used as the completely broken product. In order to study the effect of voltage on the high-voltage pulse fragmentation, the pulse number and electrode spacing were maintained at values of 70 and 25 mm, respectively, while the voltage was varied through the values of 90, 110, 130, 150, and 170 kV. The effect of voltage on the contents of completely crushed products and average size of the sample is shown in In order to study the effect of number of pulses on the high-voltage pulse fragmentation process, the voltage and electrode spacing were maintained at 130 kV and 25 mm, respectively, whereas the number of pulses was changed through the values of 40, 55, 70, 85, and 100. The results are shown in It can be seen from The optimum values for the pulse number and voltage were 70 and 130 kV, respectively. In order to study the influence of electrode spacing on the high-voltage fragmentation, the spacing was changed through the values of 21, 23, 25, 27, and 29 mm. The contents of completely crushed products and the average size are illustrated in For the pulse number of 70 and electrode gap of 25 mm, the enrichment rate ( For the voltage and electrode gap of 130 kV and 25 mm, respectively, the enrichment rate ( For the voltage and pulse number of 130 kV and 70, the electrode spacing was varied through the values of 21, 23, 25, 27, and 29 mm. The results are shown in In order to investigate the effect of particle size on the enrichment of chalcopyrite during the process of high-voltage pulse fragmentation, the variation of With the change in operational parameters, the value of In this study, Design-export software and the Box-Behnken response surface methodology were used to analyze the effect of various parameters, such as voltage, pulse number and electrode spacing on the yield of concentrate per unit energy consumption was studied. The Box-Behnken response surface methodology is a collection of statistical and mathematical methods that are useful for the modeling and analyzing engineering problems. In this technique, the main objective is to optimize the response surface that is influenced by various process parameters. Response surface methodology also quantifies the relationship between the controllable input parameters and the obtained response surfaces [ First, the fitting to experimental data was conducted, and the results are presented in The results of the analysis are presented in The comprehensive results for the recommended model are presented in  According to the results, the second-order polynomial model is given by the following equations which are fitted from the analysis software ‘Design-export’. Theoretical value(The final equation in terms of coded factors).  In this equation, In the above-mentioned two equations, the theoretical equation is the final equation in terms of coded factors, the actual equation is the final equation in terms of actual factors. In coded factors, the range is the same for each factor, like −1,0,1, and the factor is non-dimensional, reflect the principle of experiment design. While for the actual factors, the actual factors is the actual factor in experiment, reflect the specific characteristics. The final actual equation can better represents the accuracy for this experiment.  There are two main reasons for the gradual reduction in the value of The maximum value of  With the increase in voltage, pulse number, and the decrease in electrode spacing, the contents of completely broken products increased and the average size decreased. With the change in operational parameters, the value of β of chalcopyrite exhibited different trends. With the increase in pulse number, the fluctuation in the value of β was significant, and the value of β decreased from 1.393 to 1.147 when the pulse number was increased from 40 to 100. When the yield of chalcopyrite was over 80%, the value of β changed between 1.1 and 1.2. Overall, the graph of β values in the broken product showed a declining tendency with the increase in particle size. The value of β of −0.3 mm fraction (1.46) was higher. With the increase in particle size, there was no obvious turning point except for 0.3 mm and 4 mm fractions. However, the yield of chalcopyrite at 0.3 mm was low (only 40.57%). The effect of particle size on the value of β of chalcopyrite was not obvious. In the completely broken products, the value of The authors acknowledge the financial support by the