It is well known that high rank coals are generally more hydrophobic than low rank coal or oxidised coal. Non-coking coal (sub-bituminous) of the Talcher coal field in India has very high ash content and is believed to have oxidised surface. This coal is very difficult to float even at higher concentration of collector due to its oxidised surface with reduced hydrophobicity. This investigation has been carried out to study the flotation characteristics of oxidised Indian high ash sub-bituminous coal having particle size below 1 mm. Initially the flotation study was carried out using conventional reagents only in a Denver D-12 sub-aeration flotation cell. Then it was pre-treated with aliphatic alcohols i.e., ethanol and butanol to de-oxidise the coal surface. The attempt was also made using a non-conventional reagent known as black oil as promoter for this type of coal to enhance the floatability. The combinations of the above reagents were also studied to improve the flotation performance. Flotation study was also carried out at optimum reagent conditions to evaluate the flotation performance using flotation column. To characterize the flotation performance with respect to maceral's response, the petrography study was carried out on bulk, concentrate, +500 µm and −500 µm size fractions of tailings of the flotation. Based on the test data, it may be concluded that this coal has potential to give a product of around 31% ash content with 80.4% yield from 41–42% ash content of feed coal. In case of column flotation, the product ash could be reduced further to 26.6% from the same feed coal with 66.5% yield.Coal, an organic sedimentary rock is very heterogeneous; it contains organic matter, which consists of various components with distinct chemical and physical properties referred to as macerals and inorganic matter mostly in the form of minerals. The quality characteristics of coal are attributed mainly to its nature of deposit and origin. While European and American coals are of marine deposits and of in-situ origin, Indian coals in general are of drift origin. The drift origin means the original plant materials, which were later transformed into coal, were transported by rivers and laid down. As a result, the plant materials were intimately contaminated with clay and other detrital minerals giving rise to a high inherent ash content. In other words, extraneous material is intimately mixed in the coal matrix. In India 90% of the coal production is from Gondwana coals, situated mostly in south-eastern quadrant of the country. These are of drift origin ( Macroscopically, coal is made up of finely mixed discrete organic entities known as macerals, which fall into three main groups with different physical and chemical properties: vitrinite, exinite (liptinite) and inertinite ( The majority of coal reserves in India are thick and inferior in quality. In India, the total reserve of coal is estimated to be around 253 billon tonnes as of 1.1.2006. About 86% of this deposit is non-coking coal. Most of the Indian non-coking coals contain high ash in the range of 40–50%. A higher ash content obviously is co-related with a poor calorific value. The gross calorific value is typically lower than 3300 kcal/kg ( In general, washeries have been set up in India to beneficiate coking coal using heavy media cyclones (− The coal from Talcher coal field comes under non-coking (sub-bituminous) coal category. The ash content in this type of coal is 40%–50%. It is used mainly in the thermal power stations. In the present practice in the non-coking coal washeries, below 1 mm size fraction is not beneficiated. It may be blended with beneficiated product of coarse size fraction or directly rejected depending on the market demand. However, for optimum utilisation of this fine coal, it is required to reduce the ash content minimum to below 34%. The surface characteristics on coal have been carried out earlier by many researchers to understand the chemistry governing the hydrophobicity change on the surface of the coal. The hydrophobicity of coal surface could be characterised by FTIR, based on the surface hydrophilic (hydroxyl and carboxyl) groups and hydrophobic (aliphatic and aromatic CH) groups. Hydrophilicity index to describe the hydrophobic character of coal from FTIR spectra has been formulated ( An attempt was made in this study to beneficiate the non-coking coal washery − A ROM coal sample was collected from seam I of South Bolanda mine, Talcher coalfield, Orissa, India. The size reduction of the ROM coal was done as per plant practice. By size classification, − A petrographic study of the coal particles was carried out using a reflected light microscope (Litz Metal Plan Microscope, Germany) using either dry or oil immersion technique. The polished section (2 cm A flotation study of the − About 200 g of sample was taken for batch flotation experiment using Denver D-12 sub-aeration flotation machine with 2-litre capacity cell. The slurry was prepared with 40% solid concentration and conditioned with sodium hexa-meta-phosphate for 5 min at 1500 rpm. Then it was pre-treated with the required amount of promoter (either ethyl alcohol/butanol/black oil or mixture of black oil with ethyl alcohol/butanol) for 5 min whenever required. The required amount of collector was added and conditioned for 5 min. The solids concentration was brought down to 10% by adding additional water in the cell. Then the required amount of frother was added and conditioned for 1 min. The rpm of the cell rotor was reduced from 1500 to 1000. Then the flotation was carried out by introducing air. The experiments were carried out at different operating parameters given in The column flotation study was carried out employing a 100 mm diameter laboratory column flotation. The schematic diagram of the experimental set up is shown in The size analysis of the − Initially the flotation studies were carried out using conventional reagents. The effect of collector (kerosene) was studied and the results are given in As the response of coal towards flotation is not appreciable, it may be probably due to long exposure of coal to the atmospheric oxygen, resulting in an oxidised coal surface. The oxidation of coal starts with physical adsorption of oxygen on the surface to form an oxy-complex. Then, chemical adsorption of oxygen takes place to form polar carboxylic and phenolic groups on the surface of the coal so that coal does not respond to flotation ( The results indicate that when yield increases, ash percentage of the flotation concentrate decreases due to selective flotation of liberated particles. As a result, the yield of concentrate is not appreciable. The selective adsorption of alcohols on coal surface can take place only if the coals contain polar groups, which can interact with adsorbing molecules through hydrogen bonds ( A long-chain carbon atoms reagent termed as ‘black oil’ was used to improve the floatability of the coal particles. The FTIR analysis of black oil is shown in An attempt was also made to optimise the black oil at optimum dosage of kerosene oil (2 ml/kg of coal) and pine oil (0.3 ml/kg of coal). The results are presented in The overall view of these experiments indicates that the black oil is a more suitable promoter to improve the yield of the product without much increase in the ash content. The conceptual flow sheet of the overall process is given in The sample was also subjected to column flotation. It was operated at particular process parameters. The concentrate and tailings were collected at different time intervals. The tailings of the flotation were classified at 500 µm. The above 500 µm particles were added to the flotation concentrate whereas the below 500 µm size fraction was rejected. The flotation results are given in An attempt was made to enhance the floatability of high ash oxidised Indian non-coking coal at − The authors are thankful to Mr. S. K. Misra, Scientist, M. M. Dept., IMMT, Bhubaneswar for his kind help during petrographic studies. The authors are also thankful to Prof. B. K. Mishra, Director, IMMT, Bhubaneswar and Mr. P. S. R. Reddy, HOD, Mineral Processing Department, IMMT, Bhubaneswar, for their kind permission to carry out this work at IMMT, Bhubaneswar.