Biomaterials and tissue engineering are becoming increasingly important in biomedical practice, particularly as the population ages. It is clear that cellular responses to materials depend on structural properties of the material at both the micrometer- and nanometer scale, but general methods for controlling material properties on both of these scales are lacking. Using a hierarchical approach that mimics natural material formation processes, we developed a method to produce materials with controlled physical structures at both the micrometer- and nanometer scale. Our method is based upon a pre-organized micropatterned template and conformal transformation of the architecture with nanostructured minerals, namely hydroxyapatite. The newly developed materials were biocompatible with bone cells, induced a range of desirable cellular responses, and may therefore have direct application in bone tissue engineering. In addition, the design principles employed in this study can be extrapolated to the other classes of biomedical materials, including polymers, metals, ceramics or hybrid combinations.Biomaterials offer enormous promise for the repair of lost tissue function We were interested in producing biomaterials for bone regeneration with complex structures in which features of different length scales can be hierarchically organized. To accomplish this objective, we mimicked natural material formation processes. Nature has presented us numerous clues on how to produce complex, organized structures The formation of an organic template in vivo involves complicated cellular processes and is difficult to duplicate in vitro; therefore, we identified an alternative approach. Microfabrication technology, widely used in the semiconductor industry for making electronic materials, offers an excellent tool for building micrometer scale structures The schematic drawing of the fabrication steps is shown in Second, nanostructured HAP was synthesized on silicon microstructures. The procedure included surface modification with acidic moieties and mineralization in supersaturated calcium phosphate solutions. Surface modification of patterned silicon was achieved by two well-characterized reactions: silanization and succinylation. First, amine groups were attached to silicon patterns through reaction with 3% of (aminopropyl)triethoxysilane solution for about 10 Supersaturated calcium phosphate solutions were prepared by dissolving the following ingredients in de-ionized water: CaCl Silicon chips were removed from the calcium phosphate solutions at various time point for characterization. The samples were rinsed with de-ionized water and blow-dried with air. Micron-scale structure was viewed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Leica 440) after coating with a thin layer of Au-Pd (standard SEM sample preparation). Nanoscale structures were examined by both SEM and atomic force spectroscope using tapping mode (AFM, Digital Instruments 3100). Grain size of the particles was measured by AFM analysis. Chemical composition of the minerals was obtained using energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX, Jeol 8900 Electron Microprobe). Crystalline phases of the minerals were determined using thin-film X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD, Bruker-Axis general area diffraction detection system). Human osteoblast-like Saos-2 and MG-63 cell lines (both from American Type Culture Collection (ATCC), Manassas, VA) were grown in tissue culture (TC) flasks at 37°C in a humidified incubator with 5% CO Saos-2 and MG-63 cell lines were cultured at a density of 2×10 The measurement of Saos-2 cells adhesion was performed 4 The proliferation of cells on various surfaces was determined by the measurement of live cells on the substrates at 3 days of culture using MTS assay as described above. ALP was measured using a commercially available kit (104-LL, Sigma). Briefly, cells were lysed using the M-PER Mammalian Protein Extraction Reagent (Pierce) after 3 days of culture. The cell lysates were collected and the ALP activity was determined using the reaction of Each of the adhesion, proliferation and ALP activity experiments was repeated at least three times in quadruplicates. Statistical analyses were performed using the two-tailed We first patterned parallel ridges/channels (R/C) ( We expected that anionic groups on the template would play an active role in the control of nucleation and crystal growth during the biomineralization phase of structure formation After chemical modification, micropatterned materials were immersed in supersaturated calcium phosphate solutions for mineral deposition for up to 3 days ( We found that the rate and pattern formation of nanostructured HAP on the micropatterned surfaces strongly depended on solution conditions. The initial selection of solutions was based upon body fluids and cell culture medium composition, as we expected that minerals formed under these conditions would be stable in culture and in the body ( The resulting mineralized structures were examined by SEM at various times after initiation of mineralization. SEM images indicated that nucleation and crystal growth appeared on the patterned substrate within 8 It should be noted that the thickness of mineral layer can be arbitrarily selected and precisely controlled, while the crystal structure and morphology are maintained. The thickness ( To examine cellular interactions with these materials, we cultured human osteoblast-like cells, Saos-2 and MG-63, on various micro- and nanostructured surfaces. Silicon surfaces without any structures (smooth surface, S), with micrometer scale features only (micropatterned, M) or with nanometer scale features only (biomineralized, N) were compared to surfaces formed with the full hierarchical approach (micro/nanostructured, MN). Cell morphology on surfaces with micropatterned parallel ridges/channels (R/C, To further explore the function of cells on hierarchically prepared materials, the adhesion, proliferation and function of cells were measured for cells cultured on surfaces patterned with pillars ( We have produced a novel biomaterial using strategies inspired by natural mineralization process. This material has a complex structural form in which a nanometer scale mineral phase is organized in a controlled fashion on a micrometer scale template that is preset by a controllable microfabrication process. One advantage of this approach is that it allows precise control of material structures on both micrometer and nanometer length scale. The ability to control material structure with this precision will enable us to program desirable and predictable cellular responses into a three-dimensional biomaterials. Our study suggests a potential future for hierarchical synthesis of materials for biomedical applications. The authors thank Profs. A. Vignery and M. Zeichner-David for reading the manuscript and providing helpful suggestions, Ms. M. Ma and T. Watkins for technical assistance. This work was supported by a grant from NIH (DE-14097). It was performed in part at the Cornell Nano-Scale Facility which is supported by NSF under the grant ECS-9319005 and the Cornell Center for Materials Research which is supported by NSF under the Grant DMR-9632275.