This paper presents the results of preliminary support design of the subway tunnel for Ankara subway project in accordance with some empirical and numerical methods, using the phase 2D finite element method (FEM). The 5m diameter subway tunnel will advance through slightly to moderately weathered dacite and weak zones. Rock masses were characterized in terms of rock mass rating (RMR), geological strength index (GSI) and Q System. Core samples were tested in the rock mechanics laboratory to determine uniaxial compressive strength, deformability parameters, unit weight, tensile strength and triaxial compressive strength properties. Finally, rock mass strengths were determined by empirical and numerical methods. Required support system was suggested.The rock masses whose strengths are lower than the surrounding stress can be characterized in the weak rock category, while the instabilities are restricted to block falls in strong rock. Tunneling in weak rock presents some special challenges to the geotechnical engineer since misjudgements in the design of support systems can lead to very costly failures. In order to understand the issues involved in the process of designing support for this type of tunnel it is necessary to examine some very basic concepts of how rock mass surrounding a tunnel deforms and how the support systems acts to control this deformation. Generally, deformation of rock mass starts about one half a tunnel diameter ahead of the advancing face and reaches its maximum value about one half diameters behind the face. At the face position about one-third of the total radial closure of the tunnel has already occurred and the tunnel face deforms inward. Whether or not these deformations induce stability problems in the tunnel depends upon the ratio of rock mass strength to the in situ stress level. Here, it is assumed that deformation process described occurs immediately upon excavation of the face. This is a reasonable approximation for most tunnels in rock. The effect of time dependent deformations upon the performance of the tunnel and the design of the support system is not considered. The stability of tunnels can be carried out by either theoretical or empirical approaches. The properties of the rock masses surrounding the openings, the tunnel size, geometry and the used support characteristics are the basic input parameters for a safe tunnel design. Simplified models are useful for engineering pre-design calculations, parametric studies for decision making and first appraisal of bid quantities. During construction, these models allow the rapid choice, installation and control of the best solutions, after empirical adjustments for different circumstances. A 5 This paper presents the preliminary probable support requirements by both empirical and theoretical approaches for the tunnel of the Ankara subway project which is to be driven in dacite. The rock types in the study area are tuff, dacite, andesite and basalt ( Dacite was partially influenced by physical weathering. Physical weathering is effective in climatic regions that experience significant daily changes of temperature and humidity. Precipitating dacites has also been seen in Sulakyurt pluton, located eastern part of Ankara ( The preliminary site investigations were carried out during the feasibility study with particular attention being paid to the subway tunnel alignment. The engineering geological properties of the rock masses at the site have been assessed in accordance with the working partly report (  In total, 166 discontinuities were measured. Orientations are processed utilizing a computer program based on equal-area steographic representation and the following dominant joints were distinguished for dacite and andesite ( Rock samples were taken for laboratory testing. Laboratory testing was carried out on core samples, consisting of bulk unit weight, uniaxial compression, deformability and Brazilian tests, determination of shear parameters of intact rock. The laboratory test results are given in Rock mass classifications, which serve as powerful design aids in underground construction when used in conjunction with observational, analytical and numerical methods, provide a basis for characterizing the strength of rock masses. RMR and In this study, due to the difficulties in determining the material constants,  On the other side, the Geological Strength Index (GSI), introduced by Hoek (1995) and Alternatively, GSI can be calculated from the 1989 version of Bieniawski's RMR classification ( The analysis were concentrated on: the completely weathered dacite and the weakness zones intersecting the tunnel inside the moderately to slightly weathered rock which may possibly create stress failure problem. Analytical solutions were carried out to determine the possible rock behaviour and performance around the opening, by employing the data obtained from site observation and laboratory testing. Indicators of rock condition, such as rock burst and slabs around the tunnel, as well as the development of plastic zone and squeezing conditions and the support pressure were estimated by these analyses. Considering the relatively shallow depth of the tunnel and the incompetent nature of rock the possibility of loosening ground conditions, probable ground reactions were also investigated to assess the increment in rock loads which may result from delay in placing supports. Since both squeezing and rock bursting phenomena occurs as a result of the overstressing of rocks, it is important to characterize the strength of rock masses for predicting their behaviour in underground excavations.  The completely weathered dacite and weakness zones inside dacite provided the mass strength, as 3.2 The uniaxial compressive strength of the rock mass Theoretically, the strength of rock masses should be greater than stresses around openings, to maintain the stability of the opening with an acceptable factor of safety (SF). Therefore the rock mass behaviour of the tunnel can be estimated if the ratio of rock mass strength to in situ stress is available. For the purpose of this analysis, the in situ stress is estimated from the depth below surface and the unit weight of the rock. For a depth of 100 The maximum stress concentrations around openings are the tangential in nature and they can be easily calculated by using Kirch equations in polar coordinate system. In the case of a circular tunnel under uniform (hydrostatic) stress field, the tangential stress concentration at the wall, compressive in nature and is twice of vertical stress which is equal to 4.6 Safety factor of slightly to moderately weathered dacite is 3.64 (16.74/4.6) and this rock unit needs no support. Similarly, considering the rock mass strength (1.75 On the other side, empirically, The tunnel closure can be as large as 17% of the tunnel size as Therefore, both theoretical and empirical solutions shows instability and need of support requirement. Mohr–Coulomb compressive failure criteria, on the side wall of circular tunnel is applied as, On the other side, Barton's roof empirical roof support pressure estimation equation yields support pressure as 0.08 In order to explore the concepts of rock support interaction in a form, which can readily be understood, a very simple analytical model utilized. This model again involves a circular tunnel subjected to a hydrostatic (uniform) stress field in which the horizontal and vertical stresses are equal. A Package program prepared by Rock Science Phase 2 Finite element analysis and support design for excavation have been utilized for the analysis. In this analysis, it is assumed that the surrounding rock mass behaves as an elastic-perfectly plastic material in which failure involving slip along intersecting discontinuities is assumed to occur with zero plastic volume change (  It is assumed that the onset of plastic failure, for different values of the effective confining stress It has been found that the ratio of the uniaxial compressive strengths in the field and the laboratory ( Based upon observations in the field, the slightly to moderately weathered dacite is estimated to have a GSI value of approximately 60 and the substitution of GSI=60 and In the case of the completely weathered dacite and fault material, GSI has been assigned as 11–16. Substitution of GSI=11–16 and  When the support pressures generated both by empirical and theoretical systems are compared with each other, there seems to be no close agreement. Therefore, the maximum support pressure suggested by FEM analysis was taken into consideration to be on the safe side. Based on the information collected at site and the analysis carried out, the support requirement have been determined for both dacite (slightly to moderately weathered) and its highly weathered type associated with weakness zones. Both theoretical and empirical solutions showed that dacite creates no problem since the rock mass strength greater than tangential stress concentration. This situation is also checked by FEM analysis and the deformations are negligiably small and mostly elastic in nature and no permanent support is needed. On the other side, weakness zone indicates failure since it has lower mass strength than in situ stress concentration and also FEM analysis yielded 9.6 However, the validity of the proposed support system should be checked by comparing the predictions with actual measurements during construction. Together with the suggested support, contact grouting is suggested to fill the large voids behind the concrete liners, and consolidation grouting is suggested to consolidate blast damage or relaxed rock. The support for the project by Ankara University Research Foundation is gratefully acknowledged. The authors would also thanks to Dr Yusuf Kagan Kadıoglu for mineralogical and petrographical determination of dacites