Background
                  We asked whether open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) or radial head arthroplasty (RHA), common techniques used for the confrontation of displaced or comminuted radial head fractures, are correlated with cartilage wear of the capitulum.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  We hypothesized that neither ORIF nor RHA are correlated with capitellar cartilage wear.
               
                  Material and methods
                  On 5 cadaveric elbow specimens, osteotomies were employed to simulate radial head comminuted fractures followed with ORIF by Herbert screws. Radial heads were also excised from other 5 cadaveric elbow specimens and were replaced by metallic monopolar implants. Finally, 2 elbows were not operated and used as a control group. Custom-made rotary machines, working unstoppably, generated 700,000 pronation and supination forearm movements at a 110° arc of motion. The elbow joints were examined with pre- and postoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans and the articular surfaces of the capitula were resected and sent for histopathology study.
               
                  Results
                  In the 2 cadaveric elbows of the control group and the 4 elbows treated with ORIF, no cartilage damage was found. The fifth one displayed cartilage fissures, which were, classified according to International Cartilage Repair Society (ICRS) grading system as grade I cartilage damage. On the contrary, all 5 elbows treated with RHA sustained complete cartilage loss, exposure of the subchondral bone and were classified as ICRS grade IV cartilage damage.
               
                  Discussion
                  Our study suggests that metallic monopolar RHA after a displaced or comminuted radial head fracture carries a high risk of rapidly evolving cartilage loss of the capitulum.Biomechanical studies have outlined over the years, the important role of radial head as a secondary static stabilizer of the elbow joint, particularly against valgus forces in association with the medial collateral ligament The best method for the treatment of displaced radial head fractures in adults remains controversial, even though the moto “save the head” should be the surgeon's priority To our knowledge, there are few clinical studies in the extant literature referring to the wear effect of RHA or ORIF on capitellar cartilage but none that proves it in vitro. We hypothesized that neither ORIF nor RHA are correlated with cartilage wear of the capitulum. Following approval of the Aristotle University Ethical Committee, we used 12 human adult fresh-frozen cadaveric upper limbs from 12 different donors (midhumerus proximally to fingertips distally). There were 5 males and 7 females, 7 right and 5 left elbows, with a mean age of 43 years (range, 35–51 years) and similar characteristics (weight, dimensions). The specimens were stored at −20 One senior surgeon, through a 5 Afterwards, all cadaveric elbow specimens were stably placed at custom-made rotary machines. Each machine consisted of an adjustable-height rectangular metal frame, where a powerful windscreen wiper rotary device, placed at the top of the frame was connected to a handle made of polyvinyl chloride, at which each arm had to be steadily stabilized through its fingertips with tire ups after having been wrapped with elastic bandage in order to enhance their grip. The elbow joint was supported on a length adjustable supporting beam at the base of the frame to maintain flexion angle of 90° and neutral alignment of the forearm. The humerus was fully constrained on the beam with tire ups and the forearm only partially constrained, allowing controlled pronation and supination ( All elbows were examined again with MRI scans. They were performed with the elbows in maximum achievable extension and the forearms in neutral position, with coronal and sagittal fast spin-echo sequences (TR/TE: 1710/43, PD STIR). Regarding the elbows treated with RHA, we had to remove the implants prior to the second scanning, in order to avoid scattering. Given that the elbows were rotating steadily at 90° of flexion, we anticipated cartilage loss appearance on their frontal capitellar articular surfaces. These parts of the joints were resected carefully, without causing any damage to the cartilage, stained with methylene blue solution and sent for histopathology study. This was performed by the preparation of histological sections, which were studied with a microscope after they had been stained with hematoxylin-eosin staining. In the 2 cadaveric elbows of the control group and the 4 elbows treated with ORIF no capitellar cartilage damage was found visually. The fifth one displayed cartilage fissures, which were, classified according to ICRS grading system as grade I cartilage damage The MRI scans revealed no capitellar cartilage wear of the control group and the 4 elbows treated with ORIF. The fifth one displayed articular microcracks accompanied with lateral condyle bone marrow edema. All 5 elbows treated with RHA developed complete loss of the capitellar cartilage and disorganization of the radiocapitellar articulation. None of the scanned elbows showed remarkable changes in the rest anatomic features of their joints and their ligamentous integrity was retained. The histological sections of the capitellar cartilage of the control group and the 4 elbows treated with ORIF had a very well preserved and intact structure. The fifth one developed focal discontinuity of the surface zone and was classified according to Osteoarthritis Research Society International Osteoarthritis (OARSI) Cartilage Histopathology Assessment System as Grade 2 cartilage damage ORIF after displaced radial head fractures, in the presence of ligament integrity, is the gold standard The experiment was performed in vitro, on a small number of cadaveric specimens due to lack of financial support, so our study is limited to a 70% level of power. According to the power analysis we performed, we should have used four more specimens (two for each group) in order to achieve a desirable 80% level of power. We used a model that attempted to duplicate loading on the capitulum with continuous passive forearm rotation in cadavers providing a direct loading which does not always duplicate in vivo loading of the radial head-capitulum forces. Also, each elbow rotated unstoppably at the same constant rate through an 110° arc of motion, a state not usually seen in vivo. The fact that our data were only recorded at 90° elbow flexion and only rigid metallic monoblock implants were used, are also limitations of the study. In vivo, the synovial lining replenishes the synovial fluid within the joint. In our biomechanical study, the joint fluid was not replenished and this may have increased the friction coefficient within the joint. Further long-term clinical studies and biomechanical experiments with different types of RHA implants are necessary in order to document the risk and prevalence of capitellar cartilage damage after RHA. We suggest that metallic monoblock RHA carries a high risk of rapidly evolving capitellar cartilage loss. Our data agree with the references which support that metallic mono- or bipolar radial head prostheses can induce changes in capitellar cartilage such as erosion and degeneration. Van Riet et al. found severe erosion of capitellar cartilage in 20 of 47 elbows RHA after displaced or comminuted radial head fractures have serious drawbacks (dislocation, painful loosening, radial neck resorption, capitellar osteopenia, radioulnar synostosis, reduction of grip strength, deep infection) The Ethical Committee of Aristotle University Medical School approved the use of the cadaveric elbow specimens for experimental reasons. Study Number: 267/2016. All authors or their institutions had no industrial or institutional or academic grants or financial support regarding the current study. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. None.