Severely comminuted intra-articular calcaneal fractures often culminate in subtalar arthrosis and stiffness even after operative reduction. In some instances, subtalar arthrodesis is necessary to reduce the symptoms. Primary subtalar arthrodesis for these fractures has gained acceptance in recent years. However, few definite predictors of functional outcome after primary fusion have been found. A series of 17 patients with highly comminuted fractures were studied to determine which radiographic parameters were predictive of functional outcome. The American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society Ankle-Hindfoot scale score was obtained at an average of 34 (range 12 to 157) months after arthrodesis. Radiographic measurements included the talocalcaneal, calcaneal inclination, talo-first metatarsal, and Böhler’s angles, and the height of the tibial plafond, width of the calcaneus, and the presence of a medial step-off on the injured and uninjured foot. The mean Ankle-Hindfoot scale score was 78 (range 56 to 92), and the mean visual analog score was 1.9 (0 to 4). Statistically significant associations were noted between greater postoperative function and increasing age (p = .028), the quality of restoration of Böhler’s angle (p = .038), and the talocalcaneal angle (p = .049). No patient had nonunion. The results of the present study suggest that the outcomes after primary arthrodesis of the subtalar joint are favorable, in particular, when the radiographic relationships of the hindfoot have been restored.The treatment of severely comminuted intra-articular calcaneal fractures remains controversial From empirical observations of patients with highly comminuted fracture patterns, our experience has paralleled that of these other published reports An institutional review board exemption was granted for the present study at one of the institutions, and the institutional review board at the other institution approved the study. A retrospective analysis was performed of the medical records and radiographic images of the 17 patients with comminuted intra-articular calcaneal fractures classified as Sanders type IV ( The medical records were reviewed, and data were excerpted independently by each of the surgeons (S.E.L., J.M.S.). Each surgeon reviewed only their own individual patient information and data. The descriptive variables included age at the injury, gender, weight, mechanism of injury, interval from the injury to the index operation (in days), fixation construct, the use of biologic agents or bone graft, and whether hardware was removed. The radiographic data included measurements of the injured and uninjured feet. Contralateral images served as the reference to evaluate the level of restoration of the normal anatomy and to identify any residual postoperative deformity. Radiographic measurements were done in accordance with standard techniques The evaluation of functional outcomes consisted of a modified American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society Ankle-Hindfoot scale (AHS) score and visual analog scale (VAS) pain score obtained prospectively for all patients at the most recent follow-up visit. As discussed by other investigators, the maximum possible score for the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society scale for patients with STJ arthrodesis is 94 Statistical analysis was performed to determine which demographic, radiographic, and anatomic parameters would correlate with better outcomes. Linear regression models were calculated to determine whether any of the relationships were meaningful. The level of statistical significance was set at The operative technique consisted of placing the patient under general or spinal anesthesia in a lateral decubitus position or supine with an ipsilateral beanbag under the hip. A lateral incision was made over the sinus tarsi long enough to expose the posterior facet of the STJ and critical angle. The posterior facet fragments, if large enough, were elevated to disimpact the fracture. The calcaneal tuber was repositioned to align with the superomedial fragment using either a Schanz pin or an external fixator and then temporarily fixated to the sustentacular fragment with small caliber Steinmann pins or 2.0 mm Kirschner wires. The cartilaginous surfaces from the calcaneal articular fragments and posterior facet of the talus were sharply debrided down to raw cancellous bone. If the fragments of the posterior facet were large enough, they were reduced to the sustentacular fragment and fixated with small caliber screws. Smaller fragments were saved in a bath of lactated Ringer’s solution. The morphology of the calcaneus was checked using fluoroscopy such that the height and width were restored and the medial step-off was minimal. Definitive fixation of the fusion mass was then completed ( A total of 21 patients had undergone primary subtalar fusion after intra-articular calcaneal fracture. Of the 21 patients, 17 (17 fractures) met the inclusion criteria. The results for the descriptive variables are listed in Two of the fractures (11.8%) were temporarily stabilized with external fixation before placement of definitive internal fixation. Definitive fixation of the arthrodesis consisted of large fragment screws in 16 of the fractures (94.1%) and Kirschner wires with a delta-frame external fixator in 1 fracture (5.9%). When fracture patterns dictated the need for additional stabilization, supplemental plates or screws were used ( The results of the radiographic measurements are listed in The most recent AHS and VAS scores for all patients are listed in The concept of primary fusion for the treatment of intra-articular fractures dates back to the early 20th century Although the improvements in functional outcome related to restoration of calcaneal morphology have been commonly accepted, the precise mechanism of improved function is obscure and debatable. Some reports have suggested that restoration of calcaneal morphology might be more important than anatomic articular congruity, because the resultant motion available at the STJ has often been quite limited Although the outcome scores have supported operative treatment of most calcaneal fractures, the rate of complications has been reported to be greater in patients treated operatively Recognition and acceptance of an almost universal occurrence of STJ arthrosis, regardless of the quality of the operative reduction, has led to an increased incidence of primary arthrodesis of highly comminuted fractures of the calcaneus Our series is comparable in size and outcomes to many of the existing published reports on this subject The realization that the calcaneal morphology is important for optimal function requires certain intraoperative maneuvers to achieve this goal. Just as in formal ORIF, the ability to mobilize the fragments to establish morphologic relationships is essential. However, the loss of many anatomic landmarks from the massive comminution seen in this group of patients often complicates the sequential assembly of the fusion mass. Accordingly, some of our radiographic parameters were overcorrected in our zeal to restore the height and proper talocalcaneal relationships. The width of the injured calcaneus was somewhat increased compared with the opposite limb. This was not necessarily expected in view of the complete restoration of the other parameters. We also performed all these procedures with a direct approach overlying the STJ rather than an extended lateral approach. This surgical corridor involves less soft tissue dissection and precludes the often reported compromise of the lateral flap. Furthermore, the ability to denude the inferior surface of the talar subtalar facet is greatly facilitated. Fixation constructs should be designed to dampen the tendency for subsidence of the talus into the calcaneus to preserve the morphology achieved during the operative session. Although we did not observe any patterns with regard to the timing of the operative intervention, generally, the same guidelines for the timing of the extended lateral approach were applied. It is likely that primary fusion can be performed sooner because the direct lateral incisional approach to the STJ is less of an insult to the soft tissues. The results of the present study support the notion that primary fusion is a reasonable strategy in managing these highly comminuted fractures. We also believe that the results of this investigation can be used in the development of additional studies on the treatment of these injuries. The present study was limited by its retrospective nature, relatively small sample size, and a lack of consideration of any comorbidities that might affect the functional status of the patient. We also did not compare the results of primary arthrodesis to formal ORIF. Although this would have been desirable, the results reported in the published data have been diffuse and not ideally suited for direct comparisons of the outcomes. We acknowledge Stuart Gardiner, PhD, for assistance in the statistical analysis of our findings.