In our previous study, it has been proven that the content of scandium could be enriched to about 0.04wt% in a solid product after proper pretreatment of bauxite ore residue. The extraction of scandium from this scandium-rich material was investigated in the present study, with emphasis on both acid leaching of various components and solvent extraction of scandium from acidic leachate. It showed that more than 90% of Sc2O3 was leached out from this material with 6–8mol/L phosphoric acid at 120–140°C for 60–90min and liquid-solid ratio of 10–12mL/g. The presence of phosphoric acid promoted the leaching of scandium due to increased dissolution of perovskite, which converted to CaHPO4 and (TiO)3(PO4)2 and then TiO2 precipitates through TiO2+ hydrolysis precipitation. In the subsequent solvent extraction step, about 98% of Sc3+ was further extracted from the acidic leachate with 2% D2EHPA (P204) at pH1.8 and aqueous-organic ratio of 3:1. Compared with hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid and nitric acid, phosphoric acid had much higher selectivity in separation of Sc from the other main constituents, as demonstrated by its large separation coefficient (β) between scandium and other elemental species (e.g., for iron, βSc/Fe
                     =2703).Scandium is a rare earth element having wide applications in metallurgical, chemical and electronic industries, etc. ( Bauxite ore residue is an alkaline solid waste generated in the alumina production, which enriches approximately 98% of scandium in the bauxite ore ( Hydrochloric acid can be used for treatment of bauxite ore residues, while the impurity elements like iron, aluminum and calcium are co-extracted from the leachate ( Several extractants like P204, P507 and P350 are generally used to recover scandium from aqueous solution. P507 is a common extractant due to its strong selective separation ability ( In our previous work, a process was developed based on reductive roasting for stepwise extraction of Fe It has been proven that phosphoric acid was an effective leaching agent for selective separation of scandium and other impurities because of its high efficiency ( As described in our previous studies ( The details of reductive roasting, acid leaching and alkali leaching of bauxite ore residue have been described in the literature ( Acid leaching was conducted in an autoclave equipped with four 100 The acidic leachate was mixed with Di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphate (D2EHPA, P204) at an appropriate pH value and aqueous-oil ratio. The mixture was oscillated by separating funnel for 15 The chemical compositions of pulverized samples were examined using an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, PANalytical, Axios mAX, Netherlands). Their mineral constituents were determined by using an X-ray diffraction (XRD, RIGAKU, D/Max 2500, Japan) under the conditions of radiation: Cu Kα tube current and voltage: 250 The content of scandium in the solid material and aqueous solution was determined using a plasma emission spectrometer (ICP-AES, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Icap7400 Radial, USA). The scandium-rich material was leached with different phosphoric acid concentrations at 120 The scandium-rich material was leached in 8 The scandium-rich material was mixed with 8 The effect of liquid-solid ratio on the leaching of scandium-rich material is shown in Based on the above results, the optimal leaching conditions for the scandium-rich material were recommended as follows: H In the leaching process, the ionization reactions of phosphoric acid occur stepwise as shown in Eqs. As depicted in Titanium-bearing minerals may contain significant amounts of scandium ( The precipitation pH was used to characterize the solubility of ions in acid liquor. To further illustrate the hydrolysis reaction of TiO Precipitation is considered to occur in the period of time when the concentration of TiO The scandium-rich material was leached in phosphoric acid and then the pH value of the leachate was adjusted further by adding phosphoric acid liquor. It is observed that precipitates formed when the pH value of leachate was adjusted to 3. The main chemical and phase compositions in According to the reported results ( From above analysis, the calcium‑aluminum‑iron oxide (Ca P204, P350 and P507 are generally used to extract scandium from acid leaching solution. P204 has strong extraction ability and it recovered about 90% of scandium from red mud in hydrochloric acid ( To determine the effect of impurity elements on the solvent extraction of scandium, the impurity ions were added into the synthetic scandium-bearing phosphoric leachate separately. The solvent extraction conditions were fixed at P204 concentration of 2% with aqueous-organic ratio of 3, with oscillation for 15  Overall, iron and aluminum could be separated from scandium by adjusting the acid concentration, but calcium was difficult to separate through solvent extraction using P204. The scandium-rich material was leached with phosphoric acid liquor under the optimal conditions. The solvent extraction conditions were fixed at P204 concentration of 2% and aqueous-organic ratio of 3, with oscillation for 15 The effect of acid medium (hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, nitric acid and phosphoric acid) on solvent extraction process was further investegated. The scandium-rich material was leached by different inorganic acids with concentration of 8 Although the extraction of scandium exceeded 90% using all types of acids, the separation coefficients between scandium and other species were much higher in phosphoric acid compared with the other acids. Additionally, it can be observed that an apparent flocculent third phase was formed in the sulfuric acid medium due to the formation of calcium sulfate, which heavily hindered the solvent extraction process. Apparently, P204 had better selectivity for extraction of scandium from iron and aluminum in phosphoric acid. Particularly, the separation coefficient between scandium and iron in phosphoric acid attained 2703. In this study, the feasibility and mechanism of recovering scandium from a scandium-rich material were investigated based on the acid leaching and solvent extraction process. The results showed that phosphoric acid had an advantage in separating scandium from impurities over hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid and nitric acid. Under the optimal conditions of phosphoric acid concentration of 6–8 The leaching of scandium increased with the deepened extent of dissolution reaction between phosphoric acid and perovskite. The reaction between perovskite and phosphoric acid produced CaHPO The authors wish to express their thanks to the