It is well known that galvanic interactions between sphalerite or pyrite and manganese (IV) oxide(MnO2) accelerate the leaching of these minerals. Because MnO2 is nobler than chalcopyrite, chalcopyrite acts as cathode to be oxidized in contact with MnO2. We investigated the feasibility of galvanic leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate using chemical reagent MnO2. Leaching experiments were performed in an erlenmeyer flask containing a sulfuric medium agitated on a magnetic stirrer at room temperature. Although the addition of MnO2 improved the leaching rate of chalcopyrite, its effect was limited. Adding carbon black significantly accelerated the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching in the presence of MnO2, and the Cu extraction yield was 81% at MnO2/carbon black/chalcopyrite ratios of 4:1:1 in 29h. In the absence of carbon black, the extraction was 7%. The extraction rate of Mn from MnO2 also increased. Carbon black did not affect the sulfuric acid or ferric sulfate leaching of chalcopyrite without MnO2, indicating that it could play an important role in the galvanic interaction between chalcopyrite and MnO2. The effects of several variables such as pH, dosage of MnO2 and carbon black, and temperature on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching were examined.Galvanic interactions among electrically conducting minerals are well-known phenomena. When two such minerals are in contact with each other in an acid electrolyte, a galvanic couple is formed wherein the mineral of lower rest potential corrodes at an enhanced rate as the anode of the couple, and the mineral with higher rest potential acts as the cathode. This interaction accelerates or retards the dissolution of minerals in acid media (  Manganese(IV) oxide (MnO Manganese dioxide is also nobler than chalcopyrite and MnO The chalcopyrite concentrate (− MnO Carbon black, which is produced by the continuous thermal decomposition of acetylene gas, was provided by Denki Kagaku Kogyou Co. Ltd. Leaching experiments were carried out in 300   As shown in The overall reaction between chalcopyrite and MnO The molar ratio of dissolved Mn ions to Cu ions observed in the leaching experiment was 3.9, which is relatively high compared to the stoichiometric value of 2.5 predicted by reaction In the presence of MnO MnO The leaching experiments were performed with the addition of 0.5 In the presence of carbon black, Fe occurred as ferrous ions in the absence of MnO Magnetic stirring may cause a size reduction of chalcopyrite during the leaching experiments; this would affect the leaching rate of chalcopyrite. In order to investigate the effect of the agitation method, a leaching test was conducted using a 1 In order to evaluate the effect of initial pH on the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching, leaching experiments were performed, wherein initial pH was varied from 0.6 to 1.0. The results ( In order to investigate the effect of MnO  Leaching experiments were conducted at 50 Experiments were also carried out by varying chalcopyrite dosage from 1 In the chalcopyrite leaching with the addition of MnO It has been stated that during ferric sulfate leaching, chalcopyrite surface undergoes passivation by impermeable layers such as an elemental sulfur layer ( Two leaching experiments were performed using − The feasibility of reusing carbon black from the residue for treating subsequent charges of chalcopyrite and MnO Since MnO Although MnO Chalcopyrite is refractory in ferric sulfate media. A low dissolution rate of Cu from chalcopyrite may be attributable to the formation of passive layers such as an elemental sulfur layer ( Addition of carbon black dramatically accelerated the kinetics of chalcopyrite leaching in the presence of MnO The feasibility of galvanic leaching of chalcopyrite was examined using chemical reagent MnO