Lost circulation is the most common problem encountered while drilling oil wells. Occurrence of such a problem can cause a lot of time and cost wastes. In order to drill oil wells, a fast and profitable way is necessary to predict and solve lost circulation problem. Expert system is a method used lately for problems that deal with uncertainty. In this paper, three approaches are carried out for prediction of lost circulation problem. These approaches include design of experiments (DOE), data mining, and adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system (ANFIS). Data of 61 wells of Maroon oilfield are selected and sorted as the feed of the systems. Seventeen variables are used as inputs of the approaches and one variable is used as the output. First, DOE is conducted to observe the effects of variables. Plackett-Burman method is used to determine the effects of variables on lost circulation. After that, data mining is conducted to predict the amount of lost circulation. The class of regression is used to determine a function to model the data and the error of the model. Then, ANFIS is applied to predict the amount of lost circulation. The chosen data are used in order to train, test, and control the ANFIS. Furthermore, subtractive clustering is used to train the fuzzy inference system (FIS) of the model. The performance of the ANFIS model is assessed through the root mean squared error (RMSE). The results suggest that ANFIS method can be successfully applied to establish lost circulation prediction model. In addition, results of ANFIS and data mining are investigated through their prediction performances. The comparison of both methods reveals that ANFIS error is much lower than data mining.Lost circulation problem is usually the most important problem in drilling industry and causes the most drilling non-productive time. Therefore, the industry spend about US$800 million per year to cure problem [ The main focus relevant to lost circulation in past years was how to cure the loss while it happens. This is due to the lack of knowledge about the mechanisms of lost circulation and variables, which may affect the lost circulation. The major problem in this case is uncertainty about how lost circulation occurs. A new model is presented here to predict the lost circulation. Data of one of the Iranian oilfields are used to feed the approaches. Seventeen variables are used as inputs and one variable is used as the output of the systems. By collecting drilling and geomechanical data of Maroon oilfield, proper results about predicting the amount of lost circulation are gained. In this paper, three approaches are carried out for prediction of lost circulation problem. These approaches include DOE, data mining, and ANFIS. First, DOE is conducted to observe the effects of each variable. DOE is an approach applied at the stage of collecting data in order to ensure the reliability and validity of data. Furthermore, by applying this approach the effect of each variable can be determined. Plackett-Burman method is used to determine the effects of variables on the amount of lost circulation [ DOE is a method by which sensitivity of variables and their independencies are examined. The purposes of DOE are as below [ Comparison: this is used when there are more than one option to design. For example, there are several materials and it is decided which material or materials are the best. Variable screening: this is used when there is a large data set and amount of variables are too high. By conducting this work, those variables which are more important and their effects are higher than some others, can be selected. Therefore, the number of variables decreases and better results can be obtained with low variables. Transfer function exploration: after identifying the important variables, effects of these variables and their responses to the system can be tested. Transfer function is the relationship between the input variables and response of the output of the system. System optimization: the purpose of designing a system is a highly improved system in some aspects such as performance, reliability, quality, and efficiency. After identifying the transfer function between variables and outputs, optimization can be conducted in order to improve the performance. System robustness: after conducting optimization, system has to be robust against noise. Data mining is the process of extracting nontrivial and potentially useful information, or knowledge, from the enormous data sets available in experimental sciences (historical records, reanalysis, general circulation method (GCM) simulations, etc.), providing explicit information that has a readable form and can be used to solve diagnosis, classification or forecasting problems. Traditionally, these problems are solved by direct hands-on data analysis using standard statistical methods, but the increasing volume of data motivates the study of automatic data analysis using more complex and sophisticated tools which can operate directly from data. Thus, data mining identifies trends within data that go beyond simple analysis. Modern data mining techniques (association rules, decision trees, Gaussian mixture models, regression algorithms, neural networks, support vector machines, Bayesian networks, etc.) are used in many domains to solve association, classification, segmentation, diagnosis, and prediction problems [ There are six task classes of data mining: 1) anomaly detection: identification of unusual data records, 2) association rule learning: this class tries to find the relationship between variables, 3) clustering: without knowing the structures in the data, this class identifies groups and structures in the data, 4) classification: this class applies generalized known structure to new data, 5) regression: considering the minimum error, this class tries to find a function to model the data, 6) summarization: represents the data set, including visualization and report generation [ The closer R ANFIS is one type of artificial neural network, which is based on the Takagi and Sugeno FIS [ We consider for simplicity that the FIS has two inputs x and y, and one output f (x, y). Therefore, the rule base consists of two fuzzy if-then rules of Takagi and Sugeno's type [  Every node i, in this layer is a square node with a node function [ Every node in this layer is a circle node, which multiplies the incoming signals and sends the product out. For example [ Each node output represents the firing strength of a rule. Every node in this layer is a fixed node “Norm”. The Outputs are called normalized firing strengths. Every node “i” in this layer is a square node with a node function [ Where, The single node in this layer is a fixed node labeled “sum” which computes the overall outputs as the summation of all incoming signals: overall output [ The premise parameters and the consequent parameters are calculated during the training process [ Maroon oilfield is one of the greatest oilfields in the western south of Iran. It is 67 km long and about 7 km wide. This oilfield is an asymmetric anticline. Oil is produced from Asmari formation in this field. Because of the magnitude of this field, it is divided into eight sections [ The data of 61 wells of Maroon oilfield are used to predict the lost circulation by ANFIS. These data include a large quantity of data that comprises the zones whether lost circulation is occurred. Because of the variety of scales of variables, all data are normalized using the below equation in order to get better results on ANFIS [ These data are shown in Inputs of ANFIS must be numbers. Therefore, types of formations are assigned to numbers. 18 different formations are considered in the Maroon oilfield. Therefore, 18 numbers are allocated to these formations. Finally, these numbers are also normalized in the interval 0 to 1, so that these data will be in similar scale of the others. Each formation according to its number is shown in The practical importance of this project resides in the prediction of lost circulation rather than solving the problem when it occurs. This work shows that in encountering problems such as lost circulation which deals with uncertainty, traditional approaches cannot predict the loss because of the complexity of the problem. This work offers a new approach for future work to prevent occurrence of lost circulation. It can be concluded that using smart systems such as ANFIS and data mining which handle a large data set, instead of curing problems, would save time and money. As a matter of fact, instead of solving problems, new approaches must be implemented to predict the problem. Because of the limitation of providing industrial data, we could collect and sort eighteen variables from Maroon oilfield. As ANFIS and data mining can handle a larger set of data, increasing number of inputs would possibly increase the accuracy of the model and decrease the error. However, it shows that other variables affect the occurrence of loss or even decrease the amount of it. Therefore, in planning new wells of the same field, these variables must be considered and optimized in order to decrease the possibility of lost circulation occurrence. According to previous discussion, DOE is used to analyze the sensitivity of data. By conducting DOE, effects of each parameter can be determined. Before using ANFIS to predict the amount of loss circulation, one class of data mining (regression) is used to find a function to model the data. Data mining is an interdisciplinary subfield in the science of computer. It is a process of finding patterns in large data sets which consists methods in artificial intelligence, machine learning, statistics, and database systems. The aim of using data mining is to extract information from a data set and change it to an analytical structure [ In this paper, class of regression is used to determine a function to model the data and the error of the model. The aim of this work is to show that regression only is not suitable for large data sets like lost circulation with seventeen variables. In ANFIS, part of data is used for training, another part is used for testing, and the rest is used for checking the model. In regression, the whole data are used together to determine the loss severity. As it is mentioned before in this paper, the data of Maroon oilfield are used to feed the ANFIS. Total amount of the data are 42948 which 66% of them are used for training, 17% are used for testing, and 17% are used for checking the system. It should be noted that all of these data are combined together and are randomly selected for each section. In order to generate FIS, subtractive clustering approach is used. Squash factor is considered to be 1.25, range of influence is 0.5, accept ratio is 0.5 and reject ratio is 0.15. We used not only backpropagation, but also hybrid optimization method to train the FIS of the model. In the backpropagation method the minimum error is obtained at epoch 150. In the hybrid method the minimum error is obtained at epoch 10. The results of these two methods are shown in In the following   From previous sections, errors of both ANFIS and data mining are calculated. In this paper, all variables such as inputs and output (loss severity) are given to the system and the goal is to find a relationship between these variables. Both ANFIS and data mining are conducted to find the desired relationship. According to By comparing these errors obtained from both approaches it can be concluded that ANFIS results are much better than of data mining. In addition, data of one well are chosen to compare the prediction ability of ANFIS and data mining methods. Results are shown in In this paper, three approaches (DOE, data mining, and ANFIS) were carried out to predict the lost circulation in Maroon oilfield of Iran. 42948 data of 61 wells of Maroon oilfield were used to predict the lost circulation. DOE was conducted to observe the effect of each variable on the amount of lost circulation. Plackett-Burman method was used to determine the effects of variables on the amount of lost circulation. According to the results of this approach the highest effect of variables relates to shear stress at shear rate 300 (θ  adaptive neuro-fuzzy inference system design of experiments fuzzy inference system membership function weight on bit statistical correlation coefficient root mean square error revolution per minute shear stress at shear rate 600 1/sec shear stress at shear rate 300 1/sec output of ANFIS layers sugeno's constants membership function firing strength  By analyzing surfaces obtained from ANFIS, the below results are concluded.                        