Mean drop size and drop size distribution in a horizontal pulsed plate extraction column were investigated using different four binary systems. The effects of pulse intensity (af) and flow rates of both liquid phases have been investigated. The drop size decreased more rapidly with the increase of pulse intensities. It was observed that an increase in intensity of the pulses will lead to narrower ranges of distribution for the drop size. Increasing the flow rate of dispersed phase tends to increase the drop size. The effect of continuous phase flow rate is weaker than the effect of the dispersed phase flow rate. By using results, a semi empirical correlation obtained for the estimation of mean drop size which proves to be in good agreement to the experimental data. The average absolute relative error (AARE) of this correlation is about 15.6%. In order to find a predictive correlation for drop size distribution, four models of distribution functions are tested. The normal probability density function is the only suitable way for representing the experimental drop size distributions with an AARE of 13.7%.pulse intensity (m/s) Sauter mean diameter (m) drop diameter (mm) number of droplets of mean diameter probability of number density volumetric ﬂow rate (m constant parameter of probability of density function constant parameter of probability of density function viscosity (Ns/m density (kg/m interfacial tension between two phases (N/m) continuous phase dispersed phase normal probability density function Liquid–liquid extraction is one of the classical methods in separation technology and finds applications in the chemical and petroleum industry, hydrometallurgy, biotechnology, nuclear technology, food industry, waste management, and other areas The vertical pulsed columns The pulsed sieve plate columns. The pulsed packed columns. The pulsed disc and doughnut columns. The pulsed spray columns. The horizontal pulsed columns The horizontal sieve plate columns. The horizontal packed columns. The main advantages and disadvantages of the two types of columns in identical conditions are as follows: Throughput of the horizontal pulsed columns is less than the vertical pulsed columns The requirement time to start up horizontal pulsed columns is more than the vertical pulsed columns. The vertical pulsed columns are proper for industries that there is surface area limitation The horizontal pulsed columns are proper for industries that there is height limitation The mass transfer efficiency for both types of columns is comparable Therefore, the advantages of vertical pulsed column are more than the horizontal pulsed columns but when we cannot use vertical pulsed column because of height limitation for installation as indoor, the horizontal pulsed column can be a proper contactor. It is well known that the mean drop size and drop size distribution are important parameters in the study and design of the extraction column It is the first time that, the effect of operating parameters in horizontal pulse column has been studied on mean drop size and drop size distribution. By the use of resulting data two empirical correlations have been proposed for the Sauter mean drop diameter and drop size distribution as a function of operating parameters, physical properties of the liquid systems and active column height. The average absolute relative error (AARE) was used as an objective function to calculate the fitted parameters: Experiments were carried out in a semi-industrial horizontal pulsed sieve plate column. The material used for construction was glass. The active part of column was a pipe housing an internal plate cartridge consisting of 25 pairs of sieve plates constructed from 304 stainless steel. Each plate has perforations 2 The sieve plates were arranged as pairs with 1.0 The pulsator is an air pulsing system. The interface location of two phases at the top of the heavy-phase inlet and under light-phase outlet in upper settler was automatically controlled by an optical sensor. A solenoid valve (a normally closed type) was provided at the outlet stream of heavy phase. This valve received electronic signals from the optical sensor. When the interface location was going to change, the optical sensor sent a signal to solenoid valve and the heavy phase was allowed to leave the column by opening the diaphragm of solenoid valve. The light phase was allowed to leave the column via an overflow. A schematic diagram of experimental apparatus is shown in Four liquid–liquid systems were chosen to cover a wide range of values of interfacial tension (9.1–46.5 Technical grade solvents were used at least 99.5 Initially, the whole column was filled with the water which is considered as the continuous phase. The dispersed phase was then entered to column. Sufficient time was provided for reaching the steady state conditions. The drop diameters were measured by photographic method (Nikon D5000 digital camera). Six regions of the active part of column were selected for taking the photographs and calculating the mean drop diameter. To determine the size of the drops, the recorded photos were analyzed by AutoCAD software. In this work for example, three photos of droplets have been shown in The drop size in the pulsed columns depends upon the drops breakage to smaller drops and drops coalescence to bigger drops In this study, three operational parameters were examined including pulse intensity and volumetric flow rates of continuous and dispersed phases. Pulse intensity is defined as the product of pulse amplitude, The main operating parameters found to affect mean drop size of the column are the pulse intensity and phase flow rates. The effect of pulse intensity on Sauter mean drop diameter is shown in The effect of dispersed phase flow rate on mean drop size is shown in The effect of continuous phase flow rates on Sauter mean drop size is illustrated in For prediction of mean drop size, a semi empirical correlation The comparison of experimental results with those calculated by Eq. The effect of the pulse intensity on the drop size distributions for different systems was studied in different operation conditions. For example at constant flow rates of both phases ( At high values of pulse intensity (af), the difference between distribution curves of different liquid systems decreases due to an overriding effect of the pulse intensity against the interfacial tension. At lower the pulse intensity values, the interfacial tension plays a significant role in the shape of distribution curves. The effect of the dispersed phase flow rate on drop size distribution has been shown in The effect of continuous phase flow rate on drop size distribution has been shown in  The probability density has been considered as a number density defined as the ratio of number of drops of a specific diameter ( In this paper drop size and drop size distribution in a horizontal pulsed extraction were studied. The observations revealed that the drop size was decreased and the distribution curve of the drop size was sharpened with an increase in the pulse intensity. The flow rates of the dispersed and continuous phases were found to have almost no significant effect; their effects were negligible as compared to the effect of the pulse intensity. Another main parameter was the interfacial tension. It can also be found that the effect of pulse intensity on drop size and drop size distribution of kerosene–water and toluene–water systems was larger than that of Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: