In present study, selective extraction of cadmium from acidic leach solutions, containing various heavy metal ions, by emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) is studied. For this reason, the zinc plant copper cake was leached with sulfuric acid and main acidic leach solution containing Zn(II), Cu(II), Fe(II), Cd(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) ions was obtained. After Zn(II), Cu(II), Fe(II) and Cd(II) ions in the acidic leach solution were separated, the important parameters influencing the extent of cadmium extraction were investigated and optimum conditions were determined. Cadmium extraction was influenced by number of parameters like initial metal ion concentration, mixing speed, phase ratio, extractant concentration, surfactant concentration, the stripping solution type and concentration, and the feed solution acid concentration. The optimum values of parameter above mentioned were used and cadmium in the acidic leach solution containing 650mg Cd/L, 365mg Co/L, 535mg Ni/L, and 1260mg Zn/L was almost completely extracted within 10min. The results showed that it is possible to extract 99% of cadmium after 10min contact time by using ELM from aqueous solutions, containing Fe(II), Al(III), Cu(II), Zn(II), Pb(II), Co(II) and Ni(II) ions, at the optimum operating conditions.Cadmium as a toxic heavy metal, which is found in industrial discharges of different industries such as manufacturing of cadmium–nickel batteries, phosphate fertilizers, pigments, stabilizers, alloys, and electroplating industries, has very harmful environmental impacts Various methods have been applied for treatment of wastewaters containing cadmium. Precipitation of the metal hydroxide and filtration is mainly used when higher concentrations are treated Solvent extraction from aqueous media by using specific extractants is also applied for separation of cadmium On the other hand, removal of heavy metals from wastewater using membrane in the processes such as ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis has been attempted. However, those methods are subjected to the drawback of membrane fouling In the present work, in order to have a better understanding of the dynamics of ELM technique, the major parameters influencing the selective removal of cadmium from aqueous solutions containing various metal ions have been investigated and optimum conditions determined. The liquid membrane phase composed of a surfactant, an extractant, and a diluent. The non-ionic surfactant used for stabilizing the emulsion is sorbitan monooleate which is a product of Fluka and commercially known as Span 80. The mobile carrier is The zinc plant copper cake (CINKUR Co., Turkiye) consists an average of 15% Zn, 10% Cu, 4.4% Pb, 1.4% Fe, 0.3% Co, 0.5% Ni, 2.5% Cd, and 2% Al on mass basis was leached with a 2 In 100 Emulsion breakage is a serious problem in ELM processing. In this study, experiments for following the breakage of the emulsion were carried out and stable emulsions were obtained. This was done by using 10 In 600 The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-6701F model, Tokyo, Japan) is used for the determinations of metals (Cd, Co, Ni and Zn). All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at the ambient temperature of 20 As seen from In order to determine the influence of acid concentration of feed solution on extraction of cadmium, the studies were conducted with various acid concentrations in the range of 0.01–2.0 Amberlite LA-2 is called liquid anion-exchanger. Only cadmium iodide anions in the acidic leach solution, not cadmium cations, can associate with Amberlite LA-2 and extracted into stripping phase, so it is very important of the ability of iodide anions associating with cadmium. In order to obtain optimal potassium iodide concentration for the ELM process, the concentration of potassium iodide in the acidic leach solution was studied in the range of 0.1–1.0 The effect of cadmium concentration in the feed solution was investigated at three feed concentration. The effect of initial cadmium concentration in the acidic leach solution on the efficiency of extraction was shown in The effect of mixing speed in the acidic leach solution was studied in the range of 225–300 As known from the literature, the main factor of emulsion liquid membrane applicability is stability of emulsion. In addition to mixing speed, carrier, and surfactant concentration, another parameter is stripping agent types As the extraction step occurs in the interface between the feed solution and the liquid membrane, the extraction of metal necessarily requires a simultaneous back-extraction step at the opposite side of the membrane. In the back-extraction stage, the extractant is regenerated and the metal is stripped As volume ratio of the stripping phase to membrance phase ( Extractant concentration in the membrane phase plays a vital role in the overall extraction behaviour of ELM systems. To study this effect, the extractant concentration in the ELMs was varied in the range of 2–8% by weight of membrane phase. The results obtained were shown in In order to determine the influence of surfactant concentration in the membrane phase of the emulsion on extraction of cadmium, the studies were conducted at four Span 80 concentrations. Emulsion with 4% Span 80 was not stable for the total duration of run time. Except for 4% Span 80, decreasing the surfactant concentration from 8% to 5% resulted in slightly increase in the amount of cadmium extracted as shown in The optimum conditions were obtained from the earlier experiments. The membrane phase consisted of the surfactant Span 80 (5%), the extractant Amberlite LA-2 (3%), and the diluent kerosene (92%), by weight. Acid and KI concentrations of feed solution, mixing speed of feed solution, cadmium concentrations of feed solution, concentration of stripping solution, and the volume ratio of stripping phase/organic phase/feed phase ( As seen The effect of optimum conditions on the extraction efficiency of cadmium and other ions from the acidic leach solution containing 650 The separation factors An emulsion liquid membrane process using Amberlite LA-2 to extract and separate cadmium from acidic leach solutions of zinc plant copper cake-containing various metal ions has been investigated. From this study the following conclusions can be drawn: Extraction efficiency increases by decreasing of surfactant up to a certain concentration, and then decreases due to deterioration of emulsion stability. Extraction efficiency of cadmium depends on acid concentration in the feed phase. Separation capacity of the systems with higher solute concentrations is higher than that in the system with lower solute concentrations due to the larger concentration driving force. At the optimum conditions, the extraction of cadmium has been achieved with an efficiency of about 96.8–99.0% from acidic leach solution containing various metal ions within 10 The liquid membrane selectivity of cadmium with respect to other ions that existed in the acidic feed solutions was reasonably high within the first 2 The reduced amount of solvent required for selectively separation and concentration of toxic cadmium metal, account for the promising performance of this technology in practical applications. The author wish to express his sincere gratitude to the