The search for suitable resins for goldcyanide recovery from cyanide solutions prompted the synthesis of resins incorporating new functionalities that solve many of the existing problems. A new type of ion-exchange resin (PS-PIP) incorporating a piperazine group, linked onto a styrene–divinylbenzene macroporous network, was developed for goldcyanide solutions. Kinetics measurements were made on the extraction of goldcyanide (Au(CN)2
                     −) with the ion-exchange resin (PS-PIP). The extraction process is accompanied by fast ion-exchange reaction and is characterised by a sharp moving boundary between the reacted shell and the shrinking unreacted core within the resin. Analyses of the respective rate data in accordance with two theoretical models used to explain the metal extraction kinetics showed that the process is controlled by the rate of diffusion of the ions penetrating the reacted layer at goldcyanide concentrations in the range 10–40 mg l−1 and controlled by the rate of diffusion of the ions across the liquid film surrounding the resin particle at goldcyanide concentrations lower than <2 mg l−1. Particle diffusion coefficients and mass transfer constants across the liquid film were determined from the graphical representation of the proposed models.Hydrometallurgy routes for gold mineral processing are based on the combination of cyanidation leaching steps with subsequent gold cyanide complex (Au(CN) These studies show that the acid–base properties of the secondary amine groups of the piperazine polymeric ligand were strongly modified when attached onto the PS-DVB macroporous supports with an increase in the acidity properties of the piperazine group. However, the application of these systems in industrial scale equipment using fixed column or fluidised bed technology requires knowledge of the equilibrium and kinetics of the metal extraction processes and the operating hydraulic behaviour. The determination of the kinetic parameters has two objectives: (i) to approach, as accurately as possible, the real physical chemistry of the metal extraction process and (ii) to obtain empirical or semi-empirical equations for the design of the equipment. The present paper describes the goldcyanide extraction kinetics behaviour of the piperazine-based PS-DVB macroporous resin (PS-PIP) in an attempt to determine the kinetic parameters of the ion-exchange process in the expected conditions of the mineral leaching processes with goldcyanide contents in the range of 0.5–40 mg/l depending on the mineral content. The experimental procedures, data collection, graphical and numerical treatment of kinetic data used in the study of the metal extraction kinetics are based on the procedures developed for the study of ion-exchange resins as described later. The resin (PS-PIP), synthesised as described previously NaCN solutions were maintained at pH above 11 to avoid hydrogen cyanide (HCN) formation. Those solutions were used to dissolve metalcyanide complexes. Stock solutions were prepared by dissolving KAu(CN) Real cyanide leach liquors were obtained by leaching two gold mineral samples. A gravimetrically concentrated sample from the Facenda Brasileira mineral deposit (Brazil) (FB sample) and a sample collected from mineral tailings located on areas of the Genipapo Garimpo in Rondonia (Brazil) (GN sample). The gold ore FB sample was crushed to 100% passing −100 mesh (<0.149 mm). Two different types of leach solutions were used in the evaluation of PS-PIP resin on goldcyanide extraction. A filtered leaching solution (FB1), and a clarified leaching solution (FB2), were obtained after the precipitation of the colloidal phase of the solution by acidification of the solution (pH 3–4) and subsequent addition of CaO to increase pH values to around 9–10. The composition of both FB1 and FB2 leaching solutions are shown in The gold ore GN was previously aggregated using cement, due to the small particle size of the grains, and leached in column experiments with cyanide solutions. The composition of the leaching solution is collected in Two different types of experimental set-ups were used to determine the kinetic data: (a) a shallow bed reactor and (b) a standard agitated reactor. For both cases, only a wet-sieved resin fraction of narrow particle size range (0.5–0.7 mm) was used. According to this technique Dynamic contacts between resin and solution were effected on a mechanical shaker at different shaking speeds to determine the minimum shaking speed above which the kinetics are independent of the degree of agitation and hence not influenced by film diffusion. Sorption rates were always measured at a shaking speed well above this minimum speed. To determine sorption as a function of time, dynamic contacts were effected in small batches, separately for each time period. The system was frozen after a specified period of shaking by draining the solution quickly through a screen with openings small enough to retain resin particles. The extent of sorption was determined by measuring the residual amount of sorbate in liquid. The reproducibility of the results was greater than 95%. Gold content was again determined by AAS or ICP. Metal extraction reactions in ion-exchange resins, as in other heterogeneous reactions between solids and fluids, could be explained through a number of sequential processes that determine the rate of reaction: (a) Diffusion of ions through the liquid film surrounding the particle (film diffusion (LFD)); (b) Diffusion of ions through the polymeric matrix of the resin (particle-diffusion control (PDC)); (c) Chemical reaction with the functional groups attached to the matrix. One of the steps usually offers much greater resistance than the others, so it can be considered as the rate-limiting step of the process In this model, the extraction mechanism involves counter diffusion of Au(CN) When the porosity of the polymer is small and thus practically impervious to the fluid reactant, the reaction may be explained by the ‘Shell Progressive’ approach. The kinetic concept of a ‘Shell Progressive’ mechanism can be described in terms of the concentration profile of a liquid reactant containing a counter-ion A advancing into a spherical bead of a partially substituted ion exchanger. As the reaction progresses in the bead, the material balances of counter-ion A follows Fick’s diffusion equation with spherical co-ordinates. In this case, the relationship between reaction time and degree of conversion is given by the following expressions (a) When the fluid film controls: (b) When the diffusion though the reacted layer controls (c) When the chemical reaction controls The aim of this kinetic study was to find a mathematical model that describes the experimental data, to determine the rate controlling steps and to determine the kinetic parameters of the mass transfer of the goldcyanide anions. Kinetics measurements in the extraction of Au(CN)  The results of the linear regression analysis for both functions (−ln(1− The linear correlations indicate a good fit for both models. The slope values can be used to calculate effective diffusion coefficients for goldcyanide anion using Kinetic measurements in the extraction of Au(CN) Kinetic data with mineral leaching solutions were measured in order to determine the effect on the kinetic parameters of interfering metallic species such as Fe(CN)  In contrast, kinetic data collected from the Genipapo mineral leaching solutions containing 1.2 mg/l of Au(CN) Due to the lack of precise information on the metal exchange reactions in ion-exchange resins, it is unlikely that a rigorous kinetic model can be developed. We have used the Fick’s law approach and the shell progressive model to fit our experimental data. In a first approximation, both models can be used in the study of the goldcyanide extraction processes in the PS-PIP resin. Results obtained in this work on the kinetics adsorption of Au(CN) Working with typical leaching solutions (10–40 ppm of Au(I), pH around 10 and 200 ppm CN Both HPDM and SPM models allow the calculation of a mean or average inter-diffusion coefficient for the case of high levels of goldcyanide and the mass transfer coefficients for the low level range of goldcyanide concentrations, which provides an insight into the diffusion mechanism and a parameter for subsequent design calculations. Better system description is provided by the SPM model. While the diffusion coefficients provided by the HPDM varied over an order of magnitude, the diffusion coefficients provided by SPM varied only 2.5 times. Fick’s law and the shell progressive mechanisms represent good general approaches to the kinetics of metal extraction reactions on polymeric macroporous ion-exchange resins. The kinetic parameters obtained (particle diffusion) are of the same order of magnitude as those measured by other authors  stoichiometric coefficient total concentration of both exchanging species, M total concentration of both exchanging species in the ion exchanger, M concentration of species A in bulk solution, M concentration of solid reactant at the bead’s unreacted core, Mt: time, s diffusion coefficient in solution phase, m diffusion coefficient in solid phase, m rate constant for film diffusion (infinite solution volume condition) fractional attainment of equilibrium or extent of resin conversion diffusion coefficient in solid phase, m mass transfer coefficient of species A through the liquid film, m s reaction constant based on surface, m s We wish to acknowledge CICYT Project QUI99C02-002 (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia de España) and the Foreign Affairs Ministries of Spain and Israel for their financial support under the bilateral program for Science and Technology Co-operation. Rubens Kautzmann thanks the Department of Mineral Production of Brazil (DNPM) and y CAPES for their financial support. Finally, one of the authors J.L. Cortina wants to express gratitude to Abraham Warshawsky for giving him the opportunity to work together during the last 11 years.