Product engineering is the design of products with desired properties using the methods of process engineering. To reduce the number of process parameters, necessary to obtain the desired properties, a characteristic feature of the respective product is helpful. For a dispersed system this characteristic feature is its complex structure on a micro-scale. This micro-structure is the link between the process and the properties of the final product. The principles of product engineering of dispersed systems are explained and demonstrated by means of different examples: Though there are limits to this concept, certain properties of dispersed systems can be obtained by determining and applying property and process functions.Dispersed systems, e.g. emulsions, foams, suspensions or powders, are commonly found in many branches of industries, ranging from chemical products to cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, food and innovative materials like metal and ceramic foams. Dispersions, in general, are systems with a characteristic structure on a micro-scale, which determines many of their physical properties and thus the quality and functionality of the product; their macroscopic appearance is often homogeneous, though. Stability, rheology, sensory and optical properties or mass transfer kinetics are only some of the properties, which are largely influenced by the micro-structure of a dispersed system. The correlation between a specific property and the micro-structure is called Emulsions are dispersions of two or more insoluble liquids, e.g. water and oil, with the dispersed phase distributed in form of small droplets in the continuous phase. From a thermodynamic point of view such systems are unstable. As a consequence, energy input is required in the dispersion step, e.g. mechanical energy for droplet disruption. Afterwards, the dispersed state obtained has to be stabilized over the desired period of storage and usage of the respective product. Both dispersion and subsequent stabilization determine mean droplet size and droplet size distribution which are important characteristics of the emulsion's micro-structure. Dispersion is most commonly obtained by means of different mechanical emulsification devices, the most important of which are shown in In the former type of apparatus, mechanical energy is dissipated in the liquid in turbulent or laminar flow or by cavitation. The resulting inertial or viscous forces acting on dispersed droplets cause their deformation and break-up. An alternative process is the direct dispersion of the internal phase by droplet formation at microporpous membranes ( A process similar to membrane emulsification is the so-called microchannel emulsification ( In emulsification devices usually employed, droplet disruption of a coarse premix is induced by various mechanisms. Shear forces in laminar flow and shear or inertial forces in turbulent flow are predominant in case of rotor-stator systems (   The lowest efficiency of disruption for this emulsion system is obtained with the colloid-mill as typical rotor-stator system. Better results are found for the high-pressure systems, though the different valve geometries give results, varying with a factor of 10 or more in droplet size. The ultrasound-system provides disruption with an efficiency close to that of the better high-pressure systems. Due to the specific mechanism of step-wise droplet disruption in the cavitating sound field typical droplet size distributions for systems of the latter type are often broad and bimodal ( In terms of energetic efficiency the membrane emulsification gives the best results for low dispersed phase contents and fine-dispersed emulsions ( As shown in  A combination of the empirical relation between maximum and mean droplet size found by Another important application of oil-in-water emulsions is the use as carrier systems for lipophilic substances such as carotenoids. Carotenoids are natural pigments occuring in many fruit and vegetables. Epidemiological studies indicate that various positive health effects are correlated with a high intake of carotenoid rich food ( Carotenoids can be formulated in dispersed systems in order to obtain a continuous aqueous phase and to enhance bioavailability. In an aqueous suspension of carotenoid crystals, bioavailability depends on particle size. Decreasing particle size results in a better uptake of carotenoids ( With regard to good bioavailability, oil-in-water emulsions with carotenoids dissolved in the dispersed oil phase are promising formulations. These emulsions are prepared by dissolving carotenoid crystals in vegetable oil at high temperatures and subsequently dispersing the hot lipophilic phase in the aqueous phase ( The concept of energy density and the refering In case of the egg yolk-stabilized emulsion the area amount of mixed-coloured (green) droplets increases significantly faster than for the system containing Tween 80. This is in good agreement with results of continuous mechanical emulsification, which indicate a significant influence of coalescence for the referring system with egg yolk ( Recently, the colouring method has been improved by using a theory which allows to calculate coalescence probability of droplets (see Powdered products are another group of dispersed systems with large practical relevance. Most important quality characteristics of powders are handling aspects like flow behaviour or dust prevention, and, as many powders are intermediate products, instant properties, i.e. wetting behaviour, dispersability or solubility. These properties are, again, largely determined by the micro-structure of the powdered product. Fine powders usually have poor wetting properties, which can be significantly improved by the formation of agglomerates. Main structural characteristics are primary particle size, agglomerate size, porosity of agglomerates and the porosity of the powder bulk as well as the binding structures between the particles (liquid or solid bridges, van-der-Waals forces). The non-stationary wetting kinetics of a liquid for a certain non-swelling and unsoluble powder bulk is characterized by the specific wetting time, which is a function of physical and structural parameters of the powder (  Subsequent to the wetting of the powder bulk wetting of the single agglomerates, desagglomeration and dispersion of the primary particles is required. Here, the structural characteristics of the agglomerates are the dominating factors. Optimal porosity and pore structure are required for a fast wetting without gas trapping in the interior of the agglomerates ( If the powder material tends to swell or is soluble in the dispersing liquid, this has to be taken into account for the description of property functions. A swelling process as well as partial dissolution alters the bulk structure of the powder and may cause interruption of the wetting process at a critical powder height in the former case ( Jet agglomeration is an example for an appropriate method to design agglomerates of a specific structure ( Typical results for characteristic wetting times of different fractions of an agglomerated cocoa beverage powder are shown in The fine fractions below 0.2 mm show long wetting times of several minutes, which are inacceptable for practical applications. But then, there is a sharp decrease in wetting time for powder fractions with a maximum particle size larger than 0.28 mm. Typical values are of the order of several seconds, with a slight decrease for increasing agglomerate size. This result is in good agreement with Alternative agglomeration methods are required, if the primary particle diameter is on the nanometer-scale. Dry agglomeration gives products with loose structure and large porosity, often above the critical value, due to the dominating effect of van-der-Waals forces. In wet agglomeration capillary forces during the drying process lead to compact structures, with poor dispersability. A promising method for the agglomeration of such systems is freeze spray drying of nano-particle suspensions, colloidal (e.g. protein) or molecular (e.g. sugar) solutions ( There are certain practical limits to the applicability of the product engineering concept discussed here ( The task of product engineering is to produce products of a certain quality, i.e. with specific properties. The tools to attain this target are the methods of process engineering. All properties are the result of certain physical, chemical or biological effects in the product, which are determined by the choice of ingredients and processing conditions. The understanding of these basic mechanisms is the key to a purposeful design of product properties. In case of dispersed systems, like emulsions, foams, suspensions or powders, which are of increasing practical relevance in many branches of industries, the linking factor between product properties and processing conditions is the system's micro-structure. Many important properties of dispersed systems are largely determined by structural parameters (e.g. mean particle size, volume ratio of the phases and others like particle shape, particle size distribution etc.). It is often possible to describe this correlation in the form of explicit Emulsions as liquid dispersions and powdered products are important examples for dispersions with great practical relevance. Driven by this importance and as the result of extensive research on such dispersed systems there are examples for explicit property and process functions for both groups of dispersions. The concept of energy density is an example for a process function with wide applicability in emulsification processes. It allows estimation of the mean emulsion droplet size to be expected under given process conditions. As key structural parameter mean droplet size determines properties like physical stability, rheology or bioavailability of functional ingredients. Wetting time and dispersability are important quality parameters for instant powders. These are closely linked to the particle or agglomerate size, the powder bulk porosity, agglomerate porosity and binding mechanisms, respectively. This powder micro-structure is influenced by the choice of agglomeration method and process parameters, like dosage, external stress during agglomeration, additives, humidity and others. Due to the complexity of the underlying effects often only simplified descriptions of the reality are attainable. Nevertheless, the respective correlations are good approximations with a definite practical value. There are limits to the applicability of this concept of property and process functions. If the decisive mechanisms are too complex or adequate methods for the characterization of the relevant intermediate structure (e.g. in case of certain molecular effects) are not available, the concept of property and process function is not useful. An example are extrusion processes, where, according to the present state of the art, direct correlations between the process and properties are easier to handle.