The number of clean development mechanism (CDM) projects aimed at reducing N2O emissions has increased in recent years. While N2O reduction projects account for only 2.6% of all CDM projects, these N2O reduction projects account for 13% of the total reduction of all greenhouse gases measured on a CO2 equivalent basis under the CDM. China is the host nation for half of all N2O CDM reduction projects while approximately 78% of the N2O reduction technologies for these CDM projects come from Japan, the UK, and Switzerland. This paper consists of an investigation of the present status of and prospects for CDM projects to reduce N2O emissions based on the data of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). N2O reduction in CDM projects has been applied to production plants for such chemicals as nitric acid, adipic acid, and caprolactam. The technologies for N2O reduction used in these CDM projects were thermal or catalytic decomposition and selective catalytic reduction with the selection of a specific reduction strategy dependent upon the underlying production process. This paper presents case studies which examine the application of specific N2O reduction technologies that have been implemented under the CDM. The CDM market for N2O reductions from the industrial sector is nearing saturation and therefore further growth will likely be dependent upon technological progress and the ability to deploy N2O reduction technologies with combustion based stationary sources and mobile sources. A particular focus of technological development efforts should be cost effectiveness and development of technologies that can simultaneously reduce N2O and NOx emissions.Since the Kyoto Protocol regulated the emission of six greenhouse gases (CO  The anthropogenic sources of N By December 2009, a total of 1952 CDM projects had been registered with the UNFCCC, of which 2.6% were related to N For the CDM projects involving the reduction of N The transferred technologies were applied to reduce N Nitric acid (HNO Overall reaction: Ammonia oxidation: NO N As regards the secondary technology, N The tertiary technology entails the reduction of N Two types of tertiary technology are categorized by whether a reducing agent such as hydrocarbons is utilized: catalytic direct decomposition and selective catalytic reduction (SCR) by a reducing agent. Catalytic direct decomposition does not require a reducing agent for N Adipic acid (C N The primary industrial use of caprolactam (C Oximation reaction: Beckmann's rearrangement: Caprolactam production starts with ammonia oxidation to produce NO N Dongbu's nitric acid plant produces about 90,000 According to the project design document, as much as 60,163 PANNA 3 is the largest nitric acid plant of the Prillex America Complex, whose nitric acid production is about 925 Under the CDM project, as the efficiency of N The five plants of Liuzhou Chemical Industry Co. produce 454,080 metric tons of nitric acid per year (tHNO As the performance of the DeN Rhodia's plant in Onsan, South Korea produces 130,000 ton of adipic acid per year. N The reactor is operated at ca. 1300 In the CDM project, the baseline emission is estimated from annual steam production by decomposition, as well as the annual emission of N As the PetroChina Company Limited Liaoyang Petrochemical Company produces 140,000 tons of adipic acid per year, the volume of N In addition to the 11,718,000 The Thai Caprolactam Public Co. produces 111,860 As the performance of the DeN The number of CDM projects for N As combustion is another large source of N From the perspective of technology, the technology for N CDM projects targeting N We acknowledge funding from Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) for a greenhouse gas reduction technology project.