Waste of electronic and electrical equipment (WEEE), or simply called e-waste, such as waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs) contain a significant amount of valuable, as well as, hazardous elements. Therefore they are considered both as an attractive secondary resource and an environmental burden. In this study, a research has been carried out to investigate and quantify the economic performance of recycling and recovering of valuable metals from WPCBs through a base metal secondary pyrometallurgical operation, namely the black copper smelting. The study involved combined detailed process modelling (thermodynamics, mass and energy balance) and techno-economic analyses. In-depth economics analysis of metal recycling out of WPCB's is useful in understanding the business models and drivers as well as the operational strategies and challenges around these processes. The capital and operating costs for the e-waste treatment plant to be built from the grass root stage has been estimated and the cost-benefit analysis has been carried out. The outcome of the study confirms that the e-waste recycling process embedded in the black copper smelting presents considerable potential value and, therefore, should be taken into consideration. It has been shown that increasing the plant annual production capacity has substantial influence on the cost to benefit ratio and the internal rate of return (IRR) of the process. It was also found that the minimum plant capacity for the process to be still economically viable is 30,000 tonnes/annum.Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are indispensable parts of almost all electronic and electrical equipment (EEE). The rapid development of technology and the requirement of high performance electronic and electrical equipment make their replacement become more frequent. This results in large quantities of waste of electronic and electrical equipment (WEEE) that needs to be processed with an environmentally sound treatment ( Extractive metallurgy processes (pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, electrometallurgy and their combinations) have been used for processing and recovering valuable and precious metals from e-waste. In the past two decades, there have been many studies on the recovery of metals from e-waste using hydrometallurgical techniques ( Pyrometallurgical processes involve the use of high temperature to extract metals. The typical processes include incineration, smelting in furnaces, drossing, sintering, melting and reactions in a gaseous phase at high temperatures ( The pyrometallurgical process of e-waste through smelting process is commonly used in industry for enriching the valuable metals carrier (to be processed and separated further) and at the same time utilising the plastics for reductant and additional source of energy. For example, Umicore ( The major economic driver for recycling of e-waste is the recovery of metals such as gold, silver, platinum and other high value metals ( Construction of an integrated plant for recycling metals is a very large investment, and will only be undertaken where it has ‘economic feasibility’, i. e. where the desired return on investment is reliable and not subject to strong risk. The predictable availability of reliable scrap-input streams is also a key determinant for how plants are set up. There is also the question of what would be the smallest capacity of the plant that is still economically viable. This paper explains the study of combined process modelling (thermodynamic, mass and energy balance) and techno-economic analyses to evaluate and estimate the cost for valuable metals recovery from e-waste (embedded in the secondary copper smelting). Hopefully, the paper provides a decision support tool for recyclers towards end-of-life strategies for waste electrical and electronic equipment. The techno-economic evaluation was performed through a two-step methodology comprising of a process simulation followed by an economic analysis. The process simulation was carried out by developing a detailed flowsheet of a processing of e-waste embedded in a black copper smelting route (a type of secondary copper recycling/processing route). The detailed flowsheet and the mass and energy balances were developed using the HSC Chemistry thermochemical package using the Sim 8.0 module ( This study evaluates the extraction of valuable metals from e-waste and copper secondary resources by a black copper smelting route. Depending on the type of the input, a reduction step can be applied in the first stage. The reduction step is needed when the majority of the input is in the form of metallic oxides (oxidised copper scrap or copper oxides, including oxides from the e-waste and recycled FCS flux/slag). Copper scrap and oxides (Cu, Ni, Sn, Zn and Pb), PCBs, FCS flux and coke were fed into the reduction process. Oxygen-enriched air blast was introduced into the reduction reactor that facilitates the combustion and mixing in the furnace. In this study, equilibrium modelling and calculations were carried out in the temperature range of 1100 °C–1600 °C, and oxygen partial pressures (pO In the next stage of the process, controlled-oxidation of the black copper was carried out. An oxygen-enriched air was injected into the black copper. This oxidised the valuable metal impurities from the liquid black copper and segregate them into the slag and vapour phases. Metal impurities such as Zn, Pb, Fe and Sn are more reactive to oxygen compared to Cu, and hence preferentially form their stable oxides. Therefore these were removed from black copper during this oxidation process. Precious metals such as Ag and Au are passive to oxidation and were retained in the liquid copper during both reduction and oxidation stages. Ag and Au are recovered in the last stage of copper processing ( Ferrous, calcium and silica (FCS) flux was introduced in the feed material to segregate impurities and oxides that have been generated during the oxidation process. It is also worthwhile to note that, during the black copper oxidation, heat is supplied by the burning of hydrocarbons. In the thermodynamic modelling of oxidation stage, pure carbon was supplied in the feed material. It was predicted that the purity of copper increases gradually during the oxidation of black copper. As the level of impurities drop, the concentrations of copper and precious metals improved with oxidation. The slag produced from the oxidation process contains valuable metals such as Cu, Zn, Pb. Therefore, this slag can be inputted back into the reduction process where some Cu can be recovered back as black copper and the Zn and Pb from the metal oxides dusts. It is also worth to mention that, both reduction and oxidation steps can be carried out in the same reactor, provided the reactor can be operated both in oxidising and reducing conditions. However, for a high throughput plant and to achieve a continuous process with a stable operation, separate reactors are recommended. In the present study separate reactors for the reduction and oxidation steps were utilised. The fire refining is an optional further purification process that carried out in two steps. This refining process mainly employed when the copper still contains high concentration of oxygen and sulphur. In particular, when some sulphide of copper or a secondary copper that contain a lot of sulphur impurities are used in the process, the fire refining process is vital. In the first step, selective oxidation of the remaining sulphur and other impurities is achieved by blowing air through the molten metal. Thereby small amounts of a copper oxide containing slag are formed, where the oxidised impurities concentrate. They can be recirculated into the smelting furnace in the previous stages. The metals which are not oxidised (e.g. precious metals) remain in the copper phase and removed by electrolytic refining. In the second step of the fire refining the oxygen content of the copper phase has to be reduced to the required final level. This deoxidisation step is achieved by blowing reductants in, such as natural gas through the molten phase. The fire refined copper with a copper content of 99% and above is cast into anodes, called anode copper ( To reach the desired high copper quality, further removing of impurities and the extraction of chemical elements, such as noble metals, nickel, selenium and tellurium takes place at the electrolytic refining. The electrolytic process provides a copper which has the required properties due to a degree of purity of more than 99.99%. Thereby the copper anodes are dissolved in an electrolyte using electric current and the copper is deposited on the cathode as pure metal. An electrolytic cell is used consisting of a cast copper anode and a cathode, placed in an electrolyte that contains copper sulphate and sulphuric acid. The cathode is either a thin blank of pure copper (starter sheet) or a stainless steel former sheet as the permanent cathode plate. At high current density and low voltage, copper ions are dissolved from the impure anode and pass into solution from where they are deposited onto the cathode. Copper is removed from the anode to the extent that the remaining anode is still mechanically strong enough to prevent a collapse. The remaining anode is then recycled to the production process, usually the converter, to cool the reaction and recover the copper ( During the process, the valuable and precious metals are segregated into the slime/sludge and settle in the electrolytic cell. The slime/sludge is further processed to recover Ag and Au. The economic of the process depends on the value of the metals recovered which is a function of associated metal market prices ( For the present study, an input/output model has been developed to evaluate the economic drivers associated with a representative e-waste metal recycling plant (EWMRP). The costs and revenues for each unit operation and each parameter that affect the cost or revenue (such as materials, labour, and product sale) were quantified. By estimating the costs and revenues for each unit operation, the total processing costs and revenues for operating a metal recycling plant (MRP) operation that handles e-waste can then be estimated. This methodology allows us to identify the critical cost and revenue drivers. Sensitivity analysis was used to evaluate the sensitivity of the modelling results to key input values. In particular, the sensitivity of costs and revenue to variations in the total treatment amount and the relative amount of mobile and computer PCBs was evaluated. To set up the economic model for the e-waste metal recovery plant defined above, technical cost modelling (TCM) was utilised. TCM first introduced by  First, the basic unit operations were reviewed and the process options within this step were identified. It was assumed that the steel, aluminium, copper, and zinc scrap were physically separated via magnetic and eddy current separation, using pre-processing equipment installed on the site. For the initial economic calculation, the transportation cost of materials (particularly e-waste) into the plant was not included. The cost elements were also defined: the capital cost which includes total direct and indirect costs; and the operating cost, that include labour, energy, materials, maintenance, and plant overhead. Second, for the selected unit operations, the baseline costs were calculated and the key process parameters were evaluated. In this step, published sources and data from individuals and private companies were utilised. With the aid of these process parameters, the functional relationships for cost calculation were established. The total MRP operation cost was calculated by summing all the unit operation costs. The revenues for each unit operation and total MRP operating revenue can be estimated with the same logic as that used for the cost estimation. The revenue sources considered were mainly copper and precious metals. The economics of the process were determined based on an “nth-plant” assumption (in other words, the learning curve associated with building new plants of this type have assumed to be overcome). A discounted cash flow rate of return (DCFROR) analysis was used to determine the minimum selling price of the recovered metals. The minimum selling price of the recovered metals is the selling price of recycled metals over the plant's lifetime at which the net present value (NPV) is zero. The capital cost estimates were based on a combination of the price list from vendors, literature data, particularly from Fixed operating costs were calculated using correlations from The technique used here for estimating the capital costs of the plant was using the Lang factor method, where the total cost is determined by multiplying the total purchased cost for all the major equipment by a constant called the Lang factor ( The amounts of raw materials required for the recycling of the metal and precious metals out of e-waste through secondary copper smelting were estimated based on the mass balance flow-sheet as shown in From the thermodynamic analysis, the distribution of elements in different phases was calculated. The equilibrium calculations were carried out using the FactSage 6.4 thermochemical package. The FactSage package is based on an integrated databases computing system for chemical thermodynamic. It has an optimised database for the solutions such as alloys, liquids, solid oxides and slags. For pure components, the data are taken from JANAF thermochemical tables and thermodynamic properties data ( A mass balance flowsheet of the valuable metals extraction from e-waste through black copper smelting is shown in The total capital investment cost of the plant is presented in The annual benefit gained from sale of recycled silver, gold and copper is given in A discounted cash flow rate of return (DCFROR) analysis was used in this study to evaluate the selling price of the recycled metallic materials from waste printed circuit board (PCB) over the plant's lifetime. It was found from DCFROR analysis that the internal rate of return of the plant over 20 years of operation is 45% and the net present value over the same period of the plant operation is a $340 million AUD as shown in As it can be seen from the above formula, the investment has a positive ROI that means the profit earned out of the investment was more than the cost put into the investment. Another indicative parameter used to evaluate the plant efficiency for converting sale to cash was the operating cash flow margin which is cash from operating activities as a percentage of sales in a given period. The operating cash flow margin was calculated using the following formula: A relatively high operating cash flow margin gained here indicates that the plant is efficient at converting sales to cash, and also is an indication of high earnings quality of the proposed plant. The time period required for the amount invested in the plant to be repaid by the net cash outflow generated by the plant (payback period) is three years as illustrated in It is worthwhile to note that there is a wide range of prices for raw material fed to the furnaces; for example for the waste PCBs and copper scrap. This is mainly a result of assumptions and key parameters related to feedstock costs and by product prices. For the current study, this fact highlights the importance of a rigorous sensitivity analysis to investigate the impact of key parameters on thermochemical and techno economic analysis of electronic waste processing through secondary copper smelting. Because of the inherent uncertainties in some of the key costs and parameters assumed for this study, it is important to carry out a sensitivity analysis to evaluate the impact that variations in these parameters will have on the money value obtained from recovered metals out of waste PCBs. The sensitivity analysis assesses the effect of the assumptions (concerning the average raw material consumption, energy consumption, interest rate for debt financing, etc.) and of possible variations in the collected data on the results. This analysis was performed by varying the assumed parameters. These implemented variations included calculations such as energy balance, using different copper scrape or PCB which could highly affect the raw material cost, etc. Hence the intention of this section is to contribute to an improved insight in the factors that determine the economic feasibility of e-waste processing embedded in the black copper smelting. The dominant factors influencing the profitability of the e-waste operations were identified. The approach used for this purpose was based on the percentage changes in annual benefit from the base value when varying the cost of utility, raw material, interest rate and total depreciation by ± 10% and ± 20%. For example while the cost of utility decreased by 20%, the calculated change in annual benefit from the e-waste treatment increased by 1.01% as shown in The three other lines in The largest impact was caused by the raw material cost, as varying the raw material price to ±20% of its base value causes the annual benefit to change from the base annual benefit of 1 to 0.78 and 1.22 respectively. As expected, because of the significant quantity of recovered gold and silver produced by the plant, the raw material fed variation has a significant effect on the annual profit of the plant, second only to the interest rate. Varying the loan interest rate to approximately ±20% of its base value (0%), resulted in an annual profit change from the base of 1–1.18 and 0.85 correspondingly. As it can be seen from In reality, the parameters used for the sensitivity analysis generally vary at the same time, so different scenarios in which the most significant parameters from the sensitivity analysis are varied simultaneously are considered to determine the impact on the annual profit gained from the recycled metal out of waste PCBs. The scenarios considered were identified as very optimistic, optimistic, base case, pessimistic, and very pessimistic. For these scenarios, loan rate of interest, raw material costs, utility cost, and total depreciable capital were varied within the upper and lower limits discussed in Section In the analyses that have been presented so far, the recovered metal price has some correlations to the feed material price and thus, by extension, to annual benefit of the whole plant. It is thus of interest to see how changes in plant capacity (feed material capacity) impact the whole cost and benefit of the plant. In line with the assumption for recovered precious metal and copper to be sold as a commodity with market demands and trends similar to those of their ores. Four feed capacities for the material throughput have been considered starting from 10,000 tonnes/annum to 200,000 tonnes/annum. The plant with feed material capacity of 100,000 tonnes per annum was considered to be the base case in this study. The total cost to the cost of the base case along with the same ratio for benefit has been calculated and shown at the left side of vertical axis (Y axis) in  It can also be concluded from In this study, detailed analyses of techno-economic supported by process modelling (thermodynamics, mass and energy balances) of a valuable metals extraction from e-waste embedded in black copper smelting have been presented. The determined annual benefit for the base case (100,000 t/a) was shown to be competitive with the capital and operating cost of the plant including the cost of fed raw material. From the sensitivity analysis, the largest impact was found to be from the variation of the raw material cost, followed by the loan interest rate. The sensitivity analysis also showed that a potential near-term research target of doubling feed raw material results in competitive economics, especially if copper scrap prices stay lower than $4.5/kg. In addition to the feedstock costs, rate of interest has the second significant impact on the economics; however the utility and total depreciation cost effect appears to be insignificant. It has also been shown that increasing the plant annual production capacity has substantial influence on the cost/benefit and IRR. It was found that the minimum plant capacity for the process to be still economically viable is 30,000 tonnes/annum. The results of this study also indicate that recycling precious metal out of waste PCBS is thermodynamically viable even for wide range of potential future market conditions. In future work, the potential of improving the economics of this process by considering cheaper feedstock, different process configurations and process intensification will be assessed.