Uyuni salar (Bolivia), the largest resource of lithium (Li) in the world not only contains a high level of Li but also ~1.3% w/w magnesium (Mg) in strong NaCl brines. The recovery of Mg is therefore essential as the resources represent high value of Mg by-products if recovered. High purity hydrated magnesium carbonate (HMC as dypingite or hydromagnesite) could be recovered from the Uyuni salar brines as an easy-saleable product. The precipitation process used for this recovery relies on the selective removal of Ca by adding excess oxalic acid at an oxalate/Ca molar ratio of 6.6:1. The excess oxalate has to be subsequently removed as Mg oxalate by adjusting the pH to pH 4–7. HMC products of 97.3–99.6% purity could be produced as a result (equivalent to 25.3–25.9% Mg in the product compared to a theoretical value of 25.99% Mg for hydromagnesite). Without removing Mg oxalate, products could only reach 23.3–24.3% Mg. The light HMC (hydromagnesite) product could be precipitated at ambient conditions as long as the drying was set at >65°C. Precipitation at >55°C also yields more crystalline hydromagnesite compared to those obtained at lower temperatures. The light HMC product has a heat adsorbing capacity (endothermic) of 1123–1196J/g dry product. The product has a sheet-like structure and is easily filtered, compared to magnesium hydroxide.Magnesium (Mg), an alkaline earth metal, is the 8th most abundant element in the Earth's crust. Since its discovery in 1808, Mg has been used in a number of applications such as in the production of magnesium metal used in alloys, aircraft, automobiles, electronics, and in chemical, pharmaceutical and agricultural industries. Due to its highly reactive nature, Mg is rarely found in the pure metallic form in nature. Mg thus is found in natural liquors such as seawater, geothermal water, brines or bitterns and in minerals such as dolomite, magnesite, brucite, carnalite, talc, and olivine ( The world production of Mg metal is estimated to have increased from 499,000 Together with the production of refractory magnesia from minerals, synthetic magnesium products such as Mg chloride, hydroxide, and carbonate can also be produced from brines and bitterns. Located in the highland of Bolivia, Salar de Uyuni contains over 40% of the global lithium and is known to have the richest Li salar brines in the world. Moreover, the Uyuni salar brines also contain a high level of Mg (~ The manufacture of Mg products from brines has been in practice on an industrial scale for several decades ( Solvent extraction and ion-exchange were also applied to produce magnesium from brines. For several years, many methods have been studied to synthesise different magnesium carbonate compounds such as nesquehonite (MgCO In a previous study, In our previous studies on the Uyuni salar brines, Mg was first recovered as a low grade Mg hydroxide using lime ( Approximately 1 Oxalic acid (H Several techniques were used for studying the characteristics of various products yielded during the study. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) using a (Cu-tube 60 The process used in this study to recover Mg as Mg carbonate compounds from the Uyuni brine included the following stages: Stage 1: Ca removal as Ca oxalate by adding oxalic acid to the brine, reaching pH Stage 2: Removal of excess oxalate as Mg oxalate at pH Stage 3: Precipitation of Mg carbonate at pH A 2-blade radial impeller was used to agitate the slurries during precipitation tests conducted at room temperature (25 In stage 1, oxalic acid was added as a precipitant for calcium removal. After such an addition at an oxalic acid/Ca molar ratio of 6.6:1, the pH dropped from pH All solids yielded were afterward carefully washed by suspending them in distilled water at a solid/distilled water mass ratio of 1:4. Each of the pure samples was then re-filtered prior to be separated into 3 parts and dried at different temperatures of 25, 65 and 100 As shown in the previous study ( Following Stabcal modelling it was possible to then selectively recover Mg from the Uyuni salar brine by sequential precipitation of Ca and Mg as oxalates and carbonates. An addition of oxalic acid at an oxalate/Ca molar ratio of 6.6:1 would selectively precipitate Ca oxalate at pH High-oxalate brine (obtained after Ca removal only, without further removing Mg oxalate), which was used in a 2-stage process, Low-oxalate brine (obtained after Ca removal as Ca oxalate and excess oxalate removal as Mg oxalate), which was used in a 3-stage process. After the removal of Ca and Mg oxalate, magnesium carbonate (nesquehonite) and HMC of different structures and hydrated water (dypingite and hydromagnesite) could be precipitated from the brines. The composition of the brines at different precipitation stages and their corresponding pHs (in the range of pH In excess CO Or Or As seen above, while a CO Losses of Li and K during the precipitation of the magnesium carbonate compounds were also observed. This was more than likely due to the physical incorporation of Li and K into the precipitate rather than co-precipitation as they could all be removed during subsequent washing. The removal of Ca was completed within 4 During Stage 2 to remove residual oxalate by adjusting the pH to pH After Ca oxalate precipitation by oxalic acid followed by the removal of the remaining oxalate as Mg oxalate, the brine obtained containing 11.8  It can be seen that all diffraction peaks of the product obtained after 25 On the other hand, there is an indication that the products obtained from precipitation using high-oxalate brines, either at 25, 55 or 100 The behavior of the precipitates obtained from the low-oxalate brine during thermal decomposition at a heating rate of 10 Mass losses measured by TGA vary in the range of 55.3–58.8% as shown in Together with TGA, thermal properties of the magnesium carbonate products obtained were also characterised by DSC analysis, conducted in a range from ambient temperature to 600 As given in FE-SEM was used to investigate the surface morphology of the product (hydromagnesite) yielded from ambient temperature precipitation and 100  In summary, after the removal of Ca and oxalate remained, the products obtained showed that high grades of Mg (~ The developed process introduced carbonate to the brine if added in excess. As shown in High purity hydrated magnesium carbonate (HMC as dypingite or hydromagnesite) could be recovered from the Uyuni salar brines which contain ~ The light HMC (hydromagnesite) product could be precipitated at ambient conditions as long as the drying was set at > We acknowledge the granting of scholarships from the government's “Brain Korea (BK) '21” to conduct this research.