In order to obtain the optimal particle size distribution for pharmaceutical powders in dry powder inhalers the particles have to be micronised. In most cases the process of micronisation is connected with a high input of energy which induces disorder and defects on the surface of the drug particles and as a result changes in the crystallinity. Consequently, changes in the physical stability of the powders may occur. To investigate changes on the physical stability of the powder, different analytical methods are used in the present investigation: laser diffraction, Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC), isothermal microcalorimetry and DVS-method.
                  Air-jet-milling is one of the most frequently used techniques in the pharmaceutical industry, in order to obtain particles of respirable size. In the treatise described here the influence of the critical parameters of the process, i.e. feed pressure, grind pressure and feed rate is assessed for salbutamol sulphate. The grind pressure is of utmost importance with respect to particle size distribution and the physical powder stability. For salbutamol sulphate, ground with a MC Jetmill 50, a grind pressure of 6 bar has been found optimal. Pressures below 6 bar are not sufficient to produce the required reduction in particle size. The feed pressure and rate have negligible influence on the powder quality. Furthermore, the micronisation process is optimised to achieve respirable particles while minimising the amorphous content. A correlation between mechanical activation and the amount of the amorphous regions is showed clearly.
                  Air-jet-milling has been compared to ball milling in this investigation. In pilot tests ball milling was not suitable to achieve the needed particle size distribution, however, it generates a specific quantity of amorphous material. With the help of specific amorphous regions in the powder, the sensitivity of the used methods for salbutamol sulphate can be examined.Salbutamol sulphate is a β In order to guarantee full effectiveness, an optimal particle size distribution is of an utmost importance. Zanen et al. In order to meet these requirements, the raw material must be subjected to a micronisation process. In the studies described here, micronisation was carried out using a spiral air-jet-mill. Spiral air-jet-mills produce size reduction through particle impact and attrition and are capable of producing super- to ultrafine particles (1–15 μm) within a very narrow size range The amount of energy required to effect fracture depends on the hardness and particle size of the material and the type of stress applied. According to fracture theory, the hardness of a material increases as its particle size decreases. Consequently, milling of finer materials requires more energy and therefore higher impact speeds than coarse milling. In addition, when fine particles are being milled, impact speeds are likely to be much lower as a result of air friction, and interparticulate collisions are likely to occur more frequently The concentration of the product affects both the cut point and the separation efficiency of the classifier. If the concentration is too high, separation efficiency deteriorates and coarse particles are separated along with fine particles In the studies described here, a type of mill was used which has an outlet on the bottom of the grinding chamber. Two end product fractions are of interest ( the fraction collected in the container beneath the grinding chamber (this accounts for the majority of the end product); the superfine particles collected in the mill bag of the cyclone system (these account for 15–20% of the end product). In order to avoid the fine particles being lost, the two fractions have to be combined. The disadvantages of this type of mill are that it produces a slightly lower yield and a less homogeneous product. The degree of comminution obtained depends on the critical milling parameters. The most important parameters are feed rate, feed pressure and grind pressure. Each of these parameters was varied in experimental studies to obtain an optimum particle size distribution at low levels of material stress. The particle size distribution was assessed by laser diffraction and SEM. Depending on the level of energy input, milling can give rise to disorder, defects or even amorphous regions on the surfaces of the crystals. Even very small quantities of amorphous material can have a marked effect on the physical and chemical stability of the product. Amorphous material is thermodynamically unstable. Upon water absorption and depending on temperature, amorphous material is preferentially converted to thermodynamically stable crystalline material. This process frequently coincides with particle growth Amorphous material in a solid can also be produced mechanically using a centrifugal ball mill. This enables a correlation to be drawn with physically produced amorphous material and allows the sensitivity of analytical methods to be evaluated. To investigate changes on the physical stability of the micronised powder DSC, isothermal microcalorimetry and DVS-method are used. This methods have already been described in numerous publications. Above all, lactose as a case substance was investigated The aims of the present study are to evaluate the critical parameters of micronisation with an air-jet-mill, optimise this process with respect to minimising the amorphous content while simultaneously achieving respirable particles. In addition, a possible correlation between mechanical activation and the amount of the amorphous regions in the product should be tested. Salbutamol sulphate (batches Nos. 200713, 200921, 1001825) was supplied by Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma KG (Ingelheim, Germany). Samples (10 g) of batch No. 200713 were prepared by ball milling in a 250 ml agate mortar with four agate balls (diameter 20 mm). The grinding time in the ball mill (Type S1, Retsch, Haan, Germany) was varied from 5 min to 5 h. The samples were stored over phosphorous pentoxide to protect them from moisture. Micronised powders were prepared with a MC Jetmill 50 (Jetpharma, Balerna, Switzerland). Nitrogen was used as feed gas. Extant room conditions came to 21±1°C and 45±2% RH. The milled samples were stored over phosphorus pentoxide. The particle size distributions of salbutamol sulphate were measured using powder laser diffraction, HELIOS-SYSTEM (Sympatec, Clausthal-Zellerfeld, Germany). Samples were introduced through the RODOS dry powder feeder. The supply pressure of the injector was at 3 bar. The optical concentration reached values between 4 and 8%. The morphology of salbutamol sulphate was examined by using a DSM 926 scanning electron microscope (Zeiss, Jena, Germany). The powders were mounted onto a plate and were sputter coated with 60 nm gold/palladium using a E5100 Cool Sputter Coater (Polaron, Watford, England). Thermoanalytical studies were performed with a Mettler Toledo DSC 820 Differential Scanning Calorimeter (Giessen, Germany). Samples (∼10 mg) were weighted into 40 μl aluminium pans and sealed with a punched aluminium lid. Thermal curves were recorded with a heating rate of 5–10 K/min in a temperature range from 25 to 320°C under a dry nitrogen purge (80 ml/min). The powder was investigated using a Thermal Activity Monitor (Type 2277, Thermometric, Sweden) at 25°C. The samples were weighted into a glass ampoule and a tube containing a saturated salt solution (Mg(NO Isotherms of water sorption were recorded using Dynamic Vapour Sorption (Porotec Frankfurt, Germany). The samples had an approx. weight of 150 mg. The humidity was varied between 0 and 95% RH at 25°C. Scanning electron micrographs show needle-like structures. The needles of salbutamol sulphate are arranged in loose groups or they appear individually. Agglomerates are extremely rare. Each single needle shows a structure with several layers and is approx. 10 μm measured crossways ( Powder laser diffraction measurements showed that following 10 min of grinding an effective reduction of particle size was obtained ( The material which was subjected to the longest period of stress (5 h) had the highest recrystallisation energy ( Shorter milling times resulted in a decrease in recrystallisation energy and a downward shift in the temperature at which the exothermic effect occurred ( The DSC scan of material which was only milled for 10 min showed no evidence of amorphous material. The limit of detection was 10% amorphous regions. By preparing mixtures with 100% crystalline and 100% amorphous material (produced by freeze-drying) a calibration curve for the heats of crystallisation versus known amorphous content of the mixtures can be produced. This curve is used to quantify the unknown amorphous content of micronised particles ( The calibration curve which has been plotted for salbutamol sulphate enables the level of amorphous material to be determined from the magnitude of the enthalpy change. The values used to prepare this curve were obtained at a relative humidity of 65%. In the studies carried out on mechanically produced (ball-milled) material, the RH was reduced to 53% in order to ensure there was some baseline prior to the recrystallisation event even in cases where the amorphous content was low. Recrystallisation took much longer to occur in the physically produced (freeze-dried) material than in the mechanically-produced material. The reason for this observation is that mechanically-produced amorphous material is found only on the surface of the individual particles, with the result that water sorption can occur more rapidly. The magnitude of the enthalpy change was not dependent on the relative humidity employed. In order to further delay recrystallisation, the substance was dried over phosphorus pentoxide in a desiccator after milling. It could be shown that the drying process affects only the time to recrystallisation and not the recrystallisation energy released ( Relative humidity, temperature and time of drying were kept constant. The sample with the lowest content of amorphous material has the lowest heat flow, which explains the difference in peak areas observed ( Crystalline salbutamol sulphate did not adsorb water to a measurable extent, which could be seen by DVS method ( In order to assess the effect of the critical milling parameters on the micronised product, a total of 28 trial millings using varying feed rates, feed pressures and grind pressures were carried out on three batches of the raw material. The feed pressure was varied between 6.5 and 8.5 bar and the grind pressure between 4 and 8 bar, respectively. Feed rates were also varied. Mean feed rates were between 1.85 and 26 g/min. It was found that, within the range tested, the feed pressure had no significant effect on the result. When the feed pressure drops below a certain limit, however, clogging could occur, which would result in blowback and unwanted discharge of the product. Unlike the feed pressure, the grind pressure has a significant effect on the result. Initially, particle size decreased markedly as the grind pressure increased. Pressures of less than 6 bar were not sufficient to obtain the required particle size distribution. There was a marked difference between the effects observed at 5 versus 6 bar ( Compared to the grind pressure, the feed rate did not have that much of an effect on the micronisation energy. There was a slight tendency for an increase in particle size with increasing feed rate; this applied particularly to particles in the medium size range. Increasing the feed rate increases the concentration of product in the grinding chamber and decreases the interparticulate acceleration distance, thus giving rise to coarser particles. To achieve the best possible particle size distribution for salbutamol sulphate with the MC 50 Jetmill the following parameters have been determined as optimal: feed pressure, grind pressure and feed rate 7.5 bar, 6 bar and 2.5–5 g/min, respectively. Laser diffraction is not suitable for the particle size analysis of absolute values of needle shaped particles, but it is possible to evaluate the relative values as a comparison because of the particle adjustment in all directions in the laser beam. The diameters are expressed by volume. The particle sizes of micronised salbutamol sulphate were similar, irrespective of the raw batches employed as starting material. Therefore a dependence of the raw material on the quality of the powder could not be evaluated. Representative particle size distribution of a micronised batch in comparison with the particle size distribution of the raw material is shown in As mentioned previously, two collecting points in the MC Jetmill 50 have to be taken into account: the main quantity of micronised particles in the collection chamber on the one hand, and the fine particles in the mill bag on the other. The data in Scanning electron micrographs of the micronised powders show irregular-formed, partly smooth-faced particles with sizes of approx. 0.25–13 μm ( DSC is not sufficiently sensitive to quantify the amorphous content in micronised salbutamol sulphate. For this purpose isothermal microcalorimetry is the method of choice. The experiments are carried out at a relative humidity of 53%. A shoulder follows the sharp recrystallisation peak. Similar observations have been made in the case of lactose The quantity of the amorphous content of salbutamol sulphate can be determined from a calibration curve of amount of amorphous material present in the sample versus the microcalorimetric signal. A dependence of the amorphous content on the feed pressure and the feed rate is not verifiable whereas a clear increase of the amorphous parts caused by a higher grind pressure was obvious: the higher the grind pressure, the more micronisation energy is transmitted on the particles and the more crystal structures on the particle surface are being destroyed, which leads consequently to a higher quantity of amorphous parts. The values given in When the product mixture was taken out of the collecting chamber and the mill bag an amorphous content of 6.9% can be established at a pressure of 6 bar. If the sample is taken from the mill bag only, 14% of the entire quantity are amorphous. This would point to the fact, that mostly the fine particles have disordered regions on their surface. The micronised powder of salbutamol sulphate shows, analogous to the pilot tests with a ball mill, clear differences in the sorption behaviour compared with the crystalline raw material. There is an initial absorption of water up to a level of 55% RH followed by spontaneous recrystallisation of amorphous regions and expulsion of water (data not shown). Apart from the isothermal micro-calorimetry the DVS-method is likewise suitable for the assessment of the crystallinity after micronisation and during storage. It was possible to produce respirable particles of salbutamol sulphate with an air-jet-mill. Optimisation of the micronisation process was necessary with respect to minimising the amorphous content of the drug while simultaneously achieving satisfactory particle size reduction. The grind pressure was of utmost importance with respect to particle size distribution and the physical powder stability. For salbutamol sulphate, ground with a MC Jetmill 50, an grind pressure of 6 bar was optimal. Pressures below 6 bar were not sufficient to produce the required reduction in particle size. Pressures above 6 bar mainly led to an increase in the amorphous content without changes in the particle size distribution. The amorphous content correlated well with the energy input during micronisation. An excess of energy input caused additional destruction of the crystallinity structure on the particle surface, without further improvement in particle grinding. Under such optimised micronisation conditions an amorphous content of 6.9% on average was generated for salbutamol. The feed rate had a negligible influence on the powder quality. Increasing the feed rate increased the concentration of product in the grinding chamber and decreased the interparticulate acceleration distance, thus giving rise to coarser particles. The feed pressure had no critical influence on the particle size.