Structure–activity relationships (SAR) modeling of separation efficiencies of 17 arylhydroxamic acids tested as mineral collectors is attempted using topological indices, partition coefficients and Connolly molecular surface areas and solvent-excluded volume. Several of the computed parameters are found to fit in a second-order polynomial regression with the separation efficiencies (E
                     s) of the collectors. Soil–water partition coefficient, logK
                     oc, gives the best correlation with a standard error of estimate (SEE) of 4.95 and correlation coefficient, r=0.9635. The data set is split into N-aryl–C-alkyl and N-aryl–C-aryl types based on the structure of the hydroxamic acids, and the regression analyses were repeated. In the case of N-aryl–C-alkyl compounds, Connolly solvent-excluded volume gives the best fit with an SEE of 2.88 and correlation coefficient of 0.9936, and several other variables used in the study are found to have r>0.97. First-order valence connectivity index and logK
                     oc give the best fit for N-aryl–C-aryl compounds, and the SEE in either case is 4.14 and r=0.9756. These results indicate that any one of the four classes of parameters considered in the study can be used for the interpretation of variation of separation efficiencies with the change in the hydrophobic part of a series of flotation collectors. It is inferred that lower-order valence connectivity indices are the good starting point to SAR modeling of flotation collectors.Chemists are always interested in correlating chemical reactivity and biological activities of compounds with their structures. Though this approach seems to be recent, according to Froth flotation is a separation technique extensively used for the beneficiation of low-grade ores. Organic compounds called collectors are used to selectively adsorb on a particular mineral and to impart hydrophobicity to the extent that they can tenaciously attach air–water interface to be levitated to the mineralized froth, the float concentrate. Molecule of a flotation collector consists of two parts, viz., the hydrophobic part and the hydrophilic part. In the case of a chelating collector, the hydrophilic part is the chelating group and the chemical interaction between the collector and the mineral surface depends on it while the extent of interaction with the aqueous phase or the medium depends on the hydrocarbon (hydrophobic) part. Design of a chelating collector thus involves the choice of a proper head group or the chelating group and a hydrocarbon backbone of appropriate molecular geometry. The chelating group could be decided on the basis of solution chemistry and the hard and soft acids and bases (HSAB) theory Once the chelating group is chosen, the carbon skeleton needs to be tailored. The dependence of efficiency of a collector on its molecular architecture has been studied by several workers Mathematical characterization of a molecular structure can easily be accomplished by computing the topological indices. Topological indices have been extensively used as molecular descriptors in predicting physicochemical properties Topological indices used in this study are Wiener index Seventeen arylhydroxamic acids were synthesized and tested as collectors in the flotation of a copper–zinc ore from Canada It can be observed from Perusal of the flotation data indicates that the separation efficiency of a collector reaches a maximum and then decreases when the length of the hydrocarbon chain substituted in the collector molecule is increased. This trend may be attributed to the structure of hydroxamic acids under consideration. In the case of alky hydroxamates, the chelating group is at the end of the carbon skeleton so the increase in carbon chain does not lead to any hindrance near the chelating site, mineral surface. On the contrary, arylhydroxamic acids have the chelating group in the ‘middle’ of the carbon backbone. Increase in chain length, especially for the The plot of separation efficiencies calculated using The data set was divided into two subsets, namely, The regression analyses of Results of quadratic curve fitting for Set C are given in The results of regression analyses of the individual and the combined data sets indicate that all the four different classes of parameters have one or more variables that correlates reasonably well ( This work was funded by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC). We thank CambridgeSoft (Cambridge, MA) for a free trial version of