Standard method for captive bubble contact angle measurements in distilled water usually yield no finite contact angles on common sulphide minerals such as chalcopyrite, galena and chalcocite although samples from such minerals have been shown to float in the absence of a collecting agent. The current study documents a case, where small but stable contact angles have been obtained on these minerals. Measured angles ranged from 0 to 36° for chalcopyrite, 0–21° for galena and 0–24° for chalcocite. During the initial period, volumes of attached air bubbles have been noted to decrease. A pronounced pH dependence has been notable from the results. High contact angles have been distinctly associated with low pH and relatively short induction periods. These effects are attributable to increased stability of elemental sulphur. Development of hydrophobicity on these minerals is in general agreement with the results of small-scale tests on their self-induced flotation. The correlation for chalcopyrite has been most notable for the acidic pH range. No correlation has been observed between the contact angle variation and flotation behavior of galena.Contact angles developed in a water–solid–gas phase have been important in characterization of a variety of solids including plastics, filter cakes/media, and minerals with different origin. The gas phase is usually air. In the area of froth flotation as a separation process for ore minerals, the contact angle studies have been an integral part of many fundamental investigations. Establishment of the contact angle is a fundamental step in the bubble-particle attachment process. In recent years, interest in contact angle measurements has increased in relation to developments to predict flotation rates from first principles Original investigations on physical chemistry of flotation involved numerous contact angle measurements. A number of contact curves were developed for sulphide and non-sulphide minerals to illustrate domains of hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity under a variety of conditions involving pH, collectors such as xanthates, carboxylic acids and depressants such as cyanide and alkali sulphides The mineral samples were obtained from Ward's Natural Science Establishment, Rochester, New York. The samples were received in the form of large lumps and crushed to about 1–2 cm and stored under nitrogen for later use. The only visible impurity in chalcopyrite was quartz. In the case of galena, tiny specks of elemental sulphur along with some carbonate-like impurities were noticeable. The chalcocite sample also had some non-sulphide impurity. These visible impurities were removed by cleavage/breakage and discarded. Representative samples resulting from each mineral were assayed using atomic absorption spectrophotometry. The original location and purity levels of minerals are shown in Contact angle measurements were carried out using the method developed by Sutherland and Wark All items of glassware used in the experiments were pre-cleaned using freshly prepared dichromic acid in an ultrasonic bath. The water used was distilled water obtained from an all-Pyrex Corning Mega Pure distillation apparatus. Conductivity of this water was in the range 0.5–1.85 μΩ cm Hand-picked specimens were freshly ground dry in batches of 1–1.5 g in a small size agate mortar and sized to 100×200 mesh (150–74 μm). Each batch was deslimed prior to flotation. Sizing was carried out using micro-sieves from Allen-Bradley. The following procedure for chalcopyrite was used: 0.65 g of freshly prepared sample was transferred to a small beaker and mixed in water with a glass coated magnet intermittently for a period of 2 min. At each interval suspension was decanted until the sized sample was free of visible slimes. The sample size for galena was about 1 g. Preliminary tests with this sample indicated more significant tendency to float. Some of batch samples were also ground under water. A few flotation tests were carried out using tap water, which had a conductivity of 370 μΩ cm Following desliming, each sample was washed on a filter paper with a relatively strong jet of water to remove additional slimes from the particles to be floated. Subsequently, the sample was mixed with a small quantity of oxygen-saturated distilled water of predetermined pH value and the suspension was transferred to the flotation cell through a funnel. The cell was filled with the same solution having no flotation agents and the suspension was conditioned for five minutes prior to final pH measurement and flotation. The flotation time was one minute at an air flowrate of 50 ml min    In Flotation results for chalcopyrite and galena are shown as a function of pH in It has been noted that once the chalcopyrite specimen has lost its hydrophobic character at a relatively high pH of 10.5, its contact angle remained in the non-measurable range despite reducing the pH to 6.3 after thoroughly rinsing the surface with distilled water. On the other hand, the hydrophobicity in the case of galena and chalcocite specimens was re-established in the measurable range upon rinsing their surfaces at the same pH. These observations can be explained by considering the presence of various surface products on these mineral specimens. Formation of a ferric hydroxide on chalcopyrite is a well-accepted phenomenon Ferric hydroxide with its p  According to reaction (1), the oxidation products on chalcopyrite include elemental sulphur. In subsequent years, details on the electrochemistry of hydrophobic entity have been reinvestigated. As a consequence, the products CuS plus S° are now viewed as an incipient single entity of a copper bearing layer rich in sulphur and deficient in iron. This initial oxidation product may have a variable stoichiometry and can be covered later on by a ferric hydroxide layer More recently, on a chalcopyrite electrode surface in contact with 0.1 N NaClO Although a greater amount of elemental sulphur was associated with galena in particulate form Surface properties and self-induced floatability of common sulphide minerals such as chalcopyrite, galena and chalcocite are sensitive to the method of sample preparation. Standard method for captive bubble contact angle measurements in distilled water usually yield no finite contact angles on these sulphide minerals although samples from such minerals have been shown to float in the absence of a collecting agent. The current study documents a case where small but stable contact angles have been obtained on these minerals. The contact angles varied from 0 to 36 The authors are thankful for the funding through a research initiation grant (Queen's University) and Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC).