The design of structures on or within a rock mass requires an estimation of the strength of the intact rock blocks. These blocks can be many orders of magnitude greater in scale than the core samples typically tested. Thus, including the scale effect into a failure criterion is required for a more realistic estimation of rock strength with various scales. In this paper, a modified multiaxial failure criterion with scale effect parameters was developed based on the model proposed by Christensen. The modification process was carried out according to the proposed scale effect equations for different stress paths, such as uniaxial compression, point loading, uniaxial tension and pure shearing. Furthermore, the scale dependency of the proposed parameters for the modified failure criterion was assessed using the results from the uniaxial compressive and point load tests. Finally, it was confirmed that one of the modified failure criterion parameters is scale independent when the results from uniaxial compressive and point load tests are included.The scale effect is a significant characteristic in brittle and quasi-brittle media such as rock. Many studies have explored the scale effect with regards to the uniaxial compressive test in different rock types. An alternate multiaxial failure criterion that incorporates scale effect is presented here. It is an extension of the simple two parameter multiaxial failure criterion for brittle materials proposed by Christensen The original criterion of Christensen, For uniaxial compression, where The parameter Uniaxial compressive and tensile tests would be sufficient to evaluate If Goodman The challenge is to define The Weibull where In practice, Now, by setting It will now be demonstrated that Eq. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rock samples measured in a laboratory is well-known to be scale dependent and obeys Eq. For a uniaxial compressive test: A scale effect is also observed in strength measured using point load test (PLT). Franklin Russell and Muir Wood in which The expressions in Eq. In tensile test, the stress condition for a 50 This result only applies to direct tensile testing. For indirect tensile testing (known as Brazilian test) due to different stress condition at failure compared to that for direct tensile testing which has not been sufficiently explored, Eq. The scale dependent tensile strength is assumed to obey Eq. After some rearrangements it follows that Pure shear test brings a sample to failure when Again the scale dependent pure shear strength is supposed to obey Eq. After some rearrangements Eq. Any two of Eqs. Using these expressions, minor approximations need to be introduced to make This last equation can be simplified even further for large values of The accuracy of the approximations introduced in A comparison between the calculated exact and approximate values for Sample diameter clearly has an influence on the failure criterion, as do the magnitudes of When When From Eq. To ensure that the failure envelopes at different diameters do not intersect, Eq. Similarly the rearrangement of the modified failure criterion (Eq. In Eqs. If scale effect observed in uniaxial compressive and uniaxial tensile tests as well as point load and uniaxial tensile tests were combined then the following expressions for For point load and uniaxial tensile tests, similar to Eqs. Due to the complexity of Eq. The modified failure criterion was correlated against the experimental data obtained from uniaxial compressive and point load tests for a range of rock types. The authors conducted an extensive literature review Similarly, for point load strength index, a comprehensive literature review Wijk et al. As a result, according to the UCS and point load strength index data presented earlier, it is true to state that The failure envelopes for four different sample diameters associated with the parameters presented in It is important to note that the above parametric study was conducted to assess the sensitivity of the proposed modified failure criterion for different possible input parameters. This is mainly due to the fact that the available scale effect data under different stress conditions are very limited. The analytical solution presented here has been based on a logical mathematical process which confirms its validity and thus the experimental data was used to verify the potential validity of the Christensen’s hypotheses on the definitions of A modified multiaxial failure criterion including scale effect was developed. The criterion was initially proposed by Christensen Since the uniaxial compressive and point load tests have been the subject of many studies on scale effect, the modified multiaxial failure criterion was calibrated against the experimental data obtained from these two tests for a range of rock types. The scale dependency of the proposed parameters for the modified multiaxial failure criterion was assessed using the results from these two tests. It was concluded that one of the modified failure criterion parameters (