The stability of Rare Earth Elements (REE), both sulfates and phosphates, was investigated using monazite ore, a residue from a synthetic rutile manufacturing process and a high-grade lanthanum sulfate sample. It was demonstrated that REE sulfates are converted into phosphates at temperatures within the range of 450–800 °C. This reaction depends on excess phosphorus present in compounds that are less stable than monazite. The presence of high partial pressures of P2O5 in the system will reconvert REE sulfates into insoluble REE polyphosphates – REE(PO3)3. Relatively high partial pressure may be attained by the decomposition of phosphorus compounds present in the sample, such as monocalcium phosphates and phosphoric acid generated by the addition of sulfuric acid. The direct contact with phosphoric acid leads, in turn, to the formation of monazite-like compounds. The gas–solid mechanism is believed to be the most suitable due to the easier access of the gas phase to the REE sulfate particles, thus making it possible to achieve the drastic decrease (conversion into phosphate) in REE extraction observed at 800 °C. This study’s results are expected to contribute to a better understanding of the factors favoring selectivity in REE extraction over iron from monazite ores.Rare earth elements (REE) are essential to modern industry. The main drivers for its consumption are the catalyst, magnets, polishing powders, and rechargeable battery electrodes. Other relevant applications for these elements can be found in the metallurgical, ceramics, phosphor, pigment, and glass industries ( Rare earth elements are extracted from four main sources, namely, bastenaesite (Ce, La, Y)(CO Bastnaesite ores often undergo physical concentration (flotation, magnetic concentration, gravity concentration) to about 60% Rare Earth Oxides (REO) prior to further processing. In China, the mixed concentrates are roasted with sulfuric acid (H Monazite is the second most important REE mineral and is usually found in complex ore bodies exposed to intensive weathering, thus resulting in refractoriness to conventional physical beneficiation due to very fine, micro-level association between the main REE-carrying mineral (monazite) and the gangue material (goethite and ilmenite, among others). This means that the solids fed to the leaching tanks often exhibit low REE content, but high content of acid-consuming contaminants, like iron. Mount Weld ( As illustrated by As the oxysulfate phase is not water soluble, the REE extraction decreases. The formation of lanthanum oxysulfate was confirmed by Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA), as described elsewhere ( A second hypothesis to explain the extraction drop would be the formation of insoluble REE phosphates due to the reaction between REE sulfate and excess phosphorus present in the monazite ore, extracted from a phosphate mine. Phosphoric acid (H This hypothesis was suggested by The present work is part of a broader investigation focusing on the application of roasting for improving the selective extraction of REE. More specifically, the hypothesis that soluble REE sulfates are back transformed to REE phosphate during roasting is analyzed in detail. The experimental approach encompassed the analysis of the leaching residue of an iron and phosphorus-rich monazite ore, thermodynamic simulation, and roasting experiments with pure reagents designed to clarify the phases involved and the mechanism behind phase transformation. The results are expected to contribute to a better understanding of the factors favoring selectivity in REE extraction over iron from monazite ores. Two distinct samples were used in this work: Ore samples received from a Brazilian phosphate mine and a solid residue obtained from the production process of synthetic rutile (TiO The extraction experiments consisted of the following steps: (i) separation of natural fines (<74 µm) by scrubbing a 50% w/w suspended solid ore pulp for 15 min and passing this material through a 74 µm sieve ( REE phosphate from the secondary source (spray roaster residue) presented a very fine particle size, not requiring a screening step. This sample was submitted to the same procedure described above. The acid:residue mass ratio was fixed to 1.2:1.0. Experiments were also performed using reagent grade lanthanum sulfate (Fmaia, 99.9% purity), phosphoric acid (Anidrol, 85% w/w purity), and phosphor pentoxide (Sigma-Aldrich, >98% purity). The materials were mixed in an aluminum crucible and submitted to 800 °C for 2 h. The experimental setup allowed direct contact between the reagents, thereby promoting solid/liquid reactions (lanthanum sulfate + phosphoric acid) and solid/solid reactions (lanthanum sulfate + phosphorus pentoxide). Some additional experiments were carried out, using 2 concentric aluminium crucibles, to investigate gas/solid reactions ( HSC Chemistry (version 8, Outotec, 2015) provided the thermodynamic data (values for standard enthalpy, entropy, and Gibbs Free energy) and software to generate the stability diagrams. The thermodynamic data for the species considered in the simulations are listed in The chemical composition of solids and aqueous solutions was determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectrometry (ICP-OES) (Varian, VISTA PRO model) and Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) (PerkinElmer, model NexION 300D). Duplicates, blanks and certified standards (DBS) were used during these analyses. All the samples were subjected to an acceptable (further defined) duplicate maximum mean error (ME) that varied with the method, the analyzed element and its concentration. Prior to the chemical analyses, the solid samples were dried in an oven at 100 °C for at least one hour and pulverized to a condition in which 95% of the particles (in mass) were below 74 µm. The solid samples containing rare earth elements, thorium and uranium (DBS every 24 samples, ME between 10% and 5%) were digested by fusion with Li The mineral composition, morphology and thermal behavior of solid samples were also evaluated in this work. Samples for X-ray diffraction analysis (XRD) were ground below 74 µm (200 Mesh Tyler) and analyzed on PANalytical Model X́PERT PRO MPD (PW 3419) equipped with a PW3050/60 (θ/θ) goniometer, X-ray ceramics tubes, Co anode (Kα1 = 1.78897 Å), and a PW3373/00 model detector (2000 W-60 kV). The diffraction patterns were acquired from 4° to 78° (2θ) at 0.02 steps. The identification of all minerals was done with X́PertHighScore version 2.1b software from PANalytical by using ICDD (International Center for Diffraction Data) files as reference (2003 database). The morphology of solid samples was characterized by SEM (Scanning Electron Microscope) using a Hitachi (SU3500) microscope equipped with EDS (energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry) using a Bruker (XFlash 6/30) spectrometer and QEMSCAN 650. In order to avoid dissolution of sulfate compounds, polished sections for SEM images were prepared by using isopropyl alcohol during polishing. The thermal behavior of solid samples was evaluated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) coupled to a quadrupole mass spectroscopy (QMS) using a Netzsch (STA 449 F3Jupiter) with alumina crucible with temperature ranging from 25 °C to 1000 °C at heating rate of 10 °C/min under nitrogen atmosphere.   In a previous publication ( The simulations indicated that when sulfuric acid is added to an REE ore, one may expect a complete conversion of REE and Fe into sulfates in temperatures below 450 °C and 750 °C, respectively ( Experimentally, the formation of monocalcium phosphate in the system is easy to observe, since it grants a plastic feature to the mixture, making the mixing process very difficult to carry out. When heated, the monocalcium phosphate decomposes into a phosphoric acid and apatite-like phase. As described by Eq. Thus, the decomposition of phosphate compounds promotes an increase in the P This reaction is assumed to be responsible for the early, unexpected SO  Thermodynamic calculations were also performed to evaluate the required P In fact, REE phosphates are very stable compounds. To assess the conversion of REE sulfates into phosphates at temperatures higher than 750 °C, reagent grade lanthanum sulfate was contacted directly and indirectly (through a gas phase) to both phosphoric acid and solid phosphorus pentoxide as earlier described. The products of this series of experiments were analyzed by XRD ( In The XRD findings were also compared to the diffraction pattern for lanthanum oxy-sulfate ( After roasting a REE sulfate concentrate,  The formation of polyphosphates, a polymeric phosphorus structure, during experiments conducted by It seems to be clear that when newly formed monazite is detected in the leaching residue, this is due to the conversion of REE sulfate into phosphate by the reaction with phosphorus (e.g. The gas–solid reaction mechanism should prevail over any possible solid–solid reaction due to a better access of the gas phase to the reacting interface. The gas-phase mechanism should also prevail over the solid–liquid mechanism (phosphoric acid) for two reasons. In typical low-grade ores, the possible amount of phosphoric acid generated by the addition of sulfuric acid is relatively low when compared to the total volume of ore. This hinders the contact between the liquid acid and the REE sulfate. To attain a significant reduction in REE, such as that observed in To confirm the mechanism of SO The selective roasting of iron-rich, REE ores would not be recommended when processing high- grade REE concentrates containing low amounts of impurities, as compared to ROM (Run of Mine) ore. High grade concentrates can undergo sulfation and direct leaching, avoiding expensive high-temperature roasting. The low amount of impurities can be removed by hydrometallurgical downstream processes, such as pH-controlled impurity precipitation ( Unless phosphate is converted into a very stable compound (displaying low P In this work, the mechanism behind the selective REE extraction over iron by the roasting of sulfated monazite was clarified. The unexpected decrease in REE extraction from ores roasted at 800 °C was explained by analyzing the phosphorus behavior in the system during sulfation and roasting stages. It was demonstrated that excess phosphorus remaining in the sulfated material may cause the reconversion of REE sulfates to REE phosphates, as well as the presence of phosphoric acid will lead to the formation of monazite-like compounds. High partial pressures of P  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank Vale S.A., in special Cassia Souza, Keila Gonçalves and Patrice Mazzoni for providing samples, material support and permission for publishing the results of this investigation. The authors are also thankful to Wagner Soares, Luzia Chaves, Vale and CDM technicians, for their technical support in this work. V. Ciminelli and D. Majuste acknowledge the support from See