As mining depths increase, new challenges have emerged, such as abrupt changes in coalbed methane (CBM) reservoir rules and gas outbursts, particularly in coal/sill contact metamorphism zones. To investigate the influence of magmatic-contact metamorphism on CBM reservoirs, fifteen samples were selected from the N1708 coalface in the Daxing Mine at different distances from a sill in the Tiefa Coalfield, China. This sill-form intrusive body had a positive effect on the properties of the CBM reservoir. The thermal effect of the igneous sill remoulds the pore structures of thermally metamorphosed coal (TMC). More generally, the seepage pores (pores >100 nm) and the surface areas of the TMC samples were more developed than those of the unaltered samples, suggesting that contact metamorphism might have significant implications for the excellent gas flow/adsorption capacity of TMC. The Langmuir volume of TMC sample #3 was measured as 36.1 m3/t. TMC samples showed higher initial desorption rates and lower moisture; in sample 2, the proportion of gas desorbed (cumulative volume/total volume) reached almost 0.5 in only 90 s. The diffusion coefficients (D) for four TMC samples were within the range 1.41 × 10−11–2.59 × 10−10 m2/s. These results show that the high initial gas desorption rate and low moisture of the TMC have a positive influence on gas diffusion and CBM drainage, but lead to high gas outburst index. The gas content and gas pressure beneath the sill were obviously greater than those in the unaltered coals. The CH4 levels of TMC were slightly higher than those of the unaltered samples. However, approaching the sill, it is significant that CO2 levels showed an obvious increase. It is postulated that the higher CO2 levels of TMC are likely derived from the breakdown of calcium carbonate under high-temperature conditions. These results indicate that the TMC covers dual gas (CH4 and CO2) outburst potential, thus gas pre-drainage before mining is necessary in contact metamorphism zones.Globally, thermal events related to magmatic intrusions are relatively common and occur in many countries, and numerous studies have been performed on the effects of igneous intrusions on coal seams (e.g., Thermal events can also show positive effects on the CBM potentials in sedimentary basins. For example, the most successful CBM development in the Rocky Mountains occurs in areas where the gas content was partially increased by post-Eocene thermal events ( The Tiefa Basin in China is a continental deposit of a concealed coalfield generated in the Mesozoic Early Cretaceous. Magmatic (dolerite) intrusion activities in the Tertiary system led to secondary hydrocarbon generation, which enhanced the generation gas content to ∼170 m The Daxing Mine in the Tiefa Basin is located in the city of Tieling in northeastern China's Liaoning province. The geographic coordinates of the Daxing Mine are ∼123°33′ to 123°36′ E and 42°21′ to 42°25′ N. The coalmine is 6.77 km long, is 3.33 km wide, and covers 21.2 km Fifteen fresh coal samples were collected using the channel method from coalface N The coal samples (#1–15) and corresponding gas samples were sampled from the No. 7 coal seam at different distances (0.1–264 m) from the sill (thicknesses of 0–60 m and an average thickness of 23 m). The locations of the 15 coal samples and 15 gas samples and the spatial relationships between the samples and sills are described in The following experiments were conducted to obtain deeper insights into the influence of thermal metamorphism on the CBM reservoir characteristics of TMC. To investigate the influence of thermal metamorphism on abrupt changes of the CBM reservoir rules, comparisons are made between TMC and unaltered coals using the coal pore structure, adsorption/desorption characteristics, the diffusion coefficient (D), gas pressure and gas content (gas outburst indexes), and gas composition. Mercury-intrusion porosimetry (MIP), nitrogen adsorption/desorption and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were conducted to quantify coal pore structure. Methane adsorption/desorption characteristics were established, and utilized to calculate D values by the unipore model of the TMC at various distances from the sill in the Daxing Mine. The tests and analyses for gas content, gas pressure and gas composition (CH MIP and gas adsorption technology have been useful in quantitative determination of the pore diameter, pore types and pore size distribution of coal. MIP was performed according to international standards ( The N A schematic of the experimental setup used for adsorption/desorption experiments is shown in Then, the D can be estimated by fitting desorption test data using the Fick's Second Law ( Thus by fitting the measured accumulated gas desorption volume vs. In situ gas pressure was measured according to China's national standard ( The geochemical data of the 15 coal samples are listed in It is therefore hypothesized that the alteration halos of the igneous sill are approximately 40 m. For this reason, samples #1–5 are assigned as TMC samples; the remaining samples are categorized as ambient samples. The thickness of the thermal aureoles is variable, and its extent may be related to different cooling mechanisms and different patterns of intrusion ( In summary, the coal metamorphic belt produced by contact metamorphism has significant local phenomena, leading to a rapid increase in the degree of coalification. The SEM images indicate that pore abundance was greater for TMC than for the unaltered coal sample #9 ( The results of the MIP test for five TMC samples (#1–5) and an unaltered sample (#9) are shown in To investigate the change in mercury intrusion volumes of the above samples, their pore size distributions were obtained by MIP analysis following the method (decimalize) of classifying pore width first used by It is noteworthy that the unexpected decline in total pore volume and porosity for sample #2 is likely difficult to explicate. If these parameters of samples #3 and #4 were taken into consideration, it can be speculated that the igneous intrusion could volatilize a mass of organisms within the coal matrix, leading to more thermogenic pores and increased porosity ( The information on the micropores of the selected typical TMC samples is examined by measuring N  Overall, the heating effect of the igneous intrusion could result in thermal cracks in the coal matrix, which offer rougher surfaces for gas flow. Furthermore, the thermal expansion of the coal matrix might also create rougher and more complex surfaces inside the coal mass ( Specifically in view of the micropore volumes and BET surface area of sample #1, samples #2–5 were chosen to complete the adsorption/desorption tests. The adsorption isotherms of the aforesaid samples are shown in Igneous intrusion induces a range of changes in coal, including coal rank, pore properties and organic composition. Taken in combination, these affect the adsorption capacity of coal. For anthracite coals in the Huaibei Coalfield, three zones were identified, corresponding to: coal/magma contact zone (0–5 m from sill), thermal evolution zone (5–60 m from sill), and unaltered zone. The adsorption capacity of coal in the thermal evolution zone was significantly greater than in the two other zones (   The diffusion coefficients obtained by modelling the methane adsorption/desorption experimental data are listed in Relationships between Generally, there are no consistent correlations between D and the pressure of the TMC samples. However, previous studies have reported a significant negative correlation between D and pressure at less than 3.5 MPa ( Previous studies reported that gas diffusion in coal varies as a function of differences in gas concentration, but that coal pore structure would have a greater influence ( As indicated by the MIP and N In order to investigate the influence of sill trapping on the gas content, the coal cores are obtained by drilling in the roof rock roadway 10 m above the coalface N The gas contents of eight coal samples (#1–8) in the sill coverage area (0.1–110 m from the sill) were measured as 5.24–9.14 m Contact metamorphism may be a significant factor in the loss of moisture in the TMC ( The 15 gas samples collected from the transportation roadway of coalface N High carbonate contents have been observed in coal close to several intrusions (e.g., Conversely, The gas pressure measurement points were arranged over the sill coverage and non-coverage areas of the No. 7 coal seam ( The gas pressures in the coal seams in the sill coverage area were larger than the gas pressures of coal seams in the sill non-coverage areas, except at one measuring point. The gas pressure gradient formula of this seam in the sill non-coverage areas can be expressed by Eq. Gas pressure is considered to be abnormally high when it exceeds the hydrostatic pressure gradient of 0.01 MPa/m ( Gas propensity of coal to outburst was authenticated following China's national standard ( If all four of the indexes listed in Although the other three outburst indexes have not been directly measured in this study, the literature includes many comparative case studies on these outburst indexes, between TMC and other outburst-prone coals ( In our previous study, the largest initial gas diffusion rate Δ Since 1987, eleven coal and gas outbursts have occurred in Daxing coal mine, of which seven took place in the coal/sill (dolerite) contact metamorphism zones. Sudden releases of coal and gas volumes in a single outburst location reached 454.3 t and 22,882 m Overall, we consider that the TMC not only shows high potential for gas outburst, but also that the elevated CO The thermal metamorphism effect of the one sill-form (average thickness of 23 m) intrusion on the CBM reservoir of low-rank bituminous coal in the Daxing Mine was highly beneficial: The thermal effect of the sill remoulded the coal pore structures. The pore volumes of the seepage pores (pores >100 nm) in the TMC (0.012–0.0658 mL/g) were mostly higher than those of the unaltered sample (0.0059 mL/g), suggesting that contact metamorphism may have significant implications for the excellent gas diffusion capabilities of TMC. The pore variations from the N The TMC have a high gas adsorption capacity, and the The gas contents of the TMC samples within the thermal aureoles were obviously greater than those of the adjoining unaltered coals. For example, the coals beneath the sill were measured to contain 5.24–9.14 m Gas samples from TMC beneath the sill showed slightly higher CH This research was supported by the  coalbed methane thermally metamorphosed coal diffusion coefficient random vitrinite reflectance mercury-intrusion porosimetry scanning electron microscopy distance from sill margin (m) moisture dry ash-free volatile matter Langmuir volume Langmuir pressure accumulated volume gas of desorption in time t (m total volume gas desorbed after infinity time (m proportion of gas desorbed length of diffusion path (m) time (s) correlation coefficient total in situ gas content (m gas loss content (m gas desorption content (m negative pressure desorption gas content prior to coal crushing (m negative pressure desorption gas content during comminution (m the gas pressure (MPa) the buried depth (m) moderate strength failure of coal large strength failure of coal seriously damage of coal initial gas diffusion rate of coal consistent coefficient