This study is a pilot exploration to develop rigorous, green, intellectualized approach for optimal controlling the 3D concrete printing. The mechanical performances of 3D printed samples during super-early age, early age, and hardened state are tested and monitored using piezoelectric zirconate titanate (PZT) patches. EMI sensing technique is applied to quantify stiffness gain of printed concrete to evaluate the structural build-up behaviour by establishing the instant correlation between the stiffness of concrete and the EMI signatures. An optimization method for printing process based on EMI detection is proposed. In this way, the PZT signals can be feedback to the digital control system of printer in real time to adjust the printing setting. Instant intellectualization for the 3D printing technique is then realized and the buildability of the printed concrete is expected to be improved. The different early age properties of both printed and casted composites are elaborated. Thereafter, changes of frequency and amplitude in the conductance spectrum acquired by mounted PZT patches are employed to characterize and quantify the mechanical behaviours of the 3D printed samples exposed to orthogonal loadings, which contribute to the understanding of damage accumulation and failure process of concrete materials.3D concrete printing has been proved a promising and innovative approach for automated construction in recent years by stacking premixed cementitious materials layer upon layer. Intensive exploration of applications of 3D printing in the building and construction industries are driven by the potential various benefits, such as low cost, high efficiency, design flexibility, low labour expense, and highly reduced wastes The cementitious material for 3D printing is expected to develop relatively sufficient mechanical stiffness at very-early ages to enable the stable stacking of structures to a large height The evolution of strength/stiffness gain and inner cracks of the 3D printed structure during curing and post-curing stage are different from that of the conventional mould-cast concretes. The minimal compaction during concrete printing may impede the stiffness gain of concrete due to the non-uniform distribution of fresh concrete, which is opposite to the mould-cast concrete It is understood that the heterogeneous mesoscale-defects, featured by voids, weak interfaces formed between adjacent layers during the 3D printing, may lead to poor compaction and undesirable mechanical anisotropy. The composite materials for 3D printing are required to keep sufficient load bearing capacity in the hardened state to resist various applied loads. The layered structure is anisotropic and voids will be unavoidably incurred between filaments, which weakens the structural capability. The quality of bond between filaments governs the strength of concrete components Researchers have proposed various printability-related and green strength testing methods to measure the stiffness and to evaluate the buildability of fresh concrete Monitoring concrete strength/stiffness gain by EMI and RFS methods using PZT patches has been reported by a few researchers. Zhang et al. In light of the proved applicability of EMI and RFS measurement to characterize the mechanical damages or even failures caused by various static and dynamic loading In this study, the stiffness development of proposed tailing composite in the fresh state is studied at super-early age (<3d) and early age (3–28d) through the physical penetration resistance method as well as the smart PZT transducers. It is continuation of the authors' previous study to develop environmentally sustainable cementitious material with copper tailings as fine aggregate materials. Mechanical response of 3D printed samples in the hardened state (>28d) subject to individual load in different directions is experimentally investigated. The damage accumulation is accessed and evaluated through the electro-mechanical impedance (EMI) and resonant frequency shift (RFS) approaches to empirically relate to the conventional testing results for intelligentizing the printing process. A 3D cementitious printing system with copper tailings as fine aggregate of the feeding material is designed and constructed to fabricate concrete samples. Our previous tests have proposed a sustainable cementitious material for 3D printing which consists of certain amount of mining tailings In this study, a printing nozzle with diameter of 12 mm is used for the preparation of samples to guarantee the printing accuracy. The extrusion rate is set as 10 cm The fresh composites are required to achieve sufficient stiffness within a short time. Conventionally, the setting behaviour of cement-based materials is characterized by the parameters of initial setting time and final setting time. However, these two parameters are not sufficient to evaluate the printability of the materials. In this section, smart PZT patches are inserted in both the mould-cast and printed samples to monitor the stiffness development in the whole structural built-up process. The stiffness state is then investigated for the proposed composite in very early age within 3 days and early age between 3 and 28 days. Penetration resistance method (PSM) is usually employed to access the stiffness development of cement-based materials at the setting process. PSM is easy to carry out and can be used to directly reflect the stiffness acquirement. Complying to the Chinese national testing standard In the additive stacking process, the bottom layers should build up sufficient stiffness in a short time to sustain the continuous pressure exerted by the subsequent upper stacks. It is understood that the traditional methods like penetration resistance test may not be used in the printing process. Instead, piezoelectric method is an appropriate alternative. The embedding positions of sensors is directly related to the accuracy and reliability of the damage quantification. All the PZT patches for stiffness development monitoring are embedded in the centre of the specimen in order to obtain the uniform signals and to reduce the influence of the sample boundaries and some extra heterogeneous effects. The adopted PZTs have sizes of 10 mm × 10 mm × 1 mm, which are covered with epoxy resin and cured for 24 h in an ambient temperature of approximately 25 °C for waterproof before embedded into the specimens. The thin patches are manually put on the surface of right printed layer and pressed with a slight pressure. This embedment process is finished in a short time and the printing will not interrupt. Due to the sensitivity of fresh concrete, carefully mechanical insertion is suggested. The physical specifications of the PZT patches are given in Additively manufacturing process of 3D models leads to relative heterogeneous mesoscale structures than the mould casting materials. Particularly, the compressions are conducted in three orthotropic directions to access the probable mechanical anisotropy featured by the voids and longitudinal flaws in the interstices between the filaments. The 3D printed prisms in size of 100 mm × 50 mm × 50 mm are compressively loaded to measure the performance of uniaxial compressive resistance. The loading set-up is illustrated in Epoxy resin is used to attach the PZT patches onto post-curing specimens and cured for 24 h before loading. The recorded EMI signals are employed to characterize the damage accumulation of 3D printed and mould-cast samples. The initial healthy condition of both printed and casted specimens (before loading) are measured as reference. The overall test set-up for the stiffness gain monitoring and damage detection is shown in   Any changes to host structure integrity or stiffness around the neighborhood of PZT’s location area would directly influence structural impedance amplitude because of stiffness alteration while in the same time structural impedance signature peaks shift as a function of frequency Based on the EMI curves, the stiffness gaining process can be divided into three stages: Dormant stage 0–3 h: For both specimens, the conductance signature of the first three hours drops slightly, indicating small change of mechanical impedance/hydration degree of the cementitious materials in this stage. Acceleration stage 3–15 h: While significant change of conductance was observed from 3 to 15 h for both printed and casted materials, especially in the duration of 3 to 6 h, indicating the rapid growth of stiffness due to the formation of large amounts of hydration products and dense network structures This result depicted in To quantify the difference of setting behaviour, two indices, resonant frequency shift (RFS) and the root mean square deviation (RMSD), are specified based on the changes in the conductance spectra. The value of RFS can be calculated by the following equation: The frequency shift of the PZT for 3D printed specimens generally shows a similar trend as the mould-cast specimens. In terms of RFS as given in  The stiffness acquirement of cementitious materials at super-early ages is reflected and quantified by the penetration resistance. From the measured data, the hydration of proposed composite proceeds more rapidly with the increasing paste age within the first eight hours and most construction may be accomplished within this time period. Comparing the measured results as depicted in  The correlation between the stiffness of concrete and the EMI signatures can be established. Therefore, stiffness gain can be predicted by PZT signatures, which can be also feedback to the printer synchronously to adjust the printing speed to improve the intellectualization of the 3D printing technique. The correlation between the penetration resistance of concrete and resonant frequency index is shown in Total 8 iterations are carried out before the fitting process converges. The fitting results are then inserted in the  The smart PZT sensors can be embedded into the material after a certain of height is built up to estimate the stability of subsequently stacking of layers. During the process of cement hydration, the stiffness or the mechanical bearing capacity However, the relationship between the overall height and paste age shown in Based on the aforementioned analysis, the printing specifications including the height The PZT conductance signatures are monitored from the 3rd day to the 28th day after the concrete cubes are cast and printed. The results show that the resonance frequency of PZT conductance curve gradually increases with paste age, and the extent of increase between 3 and 7 days is larger than in the followed period for both specimens. It can be also observed that the resonance magnitudes of the conductance curve drop gradually from the third day to the 28th day for both specimens. Due to the electromechanical coupling effect of PZT and the host structure, the resonant frequency of the PZT corresponds to the specific natural frequency of the host structure, the increase of resonant frequency and the decrease of the resonance magnitude suggest the stiffness gain of the specimen To evaluate the stiffness gain of concrete, the RFS and RMSD of the third day are adopted as baseline and the values at days 5, 7, 14, 21 and 28, respectively, are calculated cumulatively.  From the above comparison, the overall strength of printed samples is less than the casted samples due to the laminated structures by stacking process. The stresses parallel to filaments are prone to induce separation and shearing slide between the contacting layers, while the tensile strength perpendicular to the interfaces is too low to incur cracks. From  The micro cracks or damages caused by the applied compressive stresses could reduce the elastic modulus/stiffness of the concrete and increase the material damping. A decrease in the stiffness of tested materials could contribute to the decrease in frequency and increase in amplitude of EMI signals. Meanwhile, the damping increase of material would lead to the reduction of frequency and amplitude  The results in consistent well with the mechanical behaviours of specimens exposed to uniaxial compressive loadings. Besides, the prism samples fabricated with the same materials and with identical geometry show different RMSD value when in comparative stress state. RMSD values of F  In this paper, the mechanical properties of both 3D printed and mould-cast samples in the fresh and hardened stages are measured through smart PZT patches. The stiffness development and damage accumulation are detected and characterized. The following conclusions are drawn: From the EMI measurements, RMSD values are more sensitive than RFS values in terms of stiffness gain monitoring within the very-early curing age. An exponential empirical relationship is established between the EMI signal and the conventional penetration resistance. The stiffness state can be predicted by the RMSD indexes, which, thus, provides feedback and guidance for adjusting the printing procedures. The RMSD values for printed samples increase 35% within the early curing 3–7 days and only 10% after that. This indicates that in the 3–7 days printed concrete gains more stiffness. There is a higher increase of RMSD index between 3 and 7 days than the RFS values, demonstrating better sensitivity of RMSD over that of the RFS for the structural built-up properties. The different manufacturing process, i.e. printing and casting method, will not affect the inherent structural built-up development of tailing composite due to the similar changing tendency of monitored EMI signals. But the introduced defects will produce distinct influence on the conductance signatures detection. The RMSD and RFS values derived from the printed laminated structures are lower than the casted ones. It is because of the mesoscale heterogenous and less compactness of printed samples. The layer upon layer additive stacking process ensues laminate structures in the 3D printed freeform models and produces distinct anisotropy to the overall mechanical properties. PZT patches can be deployed at areas that are prone to damage during the printing process. Uniaxial compressive test indicates that the loading resistance of printed specimens varies substantially with different loading directions. Loading vertical to the plane of the layers is prone to induce shearing and separation between layers, leading to the reduction of the capacity. RFS and RMSD are proved to be effective approaches for damage detection and quantification. The change of structural mechanical impedance in the hydration process as well as structural damage incurs changes in resonance frequency and magnitudes of PZT conductance. The applied PZT transducers are sensitive to stiffness gain and damage evolution, thus the distinct detectability and applicability have been proved. In a simple summery, embedding the smart network into the 3D printed structural components credit itself an innovative and promising approach to intelligentize the additively manufactured civil infrastructures. Currently, the 3D concrete printing technique is still in a primary development stage. The defects, pores and flaws generated in the printing process are commonly encountered when applied in largescale printing. How to improve the coordination of the fresh material with the additive processes, and how to optimize the printing setting still needs further research and solution. Li Wang wrote the most part of manuscript. Yanfeng Li and Junfei Zhang performed the experimental tests and data analysis. Guowei Ma initiated the idea, designed the experimental methods. Zhijian Li revised and commented the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial supports of the