Distal humeral fractures are difficult to treat. In the elderly population, the problems are compounded by osteoporosis and gross comminution. Open reduction and internal fixation for such fractures is sometimes difficult and may be associated with poor results. Total elbow arthroplasty has been suggested as a last-ditch effort to salvage functional use for such difficult fractures in the elderly. We followed seven patients (seven elbows) with a mean age of 81.7 years at the time of injury. Open reduction and internal fixation was considered a difficult option for these fractures. They were treated with a total elbow arthroplasty using the semi-constrained Coonrad–Morrey elbow replacement prosthesis. The duration of follow up at present is between 2 and 4 years. At the latest follow up the mean arc of flexion is 20–130°. Six patients have no pain while one complains of mild pain. All elbows are stable. The Mayo elbow performance score for five elbows is excellent and two scored good. All but one patient are satisfied with the result. One patient developed superficial wound infection which resolved after antibiotic therapy. One patient has developed post-operative triceps weakness. There have been no cases of deep infection, ulnar nerve neuritis or component failure. The rarity of this procedure suggests its very narrow spectrum of indication. We feel that the short-term results do suggest an important role for semi-constrained total elbow arthroplasty in managing carefully selected comminuted distal humeral fractures in the elderly, especially those that cannot be treated by conventional open reduction and internal fixation.Distal humeral fractures comprise about 1% of adult fractures and about 10% of humeral fractures, the majority of which are usually displaced and intraarticular The problems of anatomical reduction and internal fixation, for these already difficult fractures, are compounded in the more elderly patients because of the increased comminution and osteopenia. John et al. had a 20% fair-to-poor result in 49 elderly patients aged 75–90 undergoing open reduction and internal fixation for these fractures Total elbow replacement has been suggested as a last ditch option in an effort to salvage these very comminuted fractures in the elderly Between October 1995 and November 1997, we treated seven distal humeral fractures in seven elderly patients with total elbow replacement ( Five women had simple falls, one was hit by a car in a road accident and the other had a fall during rehabilitation following a total knee replacement. The latter patient also sustained a periprosthetic supracondylar fracture in her knee. The mean interval between injury and total elbow replacement was 11.4 days (range 1–41 days). Conventional open reduction and internal fixation was considered a very difficult option in all these cases due to the involvement of comminution and osteopenia. Patient number three (see We used the AO classification system of Muller et al. to record the fracture type and comminution. All the replacements were performed by the senior author (MSB). Patients were placed in a lateral position under a general anaesthetic, with the forearm and elbow free. A tourniquet was used. A posterior midline incision was made, and the ulnar nerve was identified and freed from the fractured epicondyle. The triceps attachment along with the periosteum was then reflected off the olecranon as described by Bryan and Morrey The duration of follow up ranged from 2 to 4 years. Elbow range of movement including supination and pronation was measured with a goniometer. Stability of the joint was determined on the basis of history and physical examination. Radiographs were made for each patient. The most recent radiographs were evaluated to determine the quality of fixation and the presence of radiolucent lines. These radiographs were then compared with the immediate post-operative and sequential radiographs to determine the progression of radiolucent lines. The Mayo elbow performance score was used to evaluate the overall success of the procedure All seven elbow implants were functioning satisfactorily at the latest follow up. The mean duration of hospital stay was 11 days (5–19 days). Patient number three (see The Mayo elbow performance score was determined for all the elbows ( Radiolucent lines at the bone-cement interface were seen on the follow-up radiographs of two elbows. They had been present immediately after the operation and were found to be incomplete and nonprogressive in the subsequent sequential follow-up radiographs. Post operative complications included superficial wound infection in one patient (patient number five, see Distal humeral fractures are difficult to treat. Open reduction and internal fixation with early mobilisation is the treatment of choice and this prevents stiffness and gives better function Morrey et al. have suggested total elbow replacement as a reliable option when adequate fixation of a fracture in an elderly patient is difficult because of comminution and poor bone quality We used the semi-constrained Coonrad–Morrey elbow implant for all the cases. This prosthesis has a reliable track record over the years, having been proven effective for rheumatoid elbows We were able to mobilise the elbows almost immediately after the operation. Patients regained functional elbow movement in a short period of time. Hospital stay was therefore significantly reduced. We had problems with superficial wound infection in one patient. This was treated aggressively with high dose intravenous antibiotics followed by oral antibiotics. The infection subsided and the patient showed no long term evidence of residual infection. The Mayo, Elbow, Performance Score was chosen for the final evaluation because it encompasses pain, function, stability and motion although it does not take into consideration patient satisfaction. All but one of the patients were found to be satisfied with the procedure. Evaluation of satisfaction was only a simple closed question. The patient who was dissatisfied (patient number six in We acknowledge that this is a short-term retrospective study of a small series, but we assert that the patients were followed up on a regular basis for both clinical and radiological evaluation. Management of distal humeral fractures in elderly patients by a total elbow replacement is a relatively recent treatment suggestion However, the short-term results suggest that a semi-constrained total elbow replacement has a role to play in the treatment of distal humeral fractures in carefully selected cases which are difficult to treat by internal fixation due to osteopenia and comminution. We emphasise, therefore, that this operation should be undertaken only in very carefully selected patients and is not recommended for younger individuals.