Flavonoids, a group of natural compounds found in a variety of vegetables and herbal medicines, have been intensively reported on regarding their estrogen-like activities and particularly their ability to affect bone metabolism. Here, different subclasses of flavonoids were screened for their osteogenic properties by measuring alkaline phosphatase activity in cultured rat osteoblasts. The flavone baicalin derived mainly from the roots of Scutellaria baicalensis showed the strongest induction of alkaline phosphatase activity. In cultured osteoblasts, application of baicalin increased significantly the osteoblastic mineralization and the levels of mRNAs encoding the bone differentiation markers, including osteonectin, osteocalcin, and collagen type 1α1. Interestingly, the osteogenic effect of baicalin was not mediated by its estrogenic activity. In contrast, baicalin promoted osteoblastic differentiation via the activation of the Wnt/β-catenin signaling pathway; the activation resulted in the phosphorylation of glycogen synthase kinase 3β and, subsequently, induced the nuclear accumulation of the β-catenin, leading to the transcription activation of Wnt-targeted genes for osteogenesis. The baicalin-induced osteogenic effects were fully abolished by DKK-1, a blocker of Wnt/β-catenin receptor. Moreover, baicalin also enhanced the mRNA expression of osteoprotegerin, which could regulate indirectly the activation of osteoclasts. Taken together, our results suggested that baicalin could act via Wnt/β-catenin signaling to promote osteoblastic differentiation. The osteogenic flavonoids could be very useful in finding potential drugs, or food supplements, for treating post-menopausal osteoporosis.Bone remodeling is an active, dynamic, and lifelong process, which involves the removal of old bone by osteoclasts and the formation of new bone by osteoblasts. The process is crucial for the maintenance of bone strength and integrity. Osteoporosis, the most common bone remodeling disease, results from the imbalance of bone resorption and formation and is most frequently observed in post-menopausal women. The major cause of post-menopausal osteoporosis is the deficiency of estrogen ( osteoproteogerin alkaline phosphatase estrogen receptor Wnt-responsive element receptor activator for nuclear factor κB ligand 1,3-bis-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-4-methyl-5-[4-(2-piperidinylethoxyphenol]-1 ( T cell factor. Flavonoids, a group of naturally occurring compounds that are commonly found in variety of vegetables and herbal medicines, have been extensively reported on their ability to affect bone metabolism, and they could be sold as phytoestrogens in the consumer market. Daidzein and genistein, which are a subclass of isoflavones mainly from soybeans and their derivative foods, have been determined to reduce the occurrence of osteoporosis ( Here, flavonoids of different subclasses were first screened on their abilities to induce osteogenesis by measuring the activity of alkaline phosphatase (ALP), an indicative osteoblast differentiation marker, in cultured osteoblasts derived from newborn rat calvaria. Our results showed that baicalin, one of the major components isolated from the root of a medicinal herb Baicalin and baicalein were purchased from Wakojunyaku (Osaka, Japan); the purity of both chemicals was over 98%, and both chemicals were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) to give a stock solution at 100 m Rat primary osteoblasts were cultured and prepared by the method previously described ( In drug-treated cultured osteoblasts, the cultures were collected by lysis buffer containing 0.2% Triton X-100, 1 m Total RNA from cultured osteoblasts was isolated by RNAzol®RT reagent (Molecular Research Center, Cincinnati, OH), and 5 μg of RNA was reverse-transcribed by Moloney murine leukemia virus reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen), according to the manufacturer's instructions. Real time PCRs of COL1A1, osteonectin, osteocalcin, Runx2, OPG, RANKL, and 18 S rRNA transcripts were performed on equal amounts of reverse-transcribed products, using KAPA SYBR® FAST qPCR kits, according to the manufacturer's instruction (Kapa Biosystems, South Africa). The primers used were as follows: COL1A1 (5′-TCC TGC CGA TGT CGC TAT C-3′ and 5′-CAA GTT CCG GTG TGA CTC GT-3′; NM_053304); osteonectin (5′-GAA GAG ATG GTG GCG GAG-3′ and 5′-ACA GGC AGG GGG CAA TGT ATT TG-3′; NM_012656); osteocalcin (5′-TCT CTG CTC ACT CTG CTG G-3′ and 5′-GTG GTG CCA TAG ATG CGC T-3′; NM_013414); Runx2 (5′-AAC TTC CTG TGC TCC GTG CT-3′ and 5′-GAC TGT TAT GGT CAA GGT GAA-3′; NM_001146038.1); OPG (5′-TGC AGA GAG TGT AGA GAG G-3′ and 5′-CAA GGT GTC TTG GTC TCC A-3′; NM_012870.2); RANKL (5′-CTA TGA TGG AAG GTT CGT G-3′ and 5′-CAG GTT ATG CGA ACT TGG G-3′; NM_057149.1); and 18 S rRNA (5′-GAC TGT TAT GGT CAA GGT GAA-3′ and 5′-GAT AGT CAA GTT CGA CCG TC-3′; NR_003286). The SYBR Green signal was detected by a Mx3000p∧TM multiplex quantitative PCR machine (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). The relative levels of transcript expression were quantified by using the ΔΔ Three repeats of estrogen-responsive elements (5′-GGT CAC AGT GAC C-3′) were synthesized as described previously ( The phosphorylations of estrogen receptor (ER) α (at serine 118) and GSK3β were determined by Western blot assay. Cultures of primary osteoblasts were serum-starved for 3 h prior to the application of flavonoids. After the treatment, the cultures were collected immediately in lysis buffer containing 125 m Primary osteoblasts were harvested and lysed after transient transfection with GFP-tagged β-catenin and treatment with baicalin. The nuclear fraction was prepared using the NE-PER nuclear and cytosolic extraction reagents (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA), according to the manufacturer's protocol. Fifty μl of nuclear lysate, or total cell lysate, per sample was used, and the absorbance reflecting the amount of GFP in each sample was collected in a Tropix TR17 microplate machine. The recognition of histone-1 by antibody (1:1000; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA) served as a control for the enrichment of nuclear fraction. Luciferase assay was performed using a commercial kit (Tropix Inc., Bedford, MA). In brief, cell cultures were washed with PBS and resuspended in 100 m Primary cultured osteoblasts were directly isolated from the calvarias of postnatal day 1 rats. The cultured osteoblasts were able to undergo differentiation upon the application of the differentiation inducers (dexamethasone and vitamin C) as represented by the following: (i) increase of ALP activity ( There is an aglycone of baicalin, namely baicalein, that does not contain a glucuronic acid at the C7 position on the flavone backbone ( Estrogen is known to play a significant role in bone metabolism through the regulation of bone formation and resorption. ERs are the members of the superfamily of ligand-regulated nuclear transcription factors. Two ERs have been identified, ERα and -β. Both ERα and -β were found to be expressed in cultured rat osteoblast ( To test the correlation of the estrogenic effect of baicalin and its ability in stimulating osteoblastic differentiation, the cultured osteoblasts were pretreated with specific ER antagonists before the application of baicalin. As shown in Wnt/β-catenin signaling plays an important role in the induction of bone formation. The major components involved in this signaling, including the transcripts encoding Wnt3a (a ligand for Wnt/β-catenin receptor), GSK3β, β-catenin, and DKK-1, were found in our cultured osteoblasts ( The translocation of β-catenin into the nucleus is a critical step in controlling the Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Inside the nucleus, β-catenin acts as a co-activator of the TCF/LEF family of DNA-binding proteins in regulating the Wnt-mediated target genes for osteogenesis. Here, the amount of β-catenin and its subcellular distribution were examined. A cDNA encoding GFP-tagged β-catenin was transfected into cultured osteoblasts. The transfected cells were treated with LiCl and baicalin for 4 h, and then the nuclear fraction was isolated. In baicalin-treated osteoblasts, the amount of GFP-β-catenin within nuclear fraction was increased over 2-fold, as compared with the control; the increase was restricted only to the nuclear fraction ( DKK-1, a blocker of the Wnt receptors, functions via direct binding to LRP5/6, and as such it prevents the binding of Wnt ligands onto its receptors for signal induction. To confirm the specificity of baicalin in osteoblasts, the cultures were pretreated with DKK-1 for 1 h before the application of LiCl, or Wnt3a, or baicalin. The phospho-GSK3β, induced by Wnt3a or baicalin, was markedly inhibited after the pretreatment of DKK-1 ( In addition, the activating effect of baicalin on TCF/LEF-dependent gene transcription was tested by the luciferase reporter pWRE-Luc that contained the binding sites for the β-catenin-TCF complex (see To determine the role of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in baicalin-induced osteogenesis, the cultured osteoblasts were pretreated with DKK-1 before the challenge of baicalin. The ALP activity and the expression of different bone markers in these cultures were determined; the up-regulation of bone differentiation markers, including ALP, COL1A1, osteonectin, and osteocalcin, was completely blocked under the pretreatment of DKK-1 ( The expression of Runx2, a master transcription factor in controlling the osteoblast differentiation, in cultured osteoblasts was also determined under the treatment of baicalin Here, we also tested the effects of baicalin in regulating the expression of RANKL and OPG. Both RANKL and OPG are produced by osteoblasts. Bone resorption is dependent on RANKL, and the catabolic effects of RANKL would be prevented by OPG and thereby prevent the binding of RANK to RANKL for osteoclast differentiation. The balance of OPG and RANKL could affect bone maturation. A high ratio of OPG/RANKL expression is indicative for bone formation, although a low ratio of that favors the bone resorption. Application of baicalin increased the mRNA expression of OPG in primary cultured osteoblasts in a dose-dependent manner, although the expression of RANKL remained unchanged ( By assaying the ALP activity in cultured osteoblasts, 36 commonly encountered flavonoids derived mainly from herbal medicines and vegetables were screened for osteoblastic activity. Twenty of them showed the ALP induction, and baicalin was the best inducer among all of them. The treatment of baicalin increased the ALP activity, the mRNA expression of bone differentiation markers, and the degree of mineralization in cultured osteoblasts. Interestingly, these baicalin-induced effects were not affected by the treatment of ER antagonists, including ICI 182,780, MPP, and ( Drugs for osteoporosis could be divided into two categories, anti-resorptive and anabolic agents. Anti-resorptive agents prevent bone resorption. Anabolic agents stimulate bone growth and formation. The flavone described here could have both functions; the high ratio of OPG/RANKL expression in baicalin-treated osteoblasts suggests the ability to stimulate bone formation. The naturally occurring flavonoids have been reported to influence bone health. Ipriflavone, an isoflavone derivative of plant origin, is the first flavonoid reported to prevent bone loss in post-menopausal women ( Revealing our current results, baicalin contains at least two functions in osteoblasts, estrogenic properties via ER and osteogenic properties via Wnt/β-catenin signaling. The dual functions of baicalin could serve as a milestone in developing multitargeted drugs for osteoporosis, in particular for menopausal women. Estrogen and its receptors are known to play roles in bone formation in humans ( Most of the dietary flavonoids in nature exist in a form of β-glycoside, and in most cases, they are hydrolyzed to their aglycone form in producing effects in the body ( 