The Li0.35Zn0.3Fe2.35O4 micro-belts were prepared by cotton template for the first time. The nickel-coated carbon fibers were obtained by the electroless plating method. The formation mechanism of the ferrite micro-belt was studied. The microwave absorption properties of the two layers absorbers containing Li0.35Zn0.3Fe2.35O4 micro-belts and nickel-coated carbon fibers composites were investigated in the frequency range of 30–6000MHz. The absorbers of the Li0.35Zn0.3Fe2.35O4 micro-belts/nickel-coated carbon fibers composites have much better microwave absorption properties than the nickel-coated carbon fibers absorbers, and the microwave absorption properties of the composites are influenced by the content of the absorber.With the increasing environmental concern for microwave irradiations and the stealth technology for military platforms, microwave absorbing materials have attracted much attention In the past decades, spinel ferrites have been used as microwave absorbents in various forms due to their lightweight, low cost, and good design flexibility The detailed process of Li First, CNFs were cleaned and dispersed in ethanol and deionized water, respectively. This process eliminates the residual metal particles on the surface of CNFs and enhances the interfacial adhesion between the CNFs and metal layers. The pre-treated CNFs were then sensitized and activated in an aqueous solution containing SnCl In the next step, the activated CNFs were accelerated by immersing them for 3 Finally, the pre-treated and catalyzed CNFs were immersed in a metal plating bath (1 The mechanical stirring system was used in order to continuously keep up the good dispersion state during electroless plating. The setup consists of the bath, a temperature controller, a condenser and the mechanical stirrer. At this stage, the density and temperature of the plating solution and the stirring speed of the mechanical stirrer are the most important factors for a uniform deposition of metal onto the surface of the CNFs. The crystalline structure of the samples was determined by D/max-A diffractometer (Cu Kα radiation, The single phase crystalline nature of the belt-like Li  The Li The frequency dependences of the complex permeability and permittivity of Li The complex permittivity for the Li Electromagnetic parameters (  The Li The article is original, has been written by the stated authors who are all aware of its content and approve its submission, has not been published previously, it is not under consideration for publication elsewhere, no conflict of interest exists, or if such conflict exists, the exact nature of the conflict must be declared and if accepted, the article will not be published elsewhere in the same form, in any language, without the written consent of the publisher. This paper is funded by the