The aim of this work is to develop a model of the milling process of biomass. For this purpose, a classic approach is selected. The breakage probability, characterized by a material mastercurve, and breakage function are used to determine the breakage matrix. A classification function is also proposed, based on physics of the process itself and the calculation of the impact number for a particle. Knowing all these, the milling product characteristic in the steady state can be reproduced. The model has been tested for the milling of two biomasses: an herbaceous one (corn stalk/leaves) and a woody biomass (poplar) in a commercial laboratory mill. The model will reproduce quite reasonably to both cumulative and discrete particle size distributions for the two biomasses tested and for several operating conditions of the mill (rotor speed, sieve openings and feed rate), as shown validating the model results with experimental work. Other parameters as input size of the material show to be less important for the sizes essayed. The main novelty of this work is to present this milling model for biomass material, introducing also the classification system modeling and the calculation of the number of impact.The use of biofuel has been increasing in the last years as alternative to fossil fuels in order to decrease the greenhouse gas emissions, mainly carbon dioxide. The rationale is that the photosynthesis of growing plants removes CO Industrial milling process involves multi-physics underlying mechanisms related to mechanics of contact and fracture, surface physics, fluidodynamics and, even possible thermal effects on materials. All of them are mixed in an intricate manner, still nowadays, incomplete and lack of physical understanding. Comminution process is related to material properties and to the design and operation variables of the mill, as well as all interactions between them. In all cases, material behavior must be known to understand the particle response under high velocity impacts (hammer mills). Other mechanisms, still uncharacterized, play relevant roles on milling process: the fluidodynamics of air-particle inside the mill chamber, the random particle-to-particle collisions and, above all, the size classification mechanism of the particle. This process has been studied at several scales from the molecular level (e.g. crack growing) to industrial field Semi-empirical milling theories such as Rittinger Other authors focused their experimental campaign in obtaining the milling energy consumption and product quality for different herbaceous No relationships have been found between general laws for particle properties relevant to grinding and first principles up to the present. Conceptually, mean particle properties or methods of probabilistic breakage mechanics have to be employed Population balance models for milling processes have been widely developed, mainly, for mineral applications from 1970s. Austin In this work, a population balance model of a lab-scale impact mill is carried out with two biomass resources: poplar and corn stalk/leaves. Breakage probability ( breakage function classification matrix particle size (mm) Discrete Element Model feed material vector resistance against the external load (kg input particle size (mm) number of impacts mixture of particle inside mill chamber previous to impact impacted material vector final product vector population balance model particle size distribution recirculated material vector angular speed of the mill rotor (rpm) breakage probability impact energy (J energy threshold for particle fracture (J breakage matrix Population balance model (PBM) predicts the particle size distribution of the milled product as a function of the material properties, the design and operational variables of the mill and the interactions between material and mill. It will contribute to understand the underlying mechanism that governs the milling in order to obtain a high quality product with the lowest feasible energy cost. PBM is conceptually understood as a discrete mathematical method of particle flow balance of new daughter particles generated from the fracture of the mother ones. Particle breakage is understood as the fracture response under single impact and depends on the material properties, the impact energy and the number of impacts. It is defined by the breakage probability of the particle ( Breakage probability is characterized under Vogel and Peukert's mastercurve The breakage function ( Gil et al. From  The matrix elements under the diagonal represent the fraction of particles generated by the fracture of the coarser ones. It depends on the amount of broken particles after the collision ( As a consequence, the breakage matrix Breakage matrix Another key factor to determine the particle size distribution of milled product is the particle classification. Classification matrix The final product The model is assumed under steady state conditions. After a short transient period, the mass rate of milled product is the same with the mass rate of feeding material. In the model, the steady state is discretized in infinitesimal instants of time that involve several steps: one impact and the classification process, i. e. particle rejection by the screen to the mill chamber. In every discrete time Δ This heterogeneous particle mixture inside the mill chamber Note that the time intervals prior to k's first impacts are the starting transitory period, where the mass flow leaving the mill is smaller than the mass flow of feed particles. On the same way, when the feeding flow stops, it would take a time of k The dimension of the vectors Consequently, the final product has the same particle composition at any time, such as in the mass product rate as in particle size distribution because it is the result of the same events (impact and classification) above the same particle mixture inside the chamber mill Two biomasses, SRF poplar and corn stalk/leaves, classified like woody and herbaceous biomass, respectively (EN 14961-1:2010), have been tested in order to analyze the differences on breakage behavior between both groups of biomass resources. SCF Poplar ( After harvesting, both biomasses were chipped and subsequently hammer-milled in an experimental pilot plant (facility details in The material from milling process were collected and prepared under CEN/TS 14778-1:2005 EX Another part of the milled biomass was also screened to obtain particles into two different size ranges: 0.5 to 1 Around 30 Subsequent to milling tests, the material was collected and the particle size distribution was obtained by mechanical sieving for twenty minutes under standard specifications (standard EN 15149-2:2010 Experimental test campaign should involve all variables with a relevant influence in the process. Population balance model should describe the real conditions under different operational conditions and materials. Differences on material properties between poplar and corn stalk/leaves have been described in Regarding operational parameters, three variables were considered: 1) the opening size of the metal screen surrounding the mill chamber, 2) the revolutions of rotor and 3) the feed rate. The first one affects the particle classification, the second one affects the impact energy (basically kinetic energy of the hammers) and the third one affects the particle-to-particle interactions due to the fact that the higher the particle concentrations inside the mill chamber the higher the probability of collisions. In brief, the variables and their value ranges considered in this study are: Type of input material: SRF poplar and corn stalk/leaves Input particle size of feed material ( Opening sizes of the metal screen ( Angular speed of mill rotor ( Feed rate: depending on the angular speed of the feeding screw conveyor at 104.72 and 188.5 All combinations between these variables were performed. A total of 12 tests were carried out for each biomass ( The code of each test identifies, firstly, the tested biomass ( Final formulation of the PBM model (Eq. As a matter of fact, some authors considered that if a particle reaches the classifier size, it automatically passes through Classification function means the probability that a particle goes through the metal screen by one of its openings. This probability, basically, depends on the probability that the particle trajectory ends on one of the openings ( The former ( The particle classification depends also on other factors of difficult quantification as the particle morphology (size and shape). Particle size plays a key role because the coarser particles, of which the size is close to the opening size, have less probability of classification than the fine ones After this theoretical analysis of the factor involved in the particle classification, it is concluded that is not possible to measure and quantify the effect of each factor. Therefore, a semi-empirical assessment of the probability of particle classification was developed and incorporated to the model (Eq. In order to achieve a proper formulation for the classification efficiency, at first the probability that a particle passes through the classifier was adjusted in the model with a process of trial and error. The correction was applied so that the model results were as close as possible to the experimental ones, but with the constraint that a smaller particle has more probabilities to be classified than a bigger one. Plotting the results ( Eq. The model output shows the particle size distribution (PSD) of the new particle population generated in the milling process. The model must be sensitive to the influences and effects of the variables under study: the input particle size, the type of biomass, the angular speed of hammers, the opening size of the screen and the feed rate. Feed rate affects the particle-to-particle interactions (impacts, deviations of trajectories, changes on particle velocity). These effects were not considered in the model because they are unfeasible to measure and quantify and, moreover, are considered negligible in comparison with other effects. However, an experimental test under two different feed rates were performed in order to check if this assumption could be attainable. Negligible differences were found on the experimental PSD when the feed rate was varied ( Analyzing the experimental particle size distributions of the milled biomass, the influences of the variables in the real process can be determined. Model fundamentals should be sensitive to the effects of the material properties and to the operational parameters. In Model simulations allow one to obtain a prediction of the number of impacts ( Experimental effects observed as a function of the openings size of the screen and the angular speed are in accordance with the PBM results. Regarding the prediction of the PSD of the final milled product, Model results also can be represented for each size interval of PSD, showing the quantity of particles within a specific interval range in a direct form. Frequently, the representation of discrete PSD presents multiple lines overlapping between the results from different tests. Therefore in In addition, the model also calculates the number of impact required to mill completely a biomass particle ( Other relevance results to highlight is the almost negligible influence of the input particle size (within the considered particle size). Input particle size has no effect on the final PSD but also in the number of impacts. Only one more impact was obtained for some tests when the input particle size was 0.5 As a result of this work, a population balance model that allows predicting the particle size distribution of the hammer-milling product was developed. The model was found reliable under different operational parameters and with different types of biomass. A population balance model (PBM) of hammer milling was performed for two biomass resources: poplar and corn stalk/leaves, classified like woody and herbaceous resources. The theoretical model incorporated the effects of material properties and of the operational mill variables. The former involves the type of biomass, its input particle size and its breakage behavior. The latter comprises the angular speed of rotor and the opening size of the screen. A set of experimental tests with a lab-scale mill were carried out also taking into account these variables in order to validate experimentally the theoretical model. The population balance model incorporates the breakage behavior of these biomasses, characterized in Gil et al. In addition, the model incorporates the event of particle classification by a metal screen surrounding the mill chamber. It was found out that the probability of the particle classification, once the particle reaches the screen opening, is a function of a dimensionless ratio between the particle size and the opening size of the screen. A hyperbolic formulation was developed and incorporated to the PBM. Cumulative particle size distribution of the milled particle obtained by the theoretical population balance model and by the experimental tests agrees with a In brief, a population balance model was performed for impact mills with screen classification that is able to predict the particle size distribution at steady-state operating conditions for biomass resources and it is sensible to follow the effects and variations generated by the material properties and operational parameters. This work was partially supported by the