Alkali-activated materials (AAMs), sometimes called geopolymers, have wide industrial relevance and are produced through alkaline activation of alumina and silica-rich precursors, including industrial side streams. It has been observed that MgO content in AAMs results in improved mechanical properties. However, most of the suitable MgO sources are either prohibitively expensive or carbonate-based, which leads to higher CO2 emissions. Phlogopite is an attractive source of MgO as it is carbonate-free and locally abundant. Besides MgO, phlogopite also contains significant quantities of silica and alumina, making it a viable candidate for alkali activation. However, an alkaline solubility test in NaOH revealed phlogopite to be highly inert, with both silicon (Si) and aluminum (Al) solubility at around 1wt% of the original material. In this work, thermal treatment was considered to improve the alkali activation potential of phlogopite. Thermal treatment was found to be successful; the resulting glassy material showed 45% Si and 33% Al release into the solution, on a par with highly soluble metakaolin (26% Si and 40% Al). During the solubility test, significant quantities of magnesium and iron were also released but they did not stay in the solution. Rather, they formed precipitated products, the main one of which was meixnerite (Mg6Al2(OH)18·4H2O), a hydrotalcite-like compound. The resulting alkali-soluble glass with phlogopite chemical composition can be used asa carbonate-free source of magnesium in alkali activation purposes. However, any commercial application should allow for due consideration of cost.Alkali activation is widely used for the synthesis of alkali-activated materials (AAMs), sometimes called geopolymers, from a variety of solid precursors rich in alumina and silica. Such binders are considered greener alternatives to conventional cementitious binders ( The structure of aluminosilicate AAMs consists of interconnected silicate and aluminate tetrahedra forming a 3-dimensional negatively charged framework, with pores filled with counter-balancing cations, Group I or Group II, and water molecules ( Magnesium is an abundant alkali earth metal with considerably higher electronegativity than calcium, and is therefore a widely studied component in durable binders, including alkali-activated materials. Phlogopite is one such candidate; it is rich in magnesium and significant amounts can be found in mine tailings around the world, including Finland. The apatite mine in Siilinjärvi (Eastern Finland) has been producing apatite since 1979 ( Untreated phlogopite is known to have high stability ( In this work, phlogopite was calcined to a series of temperatures and melted to produce a glassy material. All the treated materials were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) to understand the phase changes during thermal treatment. The alkali activation potential of the treated materials was assessed using a solubility test in 6M NaOH, and the extent of elemental release into the solution was estimated with the help of ICP. The residue remaining after the solubility test was subjected to scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM), XRD, and an acid solubility test to understand the process of alkaline dissolution. The phlogopite (P) used in the present study was obtained from LKAB, Siilinjärvi, Finland. It was a by-product from the processing of apatite ore formed during early Proterozoic alkaline intrusion at the mine. Metakaolin (M), branded as Metastar 402 by Imerys Minerals, was used as The milling of the material was done using a vibratory disc mill (Retsch RS 200) for 1–5 Phlogopite was milled to have an average particle size of between 1 All the pretreated materials were milled (if necessary) to have an average particle size of between 1 An acid solubility test of the solid residue was also performed to estimate a rough composition of the precipitated phases. For this purpose, five different concentrations of HNO XRF analysis of the raw materials ( All the samples thermally treated up until 900 The sample prepared by treatment at 1600 The untreated phlogopite (P) is practically inert for alkali activation as it had both silicon and aluminum solubility of around 1 The most promising sample was found to be the glassy material made at 1600 Potassium solubility for the untreated phlogopite (P) was around 15 Note that during this process, the structure of phlogopite remains unaltered as the only lost component is the hydrogen, which is not a structural component of the phlogopite ( The alkaline solubility test revealed both magnesium and iron solubility for untreated phlogopite to be negligible ( Studies of the solid residue using XRD and STEM indicated that both magnesium and iron were released during the alkaline dissolution process but that they tended to form precipitated products rather than stay in the solution. The solid residue (P1600g-r) remaining after the solubility test of the glassy sample (P1600g) was characterized by XRD ( Characterization using STEM was done for the solid residue, P1600g-r. For reference purposes, the same characterization for P1600g was also carried out. P1600g consisted of irregular shaped particles ( Soluble concentration of various elements (mostly silicon and aluminum) obtained during the alkaline solubility test is usually used as a benchmark for estimating the potential of precursors for alkaline activation purposes ( Acid solubility of the solid residue (P1600g-r) in a series of concentrations of acid can provide a rough estimate of the composition of the precipitated phases. During the etching of the solid residue with a low concentrated acid, precipitated phases will be predominantly dissolved. This means that filtrate will be rich in magnesium, iron and aluminum as they are the major constituents of precipitated phases ( The true potential of the material for alkali activation is indicated by the total material reacted during the alkaline solubility test, which includes the soluble and precipitated phases. In this way, the true potential of P1600g for alkali activation was obtained by summing up the soluble components obtained during the alkali-solubility test and the precipitated component obtained using incremental acid etching ( This study focused on exploring the potential of phlogopite as The most soluble sample after treatment shows 45% Si and 33% Al release into the solution, which is comparable to that of highly soluble metakaolin (26% Si and 40% Al). During the solubility test, magnesium and iron were also released, but they exclusively precipitated as secondary minerals rather than staying in the solution. Acid solubility of the solid residue reveals that 34–80 In short, the thermally treated phlogopite has serious potential to be used as an efficient magnesium-rich precursor for alkali activation purposes. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support received from the project “Novel synthesis methods for porous ceramics from mine tailings,” funded by