The aim of this work was to improve the quality of wastewater effluent coming from an Integrated Gasification Combined-Cycle (IGCC) power station to meet with future environmental legislation. This study examined a homogeneous photocatalytic oxidation process using concentrated solar UV energy (UV/Fe(II)/H2O2) in a Solar Compound Parabolic Collector (CPC) pilot plant. The efficiency of the process was evaluated by analysis of the oxidation of cyanides and Total Organic Carbon (TOC). A factorial experimental design allowed the determination of the influences of operating variables (initial concentration of H2O2, oxalic acid and Fe(II) and pH) on the degradation kinetics. Temperature and UV-A solar power were also included in the Neural Network fittings. The pH was maintained at a value >9.5 during cyanide oxidation to avoid the formation of gaseous HCN and later lowered to enhance mineralization. Under the optimum conditions ([H2O2]=2000ppm, [Fe(II)]=8ppm, pH=3.3 after cyanide oxidation, and [(COOH)2]=60ppm), it was possible to degrade 100% of the cyanides and up to 92% of Total Organic Carbon.In a previous study, we showed that the main pollutants in Thermoelectric Power Stations wastewaters (cyanides and formates) can be successfully degraded using homogeneous photocatalysis (UV/H TiO In another study, our group applied direct solar illumination to IGCC power-station effluent using a low-cost solar-concentration installation based on a Fresnel lens provided with solar automatic tracking ( A ferrioxalate assisted photo-Fenton homogeneous process at a solar CPC pilot plant could be an alternative treatment which minimizes the inconveniences described above for the following reasons: the CPC pilot plant allows for a continuous treatment of wastewater, thus being an industrially feasible technique and the use of ferrioxalates in the degradation of organic pollutants using sunlight has been reported to be effective ( The aim of this paper was to improve the quality of wastewater effluent coming from an Integrated Gasification Combined-Cycle (IGCC) power station by proposing an economical and practical alternative to other energy-dependent processes. Wastewater used during this investigation comes from the alkaline stripper of the Gasification Unit. The existing treatment for this wastewater stream consists of an acid stripping for H Analytical grade ferrous sulfate (FeSO The CPC consisted of a continuously stirred-tank solar reactor (50 Wastewater coming from the Gasification Unit upstream of the on-site treatment unit, containing up to 10 This process occurs in two stages: first, cyanides are removed at high pH (>9.5), and then, TOC is removed after the pH is lowered. Evolution of the H Total cyanide concentration was measured using a continuous-flow analyzer (PrEn ISO 14403). This method determines the sum of organically bound cyanides, free cyanides ions, complex compounds and simple bound metal cyanides, excepting cyanides in cobalt complexes. Complex bound cyanide is decomposed at pH 3.8 in a continuously flowing stream by the effect of UV radiation (350 Total Organic Carbon concentration was determined using a TOC analyzer (TOC-5000A Shimadzu). A central composite experimental design was applied to investigate the effects of four variables, initial concentrations of H a factorial design with 2 selection of the axial distance of the star points (codified values replicates of the central point (three experiments). The complete experimental design including variable ranges is shown in In all the experiments, the disappearance of cyanides and TOC followed pseudo-first order kinetics with respect to the pollutant concentration, as follows: The Neural Network (NN) applied in this work was solved with two neurons, using a simple exponential activation function with a strategy based on a back-propagation calculation. Further details can be found in the literature ( Finally, a measure of the saliency of the input variables was made based upon the connection weights of the Neural Networks ( Experimental results and NN fitting are shown in Eq. Fitted parameters are shown in The results of a saliency analysis on the input variables for each Neural Network (%) are also shown in The equation shown in These results show that Under the experimental conditions used in this work, the concentration of H On the other hand, it can be seen that the effect of solar power is augmented at high hydrogen peroxide concentrations.  It can be seen that the maximum degradation rate is reached at [(COOH) As can be seen in Eqs. After cyanide oxidation (performed at pH The equation shown in As seen in   Simulation from NNs showed that mineralization rate is positively affected when temperature increases, but slightly decreases with changes in UV-A solar power in the experimental range (16–43 From these results we deduced that the optimum conditions for both processes under the studied range of variables are as follows: Cyanide oxidation: pH Mineralization: pH Since cyanides are easily removed due to their low concentration in water (about 10 These results show that in the first stage (pH However, the maximum legal wastewater disposal limit for Fe (II) is usually 2 The maximum cyanide degradation constant obtained in this research was about 0.35 However, the solar process is still efficient, particularly for plants with low flow rates, since a 100% cyanide removal and up to a 92% mineralization can be achieved. Moreover, operating costs, excluding added reactants, are very low as no lamps are needed and a renewable energy is used.  Simulations using the NN equations confirmed that pH and [Fe(II)] are the main variables involved in the mineralization of wastewater from an IGCC power station using a solar ferrioxalate-assisted process. Under the optimum conditions ([H The use of a homogeneous process with solar UV light can offer an economical and practical alternative for the destruction of environmental pollutants present in thermoelectric power-station effluent. Financial support from the