Background
                  Fractures of the radial head are common with most partial articular fractures resulting in an anterolateral fragment. The exact mechanism of radial head fracture is unknown; however, forces transmitted and variations in local bone density are believed important. This study quantifies the regional variations in bone density and volume of the radial head to better understand the pathomechanics of fracture patterns.
               
                  Methods
                  Computer tomography scan data of 18 cadaver elbows were imported into imaging analysis software. The radial head was divided into quadrants based on neutral forearm rotation. Bone density and volume were calculated and compared between quadrants.
               
                  Results
                  The regional densities of bone expressed in Hounsfield units (HU) were posteromedial quadrant (PM) 496 ± 87 HU, anteromedial quadrant (AM) 443 ± 72 HU, anterolateral quadrant (AL) 409 ± 60 HU, and posterolateral quadrant (PL) 406 ± 57 HU. The volume of bone in descending order was PM 1138 ± 179 mm3, PL 1013 ± 213 mm3, AM 1010 ± 210 mm3, and AL 938 ± 175 mm3. The PM quadrant was significantly denser than the AM, AL, and PL quadrants, (P = .001) and the AM quadrant was significantly denser than the AL and PL quadrants (P = .006 and .009). The PM quadrant had significantly more bone volume when compared to the AM, AL, and PL (P = .001). The AM and PL quadrants had significantly greater bone volume compared to AL quadrant (P = .023 and .018, respectively).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Radial head bone volume and density is highest in the posteromedial quadrant and lowest in the anterolateral quadrant where fractures occur more frequently.Fractures of the radial head most commonly include an anterolateral fracture fragment. Limited data are available documenting regional variations in radial head bone density. Furthermore, the literature is confusing as the reference position of forearm rotation varies between studies. Some authors use a quadrant system referenced in the anatomic position (forearm in full supination), while others use a more clinical definition with the forearm in neutral rotation, shifting the anatomic quadrants by 90°. For clarity, in this paper, we will refer to the neutral reference orientation and convert all studies discussed to this orientation. Bartz et al The purpose of this study was to determine if there are regional variations in the volume and density of bone in the radial head. This information may improve our understanding of fracture pathomechanics and assist in determining the optimal location for placement of internal fixation. Eighteen male cadaver (mean age, 75.3 ± 7.3 years; range, 57-88) arms were scanned using a 64-slice computer tomography (CT) scanner (GE Discovery CT750 HD The CT images were imported in DICOM (Digital Imaging and Communications in Medicine) format to Mimics 14.0 An orthogonal coordinate system was created with the forearm in neutral rotation. Each specimen was oriented with reference to the distal radius. A coronal plane was created using an axis that was drawn to bisect the radius from the midpoint of the distal radio-ulnar joint to the apex of the radial styloid. This plane was extended proximally along the radius to the center of the articular surface of the radial head ( The radial head was divided into quadrants with the forearm in neutral rotation. Anteromedial, anterolateral, posterolateral, and posteromedial quadrants were created with an arc length of 90°, centered on the radial head. Each quadrant was analyzed separately using the Mimics 14.0 Descriptive statistics for each quadrant were computed using SPSS 18.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL). These values were analyzed for differences within subjects using general linear model analysis of variance. Significance was set at Qualitatively, patterns emerged when the axial images of the radial head and neck were examined ( Quantitatively, the mean [± standard deviation (SD)] bone density within each quadrant measured in HU in descending order was posteromedial quadrant 496 ± 87 HU, anteromedial quadrant 443 ± 72 HU, anterolateral quadrant 409 ± 60 HU, and posterolateral quadrant 406 ± 57 HU ( The mean volume of bone within each quadrant in descending order was posteromedial 1138 ± 179 mm Skeletal mass, geometric properties, and material quality are 3 determinants of structural bone strength. Gordon et al suggested that one common mechanism of radial head fractures may be a combined axial, valgus, and external rotatory loading mechanism, causing shearing of the anterolateral segment of the radial head as it subluxates posterior to the capitellum. Our results indicate the posteromedial quadrant has significantly greater bone density and volume. We hypothesize that this may be because of the increased joint reactive forces experienced by the radial head in this location, as it articulates with the lesser sigmoid notch of the ulna. This is in keeping with Wolff’s law The anteromedial, anterolateral, and posterolateral quadrants have qualitatively and quantitatively reduced density and larger spaces between the bony trabeculae. The combination of lower density and decreased volume of bone may decrease the yield strength of these regions and predispose them to fracture. The observation that many radial head fractures include a fragment from the anterolateral aspect Several studies have examined the mechanical properties of the radial head and kinetics of the injury to explain why radial head fractures occur in a characteristic manner. Gordon et al examined the mechanical properties of the subchondral cancellous bone of the radial head using a flat indentor. In another study, Eckstein et al used CT osteo-absorptiometry to assess subchondral mineralization of the elbow. Koslowsky et al developed a 2-dimensional density distribution pattern of the subchondral cortical bone of the radial head using subtraction densiometry. During open reduction and internal fixation of radial head fractures, screw purchase into bone is important for secure fixation. Based on the results of this study, screws directed across marginal fragment fractures will find better bony purchase if directed towards the subchondral bone of the posteromedial quadrant. The authors’ clinical experience has been that screw heads are commonly predisposed to subsidence in the lateral sided quadrants, where a thin cortical rim covers the relatively osteopenic underlying cancellous bone ( Any study of the radius is limited by the variability in the anatomy of the radial head and rotational relationships with the landmarks, including the distal radius and proximal radio-ulnar joint. Dividing the radial head into a quadrant system, though previously described, is an artificial distinction, as fractures rarely affect one quadrant in isolation. Error is also introduced as the radial head is not circular but rather elliptical; it is therefore difficult to divide into exact quarters. Our study was limited in that cadaver specimens were all male and generally older. Female specimens should be included in future studies. As bone mineral density in the radial head is known to decrease with age, the results of this study may not be applicable to younger patients with increased density. The strengths of this study include the fact that the entire radial head was examined via an anatomic 3D model, as compared to previous studies that examined only specific areas of the radial head. The analysis of the radial head was also extended to the head-neck junction where fractures typically exit, so that all of the cortical and cancellous bone involved in fractures could be assessed. This study hypothesized that regional variations in radial head bone density and volume may be a substantial factor in fracture of the anterolateral aspect of the radial head. The posteromedial quadrant was found to have a significantly greater density and volume of bone than the anteromedial, anterolateral, and posterolateral quadrants. Clinically, fractures of the posteromedial quadrant are less common, and the increased bone density and volume may prevent propagation of fractures in this area. Lower bone density in the remaining quadrants may pre-dispose them to fracture and comminution. A convention noting orientation of the forearm should be adopted for studies involving the radial head to improve clarity when communicating results. We suggest using the forearm in neutral rotation, as this is how fractures are typically described intra-operatively; it is also the position that places the safe zone of the radial head directly lateral. The authors would like to acknowledge Louis Ferreira, PhD, for his assistance. None of the other authors, their immediate families and any research foundation with which they are affiliated received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.