Background separation from anomalous populations in the polymetallic mineralization is a problematic issue in geochemical exploration. This study focuses on the applications of fractal modeling, correspondence analysis (CA), classical principal component analysis (PCA), and PCA method based on centred log-ratio (clr) transformation for the multi-elemental evaluation of geochemical data in Glojeh polymetallic mineralization, NW Iran. A Concentration-Number (C-N) multifractal modeling was applied to delineate individual self-similar patterns for elemental distributions simultaneously in terms of Au, Ag, Cu, Pb, and Zn. The differences between fractal dimensions and clockwise angle between fitted lines in the C-N Log-log plots could lead to evaluate mineralized rank corresponding to Au≥Ag≥Pb≫Cu≈Zn. A more comprehensive evaluation via CA and PCA of clr-transformed data could facilitate the vein structure identification in high-dimensional data. The PCA results of clr-transformed data revealed the potential intensification trend of (Pb, Ag, As, Te, Au)>(Mo, Zn, Be, Cu)>W>(S, Cd), that is more consistent with fractal and CA approaches. The closure effect problem was overcome by the clr transformation, and the total variance explained by the first factor increased from 28.2% in classical PCA to 43.7% in clr transformation. Accordingly, As, Sb and Cd were considered as potential pathfinder elements for Au in Glojeh deposit. The ability to handle zeros in the data matrix and determining an elemental eccentricity as a criterion are the advantages of CA method, while loading factors spread in a full circle and providing subcompositional coherence are the competitive advantages of PCA (calculated according to log-ratio transformation). However, the CA and PCA based on Log-Ratio transformation techniques showed significant potential to draw an inference in such deposits.Depending on physico-chemical conditions, magmatic hydrothermal fluids can migrate away from the magma chamber along ancient fractures or shear zones ( Geochemical anomaly recognition is one of the most important stages in geochemical exploration ( PCA based on Log-Ratio transformation, cluster analysis, and CA are appropriate methods for geochemical classification ( This paper deals with the distribution of ore elements and their corresponding association in an orebody have tried to use C-N fractal model, the CA, cluster and PCA. Determination of geochemical concentrations and spatial distribution of elements regarding geological features using different statistical methods is an essential analysis for mineral exploration ( The aim of this study is to present a methodology (combination of fractal geometry and CA) for analyzing elemental distribution, clustering the elemental rank of mineralization, and spatial association between elements and samples in Glojeh polymetallic mineralization. Subsequently, the obtained results via the mentioned-above combination are used to demonstrate and evaluate mineralization in Glojeh polymetallic deposit. From a theoretical point of view, the extraction of qualitative and quantitative properties of mineralization in epithermal and porphyry deposits can be improved by these methods. The Glojeh district is located in NW Iran, central part of the Tarom-Hashtjin Metallogenic Province (THMP), which is one of Iran's major metallogenic provinces. Structurally, this subduction-related continental margin arc, which extends from amalgamation of western Alborz Magmatic Belt and Urumieh-Dokhtar Zone, includes some important polymetallic epithermal gold deposits ( The Glojeh mineralization rock types consist of rhyodacite (main host rock), rhyolite, tuff, andesite and andesitic basalt. Associated intrusive rocks are mainly granodiorite, granite and quartz-monzonite ( In the Glojeh polymetallic deposit, 11 boreholes were drilled with original dip of 45° and azimuth of 180° (as same as the trenches) in the area ( For evaluating the quality of analytical data (geochemical QA/QC) the Thompson-Howarth graphical method have been used, when duplicate (or/and replicate) samples were taken to evaluate the precision or accuracy in analysis. After crushing a sample and milling the two 200 Trench TR2 is 60–70 Fractal geometry is an appropriate method for distinguishing between anomalous and background populations ( The CA is a graphical technique for representing information in a two-way contingency table, which contains counts (frequencies) of items for a cross-classification of two categorical variables ( The CA method will be applied when all elements in the matrix have positive values or zero ( The The eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the matrix Eigenvectors [a Finally, The Cluster analysis and PCA analysis were used to classify the objects (parameters) into clusters or factors based on their similarities ( These methods could be done with both normalized and non-normalized data ( By C-N fractal modeling, geochemical populations for Au, Ag, Cu, Pb, and Zn, corresponding thresholds and anomalous values were recognized based on 138 samples taken from the BH2N1 borehole. However, the frequencies (number of occurrences of each data set equals to 138 minus cumulative number) have been plotted against the average concentration of each data set in a log-log plot of C-N fractal model ( By application of CA method, the 42 eigenvalues ( The first factor (Dimension 1) indicates the association of As, Te, Mo and minor S, W are more considerable for mineralization with Au, Ag, Cu, Pb and Zn in the Glojeh deposit. They have very high eccentricity and sample IDs of 35, 33, 28, 29, 32, 34, 31, 30, 36 and 81 confirm this mineralization as an indicator samples. The results show the potential for polymetallic (highly anomalous elements are Ag, As, Pb and Au) veins. This strong phase of mineralization explains 65.14% of the total inertia and variance in Glojeh deposit ( On the other hand, the second phase of variations (Dimension 2) indicates that Au and Ag show two different trends. The sample IDs of 80, 15 and 81 show enrichment for Au, while Ag is enriched in the IDs of 35 and 33. Au tends to be associated with Ca, Sb and As, but Ag is in connection with Zn, Mo, Pb and S. This factor explains 12% of the total variance in district ( In the third phase (Dimension 3), Au and Na show two different stretching out from the center. In this factor, Ag, Ni, P, Mg, Mo, Co tend to be associated with Na, while, Cu, Sb, Tl, Ca are associated with Au. These two different couplings include 7% of the variation in area. The fourth factor (Dimension 4) could be ascribed for S (invigorated with association of Pb, Cu, Te, Ag, As) and Zn (invigorated with association of Cd, Mo, Au and minor W, V, Co) elements showing two opposite trends with samples of 34, 36, 29, 35, 100 and 32, 30, 33, 31, respectively. It accounted for 6% of the variation in data. The indicated factors of CA can provide an intuitive graphical display of element association in one or two dimensional visual representation. The combination of the first and the second dimensions explain 77.14% of the total variance. This percentage is sufficiently high that indicates a visual representation of relationship between elements and samples. The symmetric plot that shows both row principal coordinates and column principal coordinates overlaid in a joint display. At this plot, the row-to-row (sample-to-sample or Q-mode) and column-to-column (element-to-element or R-mode) distances are approximate Based on multivariate PCA and cluster analysis, complementary results can be provided. Hierarchical clustering analysis Ward's method performs two main groups (clusters) and four meaningful subgroups (red, blue, green and yellow) as a dendrogram in The enriched and depleted samples for the red, green, yellow, and blue groups are accompanied with all elemental spatial distribution. It is clear that 12 samples (IDs of 33, 28, 32, 35, 31, 29, 30, 81, 80, 47, 34 and 36) are highly and (IDs of 49, 70, 86, 38, 52, 82, 15, and 50) are moderately concentrated from the red group and depleted from the blue group while the sample ID of 118 which is enriched from blue group and depleted from the red group. In addition, the sample IDs of 128, 110, 129, 126 and 130 were enriched and considered as the indicator samples of yellow group. Therefore, spatial distribution of the samples within the studied area is corresponding to first and second loading factors revealed that the 12 indicator samples were originated from vein, veinlet or brecciated zone. They are recognized as anomalous samples for polymetallic vein for Au, Ag, Cu, Pb, and Zn. An anisotropic vein that indicates intense mineralization according to different elemental distribution, may be reflected in multi-element fractal models. However, only based on this method, a geoscience researcher cannot significantly judge about geochemical patterns. Many fractal models of geological objects indicate that the fractal dimension (D) often increases from the first segment to the i The fractal dimension (D) varies for different element from 0.139 (for Ag) to 0.6 (for Cu) in the background, and from 0.49 (for Ag) to 1.21 (for Zn) in anomalous values (  Results from this study indicate that the CA based on Euclidian distance, by calculating element and sample matrices (U and V-matrices) and indicator F matrix can emphasize the results which obtained from fractal geometry. Accordingly, 12 samples (samples IDs 35, 33, 28, 29, 32, 34, 31, 30, 36, 81, 47, and 80) were determined as polymetallic (multi-element Au-Ag-Cu-Pb-Zn) anomalies and 126 samples are determined as background. All of the CA factors suggest that Glojeh district is clearly enriched for Ag, As, Pb, Te, Mo, Au, and Zn mineralization. Au-As and Au-Sb are common associations in epithermal gold deposit, so that obviously Au-As is high correlated and presented in the first factor of mineralization in Glojeh deposit. The presence of outliers and zero data can cause misleading conclusions for classical PCA ( This study mainly focused on the applications of fractal modeling, CA, and PCA based on log-ratio transformation method. Based on frequency distribution for multi-elemental fractal features, it cannot be possible to make a judgment on elemental associations and spatial distribution. The fractal dimension (D) and angle between linear segments (α) criterion in bi-fractal models indicates that Au-Ag-Pb and Cu-Zn have the same specification and distribution within the Glojeh deposit, while Au-Ag-Pb have been more concentrated in veins. The CA based on R- and Q-mode analysis confirmed the fractal results and revealed 90% of variation in four factors. As a result, Au, Ag, As, Te, Pb, Mo, Zn, S, W and Cu, respectively are also more considerable for polymetallic mineralization in Glojeh. The lack of spatial correlation and full circle spread of eigenvectors in normal scores data has been overshadowed by opening clr-transformed with PCA analysis. Furthermore, the total variance, explained by the PC1 based on the clr-transformation of increased from 28.2% to 43.7%. It can reveal the potential intensification trend of (Pb, Ag, As, Te, Au) According to the results of multivariate CA, normal scores and log-ratio transformed data opened by the PCA analysis, it would be possible to do much better clustering for Glojeh polymetallic deposit. In addition a moderate degree of clustering was done based on multi-elemental fractal features. Among the given multivariate methods, the CA and PCA (carried out based on Log-Ratio transformation) are considered as robust estimators for an enhanced compression of a large amount of information into interpretable factors or linear combinations of variables. They are well-known techniques in comparison to ordinary classical PCA and cluster analysis methods for compositional data. The Euclidean distances between the observations and the variables, individually or as a set of points, via differences in eccentricity from center and also, its ability to handle zeros data are the advantages of CA method. While, loading factors that spread in a full circle and provide subcompositional coherence are the competitive advantages of PCA based on Log-Ratio transformation. The authors are grateful to the Iranian Mines and Mining Industries Development & Renovation Organization (IMIDRO) for their permission to have access to Glojeh deposit dataset as well as financial support. The authors also acknowledge the E.J.M. (John) Carranza, Renguang Zuo and Mohammad Jalali for their comments and valuable remarks. The authors also are hugely thankful to Mr. Fattahi and Mr. Hemmati for their encouragement and valuable help. We also would like to acknowledge Dr. Amir Bijan Yasrebi from Amirkabir University of Technology and University of Exeter for his remarkable contribution to make this paper as comprehensive as possible. The following KML file contains the Google map of the most important areas described in this article. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version