The purpose of this study was to compare different methods for the determination of moisture in biomass. Twenty different biomass materials from various places in Europe were investigated for total moisture using oven drying in air at three different temperatures (80, 105 and 130°C), distillation with xylene, and freeze drying. In addition, the materials were used for the comparison of different methods for the determination of moisture in the analysis sample. In all cases CEN TC335 Solid Biofuels—Methods for determination of moisture content—Oven dry method was used as the reference method. Significant differences were obtained between the oven-drying methods in air at various temperatures. Similar results were found for some materials when comparing the reference method with xylene distillation and freeze-drying methods. In some cases the discrepancies were explained by the loss of volatile organic compounds during the oven-drying step at elevated temperatures. Small differences were found in the comparison of methods for the determination of moisture in the analysis sample.Determination of the moisture content by drying the sample in an oven is nowadays an accepted method for solid biofuels in Europe Lack of knowledge within this field may cause a bias in the moisture determination and in the calculation of the net calorific value since many volatile organic compounds (VOC) e.g., terpenes have a high calorific value. The aim of this project is to study different methods for the determination of moisture content in comparison with a reference method for oven drying of biomass in order to evaluate eventual problems with bias between the techniques. The reference method has been accepted as a technical specification in CEN TC335 and is based on the Swedish Standard SS 18 71 70—Determination of moisture content. The study was part of the project BIONORM Work Package II ‘Physical/Mechanical Tests’—Task II.1 ‘Moisture content and bulk density’. Samples of biomass from southern and northern Europe have been selected by the working group in the Bionorm—project task Task II.1 (See The materials with large particle sizes were ground using a knife mill (Retsch SM 2000 equipped with a 10 In the examination of methods for the determination of moisture in the analysis sample, the various materials were dried in air at 40 The oven-drying experiments were performed according to the technical specification CEN TC335 Solid Biofuels—Methods for determination of moisture content—Oven dry method—Part 1: Total moisture—Reference method The drying cabinet, (Elvärmedetaljer, size 1600×800×700 Xylene distillation experiments were carried out according to the standard method T 208 os-78 The equipment for the xylene distillation method consisted of standard glassware; a 500 The freeze-drying experiments were carried out on sawdust, miscanthus, pitchy wood and wood pellets using a Modulyo 4 The comparison of the analytical methods was carried out by parallell analyses of the various biomass materials using oven drying in air at 105 A crucible tray specially designed for the oven-drying method in nitrogen atmosphere was used during this experiment. The tray, which had room for 24 crucibles, was connected to nitrogen gas tubing at the front. A cover with holes at the rear ensured that the gas could pass over the crucibles and prevent air coming in contact with the samples. The vacuum obtained during the drying experiments was 0.65 Homogeneity of the biomass samples was investigated by using ANOVA in comparing the variance within the replicates with the variance between the samples. If the variance between the samples was not significantly larger than the variance of the replicates, the samples were considered homogeneous.   All significance tests were compared with the reference method at 105 The homogeneity of the biomass samples were examined by determining the moisture in at least five randomly chosen samples, where each sample was divided into two replicates. The drying method used was the reference method CEN TC335 at 105 The result indicates that most of the materials were homogeneous. In the case of pitchy wood, only one sample was responsible for the lack of homogeneity. In As can be seen the precision is acceptable for both the temperatures with a relative standard deviation of the order of 1% or less in most cases. The  The results from the comparison of oven drying in air at 130 and 105 The relative standard deviations are of the order of 1% or less in most cases at 130 The results in The results from the comparison of the xylene distillation and oven drying in air at 105 The The The results from the freeze-drying experiments summarized in No significant difference between oven drying of the analysis sample in nitrogen at 105 A significant difference in results between oven-drying methods at different temperatures was found for most biomass materials, even though the absolute bias was of the order of 1% or less. One explanation to this discrepancy may be a difference in adsorption energy of the water molecules within the material, resulting in the release of water at different temperatures. Another reason can be that VOC of different volatility are emitted during the drying process. The poor precision of the xylene distillation method compared to the oven-drying techniques can be explained by two reasons. First of all the sample sizes used in the distillation method are a factor 3–10 smaller, resulting in a decrease in representativity in the sampling. Secondly, the readability of 0.1 The large difference between the oven method and the xylene method in determining the moisture content for pitchy wood is due to the high content of VOC emitted during the oven-drying process, which has been confirmed elsewhere The freeze-drying method shows significantly lower values for the moisture content compared to the oven method for the biomass materials studied. In particular this is valid for pitchy wood, but for wood pellets and miscanthus a large deviation is also observed. As for the xylene method this deviation may be explained by the amounts of VOC in the materials, which are released at the elevated temperatures during the drying step in the oven method. Similar results have been reported earlier No or little differences of significance are obtained when comparing the reference method with oven drying in nitrogen or vacuum for the determination of moisture in the analysis sample. This indicates that the drying atmosphere is of minor importance during the determination. The small deviation for the vacuum method can be explained by the lack of ventilation through the vacuum drying cabinet during the analysis. The conclusions that can be drawn from this investigation are as follows: The results clearly indicate almost exclusively a significant difference between the reference method at 105 For the xylene distillation method significantly lower values were obtained for pitchy wood and miscanthus. A possible explanation for this is the emission of VOC in the oven method, resulting in an overestimation of the moisture content. For hard wood, olive stones and triticale a difference was established for reasons discussed earlier. The freeze-drying method determined significantly lower moisture content values compared to the reference method, in particular for pitchy wood and miscanthus. An explanation similar to that for the xylene method appears reasonable. The tested methods for the moisture content in the analysis sample showed no or little differences from the reference method. The authors would like to thank Magnus Rudolfsson and Cecilia Åstrand for technical support. This study was financially supported by the European Commission under the Fifth Framework Programme (Project ENK6-CT-2001-00556).