Tissue engineering aims at replacement, repair, and regeneration of tissues by a combination of scaffolds, growth factors, and cells. In this study, we report the synthesis of biodegradable composite scaffolds fortified with mesoporous zinc silicate (mZS) and assessment of in vitro properties for bone tissue engineering (BTE) applications. The scaffolds consisted of chitosan (CS) incorporated with mZS at 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.5 wt%. The bio-composite scaffolds were visualized using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FE-SEM). The incorporation of mZS was confirmed using Energy dispersive x-ray (EDS) analysis. Biomineralization studies were conducted in simulated body fluid (SBF) and indicated bioactivity of fabricated scaffolds. The scaffolds also displayed antibacterial action against Staphylococcus aureus. Cellular attachment within the scaffold network established biocompatibility of the material. Incorporation of mZS within the chitosan scaffolds matrix improved properties such as porosity, degradation rate, and biomineralization. Therefore, fabricated scaffolds exhibit exceptional features and have the potential to serve as an implant for BTE applications.Every year approximately four million surgical procedures involve bone grafts and/or substitutes making bone the second most commonly transplanted tissue in the world [ Bioactivity refers to the property of the material to form a direct bond with the surrounding living bone tissue. A biodegradable and bioactive scaffold serves as a preliminary 3D support onto which the cells adhere, grow, proliferate, and subsequently secrete extracellular matrix (ECM) proteins. The porous nature of scaffolds provides unique advantages such as the ability to accommodate cells, allows mass-transport between the implant and its surroundings, promotes cell migration, cellular attachment, vascularization, and supports bone growth from within the scaffold material [ Polymer-based scaffolds are promising candidates for the synthesis of biodegradable implants [ Based on the above-mentioned attractive properties of chitosan and zinc silicate biomaterial, the current study demonstrates the fabrication of mesoporous zinc silicate fortified chitosan scaffolds. The Sodium Hydroxide (NaOH), Glacial Acetic Acid, Zinc Acetate, and Cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) were purchased from Fisher Scientific Pvt. Ltd. Tetraethylorthosilicate (TEOS), Pluronic F-127, Chitosan (low molecular weight, 75%–80% deacetylated), and Lysozyme (lyophilized powder, ≥40,000 units/mg protein) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Luria Bertani (LB) broth and agar. Rose Bengal (RB) dye was procured from SRL. MTT [3-(4,5-dimethyl thiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide] powder was acquired from BioBasic Inc., India. Ultrapure Milli-Q water (18 MΩ.cm) was used for all the experiments. Mouse mesenchymal cell line (C3H10T1/2) and human kidney epithelial cell line (HEK293) were procured from the National Centre for Cell Science (NCCS), Pune, India. Reagents and media for cell and bacterial culture were acquired from HiMedia, India. The chemicals and reagents utilized during the experiments were of analytical grade. Zinc silicate (mZS) was synthesized using the previously reported protocol [ Bio-composite scaffolds were fabricated by employing a freeze-drying method [ Structure, morphology, and porosity of the synthesized scaffolds (mZS fortified chitosan scaffolds and chitosan only scaffolds) were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Zeiss EVO40) and field emission electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Tescan Model LYRA 3 XMU). Prior to analysis, the samples were placed on stubs with carbon tape and gold-coated The extent of porosity of both chitosan (CS) as well as (mZS/CS) scaffolds was analyzed by employing a reported method [ The swelling properties of synthesized scaffolds were studied in PBS [ To assess the The biomineralization ability of scaffolds was tested in simulated body fluid (SBF). The SBF solution mimics the ionic concentration and composition of the human plasma The biomineralized samples were also subjected to EDS analysis and visualized using SEM. The antibacterial activity of scaffold samples (CS and mZS/CS) was tested against The cells were seeded onto pre-sterilized scaffolds. Incubation was carried out at 37 °C under aseptic and humidified conditions (5% CO The cytotoxicity of synthesized scaffolds was assessed using mouse mesenchymal stem cells (C3H10T1/2). Indirect MTT assay was employed for the determination of cell viability [ The above-mentioned quantitative experiments were done in triplicates. Statistical significance was analyzed by applying the student's The physical and biological properties of the mZS composite powder have been established in our previous report [ The pores present in the scaffold structure were well-formed, interconnected, and heterogeneous in nature ( FE-SEM imaging ( The elemental composition as well as the pristine nature of fabricated scaffolds were assessed with the help of energy dispersive X-ray (EDS) spectroscopy. During the elemental analysis, the composite scaffold displayed additional peaks ( The FTIR spectra of the mZS material and synthesized scaffolds are shown in The XRD analysis ( The integration of polymeric scaffolds with mZS resulted in an increase in the percentage porosity ( Upon implantation, degradation of the chitosan scaffold Bioactivity of the scaffolds can be assessed by its ability to generate a mineral apatite layer Enhanced biomineralization in the case of composite scaffolds could be due to the presence of mZS inorganic material within the scaffold matrix which serves as nucleation points for precipitation and growth of apatite crystals [ In the case of implantation of scaffolds within a living system, post-surgical infections are a common occurrence [ Thus, the antibacterial action of chitosan (CS) and bio-composite (mZS/CS) scaffolds against The antibacterial action of mZS is due to the presence of zinc within the composite material. Zinc inhibits bacterial growth while promoting ROS mediated cell killing due to the release of Zn ions [ To assess the biocompatibility, cell seeding was done onto pre-sterilized mZS/CS (0.3 wt%) an. scaffolds, incubated at 37 °C and the media was replenished daily. After 8 days of culture, the scaffolds were processed for SEM imaging. The SEM images ( In the case of scaffolds as biomaterials to be used for implants, the material itself is immobilized, thus, most of the biological action exerted is largely indirect due to the action of dissolution products. Therefore, cell viability studies of scaffold samples were performed In the case of scaffolds as biomaterials to be used for implants, the material itself is immobilized, thus, most of the biological action exerted is largely indirect due to the action of dissolution products. Therefore, cell viability studies of scaffold samples were performed An ideal scaffold for BTE should satisfy various requirements such as sufficient porosity, biocompatibility, cellular attachment, delayed degradability, and efficient biomineralization. Polymeric scaffolds when incorporated with inorganic materials give rise to a unique composite material displaying properties of both the constituents. Zinc is well known for exhibiting antibacterial activity, osteogenic, and angiogenic potential. Silica-based materials are bioactive and promote bone formation and mineralization. Therefore, a composite material such as zinc silicate amalgamates the promising features of both zinc and silica towards bone repair and regeneration. In this study, synthesis and characterization of chitosan (CS) and bio-composite (mZS/CS) scaffolds was performed. The integration of mZS material enhanced the porosity, improved swelling, and biomineralization of the polymeric scaffold while controlling the degradation rate in lysozyme-PBS at physiological temperature. Addition of mZS also improved the antibacterial activity of scaffolds towards The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at    No conflicts of interest are declared by the authors. The authors would like to acknowledge