Oil agglomeration can be a promising technique to recover fines and ultra-fines coal particles from the discarded tailing generated from coal preparation plants. In the present study, an artificial neural network (ANN) and response surface methodology (RSM) was used to predict the behavior of coal oil agglomeration in terms of % ash rejection (% AR) and % combustible matter recovery (% CMR). A three layered Feed Forward Neural Network was developed by varying process variables such as solid concentration (SC), oil dosage (OD) and agglomeration time (AT). Waste soybean oil was used as bridging liquid. An approach of Multilayer Forward Back Propagation Neural Network has been used in conjugation with the hyperbolic tangent sigmoid (tansig) as transfer function. The network is well trained (learning) with Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) algorithm. For further improvement in the generalization of the developed ANN model Bayesian regularization technique has been adopted. Sensitivity analysis was performed using Garson’s algorithm, Pearson correlation coefficient and Connection weight approach. The % CMR values predicted from ANN have been in good agreement with the obtained experimental values (R2 0.9965) and shows better correlation between predicted and observed values than RSM (R2 0.9892). Also, for % AR the correlation (R2 0.9965) obtained using ANN found to be higher than RSM (R2 0.9956).The low reserves of good quality coal, modern mining methods and use of highly mechanized equipments has led to the mining of inferior quality coal, which has ultimately route to the generation of more fines and ultra-fine coal particles Oil agglomeration is a size enlargement, a surface phenomenon based process in which intense mixing of oil and slurry of fine coal is done. The oil selectively adheres to the carbonaceous surfaces and acts as a bridging liquid to gather other oil-coated coal particles and form into an agglomerate of larger size. The size of the agglomerates increases with time and the difference in surface hydrophobicity causes the oil to agglomerate preferentially the hydrophobic combustible coal material, thus enabling separation of the organic carbon portion from the hydrophilic inorganic mineral matter There are several parameters which affect the oil agglomeration process such as coal rank, solid concentration, oil dosage, agglomeration time, pH, particle size, agitation speed, conditioning time, angle of contact, wetting characteristics, interfacial surface tension, ionic-strength, pretreatment methods (bacterial/microwave/ultrasonic), presence of salts, oil type, amount of washing water, temperature, recovery sieves etc. It can be difficult and time taking to analyze any process by using conventional univariate (one-factor-at-a-time) approach. Also, the study of main and interactional effect of variables is difficult and incomplete using univariate approach. Thus, to overcome this problem various researchers have used multivariate approach using design of experiments Since oil agglomeration, process has suffered a knockout in its commercialization due to the high oil costs; there is an imperative need to investigate such oils, which could bring down the process cost to the minimal. Waste oils can provide a solution to such problems and can prove a boon for this process. The growth in the food industry and production of waste vegetable oils are going hand in hand. Soybean oil being cheap and easily available in India, favors its utilization among the lower and the middle classes of family and thus, even its disposability after use has become a challenge that needs to be taken-up. Therefore, the utilization of these waste oils for recovering fines from the beneficiating plants and their quality up-gradation can be fruitful from both economic and environmental point of view. In this study, an attempt is made to use oil agglomeration process for the beneficiation of coal fines, grounded to below 75 µm for their better improved liberation using waste soybean oil. In context of this, in the present study ANN with a feed forward back propagation neural network has been used to envisage the responses, % ash rejection (% AR) and % combustible matter recovery (% CMR), depending upon the input variables such as solid concentration (SC), oil dosage (OD), and agglomeration time (AT). The different approaches (ANN and RSM) to infer the significance of input to output parameters are also preconceived comprehensively. Models have been proposed for % AR and % CMR, based on input and output weights/variables of the designed ANN model. The coal sample was collected from Jamadoba Coal Preparation plant (JCPP), Jharkhand, India. A fine coal sample of approximate 50 kg was collected from the cyclone underflow and feed to froth flotation. The particle size-by-size weight and ash distribution (air dried basis) of feed sample is given in Several trial runs were conducted at different levels for each process variable. From the preliminary test runs, it was found that the increasing solid concentration beyond 10% solid concentration, the response of oil agglomeration were not satisfactory or encouraging. Similarly, levels for each process variable used in the present were set to obtain maximize ash rejection and combustible matter recovery. Thus, the levels were selected at equidistant for each variable. Experiments were performed in a rectangular cell equipped with detachable baffles placed above approx. 10 mm from the bottom. An agitair flotation cell (Galigher, Model LA-500) was used for the experiments without air addition. Aqueous slurries of coal fines of −75 µm, of solid concentration (SC) 3%, 6%, 9% (%w/w of coal-water mixture) were prepared respectively. For each oil agglomeration test, 1000 ml of freshly prepared slurry using tap water was poured into an agglomerating vessel of 1.5 L capacity. The bridging oil (5, 10 and 15%, %w/w of coal) was used in the experiments to analyze the effect of the waste soybean oil at different oil dosage, solid concentration and agglomeration time (5, 10, 15, 20 min). The experiments were performed at ambient pH of the mixture. The experiments were carried out at an impeller speed of 800 RPM and conditioning time of 3 min, and were kept constant throughout the experiments for better wettability of coal particles. For conditioning, pre-determined oil dosages were added and mixing was done with varying agglomeration time of 5, 10, 15 and 20 min respectively. The agglomerates formed were washed, and recovered by wet screening over a series of sieves (0.150 mm > 0.105 mm > 0.075 mm) to recover agglomerates from suspension of water and mineral matters. Agglomerates were further washed using equal amount of water for each test run to remove mineral matter adhering to the surface of agglomerates and then with ethanol/acetone (20 ml/g of feed) to ensure removal of oil and dried at 60–65 °C until constant weight was attained. The dried agglomerates were weighed, and stored in airtight plastic bags for further analysis. The efficiency of this process was based on % ash rejection (% AR) and % combustible matter recovery (% CMR) which were calculated by: An artificial neural network (ANN) is a computational model inspired in the base of natural neurons in Biological Neural Networks (BNN). As in the brain, neurons receive signals via synapses present on the dendrites of the neuron. When the signals received from the dendrites, the neuron is activated and emits a signal through the axon and hence the movements of signal through these neurons give the final output and this is how a BNN works. Similarly, ANN consist of input, multiplied by different weights, and then computed by a mathematical function or Activation function which determines the activation of the neuron and these different artificial neurons combine in order to process information and gives the final output. The major role of the artificial neural networks is to convert the random, meaningless data inputs to get significant outputs In every neural network, weight values are associated with each vector and node and these values constrain to input neurons are related to output data. Weight values are determined by the iterative flow of training data through the network these weights may be either positive or negative; the computation of the each neuron will be different. By adjusting the weights of an artificial neuron, we can obtain a significant output for prediction. But when we have a large number of neurons, it would be quite complicated to adjust weights manually, so we use the different type of algorithms which can adjust the weights in order to obtain the desired output from the created network and this process of adjusting the weights is called learning or training. In another way, a large number of very simple processing neuron (nodes) as ‘artificial neurons’ known as artificial neural network in which nodes can be seen as computational units which receive inputs, and process them to obtain an output, connected with a large number of weights between the neurons or nodes. These connections determine the information flow between nodes distributed as the representation of knowledge (outputs) over these connections and finally the output is acquired by network through a learning process. The most commonly used activation functions are the sigmoid, logistic sigmoid and hyperbolic tangent sigmoid functions. The typical architecture of a three-layer ANN contains input layer, a hidden layer, and output layer. There are several types of neural network techniques available, amongst all multilayer perception (MLP) a feed forward back propagation neural network is usually used ANN application. In learning with a back-propagation algorithm, the connection weights are selected randomly. On the basis of the initial weight values algorithm tries to minimize the square root of the Mean Square Error (MSE) and determination of coefficient (R The response surface methodology is a statistical and modeling tool used to analyze the behavior of different process variables on the responses. The steps involved in RSM are (a) designing of experimental sets using different levels of variables for adequate and reliable measurement of response, (b) development of model, which is fitted by polynomial equations, with the best fitting response, (c) finding optimum condition for the maximization or minimization of response, (d) evaluating main and interactional effect of variables using 2D or 3D plots In the present study, Box Behnken design was used to study the effect of different variables on the oil agglomeration. The process variables such as solid concentration, oil dosage and agglomeration time were varied to different levels for the determination of their individual and interactional effect on the responses (% ash rejection and% combustible matter recovery). The design of experiments was based on three variables and three levels as mentioned in In the present work a 3-layer feed forward neural network (3-3-1) was designed by changing the three different operational process variables of oil agglomeration, viz., solid concentration, oil dosage and agglomeration time, and the results were evaluated on the basis of % ash rejection (% AR) and % combustible matter recovery (% CMR). The Multilayer Perception (MLP), has one input layer associated with three nodes, one hidden layer associated with three hidden nodes, and one output layer with one output node value. All these neurons/nodes were coupled with different weights and bias. In the present study, ANN model has been designed by carrying a total number of 36 runs as mentioned in All the input variable and output variable were normalized in the range of (−1,1) before starting the training of data. A multilayer feed forward, back propagation neural network was used with hyperbolic tangent sigmoid (tansig) as a transfer function at learning rate of 0.1, momentum rate of 0.5 and 21 epochs. The ANN architecture was trained using stopping criterion as 1000 iterations. Different algorithms such as Levenberg-Marquardt (LM), Bayesian Regularization (BR), Gradient Descent with Momentum (GDM), and Gradient Descent (GD) were used but among all of these LM algorithms shows a very good relationship and shown to be more reliable in obtaining appropriate solutions In addition to this, to enhance the generalization of the designed ANN model technique of BR approach has been utilized. BR helps in minimization of combination of squared error terms and weights, and then it will allocate the accurate and proper combinations to give better output. The BR approach has been executed using MATLAB. For comparison of the ANN models, an unbiased estimate coefficient of efficiency has been adopted The major concern is to select proper input variables to predict the output and validate through sensitivity analysis. There are different approaches used for selection of essential input variables viz. the Pearson correlation coefficient, Garson’s Algorithm (GA) and Connection Weights Approach (CWA). The Pearson correlation coefficient mitigates for determination of proper input variable in the developed ANN model  The generation of model equation using ANN application is a difficult task. In the present study, there are three parameters (SC, OD and AT) for which a model equation can be established with the weights as the model parameters The correlation between responses and input variables using weights and biases can be written as: Equations for AR The Equations for CMR The The three levels and three variables Box Behnken design have been used to analyze the effect of main and interactional effects of process variables on the responses of oil agglomeration process (as mentioned in After removing insignificant terms from the above equations it can be written as: The statistical significance of model was evaluated by F-value and p-value using analysis of variance (ANOVA). The high model F-value for % AR (128.77) and% CMR (51.02) indicates the statistical significance of the given model. The low p-value of model (p-value < 0.0001 for % AR and % CMR) indicates the significance of the model given for responses as mentioned in From ANOVA The combustible matter recovery and ash rejection obtained from the experiments were plotted against solid concentration, oil dosage and agglomeration in As indicated in As seen from From The predictive capability of both ANN and RSM models were compared. Different statistical analysis, in terms of various statistical parameters such as Nash Coefficient, RMSE, MAPE has been calculated. The results of the statistical analysis and comparison between RSM and ANN models are listed in Oil agglomeration is successfully employed for the recovery of coal fines below 75 µm using waste soybean oil for Indian coal. A three layer (3:3:1) feed forward, back propagation ANN model using tangent sigmoid hyperbolic transfer function has been used to predict the behavior of coal oil agglomeration for the responses CMR and AR. The sensitivity analysis of process variables such as solid concentration, oil dosage, and agglomeration time has been performed using the Cross relation approach, Garson’s Algorithm and Connection to Weight approach. Solid concentration is found to be most effective for % AR and oil dosage found to be most effective for % CMR. The high R Authors are grateful to the Department of Fuel and Mineral Engineering, IIT-ISM Dhanbad for providing necessary facility for conducting experiments and other help. Authors are also grateful to the Reviewers for their valuable suggestions to improve the quality of the manuscript.