In the present the study, the hydrothermal removal of gangue components (Si, Al, and P) from iron ore as a means of producing high-grade iron ore from low-grade iron ore (limonite) is investigated. Ores of different types and countries of origin are treated with several kinds of solvents, and the effects of temperature and type of solvent on the extent of gangue removal are rationalized in terms of the chemical and physical compositions of the iron ores used. Relatively good correlation is observed between the Al and P contents of the iron ore specimens used in this study, while the gangue content correlates with the iron content. When the iron ores are treated with distilled water at 16.5 MPa and temperatures up to 350 °C, the removal rate is low, irrespective of the type of iron ore. Furthermore, gangue removal by hydrothermal treatment with 1 M NaOH is higher than those when 1 M NaHCO3 and 1 M Na2CO3 solutions are used. The effects of NaOH concentration and temperature on gangue removal by hydrothermal treatment are investigated using 5 M NaOH, and removal rates of 10–91% for Si, 39–70-% for Al, and 38–76% for P are achieved by treatment at 300 °C for most of the specimens. In addition, there is good correlation between the removal rates of Al and P by hydrothermal treatment with 5 M NaOH. Although the development of pores by calcination of iron ore positively affects gangue removal at room temperature by NaOH leaching, no such effect is observed for hydrothermal treatment with NaOH up to 350 °C. The specific surface areas and pore volumes of the in iron ore specimens decrease after hydrothermal treatment with NaOH. In addition, the α-FeOOH observed in the iron ores before hydrothermal treatment with NaOH is transformed to Fe2O3 in the treated samples. These results demonstrate that this method is effective for converting low-grade iron ores into high-grade iron ores with low porosity, low gangue content, and high Fe content (Fe2O3).Japan relies on imports, primarily from Australia and Brazil, to meet >90% of the iron ore requirements of its iron and steel-making industry. However, the contents of gangue components (Si, Al, and P) in iron ore are increasing, and the iron ores procured are increasingly of low-grade, i.e., of low Fe content. In addition, it has become increasingly difficult in recent years to obtain high-grade iron ore, which has low gangue and high Fe contents, due to increased demand from the steelmaking industries in emerging countries. Hence, the Japanese iron and streel industry will have to actively use low-grade iron ore such as limonite, which has high contents of goethite (α-FeOOH), combined water, and gangue. Ironmaking in Japan is primarily conducted using blast furnaces, and low-grade iron ore such as limonite is not suitable for use in blast furnaces due to its high H As is well known, although the Si and Al species in iron ore are removed as slag during pig iron production by the blast furnace route, the P in iron ore is transferred into the iron product resulting in cold brittleness of the cast iron produced. Therefore, the sustainable development of the iron and steel industry, not only in Japan but also worldwide, necessitates measures to improve its environmental impact and cost competitiveness by addressing the three primary problems of resource procurement, high energy consumption, and CO In general, although mineral dressing methods have been used for the removal of gangue species from iron ore, these methods entail problems of low gangue removal and high Fe loss ( In the present study, we examined the removal of gangue components from iron ores of several types and different countries of origin by hydrothermal treatment using several kinds of solvents in order to develop a method of ore upgradation, i.e., producing high-grade iron ore form low-grade iron ore (limonite). The effects of temperature, type of solvent, and the physical properties of the iron ore on the extent of gangue removal were investigated in term of the chemical and physical compositions of the ore specimens. Seven types of iron ores (INL, ALY, ALR, MLL, ILS, WAL, and BRH) produced in Brazil, Indonesia, Malaysia, and Australia were used in this study. The fraction size was <150 μm. The total Fe and gangue (Si, Al, P) contents, pore properties, and Fe forms of the ores are given in Fig. S1 in Supplementary material shows the changes in specific surface area and pore volume for the calcined ALY. The surface area of ALY increases as the temperature increases above 300 °C, reaches its highest value (100m In the present study, the effect of pore properties on gangue removal by hydrothermal treatment was investigated at calcination temperatures of 350, 600, and 900 °C, i.e., the temperatures corresponding to the largest surface area, largest pore volume, and highest degree of reduction in porosity, respectively. The experimental flow is summarized in Fig. S2 in Supplementary material. Hydrothermal treatment was carried out in a batch reactor custom-made from a SUS316 tube. Approximately 2.5 g of sample and 7 mL of solvent were introduced to the reactor (length of 100 mm, outer diameter of 24 mm, and wall thickness of 2 mm), which was connected to a pass consisting of a pressure gauge and a stop valve. The pulp density was maintained at approximately 0.357 g/cm In the present work, distilled water, 1 M NaHCO The pore structures of the samples were measured using N  The relationships between the Fe, Si, Al, and P contents of iron ores, as shown in According to previous reports, there exists a correlation between the Si content and the sum of the Al and P contents, i.e., the Al + P content of iron ore. Specifically, the Al + P content decreases with increasing Si content until the latter reaches 1.0 wt%, and becomes constant at higher Si contents ( In the present study, the Al + P content can be regarded as equal to the Al content, because the P contents of all the iron ore specimens in this study are very low (0.006–0.083 wt%), compared to the Al contents (0.5–3.0 wt%). Therefore, the P in the iron ores used in this study most likely exists in a form associated with goethite because the plot of Si vs Al or P in Fig. S3a shows that the Si content is higher than 1.0 wt%. The Fe content of the iron ores used tends to decrease with increasing extent of LOI, whereas the P content linearly decreases increasing extent of LOI (except in the case of INL), as shown in As is well known, low-grade iron ore has a large LOI due to its high α-FeOOH content. Although the relationships between specific surface area or pore volume and the Fe, Si, Al, or P contents of iron ores are investigated in this study, as shown in Fig. S4, no correlation is observed between the pore properties and the Si, Al, or P contents, whereas the Fe content tends to decrease with increasing specific surface area and pore volume, as shown in Fig. S4. From these results, it was concluded that the Si and Al contents mainly depend on the type of iron ore, and that P likely exists in forms associated with Al and goethite in the iron ore specimens used in this study. Tables S1 and S2 and Fig. S5 in Supplementary material show the yields, extents of gangue removal, pore properties, and Fe forms in the ALY and ALY350 specimens subjected to hydrothermal treatments with distilled water at different temperatures. The ALY350 sample was used to investigate the effect of dehydration. As shown in Fig. S1, dehydration of ALY occurs at 300-350 °C, and an increase in specific surface area is observed ( Fig. S6 in Supplementary material shows the results of hydrothermal treatment with distilled water at 350 °C for the iron ores used in this study. When the ores are subjected to hydrothermal treatment with H Hydrothermal treatment of ALY using three kinds of alkaline solvents (1 M Na When 1 M NaOH was is for the removal of gangue from iron ores by hydrothermal treatment, the removal extents are <50%. Therefore, the temperature dependency of gangue removal was first investigated by reference to the hydrothermal treatment of ALY and ALY350 with 5 M NaOH. The ALY350 sample was used to investigate the effect of dehydration on gangue removal, and the results are shown in  These results suggest that NaOH contributes to the decrease in porosity and change of the Fe form during hydrothermal treatment. The effects are significantly pronounced in the case of the dehydrated iron ore. Moreover, it is assumed that the decrease in yield primarily occurs due to dehydration of α-FeOOH and removal of gangue in the case of ALY and ALY350 because Fe effluence is not significantly observed for hydrothermal treatment using 5 M NaOH. As is well known, porous Fe To investigate in detail the effects of the pore properties, i.e., the specific surface area and pore volume, of the iron ore on gangue removal, the original ALY and calcined ALY (ALY350, ALY600, and ALY900) samples with different pore properties were subjected to hydrothermal treatment with 5 M NaOH at 300 °C.   Fig. S7 in Supplementary material shows XRD patterns of the treated iron ores, and Thermo-equilibrium calculations were performed according to the methodology of previous studies, that have established that Si, Al, and P in iron ore exist as quartz (SiO It is well accepted that P in limonite exists in the following forms: adsorbed on limonite, having replaced a fraction of the Fe oxide, and as apatite species ( According to the results of the thermo-equilibrium calculations, Eqs.(18) and (19) are thermodynamically favorable at temperatures ranging from room temperature to 350 °C, and the NaFeO Based on these results, we determined that hydrothermal treatment is an effective method for upgrading low-grade iron ore because of the possibility of transformation of the goethite in the iron ore into hematite with low porosity, thereby lowering gangue content. Thus, this method can produce high-grade iron ore from low-grade iron ore. Future work will focus on clarifying the details of the mechanism and further increasing the extent of gangue removal. In addition, although Na contents in iron ores used in this study ranged from 0.025–0.075 wt%-dry, the contents increased 0.04–0.38 wt%-dry (1.5–5.0 times) comparing with those in original samples after the each treatment. Therefore, Na removal from treated iron ores also will be important subject in future work because Na is harmful to sintering and ironmaking. In the present study, the removal hydrothermal of gangue (Si, Al, and P) from iron ores of several types and different countries of origin with several kinds of solvents was investigated in order to develop a method for producing high-grade iron from low-grade iron ore (limonite). The effects of temperature and type of solvent on gangue removal extent were investigated from the viewpoint of the chemical and physical compositions of the iron ore specimens. The key finding are as follows. Hydrothermal treatment with NaOH solution leads to higher gangue removal than that achieved by treatment with NaHCO NaOH concentration and temperature influence gangue removal, and removal extents of >30% for Si and > 40% for Al and P are achieved by treatment at 300 °C for most of the iron ores. The specific surface area and pore volume of the iron ores decreases following hydrothermal treatment with NaOH. The α-FeOOH observed in the iron ores before hydrothermal treatment with NaOH is transformed to Fe  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at