In order to investigate the behavior of nitrogen active species during the pulsed d.c. plasma nitriding process, emission spectra measurements by using optical emission spectroscopy (OES) were performed for various treatment temperatures, duty factors and different gas pressures in the reactor. Results of the OES were compared to those of the metallurgical analysis of plasma nitrided sintered steel and high speed steel substrates. The spectral intensities of N2
                     + and N2 were influenced by process parameters (gas pressure, treatment temperature and duty factor). The thickness of the nitride layer and the size of micro-pore increased with increasing treatment temperature. Especially, the thickness of the compound layer was mainly influenced by the gas pressure in the reactor.Plasma nitriding treatment of steels is one of the most effective methods for increasing corrosion and wear resistance In recent years, several studies have been carried out to understand the role of the plasma during plasma diffusion treatment (PDT) In plasma nitriding, clear interpretation of the characteristics and kinds of active species, which affect the formation of the nitride layer, is not found yet. However, Rie et al. The purpose of the present work was to investigate the formation behaviors by emission spectroscopy under various process conditions (composition of gas mixture, gas pressure, duty factor and treatment temperature) of plasma nitriding. In addition, the interrelation between the results of OES diagnostics and the behaviors of nitride layer formation has been considered. JIS G4403 SKH-9 (AISI M2) high-speed steel (0.8–0.9 wt.% C, <0.4 wt.% Si, <0.4 wt.% Mn, <0.03 wt.% S, 3.8–4.5 wt.% Cr, 4.8–5.5 wt.% Mo, 5.6–6.7 wt.% W, 1.6–2.2 wt.% V) and sintered steel (0.3 wt.% C, 4.0 wt.% Ni, 1.5 wt.% Cu, 0.5 wt.% Mo) plates of 2-mm thickness were cut into many small pieces with a square configuration (20 mm×20 mm). The substrate surface was ground and polished using a 1-μm diamond paste and then cleaned with acetone in an ultrasonic cleaner. The pulsed plasma nitriding unit was made into a laboratory size (300 mm diameter×400 mm height) with a unipolar power supply (maximum on/off frequency: 33 kHz). The chamber has an auxiliary heater composed of molybdenum rods. The nitriding of sintered steel was carried out in a nitrogen–hydrogen plasma (N The emission spectra with the process conditions were analyzed by a SPEX 750M spectrometer (OES; 1200 grooves/mm grating, focal length 750 mm). This equipment consists of a monochromator with one detector head, a photomultiplier tube (PMT). The emission spectra of the discharges were recorded with a PMT tube in the range from 350 to 800 nm with an integration time of 0.1 s and a resolution which is better than 0.015 nm. A schematic diagram of the plasma nitriding unit and OES system is shown in The layer properties with process conditions were evaluated after the plasma nitriding. The cross-sectional microstructures were observed using optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) after etching in ‘Nital’(HNO The emission spectra obtained during nitriding in 80% N The spectral intensity of excited N From the data in The cross-sectional microstructures with gas pressure (0.6, 2 and 6 torr) are shown in To confirm the microstructural results, we analyzed the change of surface topography with gas pressure by AFM (  A lot of emission spectroscopy investigation (OES diagnostics) has been performed, particularly the pulse duration and/or pulse repetition time The formation behaviors of nitrogen active species during the plasma nitriding by means of optical emission spectroscopy were examined. In addition, the interrelationship between the results of OES diagnostics and the microstructures of the nitrided specimens were investigated. The main results obtained in the present study are as follows. The thickness of the compound layer and diffusion zone increased with increasing gas pressure. However, in case of a lower gas pressure (<0.6 torr), the compound layer was not formed. The spectral intensity ratio of excited N