Characteristics of the dense phase high density fluidized bed for mineral separation were briefly introduced. The main parameters effecting on uniformity and stability of bed density were also discussed. Effect of parameters of distributor on fluidizing and separating performances, including pressure drop and ratio of aperture, were studied in detail. A pressure drop number C
                     P discriminance was proposed for distinguishing the quality and separation performance of a fluidized bed. Experimental results show that the higher the pressure drop of gas distributor is, the better the fluidizing performance of fluidized bed is. A fluidized bed with uniform and stable density for mineral separation can be formed when the pressure drop of gas distributor is higher than its critical value. The smaller the aperture of gas distributor is, the better the uniformity and stability of density is, under same ratio of aperture of distributor. The larger the ratio of aperture of gas distributor is, the better the uniformity and stability of density is, under same aperture of distributor.Coal beneficiation is a cost saving and efficient method for coal resource utilization and reducing SO The schematic diagram of experimental system is shown in The fluctuation of bed pressure drop, uniformity of bed densities and stability of bed surface are commonly used to evaluate fluidizing quality. Factors which induce instability of a fluidized bed can be classified as two sorts. One is the original instability, which is induced by properties of fluidizing medium and medium solids, such as air and magnetite powder, etc. The fluidizing medium and medium solids are chosen according to technical and economic requirements of process. Another is the subsequent instability, which is induced by vessel structure, including that of gas distributor, height diameter ratio, etc. The fluidizing quality is mainly determined under same technologic and operating conditions. The parameters of gas distributor include pressure drop, size of aperture, distributing of aperture and ratio of aperture. Qualitatively, the larger the pressure drop of gas distributor and the ratio of aperture are, the better the fluidizing and separating performance of fluidized bed are. Even then, the parameters of distributor should still be optimized correspondingly because of emerging of some problems, among them the larger the pressure drop of distributor is, the higher the wasting power is. The pressure drop is the most significant parameter of gas distributor. It determines directly in some degree the fluidizing quality of fluidized bed. Based on process technical requirements, such as a specific bed density, bed height, etc., three sorts of distributors with various pressure drops were tested to examine fluidizing performances. Experimental conditions were as follows: fixed bed height of 300 mm and air pressure of 0.025 MPa. The corresponding fluidization characteristic curves are shown in For a gas–solid fluidized bed, the pressure fluctuating with time in a same point was used to evaluate the stability of bed density. The pressure difference between two arbitrary points was used to evaluate the uniformity of bed density. The testing results of stability and uniformity of bed density using various pressure drop distributors are shown in The pressure drop of distributor should be optimized although the high pressure drop distributor is of a good performance for forming high quality fluidized bed. We must consider the feasibility and economic index because the higher pressure drop distributor will consume more power. Therefore, a set of experiments was carried through to examine fluidizing quality of fluidized bed in the conditions of different ratios of distributor pressure drop to total pressure drop (that is the sum of distributor pressure drop and fluidized bed pressure drop). The fluidized bed pressure drops change along with the change of bed height if using a same distributor. That is the pressure drop ratio of distributors to total also change. So, in those experiments, only a single gas distributor of 6000 Pa was used. The fluidization characteristic curves with different bed heights are shown in The size of fluidized bed must be big enough in order to meet separating requirement of separated material. In other words, the height of fluidized bed exists a minimum. According to the study results above, the pressure drop of distributor must be higher than the critical value in order to form a fluidized bed with uniform and stable density. So, the pressure drop of gas distributor Δ Let  When 0< When For the fluidized bed with height of 300mm in The ratio and distribution of aperture are another key parameters of gas distributor, which effect on the expansion ratio of bed and the size of bubbles in bed markedly. A set of distributors, which were made in armor plate with 2 mm apertures, were prepared for testing. The bordering three apertures were disposed in equilateral triangle, which made apertures distributed uniformly. The ratio of aperture of distributor The fluidization characteristic curves of fluidized beds using three distributors, which are of same ratio aperture but different aperture ( The fluidization characteristic curves of fluidized beds using three distributors, which are of same aperture but different ratio of aperture (  The parameters of distributor belong to the subsequent unstable factors of a fluidized bed, in which the pressure drop and ratio of aperture are key parameters. The higher the pressure drop is, the better the fluidizing quality is. Under a same ratio of aperture, the smaller the aperture is, the better the uniformity and stability of bed density are. Under a same aperture, the larger the ratio of aperture is, the better the uniformity and stability of bed density are. A pressure drop number CP discriminance was proposed for distinguishing the quality and separation performance of a fluidized bed. It can be expressed as The financial support provided by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Projects Grant Nos. 59974030 and 90210035) for this work is gratefully acknowledged.