Composite solid electrolytes are attractive as they combine the high ionic conductivity of ceramic nanoparticles and the excellent mechanical properties of polymer electrolytes. Vertically aligned ceramic nanoparticles in the polymer matrix represent an ideal structure for maximizing ionic conductivity of composite electrolytes. The ice-templating method was used to build rechargeable solid-state lithium metal batteries with a vertically aligned ceramic/polymer composite electrolyte composed of high ionic conductivity Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) and polyethylene oxide (PEO) polymer. The vertical LAGP walls provide continuous channels for fast ionic transport, while the PEO matrix renders the composite electrolyte flexible. This solid-state composite electrolyte has a conductivity of 1.67 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature and 1.11 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 60 °C. LiFePO4 (LFP)/vertically aligned LAGP- PEO/Li full cells were also developed with a high capacity retention of 93.3% after 300 cycles. This study demonstrates the successful application of vertically aligned ceramic/polymer composite electrolytes for solid-state batteries with high performance.Lithium-based rechargeable batteries with high energy density play an important role in many applications including electric vehicles, grid-level energy storage, and communications [ Increased interest in solid electrolytes has led to development of ceramic electrolytes such as sulfides [ Various strategies have been studied to fabricate polymer/ceramic composite electrolytes to leverage the advantages of these two types of solid electrolytes, including the electrospun ceramic electrolyte nanowires/polymer composition and the addition of ceramic electrolyte nanoparticles into a polymer matrix [ Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG, Mw 400), Poly(ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether (PEGDME, Mw 500), Poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO, Mw 600,000), acetonitrile (anhydrous, 99.8%), Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA, Mw, 85,000–124,000), 1-Octanol, Lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI), 2,4,7,9-tetramethyl-5-decyne-4,7-diol ethoxylate were received from Sigma-Aldrich. LAGP (200–500 nm) were purchased from MTI corporation. LiFePO The starting suspension of ice templated PEO/LAGP electrolyte was composed of 3.5 wt % PVA as binder, 60 wt % H For the random PEO/LAGP electrolyte, 0.16 g PEO (Mw, 600,000) and 0.16 g PEGDME-500 were dissolved in acetonitrile and stirred at 50 °C for 6 h. 0.13 g LiTFSI and 0.68 g LAGP were then added into the PEO/PEG acetonitrile solution and stirred for another 4 h. The prepared suspension was casted into a Teflon mold, and dried in a desiccator for 12 h. The process of removing acetonitrile and water was the same as above. SEM images were acquired by a Zeiss SIGMA VP scanning electron microscope, with EHT at 3 kV during the measurement. The TGA measurement was carried out by a TA Instrument Q500. All samples were tested under O Symmetric stainless steel/electrolyte/stainless steel cells were assembled for EIS measurements in the pouch cell configuration. Cyclic voltammetry measurements were performed in lithium/SPE/stainless steel cells in the coin cell configuration. The lithium metal anode used in half-cell cycling was 250 μm in thickness and the LiFePO The EIS and cyclic voltammetry were measured by a Bio-logic VMP3 potentiostat at voltage amplitude of 10 mV and a frequency range of 1 M Hz – 0.1 Hz. The cyclic voltammetry was measured between −0.2 V and 4.5 V vs. Li/Li  The samples at different stages were first characterized by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to verify the vertically alignment of the structure. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of stainless steel/ice-templated LAGP/PEO composite electrolyte film/stainless steel cells was measured at different temperatures to determine that the vertically aligned structure could facilitate the transport of Li The temperature-dependent EIS measurements shows that the ionic conductivity of ice templated LAGP/PEO reaches 1.11 × 10 The conductivity of ice-templated LAGP film soaked in a dilute organic liquid electrolyte (2.47 × 10 Continuous pathway in vertically aligned LAGP nanoparticles lead to higher ionic conductivity compared to other configurations, such as random LAGP/PEO (conductivity = 2.7 × 10 The conductivity of the ice-templated LAGP/PEO is similar with the previous work on vertically aligned anodized aluminum oxide (AAO)/polymer composite electrolyte, which has an ionic conductivity of 1.79 × 10 In addition to the relatively high ionic conductivity, ice-templated LAGP/PEO composite solid electrolyte also has a Li-ion transference number (t The electrochemical stability of the LAGP/PEO composite electrolyte was further characterized by cyclic voltammetry at 60 °C. Lithium metal foil and stainless steel were used as the counter electrode and the working electrode, respectively. As shown in The membrane also shows reasonable flexibility, determined through measurements of ionic conductivity after bending to a specific diameter a certain number times ( To demonstrate real applications in batteries, the electrochemical performance of the ice-templated LAGP/PEO electrolyte was first tested in the lithium/lithium cell at 60 °C. As shown in The LAGP/PEO composite electrolyte is further combined with lithium metal anode and LiFePO In summary, this paper presents the study of rechargeable solid-state batteries with vertically aligned ceramic/polymer composite electrolyte, composed of ice-templated LAGP vertically aligned walls and flexible PEO/PEG polymer. The aligned ceramic phase in the composite electrolyte allows fast conduction of lithium ions. The conductivity reaches 1.67 × 10 Y. Yang acknowledges the funding support from The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at