In the flotation of platinum group minerals (PGMs) occurring in the Platreef ore body, it is often assumed that the interactions between thiol collectors and tellurides of Pt and Pd are similar to those occurring with the equivalent sulphides. In order to gain a greater insight into this assumption a rest(mixed) potential study was conducted to investigate the interactions occurring between two thiol collectors, viz. sodium ethyl xanthate (SEX) and sodium diethyl dithiophosphate (SEDTP), and selected PGMs, viz. moncheite (PtTe2), merenskyite (PdTe2), cooperite (PtS) and vysotskite (PdS) as well as pure platinum and palladium. The results have shown that all these minerals reacted with the collectors in question but that the rest potential of the Pt minerals are more anodic than those of the Pd minerals. Moreover when SEX was used, dixanthogen is more likely to form on PtS than PtTe2 but the reverse is the case for PdTe2 and PdS. In the case of SEDTP it was found that the dithiolate (SEDTP2) did not form on any of the mineral surfaces. The results were compared to those already reported in a previous investigation of the same systems using cyclic voltammetry. The information obtained in these two investigations complement each other and may provide a more fundamental understanding of the role of these collectors in recovering the respective minerals.In the flotation of platinum group mineral ores in the Bushveld Complex it has generally been assumed that all the minerals will respond as is typically expected of base metal sulphides ( In flotation of the Platreef ore it has been found that PGMs reporting to flotation tailings are mostly tellurides, and therefore it is important to gain a greater understanding of the interactions of these minerals with the flotation reagents used ( A cyclic voltammetry study has been conducted on telluride and sulphide PGMs (PtTe Whilst cyclic voltammetry has been used to determine a variety of species that form on mineral surfaces it is the rest potential of the mineral surface which is indicative of the species of oxidised collector formed under given conditions. Since the oxidation of the collector species is driven by the electrochemical potential across the mineral solution boundary it has been found that measurement of the rest potential provides meaningful information in predicting collector species present at the mineral surfaces during flotation ( Thiol collectors have been used for sulphide mineral flotation mainly because of their selectivity towards sulphide minerals. These collectors are very commonly used in the flotation of base metal sulphides. The most extensively used of the thiol collectors are xanthates and dithiophosphates, the molecular structures of which are given below. The R in the molecular formulae denotes an alkyl hydrocarbon chain. Traditionally it has been common practice to use these same collectors in the flotation of PGM ores in general irrespective of the specific mineralogy in the ore deposit being exploited. When the PGMs are associated with sulphide minerals as is the case of the Merensky reef, this is an appropriate approach. In the context of the present study, the adsorption mechanism of these collectors onto sulphide minerals has been extensively studied and is considered to be an electrochemical reaction ( Another reaction proposed to take place is the chemical reaction between the thiolate anion and the cationic metal species resulting in the formation of a metal-thiolate compound. Lastly the formation of a dithiolate was proposed, (Reaction The reduction reaction that is coupled with these oxidation reactions has been accepted to be the reduction of oxygen according to Reaction The issue of the role of dissolved oxygen on the adsorption of collectors has been tackled by various researchers. It is generally concluded that dissolved oxygen is required for the oxidative adsorption of collector onto the mineral surface. Dithiolates can be formed at the mineral surface but can also be formed away from the mineral surface by the coupled reduction of metal ions such as Cu It is believed that dithiolates are the species responsible for the flotation of many sulphide minerals ( As referred to above, in the flotation of PGMs the current practice is generally to assume that all PGM bearing minerals will respond to thiol collectors in a manner similar to that observed in the case of sulphides. Given, however, the quite different crystal structures of minerals such as Pt or Pd telluride compared to their sulphide equivalents it is not necessarily correct to assume that this will be the case. Hence it is of significant importance to ascertain whether the surface reactions taking place between various thiol collectors and sulphides and tellurides of Pt and Pd will be similar or different. Previous work using cyclic voltammetry has shown differences in the reactions between sulphides and tellurides with thiols and in this study rest potential measurements, which are a more sensitive and relevant technique towards flotation, are made to determine whether the same information can be obtained. These measurements may eventually lead to a more fundamental approach to the choice of appropriate collectors in the flotation of such minerals. In the present paper results will be presented of the rest potentials measured for the selected PGMs as a consequence of reactions occurring between these minerals and sodium ethyl xanthate and sodium diethyl-dithiophosphate in order to investigate the reactions which are occurring on the mineral surface. The effect of dissolved oxygen on the reactions of thiol collectors has already been established in the literature and is summarised above, therefore it is not a consideration within this work. This study was carried out in aerated systems as it has been established that oxygen is a key component for reactions to occur. The PGMs used are PtTe All of the PGM sulphides and tellurides were synthesized at the Anglo American Research laboratories using methods previously described in detail elsewhere ( The buffer sodium tetraborate decahydrate, the electrolyte sodium sulphate and the collector sodium ethyl xanthate were obtained in powder form. Their collector content is given in the table. Sodium diethyl dithiophosphate (Senkol 3) was in liquid form and this collector was obtained in a buffer solution of sodium hydroxide. The buffer solution does not affect measurements in this work. Concentrations of all the reagents were calculated based on the mass of the desired species within the reagent. A three electrode electrochemical cell was used for electrochemical measurements. The reference was a Ag/AgCl electrode (3 Equilibrium potentials of the collectors were measured in the same buffered solution described above. All measurements were made in an aerated solution. Three different collector concentrations were used, viz. 1 Mixed potential measurements were performed by measuring the open circuit potential of the mineral electrodes. The open circuit potential was measured for 10  The mixed potentials of Pt, PtTe From the results it is observed that acidic conditions (pH 4.2) give rise to more positive potentials than alkaline conditions (pH 9.2). This is to be expected since the potentials of both reactions In comparison with the mixed potential of Pt it is clear that the more negative mixed potentials of PtTe₂ and PtS show greater reactivity towards oxidation for these minerals. As a result the mixed potentials of these minerals deviate from that of Pt due to additional oxidation reactions taking place at the mineral surfaces at lower potentials. It is proposed that the oxidation reaction of PtS could be similar to that of base metal sulphides which form a metal oxide at the surface and could be of the form shown in Reaction The equilibrium potential for this reaction is calculated to be 0.021 Since a change in potential after collector addition is indicative of a reaction occurring at the surface, the magnitude and rate of change of the potential can be used to infer interaction between the collector and the mineral surface. In the case of Pt at pH 9.2 it is seen that the final mixed potential of 0.265 At pH 9.2, the final mixed potential of PtTe In acidic conditions ( In the case of Pd, the equilibrium potential for the reaction Thus, the mixed potentials of the Pd electrode in the absence of the collector are lower than those of Pt. For the Pd minerals it can be seen from The mixed potentials of PdTe At pH 9.2 the final rest potential of the Pd minerals in a solution of SEX indicates that dixanthogen is expected to form on PdTe For PdS the final mixed potential is slightly negative relative to the equilibrium potential of SEX and this indicates that the collector will probably not oxidise to the dithiolate on this mineral surface. This is unlike the case of PtS which did favour the oxidation of the collector to its dimer. Under acidic conditions, high potentials before collector addition are observed as expected ( Formation of dixanthogen on PdTe Oxidation of SEDTP to the form of the dithiolate is not a reaction that occurs readily ( In In all cases in the presence of SEDTP, changes in potential on addition of the collector are relatively low suggesting weaker interactions of the collector with the minerals. The magnitude and rate of the decrease in potential upon collector addition is a possible indicator of the extent to which the collector interacts with the mineral ( Rest potential measurements in this work have highlighted the differences between the thiol collector species formed on sulphide and telluride minerals as well as differences in the electro-catalytic activities of Pt and Pd minerals. It was found that PtS and PdTe It is proposed that the telluride minerals undergo a sequence of reactions which involve chemisorption of the xanthate collector followed by the oxidation of adsorbed species to form PtX From the measurements of the equilibrium potential for dimerization of the collector, SEDTP was found to have high equilibrium potentials compared to SEX and the mixed potentials for all the minerals after SEDTP addition were relatively lower than the potential measured for the pure collector. This indicates that the dithiolate of SEDTP is unlikely to form on the mineral surfaces and also indicates that the reported higher selectivity of SEDTP towards minerals compared to SEX is not a result of dithiolate formation. It was shown that there is an interaction occurring between all the minerals with both SEDTP and SEX. The effect of pH was also investigated. In the case of SEDTP there was no evidence of any differences in the final species formed at the mineral surface in either acidic or alkaline conditions but in the case of SEX there was a greater tendency towards the formation of dixanthogen under acidic conditions. The rest potential measurements shown in this work were interpreted using thermodynamically calculated values and experimentally determined equilibrium potentials of formation for various species of SEX and SEDTP formed on mineral surfaces. The identification of the species formed on each mineral surface was found to be consistent with what was determined using cyclic voltammetry measurements under similar conditions. This has shown that rest potential measurements alone enable the determination of the nature of collector species present at mineral surfaces. Moreover rest potential measurements enable such determinations in the presence of a pulp typical of a real ore, whereas cyclic voltammetry measurements in pulps yield highly complex results which are difficult to interpret. This study has shown that there are indeed differences in the interactions occurring between the collectors used and the various sulphide and telluride minerals. Further studies are currently underway to determine whether these differences may result in differences in the flotation behaviour of the minerals. The authors would like to thank Dr. N.J. Shackleton of Anglo American Technical Solutions Research for synthesising the minerals used in this study. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the