The effect of nil metal complexation and complexing nickel, cobalt, copper, zinc and manganese, both individually and collectively, on the chemical stability of LIX® 63 hydroxyoxime (‘hydroxyoxime’) when in the presence of Versatic 10 and tributyl phosphate (TBP) under synthetic nickel laterite extract conditions at 45°C has been assessed. Hydroxyoxime degradation was observed at pH 5.5–6.0 even in the absence of metal complexation, resulting in half lives of 53–56weeks. Although loading up to 0.2g/L of copper, cobalt or zinc had no material effect, progressively increasing the loading of these individual metals up to 3g/L resulted in hydroxyoxime half lives decreasing to 12, 21 and 28weeks, respectively. Manganese loading of 0.5–2.0g/L also had an adverse effect, with a half life of 31weeks. In contrast, nickel loading up to 4.6g/L had little or no adverse effect on half life (48weeks). Based on the present results, increasing hydroxyoxime half life can be achieved by minimising copper and manganese loading.Although appropriate metal selectivity is of paramount importance when choosing a solvent extraction (SX) regime to apply commercially in any given process, it is not the only factor. Other issues also require careful consideration to ensure favourable process economics, including the chemical robustness of reagents. This aspect has been of particular interest for the synergistic SX system comprising LIX® 63 hydroxyoxime (‘hydroxyoxime’, Hydroxyoxime is the most expensive reagent and also the most susceptible to chemical degradation in the current synergistic system. Over the last few years we have been investigating the chemistry associated with hydroxyoxime, and in particular its stability, in the presence of Versatic 10 both with and without TBP present ( In terms of understanding the chemical properties of hydroxyoxime, work initially focussed on the El Boleo system, which resulted in the following main outcomes: Unlike current commercial copper hydroxyoxime systems where metal complexation stabilises the extractant ( At a given temperature, hydroxyoxime degradation occurs more readily under extract conditions than strip conditions; Increased operating temperature results in faster degradation of hydroxyoxime; Hydroxyoxime degradation products 5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxy-6-dodecanone (acyloin, Hydroxyoxime degradation products diketone and 5,8-diethyldodecan-6-oxime-7-one (‘keto-oxime’, Relatively rapid inter-conversion of the inactive A slower, temperature-based isomer re-equilibration process is also evident; Accounting for hydroxyoxime degradation is not currently stoichiometric. More detailed discussion of these outcomes can be found in the aforementioned papers. The more recent extension of studies to nickel laterite systems where TBP is also present in the organic phase has seen the trends associated with points 2–8 persist. In the case of point 1, different metals are complexed in the nickel laterite system relative to the El Boleo system, particularly nickel, and therefore further investigation into their effect is required. Some differences are already evident. For example, increased copper complexation has recently been shown to correlate with more rapid hydroxyoxime degradation ( A synthetic nickel laterite sulphate-based aqueous feed solution containing nickel, cobalt, zinc, copper, manganese, magnesium and calcium and a sulphate-based synthetic electrolyte-only solution containing magnesium and calcium were prepared. Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES) assay results for these solutions are presented in Synthetic electrolyte-based solutions containing different levels of cobalt (0.3, 1, 2, 3 Preparation of an organic solution containing 0.39 Experimental conditions used in the present work are summarised in Samples were taken after 5, 21, 43, 64, 82 and 105 GC analysis procedures using a Varian 3800 gas chromatograph and both DB-1 and EC1000 fused silica capillary columns and the sample derivatisation procedure have been described elsewhere ( Examination of the metal loading data associated with all experiments ( With the exception of manganese in the nickel laterite systems, no clear decrease in metal loading was seen in any of the samples over the duration of the trial. The decrease in manganese loading in the synthetic nickel laterite systems, attributable to ongoing degradation of hydroxyoxime, was about 60% at pH 5.5 (from 0.15–0.16 to 0.04–0.05 The pH levels in all samples were intermittently monitored with time and adjusted back to pH 5.5 or 6.0 as required. As observed elsewhere ( Relative to fresh organic, a yellowing of the stripped organic solutions was observed in the final day electrolyte-only and single metal systems of copper, zinc, nickel and manganese. In contrast, the stripped organic solutions from the synthetic nickel laterite systems had an orange hue, and the cobalt only systems were distinctly orange. For any given single metal system, the colour intensity, which increased in each sample as the trial progressed, typically darkened with increased metal loading. The yellow colour is indicative of the amount of diketone formed, whereas the orange colour is consistent with irreversible cobalt (III) complexation ( Hydroxyoxime levels determined throughout the trial for the organic samples (expressed as a percentage of their initial, day 0 concentration), rate constants and half lives are presented in The half life ‘errors’ in As shown by experiments 5 and 6, degradation of hydroxyoxime occurs in the absence of metal complexation under synthetic electrolyte-only extract conditions. The rates of hydroxyoxime loss under these conditions at pH 5.5 and 6.0 were comparable, being 15–17% hydroxyoxime over the 105 In comparison to the metal-free systems, the two experiments performed under synthetic nickel laterite conditions at pH 5.5 saw a loss of 28–32% hydroxyoxime over the same timeframe (i.e. an extra 14% loss on average), yielding half lives of 27 and 31 Relative to the synthetic electrolyte-only system, complexation of nickel at levels up to 4.6 Manganese loading was found to have an adverse effect on hydroxyoxime stability relative to the electrolyte-only system, although the actual metal concentration, at least between 0.6 and 2.1 Of all the individual metals, increasing copper loading had the most marked adverse effect, with hydroxyoxime half life being essentially unaffected at 0.2 From an economic perspective, it is important to note that in the case of nickel, cobalt and zinc, the decrease in hydroxyoxime half life with increasing metal loading needs to be balanced against the expectation of an increased rate of metal recovery per extract/strip cycle. Indeed, given the level of degradation associated with operation under electrolyte-only conditions, it is readily calculated that increased nett transfer of metal per unit of hydroxyoxime consumed is actually achieved as metal loading increases (e.g. divide metal loading by the corresponding half life-for each given metal, the metal loading level increases faster than the half life decreases). Based on the results obtained from the single metal systems, complexation of nickel, cobalt and copper at the levels observed in the synthetic nickel laterite system should not result in the observed rate of degradation seen in that system at pH 5.5. Given that manganese appears to play an adverse role ( An alternative approach, which could be undertaken in tandem with the above if needed, would be to minimise manganese loading initially. This could be achieved by reducing the operating pH slightly, or decreasing the Hydroxyoxime degradation results in several primary products, namely acyloin, diketone and keto-oxime with different species favoured under extract and strip conditions ( The two synthetic electrolyte-only systems serve as a useful indicator to assess degradation product formation in the absence of complexed metals. Generally comparable results were observed for the pH 5.5 and 6.0 synthetic electrolyte-only systems, with diketone formation (additional 12–15 Complexation of individual metals typically leads to a slight increase in keto-oxime concentration, except cobalt where a pronounced increase was noted. This is considered indicative of chelated hydroxyoxime being more susceptible to oxidative degradation, particularly in the case of cobalt where it could be metal-catalysed. Overall, these trends in degradation product formation for each single metal system and the electrolyte-only systems are consistent with the observed slight increase in diketone concentration and a more prominent increase in keto-oxime concentration in the multiple metal synthetic nickel laterite extract system at pH 5.5. Underivatised final day samples were analysed for Versatic 10 and TBP content using an EC1000 column. Versatic 10 contains multiple isomers of decanoic acid, resulting in multiple peaks in the GC trace, whereas TBP presents as a single peak. Under the conditions used, TBP co-eluted with some (< The present work aimed to assess the effect of individual metal (cobalt, copper, nickel, zinc, manganese) complexation on LIX 63 hydroxyoxime stability in the presence of Versatic 10 and TBP under synthetic nickel laterite extract conditions at pH 5.5 and 45 Under the conditions trialled, loss and/or degradation of Versatic 10 and TBP were minor. In contrast, degradation of hydroxyoxime occurred under extract conditions even in the absence of metal complexation (electrolyte-only systems), yielding half lives of 53 and 56 Loading of metal under synthetic nickel laterite extract conditions reduced the half life from 53–56 Hydroxyoxime degradation under extract conditions yielded the expected products, namely diketone and keto-oxime. These were observed to accrue under metal-free (electrolyte only) extract conditions. Relative to the electrolyte-only system, increased diketone formation was observed in the systems containing complexed copper. Complexation of all individual metals typically leads to a slight increase in keto-oxime concentration, except cobalt where a pronounced increase was noted. Some irreversible cobalt loading occurred in all systems containing cobalt. This oxidation occurred at a rate proportional to the amount of cobalt loaded. When total cobalt loading up to 2.0 The support of the