Tissue engineering aims to regenerate tissues and organs by using cell and biomaterial-based approaches. One of the current challenges in the field is to promote proper vascularization in the implant to prevent cell death and promote host integration. Bone marrow endothelial progenitor cells (BM-EPCs) and mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are bone marrow resident stem cells widely employed for proangiogenic applications. In vivo, they are likely to interact frequently both in the bone marrow and at sites of injury. In this study, the physical and biochemical interactions between BM-EPCs and MSCs in an in vitro co-culture system were investigated to further clarify their roles in vascularization. BM-EPC/MSC co-cultures established close cell–cell contacts soon after seeding and self-assembled to form elongated structures at 3days. Besides direct contact, cells also exhibited vesicle transport phenomena. When co-cultured in Matrigel, tube formation was greatly enhanced even in serum-starved, growth factor free medium. Both MSCs and BM-EPCs contributed to these tubes. However, cell proliferation was greatly reduced in co-culture and morphological differences were observed. Gene expression and cluster analysis for wide panel of angiogenesis-related transcripts demonstrated up-regulation of angiogenic markers but down-regulation of many other cytokines. These data suggest that cross-talk occurs in between BM-EPCs and MSCs through paracrine and direct cell contact mechanisms leading to modulation of the angiogenic response.Tissue engineering is an interdisciplinary field of research that aims to “apply the principles of engineering and life sciences toward the development of biological substitutes that restore, maintain, or improve tissue function” For these reasons, researchers have turned to the study of co-culture interactions with endothelial cells in the hope of gaining insight into the vascularization process. In the case of bone tissue engineering endothelial cells, endothelial progenitors and osteoblast or mesenchymal stem cell interactions are currently the focus interest The interaction between human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and outgrowth endothelial cells (OEC) with osteoblastic cells or primary osteoblasts demonstrated the formation of a vascular tissue-like network We used a subpopulation of bone marrow-derived BM-EPCs that can be obtained from hematopoietic stem cells expressing Flk-1 The method has been described before For co-culture BM-EPCs and MSCs were mixed (1:1 ratio) in IMDM (Sigma) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% To follow Tube formation was determined by using Matrigel (Sigma) diluted 1:1 in culture media in 48-well plates and allowed to solidify for 1 mRNA was extracted from cells cultured separately or in co-culture for 24 Data are representative of three independent experiments except where otherwise noted. Results are expressed as mean BM-EPCs and MSCs were fluorescently labeled and their behavior in co-culture was compared to single cell cultures ( The Matrigel tube-forming assay was used to test the effects of co-culture over tubulogenesis during several days. BM-EPCs and MSCs in individual culture were non-stimulated or stimulated with 40 Proliferation in co-culture was quantified and compared to non-co-cultured cells. Co-culture significantly reduced cell proliferation at all time points tested, with the relative amounts of BM-EPC/MSC almost constant ( The effects of co-culture over gene expression and differentiation were studied by real-time RT-PCR arrays for a set of 84 genes involved in angiogenesis and endothelial cell differentiation. The results are shown in BM-EPCs and MSCs are promising candidates for tissue engineering and regenerative medicine therapies. BM-EPCs have been successfully used for treating ischemia/reperfusion injury in mice and their role in neovascularization and homing to sites of vascular damage has already been demonstrated Our study intended to determine the time-dependent angiogenic interactions affecting BM-EPCs and MSCs in co-culture and identify potential target genes. BM-EPCs and MSCs were co-cultured and examined for 14 Recent work in BM-EPC/MSC co-cultures showed opposite results in proangiogenic differentiation depending on the maturation stage of the endothelial cells used The previous experiments illustrated the importance of direct cell contact and paracrine signaling in the cross-talk between BM-EPCs/MSCs leading to proangiogenic differentiation. Our next goal was to identify candidate genes involved in this process and determine their temporal profile in a 14-day time period. We performed real-time RT-PCR for 84 genes playing a critical role in angiogenesis. Several interesting targets affected by co-culture were identified (only the most statistically significant changes are discussed). Early up-regulation of cell–cell and cell–matrix adhesion proteins, growth factors and signaling cytokines took place at 3 Summarizing, the results suggest BM-EPC/MSC co-culture can induce endothelial phenotype and angiogenesis in both cell types without the addition of exogenous growth factors. This was demonstrated by Matrigel tubulogenesis assays and real-time RT-PCR for angiogenic markers. Co-culture induced strong up-regulation of direct cell contact proteins, vesicle trafficking (currently its role remains unknown), paracrine signaling through up-regulation of growth factors and synthesis of endothelial ECM and matrix remodelation proteins. Proliferation was reduced in co-culture and we associated it with the down-regulation of a large group of growth factors including several TGF-β family members. Insight into this cell cross-talk will be a valuable tool for understanding tissue dynamics We thank the European Commission (European project NMP3-LA-2008-214402, ANGIOSCAFF), the CIBER-BBN and the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation for funding (Project MAT2008-06887-C03-01). A.A. was supported with an FI-B pre-doctoral grant from the Generalitat of Catalunya. We also thank Prof. Jöelle Amédée for suggestions and constructive criticism on the manuscript. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 