During the service life of structure, cracks developed due to various internal or external stresses. These cracks offer a preferential path for the ingress of water, gas and aggressive ions through the concrete. This increase of concrete's permeability promotes the structure deterioration. A good understanding of structure permeability is thus required to design durable structures. An innovative permeability device was used to measure the impact of fiber orientation and fiber type on the water permeability of high performance fiber reinforced concrete (HPFRC) tie-specimens submitted simultaneously to a uniaxial tensile loading. Specific casting techniques provided tie-specimens with three fiber orientations (favorable, average and unfavorable) that can be found in fiber reinforced concrete (FRC) structural elements. Experimental results showed average fibers angles relative to the loading direction of tie-specimens of about 39°, 42° and 54° respectively for the favorable, average and unfavorable orientations. As fiber orientation become less favorable (from 39° to 54°), the tensile strength (ft) of characterization specimens reduced up to 33%, while the increase in permeability (Kw) tie-specimens achieved 1990% at fixed load and 600% at fixed stress in the rebar. For HPFRC casted with the same procedure, synthetic fibers provided a lower efficiency to control cracking at material and structural scales, and to limit water permeability in comparison to steel fibers. The impact of fiber orientation is clearly more significant on water permeability of HPFRC than on their mechanical behavior. These results provides insights of the impact of fiber orientation on durability of reinforced FRC structures.Durability of reinforced concrete structures relies on the transport of water and aggressive agents through concrete by several mechanisms as permeability, diffusion, capillary absorption, etc. Among these mechanisms, permeability, defined as the movement of a fluid through a porous saturated medium under a pressure gradient, can be used as a durability index especially when the concrete is cracked. The increase of permeability favors the ingress of water, gas and aggressive ions into the concrete, which promotes its deterioration by freeze-thaw, sulfate attack, alkali-aggregate reaction or reinforcement corrosion During their lifetime, structures developed cracks due to various internal stresses (shrinkage, creep) and external stresses (mechanical and environmental loads). Cracks offer an easy path for aggressive agents to penetrate into concrete by permeability. Thus, to design durable structure, it is necessary to identify and evaluate parameters influencing the permeability of cracked concrete. Studies performed on unloaded concrete specimens with one single crack showed that the water permeability of cracked concrete is mainly controlled by the crack widths Research works on loaded concrete clearly showed that fiber reinforced concretes (FRC) have a reduced water permeability in comparison to ordinary concrete. The addition of fibers provides a lower porosity and a higher tortuosity to the concrete matrix, thus reducing permeability at uncracked state Logically, parameters influencing the action of fibers in the concrete matrix may have an impact on the permeability. They must be investigated to tailor FRC according to the durability expected for structural applications. It was demonstrated that increasing concrete matrix strength favors anchorage of fibers The general objective of this project is to determine the influence of the fiber orientation and fiber type on water permeability of FRC structures. A permeability device developed at Polytechnique Montreal Tie-specimens were submitted to water permeability and cracks width measurements simultaneously to the application of a quasi-static uniaxial tensile loading at the age of 50 For steel fibers, three fiber orientations which can be found in fiber-reinforced concrete (FRC) structural elements were tested: favorable (HPFRC-ST-F), average (HPFRC-ST-A) and unfavorable (HPFRC-ST-U) orientations. The favorable orientation corresponds to the situation where fibers are the best aligned with the tensile load direction (longitudinal axis of the tie-specimen), on the contrary the defavorable orientation represent the situation where fibers are the worst aligned. The average orientation is the intermediate condition, some tests demonstrated that HPFRC-ST-A orientation is similar to the one obtained with a normal workability concrete after vibration. The tie-specimens with synthetic fibers were only tested with the favorable orientation (HPFRC-SY-F) since the higher flexibility of this fiber type does not allow easily fiber alignment and determination of fiber orientation by image analysis techniques. Four tie-specimens per conditions (HPFRC-ST-F, HPFRC-ST-A, HPFRC-ST-U and HPFRC-SY-F) were submitted to permeability tests under loading. After the tests, three slices were sawn from one tie-specimen of each steel fiber orientation, perpendicularly to the tensile load and thus parallel to the cracks, to measure the fiber orientation. The slices were taken adjacent to the three main cracks. HPFRC workability and mechanical properties were measured for each condition, results are summarized in The tie-specimens contain one Grade 400W 10M rebar along the longitudinal axis. The rebar properties were measured in accordance with ASTM A615 The tie-specimens represent a rebar and the surrounding concrete found in the tensile zone of beams, thick slabs or walls subjected to bending loads. For these structural elements submitted to bending load, the stress gradient is small and the tensile stress is nearly uniform in the concrete cover. Applying a uniaxial tensile loading on the tie-specimen is thus representative of the loading stress in these structural elements. The tie-specimen has a length of 610 The three different steel fiber orientations (HPFRC-ST-F, HPFRC-ST-A and HPFRC-ST-U) were obtained using different casting techniques based on the fact that the two main parameters influencing the fiber orientation are the casting technique (the tool used and its movement) and the flow direction Each tie-specimen of HPFRC-SY-F and HPFRC-ST-F conditions (favorable orientation) was cast in a separated mold with a hand shovel whose movement followed the longitudinal axis of the tie-specimen ( The tie-specimens were subjected to quasi-static uniaxial tensile loading with simultaneous water permeability and crack width measurements ( Before installing a tie-specimen in the load frame, thirteen PI displacements transducers with measurements lengths of 50 or 100 Once the tie-specimen was installed on the load frame, a pressure was applied to the water on the inlet tank while the outlet tank remained at the atmospheric pressure ( The water permeability coefficient K The permeability device, with an accuracy of 10 The cracks opening displacement (COD) evolution on the tie-specimen during loading was continuously measured, simultaneously to the permeability measurement, with PI displacement transducers. Once a macrocrack localizes in the specimen, the COD was obtained by removing the elastic displacement from the total displacement of the PI transducer. In most tests, a single crack is captured by one PI gage thus providing information on each crack and allowing calculation of individual, average or maximal crack openings in the specimen. With simultaneity of loading, permeability and cracking opening measurements, the permeability device allows direct correlations between the applied force, displacement, permeability, crack widths and average stress in the rebar. The rebar stress is calculated from the specimen elongation, assuming a perfect bond between the concrete and the rebar. Steel fiber orientation was analyzed by an in-house image analysis program The image analysis program detected the total number of fibers on the analyzed sections as well as the orientation angle of each fiber. The image analysis provides information on the cross-section of each fiber, thus the total fiber area expressed as a percentage of the total area of concrete can be calculated for a surface. It was confirmed that this value corresponds approximately to the fiber dosage of 0.75% for the HPFRC studied. Indeed, when random cuts were done on tie-specimens, the average fiber area obtained on the surface analyzed was 0.75%, with values ranging from 0.65% to 0.81%. When cuts where done near main macrocracks of tie-specimens, the average fiber area calculated on the surface analyzed was 0.68%, with values ranging from 0.54% to 0.81%. The slightly lower fiber dosage noted close to cracks comes from the fact that cracks appear and develop at weakest zones of tie-specimen where local fiber density is lower or local fiber orientation is unfavorable. Analyzed sections have been made as close as possible from the crack in the tie-specimen, so they represents the orientation where cracks formed. The average number of macrofibers per unit area of concrete (  Results shows that, despite the specific casting techniques used, the average fiber orientation were 38.8°, 42.3° and 54.2° for the HPFRC-ST-F, HPFRC-ST-A and HPFRC-ST-U respectively. A difference of 3.5° between the HPFRC-ST-F and HPFRC-ST-A, and of 15.4° between the HPFRC-ST-F and HPFRC-ST-U were obtained. The standard deviation increased as the fiber orientation deteriorates. The mechanical behavior of the tie-specimens tested under uniaxial tension is presented by their load versus displacement curves in The cracking development is illustrated by the load versus maximal crack opening displacement ( Results obtained from all the specimens of HPFRC-ST-A show a very low variability of the load-displacement curves and a little more important variability in the load-COD The load-displacement curves of the different testing conditions ( Once the first macrocrack has appeared, several other macrocracks form in the tie-specimens until a displacement of around 0.6–0.7 Once all the macrocracks are formed (Phase III, The minimum and maximum load values for the HPFRC-ST conditions are illustrated The evolution of the cracking pattern during the tensile loading is divided into the same three phases as represented in During Phase II-A, for a same load level, as expected During Phase II-B, During Phase III, the main macrocracks are formed and the slopes of the load versus The evolution of the water permeability coefficient ( In this study,  The evolution of water permeability in function of the average stress in the rebar (  For a same Despite the given attention to obtain favorable, average and unfavorable steel fiber orientations, it was not possible to represent the whole range of orientation angles (θ of 38.8° to 54.2° instead of 0° to 90°). Such result was already observed in other research projects dealing with the impact of fiber orientation on high and ultra-high performance fiber reinforced concrete The analysis of the average orientation angles, total number of fibers per unit area and standard deviations between all the testing conditions shows similar trends between these parameters. In fact, as fiber orientation became less favorable (mean orientation angles increasing by 9 and 39% respectively for HPFRC-ST-A and HPFRC-ST-U in comparison with the HPFRC-ST-F), the number of fibers per unit area decreased (by 17 and 39% respectively) and the associated standard deviations increased (by 9 and 22% respectively). The decrease of the total number of fibers per unit area with the degradation of their orientation may be explained by the fact that fibers with unfavorable orientation represent an obstacle to the positioning of adjacent fibers in a same transversal section of the tie-specimens. This obstacle increases as the fiber orientation deteriorates. The increase of the standard deviation as fiber orientation deteriorates can also be explained by the influence of the adjacent fibers, as the space between each other increases allowing more flexibility for rotation of fibers. The steel macrofiber orientation modify the tensile behavior of HPFRC-ST mixes ( These modifications of the pre-peak tensile behavior of HPFRC-ST had logically direct implication on mechanical and permeability behaviors of tie-specimens. Indeed, more favorable fiber orientation led to higher first macrocrack loads ( The impact of fiber orientation on tensile post-peak behavior (stress versus crack width curves in The permeability ( The relation between the permeability ( A global view of the impact of fiber orientation ( One may wonder if unfavorable fiber orientation may increase permeability close to the one of HPC. Permeability of HPC was measured in previous works In comparison to HPFRC-ST cast with the same technique, HPFRC-SY showed a lower rigidity at the end of the pre-peak phase and a lower ultimate strength (− The first crack and ultimate loads of HPFRC-SY tie-specimens were respectively higher and equal to the ones of HPFRC-ST-U tie-specimens. Moreover, macrocrack occurrences caused higher force drops in HPFRC-SY tie-specimens. These observations are in accordance with the material behavior noted on notched cylinders. The evolution of permeability ( The relation between The quantitative differences illustrated in The general objective of this research project was to evaluate the impact of fiber orientation on the mechanical behavior, cracking process and water permeability of reinforced concrete under uniaxial tensile loads. As HPFRC tie-specimens were produced with the most and the worst fiber orientation, the experimental results provided a global view of the variation of the mechanical behavior and the water permeability that can be found in reinforced FRC structures. The main conclusions are: The experimental procedure provides a good repeatability for results of the same testing condition and coherent relationships between the mechanical and water permeability measurements for the different testing conditions. When fiber orientation become less favorable (from 39° to 54°) regarding tensile solicitations in HPFRC-ST, standard deviation on orientation increase and the total number of fibers on crack surfaces decreased up to 41%. As fiber orientation becomes less favorable in HPFRC-ST (from 39° to 54°), the tensile strength of characterization specimens ( As fiber orientation becomes less favorable in HPFRC-ST (from 39° to 54°), the increase in permeability ( Despite the significant impact of fiber orientation on water permeability, HPFRC-ST with the worst fiber orientation and HPFRC-SY are significantly less permeable than HPC. For HPFRC casted with the same procedure, synthetic fibers provide a lower efficiency to control cracking at material and structural scales, and to limit water permeability in comparison to steel fibers. The impact of fiber orientation is clearly more significant on water permeability of HPFRC than on their mechanical behavior.  This research project has been financially supported by the Québec Research Fund on Nature and Technologies (