The effect of simulated solar light on nitrobenzene degradation in Fe3+/H2O2 solutions was investigated under different experimental conditions. Consumption profiles of NBE and H2O2 display an autocatalytic kinetic behavior for both dark and photo-assisted degradation experiments. The rates of the initial slow phase that precedes the catalytic phase are significantly enhanced by irradiation, although the effect of simulated solar light on the rates of the fast phase is negligible. The absolute rates of the slow phase increase with the concentrations of Fe3+ and H2O2, whereas the initial rate of the degree of conversion increase decreases with organic matter loading. The reaction progress was characterized by HPLC, GC–MS, IC, TOC (total organic carbon) and toxicity analyses. The main products detected were 4-nitrophenol, 3-nitrophenol, 2-nitrophenol, 1,3-dinitrobenzene, phenol, oxalic acid, formic acid, NO2
                     − and NO3
                     −. Product distribution profiles are discussed in connection with TOC and toxicity measurements. The results show that dark treatment is neither capable of lowering the organic content nor capable of reducing the effluent toxicity to acceptable levels. On the other hand, photo-assisted processes induced by simulated solar light can significantly enhance both mineralization and detoxification efficiencies.Photochemical remediation of wastewater using solar radiation is an active research field in modern environmental science. Although biological treatment is broadly applied to the treatment of wastewater from urban areas, a large number of compounds are not biodegradable due to their high toxicity. Therefore, alternative or additional methods for detoxification are of current interest. In recent years, increasing attention has been focused on the Advanced Oxidation Technologies (AOTs), especially those capable of using solar radiation, since they have proved to be efficient for the degradation and eventual mineralization of refractory contaminants Although the reaction manifold involved in the mineralization process can be quite complex, it is generally accepted that the oxidation of organic substrates (S) in Fenton systems is related to the highly efficient generation of hydroxyl radicals during H In photo-Fenton systems, the positive effect of irradiation is mainly related to the photoreduction of Fe(OH) Under the conditions commonly used in photo-Fenton systems, reactions Nitroaromatic compounds are extensively used as raw materials in many industrial processes such as in the preparation of pesticides, explosives, dyes, pulp and paper. The detoxification of wastewaters containing these compounds is very difficult since, due to their high stability, they are usually refractory to biological degradation In this work, we studied the autocatalytic degradation of nitrobenzene (NBE) in Fe Nitrobenzene (Fluka), 1,3-dinitrobenzene (Merk), 2-nitrophenol (Riedel de Haën), 3-nitrophenol (Riedel de Haën), 4-nitrophenol (Riedel de Haën), phenol (Sigma–Aldrich), 4-nitrocatechol (Aldrich), hydroquinone (Fluka), 1,4-benzoquinone (Fluka), catechol (Merck), H Nitrohydroquinone and 3-nitrocatechol were prepared by hydroquinone and catechol nitration, respectively, using NaNO The concentration profiles of NBE and several aromatic products were tracked using Merck-Hitachi equipment (pump L-6200, UV-Vis detector L-4200). An RP-C18 column (Lichrospher, 4 The reaction products were analyzed using a gas chromatograph (Varian 3400) coupled to an ionic trap mass spectra detector (Varian Saturn 4D) and equipped with a capillary column (Supelco, Fused Silica Capillary, 0.25 Low-molecular-weight organic acids and inorganic anions were identified by ionic chromatography using a Dionex DX-500 instrument, equipped with a Dionex column (AS9-HC, 200 The evolution of TOC was monitored using Shimadzu equipment (5000 TOC analyzer, catalytic oxidation on Pt at 680 Hydrogen peroxide concentration profiles were measured by means of an enzymatic-colorimetric method, using a mixture of phenol (0.025 The toxicity evolution of irradiated and nonirradiated samples was studied using a Microtox 500 analyzer (Strategic Diagnostics Inc.). The bioluminescence of the marine bacterium The reduction of the bioluminescence was evaluated for several sample dilutions through measurements after 5 In addition, detoxification efficiencies (DE%), calculated from TU values of treated (TU In order to eliminate the effects of pH and Fe The experiments were carried out in a cylindrical Pyrex cell (40 Working solutions were prepared daily with water of milli-Q quality, HClO Blank experiments carried out by irradiating NBE solutions using the Solarbox in the absence of H Previous studies of NBE degradation in the absence of radiation By the end of the induction period, hydroxylated products able to reduce Fe  Unlike the slow phase, NBE consumption rates observed during the fast phase for the experiments conducted in the dark and under irradiation with different sources are very similar (i.e., dark and 340 It is important to notice here that, even though during the dark experiment only a 10% of NBE is consumed in the initial phase, this period encompasses more than 50% of the time required for complete NBE oxidation (   Considering that the NBE degradation rate is proportional to both NBE and HO Using the absorption spectra of NBE and Fe The results obtained for the wavelength range 340–400 During the initial stages of the oxidation process, thermal and photochemically produced hydroxyl radicals react almost exclusively with NBE and H As [NBE] Finally, since conversion degrees near 10–15% are required for the beginning of the catalytic phase, the increase of the transition time with [NBE] Concerning hydrogen peroxide behavior during the slow phase, the aforementioned inner filter and scavenging effects also account for the decrease in In relation to the fast phase, a small increase of Taking into account the results discussed above, it is clear that an important parameter in photo-Fenton systems is the initial concentration of organic matter, since aromatic compounds can strongly influence the kinetics of the process due to both inner filter and scavenging effects. The effect of the initial Fe The concentration profiles of NBE are only slightly dependent on [H The distributions of aromatic NBE byproducts, corresponding to different conversion degrees, were studied using HPLC and GC–MS analyses. In both dark and irradiated experiments, the same products were detected: 2-nitrofenol, 3-nitrofenol, 4-nitrofenol, phenol, 1,3-dinitrobenzene, 4-nitrocatechol, 3-nitrocatechol, nitrohydroquinone, benzoquinone, catechol, 1,2-dinitrobenzene and 1,4-dinitrobenzene. The kinetic profiles ( Among the detected byproducts, 4-nitrocatechol, 3-nitrocatechol, nitrohydroquinone and catechol contain two HO groups in relative It is worth mentioning that, with the exception of 1,3-dinitrobenzene, only traces of aromatic compounds are detected after 50 The concentration profiles of NO For both dark and irradiated samples small amounts of NO It is worth noting that carboxylic acid profiles show significant differences. While oxalic and formic acid profiles rise till they reach almost constant values in dark experiments, they show a steep decrease after their maxima for the irradiated solutions. This behavior can be explained by considering the formation of Fe Under the experimental conditions of the present work, the carboxylic acids produced as the reaction progresses can form strong complexes with ferric ions The normalized TOC profiles of In addition, the comparison between the profiles of irradiated samples obtained using different [H Toxicity tests on both initial and treated samples were carried out in order to provide a more complete evaluation of the efficiency of the technologies used. TU values and detoxification efficiencies, presented in  For the dark experiment the inhibition does not decrease throughout the first 50 In the case of the irradiated samples, the important toxicity decrease is accompanied by significant reductions of both byproduct concentrations and total organic carbon. In addition, the dissimilar DE% values achieved with different [H It is important to emphasize that the use of simulated solar light allows attaining higher and faster reductions of toxicity. Furthermore, acceptable DE% values are achieved in the photo-induced processes since solutions with TU levels lower than 1 are considered as nontoxic Nitrobenzene degradation by Fe Since the transition times from the slow to the fast phase increase at high ratios of organic matter concentration with respect to catalyst concentration and the photoreduction of Fe The results obtained in the absence of irradiation show that toxicity and TOC profiles are not necessarily correlated. Therefore, the interpretation of the temporal evolution of toxicity levels requires the use of complementary analytical techniques. Besides, the use of simulated solar light allows attaining faster and higher reductions of toxicity levels owing to the contribution of additional photochemical pathways ( The comparative analysis of both reaction rates and product distributions observed for dark and irradiated experiments shows that photo-assisted processes play different roles depending on the reaction stage considered. During the initial slow phase irradiation mainly plays a kinetic role, whereas along the catalytic phase its effect on both the reaction rates and the primary yields is of minor importance. Throughout the final treatment stages, photo-induced processes strongly affect both the overall kinetics and the product distributions since noticeable differences in the shapes of aliphatic acid profiles are observed. This work was supported in part by a project grant from the CONICET (Grant No. PIP6301). Financial support from MIUR (Rome) is gratefully acknowledged. A. Capparelli and F. García Einschlag are members of CONICET. L. Carlos thanks the CONICET for a grant supporting his Ph.D. thesis. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 