The oxidative ammonia/ammonium sulphate leaching of an artificial matte was carried out to investigate the extraction behavior of copper, nickel, and cobalt. The composition of the synthetically prepared Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte was: 24.9% Cu, 35.1% Ni, 4.05% Co, 11.5% Fe, and 24.5% S. The major mineral phases associated with the matte were: CuFeS2, CuS2, (FeNi)9S8, (FeNi)S2, Ni9S8, Ni3S2, (CoFeNi)9S8 and Co metal. To optimize the leaching conditions, parameters like oxygen partial pressure, temperature, concentration of leaching reagents and time were studied. Under optimum leaching conditions (2 M NH4OH+2 M (NH4)2SO4, 213 psi pressure, 200 °C and 1 h), 93.8% Cu, 85.3% Ni and 76.5% Co were effectively recovered. From the X-ray diffraction analysis, the partially undissolved Cu, Ni and Co phases were assumed to be CuFeS2, (FeNi)9S8 and (CoFeNi)9S8, respectively. The iron present in the CuFeS2 phase was mostly converted to goethite [α-FeO(OH)], as the CuFeS2 phase dissociated and subsequently remained in the residue.Copper, nickel, and cobalt are generally produced from high grade sulphide/oxide ores or concentrates by the pyrometallurgical smelting reduction and refining process or pyro-hydrometallurgical route. As the reserves of high-grade sulphides diminish, low grade ores need to be processed. For many years these ores were not utilized due to nonavailability of cost effective processes. The development of acid leaching (LX)-solvent extraction (SX)-electrowining (EX) process during 1970's led to the successful treatment of low grade ores, concentrates/wastes etc., commercially. Presently, about 30% of the total Cu is produced from low grade ores using copper selective oxime based reagents by the hydrometallurgical LX–SX–EX process ( The research group at KIGAM has selected the pyrometallurgical reduction roasting and smelting–sulphidation route to produce Cu, Ni, Co, and Fe rich matte (mixture of molten metallic sulphides) from Pacific Ocean nodules ( Ammonia as an effective lixiviant has been widely used in a number of hydrometallurgical processes for many years due to its inherent advantages over alternative reagents. The main advantage is that the basic leach solution alleviates several corrosion problems encountered in the acidic systems. Ammoniacal leaching medium minimizes the possibility of major wasteful components like iron, by their removal during the leaching step as insoluble oxy/hydroxyl compounds. This allows selective extraction of the valuable metals (e.g., copper, cobalt, nickel) as soluble ammine complexes through reactive nitrogen-containing group, leading to higher solubility in most cases ( Literature search reveals that a considerable amount of research has been conducted on the ammoniacal leaching of Cu, Ni and Co bearing oxide and sulphide ores, industrial scraps and wastes, over the past few decades. Numerous review articles on such applications can be found in the literature ( It has been found, that each specific complex sulphide ore is different in nature and must be studied in order to optimize a proper extraction technology. In comparison to copper sulphides and Pb/Zn sulphides, literature on ammoniacal oxygen pressure leaching of multimetal matte (mixture of molten metallic sulphides) containing Cu, Ni, Co and Fe is inadequate. Our recent study on atmospheric ferric chloride leaching of matte resulted in more than 90% leaching efficiency of Cu, Ni and about 85% of Co using 1.5 M FeCl Synthetic Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte having similar composition as is expected to be obtained by reduction smelting of the Pacific Ocean nodules followed by sulphidisation of the alloy was prepared by melting the pure metals in required proportions in an induction furnace. A graphite crucible was used for this purpose. Appropriate amount of metals placed in the crucible was heated to about 1500 °C. When the alloy was completely melted and homogenized, sulphur addition was made. To avoid loss due to evaporation, pure sulphur powder was compacted into small cylinders in a mechanical press and manually held into the melt and stirred with a graphite rod. At the end of the run, the crucible was removed from the furnace and cooled to room temperature. The matte was crushed in a jaw crusher, ground in a ball mill and sieved under 100 μm for further study. The leaching experiments were carried out in a 450 mL capacity autoclave (Model 4562, PAR, USA) with 100 mL of leach solution and the desired amount of matte. Temperature was controlled through a PID controller with digital read-out for temperature, pressure and agitation speed. The contents were heated to the desired temperature. On attainment of temperature, the contents were stirred at 600 rpm and oxygen was introduced into the system continuously to maintain a constant pressure for the duration of the experiment. Reaction time was counted after the introduction of oxygen into the reactor. Each leaching experiment was performed at 5% (w/v) pulp density (PD) of matte. The contents were cooled, discharged, filtered and analyzed by atomic absorption spectrophotometer (AAS, Varian, Spectr-400) after suitable dilution. The residues were washed, dried in an air oven at 110 °C for 24 h. Known amount of residues were acid digested and analysed for Cu, Ni, Co and Fe. In each case a satisfactory (± The chemical analysis of the synthetically prepared Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte shows that it contains 24.9% Cu, 35.1% Ni, 4.05% Co, 11.5% Fe, and 24.5% S. It is established that, hydrometallurgical processes, particularly pressure leaching processes, are sensitive to particle size. So in the present study we have reduced the particle size below 100 μm prior to processing by pressure leaching. The combination of ammonia and ammonium salts is known to be a powerful lixiviant used in hydrometallurgical processes. Many metals including Cu, Ni, and Co can be extracted using the mixture of ammonia and ammonium salts. The detailed chemistry of the oxidative ammonia leach is quite complex and multistep, but the basic principles are reasonably established ( The mechanism by which pressure leaching processes affect the release of metals from sulphide mineral matrices, is largely dependent on many factors such as temperature, oxygen partial pressure, concentration of leaching reagents, time and process chemistry. Prior to the experiments investigating the effects of NH The effect of leaching time from 15 to 120 min on the extraction of Cu, Ni and Co was studied using 2 M NH The variation of NH For enhancement of the sulphide dissolution, oxygen has been widely used as an oxidant, because of its low cost and noncorrosive nature. The next set of experiments were carried out to determine the effect of oxygen partial pressure on the metal extraction rate as the concentration of dissolved oxygen in solution is directly related to the partial pressure of oxygen over the solution. The oxygen partial pressure was varied from 71 to 355 psi, keeping all other parameters such as 2 M NH Low temperature pressure leaching processes below 100 °C have not been popularly accepted because of its characteristic slow extraction efficiencies, and longer residence time for Cu and other metals. Also, high temperature pressure leaching processes have disadvantages like higher oxygen consumption and higher acid production as by-product. The greater heat production in the reactor vessel also a characteristic problem deals with high temperature pressure leaching processes, which requires longer cooling time and higher energy consumption. Medium temperature pressure leaching processes, operating at temperatures from 120 °C to 190 °C have been the focus for much research and development activity in recent years ( The combined application of XRD and SEM studies can provide useful information on the characterization and leaching of bulk samples. The samples before and after leaching were subjected to XRD analysis to see the phases that disappear and/or the products that form during leaching. In the present paper, the oxidative ammonia/ammonium sulphate leaching of a synthetic matte has been studied to investigate the extraction behavior of Cu, Ni, and Co. It was found that, leaching temperature, oxygen pressure and pH, were important factors that influenced the dissolution of metal sulphide phases present in the matte. The nature of leaching medium, particularly the ratio of NH One of the authors, Debasish Mohapatra thanks the Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources (KIGAM), Daejeon, for the award of Post Doctoral Fellowship.