The dynamic mechanical properties of steel fiber reinforced concrete (SFRC) depend largely on the content and size of steel fibers. This paper presents an experimental study on mechanical properties of SFRC under high strain-rate compressive loading. In order to explore the co-effect of the fiber content and aspect ratio on the dynamic performance of SFRC, the SFRC specimens with three kinds of fiber aspect ratio (30, 50, 60, respectively) and six kinds of fiber content (0%, 0.5%, 1.0%, 1.5%, 2.0% and 2.5% in volume fraction) were tested by Split Hopkinson Pressure Bar (SHPB) device with a diameter of 75 mm. The test strain rate ranged from 30 s−1 to 370 s−1. Test results show that SFRC has obvious strain rate effect. With the same fiber aspect ratio, the optimum fiber content of SFRC shows strain rate sensitivity. And with the increase of fiber content, the dynamic increase factor (DIF) of SFRC decrease gradually. With the same fiber content, SFRC with a fiber aspect ratio of 50 shows the maximum compressive strength at different strain rates. In addition, the study also proposed the expression of DIF, strain rate and fiber content of SFRC to each fiber aspect ratio.The concrete has the advantages of high strength, easy molding, low energy consumption and good durability, which has become the most widely used construction material and the vitally important material in safety protection engineering It was wildly recognized that the fiber volume fraction and fiber aspect ratio play a substantial role in improving mechanical properties of SFRC. Many studies have shown that the increase of fiber volume fraction can distinctly enhance the residual bending strength of SFRC and make specimens exhibit different levels of strain hardening Due to the great improvement of SFRC in impact resistance, fatigue resistance, post-cracking toughness and durability, it is widely used in civil and military engineering, such as bridges, tunnels, road surface, airport pavement and railway engineering The study on the mechanical properties of concrete under dynamic loading can be traced back to the 1920 s. D. A. Abrams T. S. Lok et al. Y. Hao and H. Hao Y. Su et al. X.W. Sun et al. R. Kseniia et al. It can be seen from the above studies that the length, content, and shape of fiber are the key factors affecting the dynamic strength of SFRC. However, in previous studies, the variables studied were all single, only considering the content or shape of fiber, and rarely explored the effect of multiple factors on SFRC. Besides, the range of strain rates used in previous tests is not wide enough. Therefore, the SHPB device with diameter of 75 mm is used in this paper to test the dynamic compressive strength of SFRC specimens with three kinds of fiber aspect ratios ( The mix proportion of SFRC is shown in In the preparation of SFRC specimens, the sand, coarse aggregate and cement were added to the blender to mix 2 min. Then, water with superplasticizer was added, and uniformly mixed for 3 min. During this process, steel fibers were evenly introduced to the blender manually. After all steel fibers were introduced, mixed 1 min more before casting. The slump test and air content test were conducted before casting to ensure the workability, as shown in According to the SHPB device dimension, the diameter of SFRC specimens is designed to 72 mm. As suggested by Bertholf and Karnes As shown in The strain signal in the bar was measured by resistance strain gauges, which was attached to the surface of incident and transmitted bar with the same distance from the surface of the specimen, respectively. In order to eliminate the interference signals of non-axial strain and to ensure the synchronization of measured signals, two strain gauges were symmetrically glued to both sides of the bar and placed at the same cross section of the pressure bar. The strain signal was collected by ultrahigh dynamic strain meter and displayed and stored by oscilloscope. The typical pulse waves of SHPB test are shown in The technique of SHPB test is designed based on the assumptions of one-dimensional stress wave propagation and stress uniformity. Based on these assumptions, two-wave method is derived to calculate mechanical properties. The dynamic stress, the dynamic strain of the SFRC and the dynamic strain rate are calculated by the equation The static compressive strength of SFRC was carried on a number of 100 mm × 100 mm × 100 mm cubes through 3000 kN electro-hydraulic servo pressure testing system, as shown in The mean value of static compressive strength results are listed in It is found that for the most fiber content, the compressive strength of SFRC specimens with fiber length of 10 mm (aspect ratio is 50) is higher than that of specimens with other fiber lengths. The reason of such condition might be that the reinforcement effect of the fiber in the concrete mainly depends on the number of fibers on the failure surface and the anchoring length of the fiber. At the same fiber volume fraction, although there are more fibers in the specimens with smaller aspect ratio, the anchorage length is insufficient to control the propagation of microcracks, which leads to a decrease in concrete strength. In the specimens with larger fiber aspect ratio, the longer anchoring length effectively controls the development of microcracks, but the lower number of fibers on the failure surface leads to the decrease of strength. It might also be found that, for the specimens with the same fiber aspect ratio, the compressive strength of SFRC firstly increases and then decreases with the increase of fiber content. The reason could be that with the increase of fiber content, the number of contributing fibers also increases, which can control the development of micro-cracks more effectively. However, excessive amount of fibers might also cause more voids and micro-cracks in the concrete matrix, making the concrete more fragile. In this case, the negative effect of the amount of fiber is greater than the positive, resulting in the reduction of concrete compressive strength. It's worth mentioning that the SFRC specimens with the fiber aspect ratio of 50 and volume fraction of 1.0% have the highest compressive strength, which is 35% higher than conventional concrete. It is critical for a valid SHPB test to realize the longitudinal stress balance of pressure bars. The longitudinal stress balance of bars can be calculated by the equation  According to the literature investigation, several methods have been adopted to determinate the strain rate, and the average strain rate is one of the most common methods The failure patterns of SFRC are related to fiber content, aspect ratio and test strain rate. This paper first studied the effect of different fiber aspect ratios on the failure pattern of SFRC at the same content. With the increase of the test strain rate, the extent of damage of SFRC specimen increased. It is found that the damage occurred not only along the aggregate interface, but also along the aggregate, which results in smaller fragments. When the strain rate is around 150 s In addition, the fiber content difference also has effects on failure patterns of SFRC specimens. Six groups of tests at different strain rates were carried out for each fiber content and aspect ratio combination in this article. The stress-strain curve of the specimen can be calculated through equation  The possible reasons for the above phenomenon might be as follows: in the quasi-static test, the damage of concrete is mainly caused by the generation and development of internal micro-cracks. The introduction of steel fiber can effectively control the propagation of cracks, and with the increase of fiber content, the effect of crack control becomes more significant. However, under the dynamic impact test, the failure time of concrete decreases sharply and the energy cannot be released in time. As a result, the damage is not limited to the expansion of the internal cracks, and the coarse aggregate will also be damaged. Generally, this failure pattern becomes more obvious with the increase of strain rate. However, the steel fiber can only control the crack growth and cannot prevent coarse aggregate damage, which leads to a decrease in the effect of fiber content after an increase in strain rate. In addition, the increase of fiber content leads to more internal surface area of concrete, which results in more micro-cracks, making the concrete more prone to failure and then reduces its compressive strength. It is also found that at the same strain rate, the fiber content has little effect on the strain corresponding to the peak stress.  Dynamic increase factor (DIF) is usually used to evaluate the mechanical characteristics of concrete materials under dynamic loading, which is defined as the ratio of dynamic compressive strength and quasi-static compressive strength:  At the same fiber aspect ratio, the DIF value of SFRC is related to fiber content and strain rate. In this paper, DIF values of SFRC of each fiber aspect ratio are fitted with nonlinear multi-parameters, and the relationship between them is obtained. Equations (4) - (6) are the DIF expression of fiber aspect ratio of 30, 50 and 60, respectively.   In order to study the influence of fiber content and aspect ratio on the dynamic performance of SFRC, this paper used SHPB device with diameter of 75 mm to test SFRC specimens with three fiber aspect ratios (30, 50, 60) and six fiber content (0%, 0.5%, 1.0%, 1.5%, 2.0% and 2.5% in volume fraction). Test strain rates ranged from 30 s SFRC has obvious strain rate effect, and its compressive strength, elastic modulus and peak strain increase with the increase of strain rate. In terms of the same fiber aspect ratio, the optimal fiber content of SFRC showed strain rate sensitivity. When the strain rate is low, the effect of fiber content on compressive strength is small. With the increase of strain rate, the optimal volume fraction gradually decreased from 2.0%. In addition, with the same fiber content, SFRC with fiber aspect ratio of 50 showed the highest compressive strength at different strain rates. Under the same fiber aspect ratio, the DIF value of conventional concrete is basically greater than that of SFRC, and with the increasement of fiber content, the DIF value gradually decreases. In addition, the expression of relationship between DIF value, strain rate and fiber content of SFRC with different fiber aspect ratio were also proposed.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors of this paper greatly appreciate the financial support provided by the