An oxidized fine coal sample with high sulphur content was subjected to oil agglomeration process in order to determine the effect of coal particle size (−0.5, −0.25, −0.125mm) on the performance of the process at different oil dosages (5, 10, 15, 20%). Maximum combustible recovery, ash rejection, pyritic sulphur rejection and sulphate sulphur rejection were achieved to be 75.23%, 97.56%, 99.23% and 98.15%, respectively. Increase in coal particle size affected the ash and pyritic sulphur rejections adversely. However, higher combustible recovery was obtained at coarser coal particle sizes. Scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) analysis and polished section examination of feed coal, clean coal and tailings support the success in rejection of considerable amount of ash and sulphur sources from the coal. Microscopic examination also showed an increase in agglomerate size with increases in coal particle size and oil dosage.Large amounts of fine coals, which are produced during excavation and cleaning activities of coals, are generally discarded. This leads to loss of valuable energy matter and potential environmental problems. Therefore, recovery of fine coals has economic and environmental benefits The techniques of oil agglomeration involve preferential wetting of organic matter of coal by oil from coal–water slurry in an agitated condition. The hydrophobic coal particles are agglomerated by oil droplets and separated by screening. Hydrophilic mineral matter is retained in the water phase Several studies have reported that performance of the agglomeration process is affected by various parameters including, solid content, oil dosage, oil type, agglomeration time, agitation speed, coal particle size and pH of the medium A coal sample from Muzret (Artvin-Turkey) coal deposit was used in this study. Proximate and sulphur analyses of the sample show that Muzret coal has high ash and pyritic sulphur content ( Separation sieve size is one of the most important parameters which affect the combustible recovery. Therefore, preliminary study was conducted to determine the separation sieve size. Particle size distribution of agglomerates showed that over 50% of the agglomerates are in the fraction of − Cylindrical glass vessel (11.7 Finally, agglomerates were analysed for ash, pyritic sulphur and sulphate sulphur contents by using standard analyses methods. The details of analyses methods can be found elsewhere In addition to above mentioned tests, scanning electron microscopy-energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) analysis by SEM-EDS equipment and polished section examination by an ore microscope were carried out to compare the feed coal, clean coal (concentrate) and tailings in terms of ash and sulphur sources. Photos of agglomerates were also taken by using a stereo microscope in order to examine the size of agglomerates. As seen from Contrary to combustible recovery, reduction of particle size enhanced ash and pyritic sulphur rejections ( Similar trend of the effect of particle size on the performance of the agglomeration process was observed at all oil dosages. While oil dosage has a positive effect on combustible recovery, it affected ash and sulphur rejections adversely. Garcia et al. As seen from SEM-EDS analysis of feed, clean coal and tailings, coal sample was cleaned efficiently by agglomeration process. It can be seen that the content of carbon which is the valuable part of the coal sample increased while the amount of gangues such as sulphur, aluminium, silica and iron reduced ( The results of agglomeration tests showed that the variation in the combustible recovery, ash rejection, pyritic sulphur rejection and sulphate sulphur rejection was in the range of 7.26–75.23%, 67.62–97.56% and 89.99–99.23%, 88.62%–98.15%, respectively. Ash separation efficiencies of 4.26–46.55%, pyritic sulphur separation efficiencies of 5.91–65.22% and sulphate sulphur separation efficiencies of 3.72–65.73% were obtained. It was observed that lower amount but cleaner agglomerates were produced at finer coal particle sizes. The size of the agglomerates increased sharply depending on coal particle size and oil dosage. The present study showed that oil agglomeration is an alternative and fairly efficient method to clean fine coals.