Introduction and aim
                  Operative fixation of distal radius fractures using fixed-angle devices has become increasingly common. Although good to excellent results have been reported in acute fractures, little is currently known regarding the fixation of healing displaced distal radius fractures that were presented late. The aim of this study was to evaluate the results of internal fixation of distal radius fractures presented late (>21 days) as compared with an acute-care control group.
               
                  Methods
                  Forty patients operated on for displaced distal radius fractures, presenting more than 21 days after injury (delayed treatment (DT) group), were compared with 75 age-matched controls with acute fracture repair (≤21 days). The same surgical approach was used in both groups, together with dorsal soft-tissue and brachioradialis release. No osteotomy was required. Direct and indirect reduction aids were used. A fixed-angle device (DVR; Biomet Inc., Warsaw, IN, USA) was used in both groups. Mean follow-up was 3.4 years. Quick DASH (Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand) and Short Form 12 scores were used to evaluate outcome, as well as radiographic analysis for Arbeitsgemeinschaft für Osteosynthesefragen(AO)/Orthopaedic Trauma Association(OTA) classification, volar tilt, radial inclination and radial length.
               
                  Results
                  Average age was 53 years in both groups and male to female (M/F) ratio was similar in the study groups. Mean time to surgery was 30 days in the DT group and 8 days in the control group. There were significantly more type C (91.5% vs. 67.5%) fractures in the control group. The average quick DASH score was 27.1 in the DT group as compared with 6.3 in the control group (p
                     <0.03); however, when controlling for two outlier cases with complications (hardware irritation and a sensory neuropathy) there was no significant difference. Volar tilt, radial inclination and length were similar in both groups and were within normal anatomical values.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Delayed primary operative fixation of displaced unstable distal radial fractures is a viable option for cases that were presented late, with predictable, favourable results. Neither extensile approaches nor formal osteotomies are required.Operative treatment for unstable distal radius fracture has recently become popular. The introduction of fixed-angle devices has allowed for rigid fixation, maintenance of fracture reduction, early mobilisation and a decrease in complications associated with other fixation types The aim of this study was to compare the clinical and radiographic outcomes of patients suffering from unstable distal radial fractures operated on more than 3 weeks after injury as compared with historical controls who underwent surgery earlier on in the course of treatment. The Ethics Committee of our Institution approved this research.  All patients were operated via a standard volar flexor carpi radialis (FCR) approach In the control group, operative fixation was carried out using the same surgical approach, using both direct and indirect reduction technique. In the majority of cases, reduction was easily achieved using manipulation with the plate affixed proximally first. Neither bone graft nor bone-graft substitute was used in any of the cases in both groups. Postoperative care was similar in the two study groups. A soft, bulky dressing was applied postoperatively, and gentle, active wrist range of motion, as tolerated, was initiated immediately following surgery. Data were recorded in the patients’ charts and included age, sex and complications. Patients were followed up in the outpatient clinic at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, 3 months, 6 months and 1 year postoperatively; quick DASH (Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand) Preoperative radiographs were analysed for AO/OTA classification. Postoperative analysis included radial height, volar tilt and radial inclination. Radiographic evaluation was measured using the latest follow-up radiographs utilising Picture Archiving and Communication System (PACS) measurement tools (Centricity, GE Healthcare Systems, Inc.). A biostatistician performed the statistical analysis. Kruskal–Wallis one-way analysis of variance was performed on radiographic and clinical variables. A two-tailed There were 15 male and 25 female patients in the delayed treatment (DT) group versus 35 male and 40 female patients in the control group. Average age was 53 (range 22–85 years) in the DT group and 53 in the control group (range 20–84 years). The differences between the groups were not statistically significant. Mean time from injury to treatment in the DT group was 30 days (range 21–108) versus 8 days in the control group (range 1–20). This difference was significant ( Fracture types according to the AO/OTA classification are depicted in Postoperative radiographic parameters are shown in Complications in the DT group included tendon irritation due to a radially prominent plate in one case and sensory neuropathy in another case. Both patients refused revision surgery (removal of implant and nerve exploration). In one case, postoperative subsidence of the joint was observed resulting in a prominent screw; hardware was removed with improvement of symptoms. In the control group, there was one case of median nerve neuropraxia. Quick DASH scores were significantly higher (worse) in the delayed surgery group (21.7 The SF-12 physical score in the DT group was 43.4 Our study demonstrates that open reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fractures using a locking volar plate can be a successful procedure, even if performed late in the course of injury. All of our cases were performed utilising the standard volar FCR approach; no formal osteotomy was required and no bone graft was applied in any of the cases. Although the outcome, as measured by the quick DASH score, was worse than in the primary fracture, when controlling for the patients who had complications, most of them due to technical issues (prominent hardware), these differences decreased substantially and became statistically insignificant. It should be mentioned that these very same complications can occur in acute fracture surgery Radiographically, the goal of restoring radial height, inclination and volar tilt towards clinically acceptable values was achieved in all cases regardless of whether acute or delayed, with a slight reduction (2°), albeit clinically insignificant, in the volar tilt in the type C fractures in the control group. We explain these favourable results due to the adequate soft-tissue release performed in the late group and by use of the anatomical plate with metaphysis – the first technique for the restoration of normal anatomical relations. The literature comparing early versus late treatment of these fractures appears to be sparse, although several existing studies report the use of a volar plate for the correction of deformity by applying an osteotomy for malunited fractures In a recent prospective study, a long-term follow-up following shortening and dorsal angulated wrist malunions has shown a deleterious effect on extremity function An interesting finding was the higher rate of type A (extra-articular) fractures in the delayed surgery group as compared with the control group. This can be explained by the fact that most displaced intra-articular fractures are primarily treated operatively in our institution, while reduced extra-articular fractures are referred for nonoperative treatment. Late displacement often leads to surgery according to a more delayed timetable. Therefore, prompt identification of fractures prone to re-displacement, such as dorsal bone comminution, would be desirable in order to prevent such a late presentation. Unfortunately, the current literature is controversial in this respect. A recent study demonstrated that all unstable fractures undergoing closed reduction would eventually collapse regardless of adequate initial closed reduction Given our results and the uncertainty found in recent reports, we recommend close follow-up following initially well-reduced fractures with the knowledge that late intervention can be safely performed in this subgroup of patients. Limitations of our study are its retrospective nature and the lack of more objective measures, such as range of motion and grip strength. However, based on the quick DASH scores and radiographic analysis we assume these to be favourable as our measured outcomes in the control group were related to such clinical measures previously published Primary delayed surgery for open reduction and internal reduction and fixation of displaced distal radius fractures with volar locking plate can be safely performed with clinically acceptable results in most cases, with reasonably acceptable complication rates. None of the authors have received funds or had any financial sponsorship or support from any party in treating the patients, collecting the data, preparing and writing the manuscript.