Froth is formed and transplanted on top of dye-containing solution to trace liquid flow. Sufficiently stable froth was formed with soap but with frothers (1-pentanol and polypropylene glycol) talc was necessary to produce transportable froth. With the soap froth liquid penetration was faster than for the talc-stabilized froth.Formation of froth in flotation is considered one of the prime functions of frother ( Stability of static froth is governed by the rate at which liquid drains under gravity. Processes which oppose drainage will increase stability. One stabilizing mechanism derives from capillary pressure driving (“sucking”) liquid from the large radii Plateau borders at the base of froth in contact with solution to the progressively smaller radii Plateau borders up through the froth ( In a demonstration of liquid (water) flow associated with surface chemistry effects, Three surfactants were tested: a soap (RONA brand liquid dish soap) selected as a known frothing agent, and two frothers, 1-pentanol (Fisher) and F150 (polypropylene glycol, molecular weight 425, Flottec), selected to give a range from low to high frothing ‘strength’, respectively ( The setup ( Solutions of 30 The soap gave two types of froth, ‘wet’ and ‘dry’. For wet froth, the sample was taken immediately after shaking from well below the froth surface; the wet foam would produce and sit on a thin layer of water when placed on the tray, which when inverted would produce a small bead of water at the bottom. The dry foam sample was drawn from the top of the foam, after waiting several seconds for it to drain. This froth was light and adhered to the tray with no water layer. No wet or dry distinction was apparent in the frother-talc cases. The dye solution for the frother tests had the same frother concentration but for the soap tests it was varied from zero soap to twice the concentration in forming the froth and included one test in presence of talc (0.2 Image acquisition, running on IFIX software, was initiated immediately the froth was in place. Images were collected till dye reached the top of the froth (ca. 0.5 The results for soap are shown in  Visually, soap froth had smaller bubbles than the frother-based froth. Small bubbles build froth more readily than large bubbles but talc is known for producing large-bubbled but stable froth. 1-pentanol gave smaller bubbles than F150, which probably reflects adsorption of F150 by talc ( As an extension of the visualization technique on single bubbles the approach forming and transporting froth samples proved tractable. In the single bubble tests it was easier to attribute liquid flow to the Marangoni effect ( The presence of talc did not influence the response of soap froth ( The experiment bears similarity to the static test used to characterize frothers. Evident in the test here is that particles provided the stability rather than surface chemistry effects associated with frother, which recent work is emphasizing ( A setup to visualize liquid penetration into froth is described. Stable froths were readily formed by soap but frothers required stabilization with talc. Penetration rates were generally higher for soap froth than for talc-stabilized froth. Surface chemistry effects contribute to persistence of the soap froth but are likely not important in frother-based froth where talc provides the stability. The funding was under the Chair in Mineral Processing sponsored by Vale, Teck, Xstrata Process Support, Barrick Gold, Shell Canada, SGS Lakefield Research, COREM and Flottec under the NSERC (Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada) CRD (Collaborative Research and Development) program.