Soil moisture is an important variable for hillslope and catchment hydrology. There are various computational methods to estimate soil moisture and their complexity varies greatly: from one box with vertically constant volumetric soil water content to fully saturated-unsaturated coupled physically-based models. Different complexity levels are applicable depending on the simulation scale, computational time limitations, input data and knowledge about the parameters. The Vertical Equilibrium Model (VEM) is a simple approach to estimate the catchment-wide soil water storage at a daily time-scale on the basis of water table level observations, soil properties and an assumption of hydrological equilibrium without vertical fluxes above the water table. In this study VEM was extended by considering vertical fluxes, which allows conditions with evaporation and infiltration to be represented. The aim was to test the hypothesis that the simulated volumetric soil water content significantly depends on vertical fluxes. The water content difference between the no-flux, equilibrium approach and the new constant-flux approach greatly depended on the soil textural class, ranging between ∼1% for silty clay and ∼44% for sand at an evapotranspiration rate of 5mm·d−1. The two approaches gave a mean volumetric soil water content difference of ∼1mm for two case studies (sandy loam and organic rich soils). The results showed that for many soil types the differences in estimated storage between the no-flux and the constant flux approaches were relatively small.The unsaturated soil water content makes up a very small fraction of the global water storage, but plays a defining role in hydrological processes from hillslope to global scales. The soil water content and distribution affects soil aggregate formation ( Soil moisture storage and its vertical variation are often represented by simplistic or very complex approaches. Simplistic approaches utilize vertically constant soil moisture, (e.g., The Vertical Equilibrium Model (VEM) was introduced as an alternative between these simplistic and complex approaches, and considers a more realistic vertical distribution of soil moisture in a simple way. With VEM the volumetric soil water content is based on the water table position assuming a zero-flux equilibrium ( Here we extended VEM so that infiltration and evapotranspiration were taken into account as steady vertical fluxes. The aim of this study was to test the hypothesis that the modeled total volumetric soil water content stored in a soil profile varies significantly depending on the vertical flux assumption. For this, the volumetric soil water content of eleven soil textural classes were simulated and compared under various flux conditions with assumptions on vertical fluxes: 1) the zero flux assumption (VEM In the original version of VEM, the unsaturated water content is calculated as a function of the pressure potential. In the case of zero vertical flux ( In the extended version presented here, vertical fluxes were introduced ( Effective saturation The effective saturation was linked to relative hydraulic conductivity Here Mualem’s model was preferred over Burdine’s ( Eqs.  At the water table, where the bottom boundary of the deepest sublayer ( The water content of eleven soil column scenarios (sand, loam, sandy loam, sandy clay loam, silt loam, silty clay loam, clay loam, silt, clay silty clay and sandy clay) were examined under the assumption of a series of steady state vertical fluxes at the soil surface, varying from −5 to 5 The integrated water content difference  Both models (VEM Next, the results of VEM Water table depth was continuously measured with pressure transducers (Level Troll 300, In-situ, USA) in groundwater wells at S4 and S22. Infiltration and evapotranspiration rates were estimated with the HBV model ( Porosity profiles and their 95% confidence intervals were derived from soil water retention measurements, as the water content at zero matric potential ( The saturated hydraulic conductivity (  As discussed above, soil moisture calculation with VEM is possible for the zone between The 95% confidence intervals for model parameters The integrated volumetric soil water content ( When the net vertical flux was positive (i.e. evapotranspiration), Similar to the example textural classes, at the two case study locations At S4 the average and maximum Taking into account vertical fluxes made the The aim of this study was to examine the significance of vertical flux assumptions for the unsaturated soil water content. Looking into various textural classes and flux conditions, it was possible to draw general guidelines regarding when the zero vertical flux assumption is satisfactory. Applying the two models, VEM We showed that depending on the soil type, the water content of unsaturated soil could be underestimated by ∼1 to 44% if the net downward fluxes are not taken into account. On the other hand, ignoring the upward net vertical flux could result in overestimating the volumetric soil water content up to almost 90%. Both the assumption about the water content above The case studies showed that the volumetric soil water content at this observation time scale was not strongly dependent on the flux assumption, except during the dry period when the net vertical flux was upward. During this period VEM From the results obtained from the two case studies, it can be concluded that VEM results in a satisfactory picture of volumetric soil water content on hillslope and catchment scale, for systems with a shallow water table. The model takes into account the variable depth of the boundary between saturated and unsaturated soil, and therefore is able to predict the dynamics of volumetric soil water content quite well. As a modelling approach, VEM There are, however, situations where VEM This work was supported by the