The rates of Diuron elimination by some advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) such as Fe(III)/UV, Ferrioxalate/UV, Fe(III)/H2O2/UV, Ferrioxalate/UV/H2O2 and Fe(III)/H2O2 have been compared. Experiments have been conducted at pH=2.3±0.1 with a batch reactor equipped with a low-pressure mercury lamp emitting mainly at 253.7nm. Data obtained under the following experimental conditions ([H2O2]0=10−3
                     M, [Diuron]0=5×10−5
                     M and [Fe(III)]0=10−3
                     M) have shown that rates of Diuron oxidation were higher with the systems Fe(III)/H2O2/UV and Ferrioxalate/UV/H2O2 than with Fe(III)/UV and Fe(III)/H2O2. On the other hand, Fe(III)/UV was found to be very efficient in mineralization of Diuron solution in comparison to direct UV photolysis. The experimental results showed that radical 
                        
                     OH is the major pathway in the process of Diuron degradation.Concern over pollution of surface water, ground water, air and soils has been voiced during the last decades and even recently. In the aquatic compartment, causes of contamination could be mainly due to the control of surface agricultural land, the domestic use of organic compounds and the discharge of industrial effluents. The use of classical oxidizing agents, such as chlorine and its derivatives, and ozone in the treatment of drinking water, was not efficient in the case of industrial wastewaters. Thus, this lack of efficiency towards those organic components could be due to their resistance to this way of destruction. In these conditions, the complete elimination of the residual toxic products needs the application of new methods of degradation called “advanced oxidation processes (AOPs)”. Considered as an alternative to conventional methods, these processes involve generation of very reactive and non-selective entities: the hydroxyl radicals There are several ways to produce the radicals OH The efficiency of Fe(III)/H In this study, we compared the rate of oxidation of Diuron in moderate concentration (5×10 Diuron [3-(3, 4-dichlorophenyl)-1, 1-dimethylurea] is a sigma product (>98%). Solutions have been prepared in high-purity water, from a Millipore set (resistivity: 0.5×10 Ferrioxalate of potassium was prepared by mixing 1 Experiments have been performed in a double wall borosilicate glass photochemical reactor (volume: 2 The irradiated solution of Diuron was analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) in isocratic mode. The device was equipped with a Waters 510 pump, a Waters Wisp 712 auto sampler, a LDC analytical UV detector (Spectromonitor 3100) and a D-2500 Merck integrator. The separation has been done using Waters C18 columns (Resolve Nucleosil C  Hydrogen peroxide was measured by iodometric method for H Ferrous ion and total ferric (after its reduction by hydroxylamine chlorhydrate) were determined by 1,10-phenantroline colorimetric method using a molar absorption coefficient for the Fe(II)–phenantroline complex of 11300 pH was measured with a “Meter Lab PHM 250”. Calibration was performed with standard buffers between pH=1.0 and 3.0 at 25 The UV/vis absorption spectra were recorded on a double-beam spectrophotometer Safas 320 D. The mineralization of the solution of Diuron has been followed by analysis of total organic carbon with Dorhman DC 80 TOC analyzer. Speciation of iron(III) was made with MINEQL+ Software ( In MINEQL+ Software program using identical simulated data to those of our experimental conditions (0<pH<3 and [Fe(III)] In  The high efficiency of this system, could be attributed to the photoreduction of the monomeric species FeSO The irradiation process of Diuron by Fe(III)/UV and Ferrioxalate/UV at 253.7 However, in our case, the rate of Diuron oxidation could be affected by interfering sulphate ions in a sense where (a) they are able to form complexes with Fe(III) and even Fe(II); (b) to generate radical anion SO Similar efficiency, but with feeble elimination rate, has been observed for Diuron with Fe(III)/UV under different experimental conditions (irradiation has been performed at 365 In the case of this process, the photodecomposition mechanism of Ferrioxalate admitted and described in the literature is based on formation of iron(II) and radicals oxalate C Mineralization of Diuron (50 As expected, maximal rate of photodecomposition of Diuron was reached in the presence of H Photoreduction of Fe(III) and Ferrioxalate at 253.7 Photolysis of H Reaction between Fe(II) and H From the results showed in Highest efficiency observed with Ferrioxalate/UV/H the photoreduction of Ferrioxalate at 253.7 the molar absorption coefficient of Ferrioxalate at 253.7 the strong absorption of UV radiations by Ferrioxalate than aromatic photoproducts; the high efficiency of the photochemical reaction of Ferrioxalate leading to formation of Fe(II) and OH The oxidation of Diuron by Fe(III)/H Degradation curve, resulting from the oxidation of Diuron by Fe(III)/H On the other side, experimental results, indicated that rate of oxidation of Diuron by Fe(III)/H The theme of this study was to compare the efficiency of some advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) in the course of the elimination of Diuron. The obtained results with Ferrioxalate/UV and Fe(III)/UV showed that efficiency was better than by direct UV photolysis. Furthermore, it was greatly enhanced when H The authors acknowledge the ministère Algérien de l’enseignement supérieur et de la recherche scientifique for their financial support and also Professor J. De Laat for his scientific advises and fruitful discussions (laboratoire de chimie de l’eau et de l’environnement: LCEE, ESIP, Avenue du Recteur Pineau, Poitiers 86022, France).