The carbon-coated palygorskite (Pal@C) was prepared by impregnation and carbonization using modified palygorskite (Pal) as a hard template and glucose as the carbon source. The amorphous carbon nanotubes (ACNTs) could be finally obtained by removing Pal template using acid and alkali treatment. In comparison with pure Pal@C nanocomposite, the maximum adsorption capacity of Congo red dye onto the ACNTs could be improved by over 13-fold (467.97 mg/g vs. 34.40 mg/g, ACNTs vs. Pal@C), which was attributed to the larger specific surface area (877.09 m2/g) and more mesoporous pores (average pore diameter is 7.62 nm) that ACNTs possess. The effects of different dyes molecules such as Congo red and methyl orange on the adsorption properties of ACNTs were investigated. The maximum adsorption capacity of Congo red was 467.97 mg/g more than that of methyl orange (253.26 mg/g) due to differences in molecular structure and size. Furthermore, Langmuir model can be used to predict the adsorption isotherm of Congo red dye by ACNTs. Our kinetic study showed that the quasi-second-order kinetic model could describe the adsorption behavior of ACNTs for Congo red. In particular, the ACNTs presented a higher adsorption capacity for adsorption of Congo red, regardless of pH.Removal of dyes from wastewater is a formidable challenge, as those dyes are toxic and detrimental to humans and aquatic life. Adsorption is one of the most effective processes of advanced wastewater treatment, which industries employ to reduce hazardous inorganic/organic pollutants in the effluent Palygorskite (Pal), with theoretical formula of Mg Raw Pal was purchased from Xuyi aotu palygorskite Company Limited Co. Ltd. Jiangsu. All reagents used in this study were of analytical grade. Ammonium chloride (NH The preparation flow chart of the ACNTs was displayed in  Various characterization techniques such as X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), Spherical aberration-corrected transmission electron microscope (TEM), and N The performance of the samples was determined through adsorption/desorption experiment. Adsorption of two types of dye CR and MO on the ACNTs was compared. The standard working curves of CR (Fig. S1) and MO (Fig. S2) at low concentrations were established, and absorbance of the remaining CR was recorded by Ultraviolet Spectrum (UV-2600) after adsorption. In a typical adsorption process, 2.5 mg of the adsorbent and 5 mL of the CR or MO solution with different concentrations were mixed in a test tube to form a dispersion. The dispersion was constantly and vigorously shaken for 6 h to establish the adsorption–desorption equilibrium at room temperature. The dispersion was centrifuged to separate the adsorbent, and the diluted supernatant liquid was collected in cuvettes for UV examination with the absorbance of the peak located at 498 nm. Factors affecting the adsorption performance (initial dye concentration, pH of aqueous solution, ion strength, temperature and amount of adsorbent) were investigated. After one cycle of adsorption on the adsorbent, the used ACNTs were filtered and washed with ethanol several times by suction filtration. The adsorption performance parameters, namely, equilibrium adsorption capacity XRD patterns of raw Pal, H-Pal, Pal@C, and ACNTs are shown in FTIR spectra of raw Pal, H-Pal, Pal@C, and ACNTs are shown in The Raman spectra of ACNTs are shown in XPS test was then carried out to further identify the element compositions of ACNTs, spectra are shown in Fig. S3a and The TEM images of raw Pal, H-Pal, Pal@C, and ACNTs samples were obtained to assess their morphological characteristics (  As shown in   Moreover, ACNTs exhibit good adsorption performance for MO. As shown in The zeta potentials of ACNTs have been detected and shown in Effect of temperature on adsorption capacity of the ACNTs is shown in Effect of adsorbent dosage on adsorption capacity and removal efficiency of the ACNTs with different initial concentrations of CR showed in Fig. S6, and the detailed description was presented in the supplementary materials. The dye removal efficiency increases and adsorption capacity of CR decrease with increase in adsorbent dosage. Desorption of CR and regeneration of the ACNTs were also investigated as shown in Fig. S7 and described in the supplementary materials. The regenerated ACNTs presented good adsorption capacity at the second recovery, but the adsorption capacity quickly decreases after five recycles. The main reasons are attributed to CR desorption difficulty and the inevitable loss of ACNTs adsorbent in the process of adsorption and desorption. The interaction between adsorbate and adsorbent was investigated and displayed through an adsorption isotherm of CR on the ACNTs. In general, two adsorptions–desorption isotherms, namely, Langmuir and Freundlich models, were used to predict the adsorption capacity of the adsorbents. The detailed description was presented in the supplementary materials. The Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms are shown in Fig. S8a and Fig. S8b, respectively. The adsorption parameters (calculated from the linear plots) of both models are listed in Table S1. Comparison of coefficient values indicates that the experimental isotherm model exhibits better match with the Langmuir model than with the Freundlich model. Pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models were used to fit the kinetic curve and investigated the kinetic mechanism of CR adsorption of ACNTs. The detailed description was presented in the supplementary materials. The pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order kinetic models are presented in Fig. S9a and Fig. S9b, respectively. The adsorption parameters of both models are also listed in Table S1. Comparison of coefficients indicates that the experimental kinetic model better fits with the pseudo-second-order model than with the pseudo-first-order model. The kinetic rate constant ( Notably, the highest adsorption capacity of the as-prepared ACNTs was 468 mg/g. To the best of our knowledge, this value is higher than most of previously reported AC prepared by carbonization technique Firstly, considering surface functional groups of the adsorbent, more positive charges exist on the surface of ACNTs below the isoelectric point, and CR is an anion dye with a negative group (Ar-SO Secondly, the ACNTs had different adsorption capacities for the removal of anionic dyes CR and MO from aqueous solution because of different structure. By contrast, CR and MO are both anionic dyes, their charges are also located at the sulfonate group, the locations and numbers of charged groups at these dyes are different, which would probably be essential in the adsorption orientations. Moreover, molecular dimensions of CR and MO are 2.66 nm × 0.75 nm × 1.04 nm and 1.56 nm × 0.46 nm × 0.29 nm, respectively, which is calculated from software of Materials Studio (see Fig. S11). Hence, CR and MO can easily be adsorbed on the external surface, channel and pores that are larger than their molecular size. Thus, the good adsorption capacity of CR onto the ACNTs was possible due to its suitable size and the location of sulfonate group. Thirdly, we speculate that the interaction between the adsorbent and the adsorbate is a very important factor for the adsorption of CR molecules. A π - π interaction is due to the π - π electron coupling interaction of CR molecules with surface layer of ACNTs. The π electrons exist within the molecular structure of CR and delocalized π electrons on the basal planes of the ACNTs. CR molecules have 6 aromatic skeletons, 4 more than MO's aromatic skeletons, and the adsorption amount of CR is much larger than MO, indicating that the π - π electron coupling interaction may lead to orientation of CR molecules in ACNTs greatly enhancing the adsorption. In summary, the excellent sorption properties of ACTNs for CR dyes can mainly be attributed to the following factors: (1) high specific surface area and large pore volume of the ACTNs for high uptake by adsorption and pore filling; (2) the π - π electron coupling interaction. However, in order to realize the practical applications of ACNTs, more relevant investigations are needed in future research. In particular, the effect of the surface functional groups of the ACTNs adsorbent on the adsorption mechanism are needed to be further studied. A new type of activated carbon-based materials and composites (including metal oxides and other functional materials) based on the surface chemistry of the ACTNs adsorbent material are needed to be developed in the next work.   Amorphous carbon nanotubes has been prepared by removal of the template of Pal in the carbon-coated palygorskite. Aims are to form rod-like carbon nanotubes by means of the nanoscale rod-like morphology of natural palygorskite. The as-obtained ACNTs adsorbent with an amorphous and hollow structure presented an outstanding adsorption capacity (467.97 mg/g) for CR dye, which can be attributed to their large specific area (877.09 m In particular, we found that its rapid adsorption of CR was not affected by the pH value of the solution, which is different from many other pH dependent adsorbents. Investigation of adsorption isotherm model and kinetic model demonstrated that Langmuir model can be used to describe the adsorption isotherm of CR dye by ACNTs and the quasi-second-order kinetic model can describe the adsorption behavior of ACNTs to CR. In present study, we proposed a new method to design activated carbons with controlled porosity and larger surface areas. This work will provide a new strategy for further designing a new type of activated carbon-based materials and composites (including metal oxides and other fuctional materials) based on the ACTNs adsorbent material for application in environmental remediation and other fields. There are no conflicts of interest to declare. We are greatly grateful for the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: