This work has been aimed at identifying suitable conditions for the separation of europium/gadolinium mixture, with a high Gd content and without previous europium reduction, into a phase of high-purity Gd and a Eu-enriched mixture. Acid and basic extractants have been evaluated in a number of experimental conditions. Two acid extractants were investigated, DEHPA and (HEH(EHP)), the latter in its natural and saponified forms. Also, a series of basic extractants, Primene JM-T®, Primene 81R®, Alamine 336® and Aliquat 336® was evaluated. The Aliquat 336® was employed in chloride and nitrate forms. The experiments with acid extractants were carried out in hydrochloric medium, while the basic extractants were investigated in nitric and sulfuric medium. The selectivity achieved with Aliquat 336® (separation factor of 2.0) was superior to those obtained with the acid extractants (separation factors of 1.48 for DEHPA and 1.59 for HEH(EHP)).Increasing interest for high-purity rare earth oxides, such as those of europium and gadolinium, can be explained by their diversified and expanding applications. Together with yttrium, europium is responsible for the red color in television screens and computer monitors. Gadolinium is employed in the medical field as a contrasting agent in images obtained by magnetic resonance, as well as in the nuclear area, as a thermal neutrons absorber ( Europium, gadolinium and samarium are part of the middle rare earths group. The separation of this group into individual elements is usually undertaken by the reduction of Eu(III) to Eu(II) and its precipitation as EuSO In the present study, the separation of a Eu/Gd mixture with high gadolinium content (96.5 Although solvent extraction is not usually applied for Eu(III)/Gd(III) separation, the high gadolinium content (96.5 Europium and gadolinium solutions were prepared from a carbonate mixture of these elements (1.90 Commercial extractants and organic solvents were used in this study without purification. The extractants di (2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid – DEHPA (97 The saponification of the HEH(EHP) was accomplished by contacting a solution 1.5 The extraction experiments were carried out by mixing equal volumes (20 The basic extractants were tested in chloride, nitric, and sulfuric solutions. For nitric and chloride media, the concentrations of Eu The extractants commonly used in metal solvent extractions are classified as neutral, acid and basic. The neutral extractants act by a solvation mechanism, while acidic and basic extractants operate by ion exchange. Acidic extractants act through their conjugated bases and, therefore, they are classified as liquid cationic exchangers. The basic extractants are constituted by amines, which extract through their salts formed via protonation. These salts extract anionic and neutral species by anionic exchange and formation of aducts, respectively ( The separation of rare earths in the trivalent state is based upon the small and systematic differences in their basicity character, which decrease with the increase of atomic number ( Based on the chemical composition of the mixture investigated in this study, basic extractants appear to be most suitable for the separation purposes. This hypothesis relies on the fact that europium is a minor constituent and has a smaller atomic number than gadolinium. Thus, europium would be preferentially extracted over gadolinium. However, the efficiency of amines depends on the medium and, in particular, on its capacity to form neutral or anionic complexes with the metals to be extracted. The results discussed below illustrate these observations. The experimental results obtained in sulfuric acid solutions indicated higher metal extraction levels with Primene JM-T in comparison with Primene 81R (experiments 1 and 2). In these experiments, the separation factor obtained with Primene JM-T is lower because of the extraction percentage with Primene JM-T was nearly 100% for both metals. A high separation factor was achieved when the concentration of Primene JM-T was halved (experiment 3). The contact of these extractants with hydrochloric and nitric acid solutions resulted in formation of stable emulsions, and therefore these chemicals were excluded from the study. In contrast to the observed behavior of the primary amines, both Aliquat (in chloride and nitrate forms) and Alamine 336 resulted in inefficient metal extraction in sulfuric medium. This is probably due to steric effects associated with the large size of the molecules of Summarizing, the best results (separation factor of 2.0) were obtained with the primary amines (Primene 81R and Primene JM-T) in sulfuric solutions and with Aliquat-nitrate in nitric solutions. The difference between the two primary amines is the number of carbon atoms in the alkyl group: Primene 81R with 12–14 carbons and Primene JM-T with 16–22 carbons (more hydrophobic character). Due to the high dispersion of the organic in the aqueous phase, Primene 81R, was excluded, and subsequent studies were carried out with Primene JM-T and Aliquat-nitrate. The effect of the extractant concentration, the saturation metal in the organic phase and the metal stripping conditions were investigated with the two selected extractants: Primene JM-T and Aliquat-nitrate. The variation in the concentration of Primene JM-T from 0.1 to 0.5 Based on these results, the following difficulties in the separation of europium and gadolinium with basic extractants can be pointed out: (i) the saturation of Primene JM-T occurs even in the first contact, (ii) there is no selectivity in the metal stripping from the loaded Aliquat-nitrate, and (iii) high nitrate concentrations are required in the extraction with Aliquat-nitrate. The study has also focused upon the extractants DEHPA and HEH(EHP) in hydrochloric acid media. The extractant HEH(EHP) was investigated in its natural and saponified form. It is well known that the hydrogen ions released in the ion-exchange process affect negatively the metal extraction due to the increase of acidity in the aqueous phase. This problem can be partially solved by saponification of the extractants, thus leading to a predominant release of sodium, potassium, or ammonium ions. Partial saponification is recommended to avoid the problems of a gel phase formation and loss of the extractant due to solubilization ( Contrary to the results obtained with amines, the extraction of Gd with acid extractants is superior to the extraction of Eu ( The extractant concentration was investigated from 0.5 to 1.5 The acidity of the feed solution is usually a variable of great importance in the solvent extraction process, and in many cases, becomes a determinant factor in the process selectivity. The influence of acidity in metal extraction was investigated from pH 0 to 3. As shown in In order to investigate the effect of Eu/Gd concentration on metal extraction, the feed solution used in the previous experiments was diluted 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5 times. The results are presented in Finally, the influence of HCl concentration on the metal stripping from the loaded extractants was investigated. In these studies, the HCl concentration varied from 0.25 to 2.0 mol L The selectivity achieved with the basic extractants (separation factor of 2.0) was superior to those obtained with the acidic extractants (1.48 for DEHPA and 1.59 for HEH(EHP)). The best results (separation factor of 2.0) were obtained with the primary amines (Primene 81R and Primene JM-T) in sulfuric solutions and with Aliquat-nitrate in nitric solutions. Despite the relatively better extractions, various difficulties were experienced in the separation of europium and gadolinium with basic extractants: (i) the saturation of Primene JM-T occurs even in the first contact, (ii) there is no selectivity in the metal stripping from the loaded Aliquat-nitrate, and (iii) high nitrate concentrations are required in the extraction with Aliquat-nitrate. Regarding the two acidic extractants, the HEH(EHP) presented the higher separation factor and metal stripping than DEHPA. Saponification of HEH(EHP) showed no detectable improvement with respect to metal selectivity. Although our studies confirm the difficulties in the separation of Eu/Gd when both elements are in the trivalent state, the results are promising and can be improved in a complete circuit comprised by extraction–scrubbing–stripping stages. The authors acknowledge the support from CNPq (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico).