Strategies to engineer bone tissue have focused on either: (1)the use of scaffolds for osteogenic cell transplantation or as conductive substrates for guided bone regeneration; or (2)release of inductive bioactive factors from these scaffold materials. This study describes an approach to add an inductive component to an osteoconductive scaffold for bone tissue engineering. We report the release of bioactive vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) from a mineralized, porous, degradable polymer scaffold. Three dimensional, porous scaffolds of the copolymer 85:15 poly(lactide-co-glycolide) were fabricated by including the growth factor into a gas foaming/particulate leaching process. The scaffold was then mineralized via incubation in a simulated body fluid. Growth of a bone-like mineral film on the inner pore surfaces of the porous scaffold is confirmed by mass increase measurements and quantification of phosphate content within scaffolds. Release of 
                        125
                        I
                     -labeled VEGF was tracked over a 15 day period to determine release kinetics from the mineralized scaffolds. Sustained release from the mineralized scaffolds was achieved, and growth of the mineral film had only a minor effect on the release kinetics from the scaffolds. The VEGF released from the mineralized and non-mineralized scaffolds was over 70% active for up to 12 days following mineralization treatment, and the growth of mineral had little effect on total scaffold porosity.Orthopaedic tissue engineering strategies have often focused on the use of natural or synthetic, degradable materials as scaffolds for cell transplantation (cell-based strategies) The degradability, biocompatibility, and large surface area/volume ratio of scaffolds can be accomplished by the appropriate choice of synthetic or natural material and processing approach. Poly(lactic acid), poly(glycolic acid), and their copolymers have been widely used in tissue engineering applications because they undergo controllable hydrolytic degradation into natural metabolites Although conductive and cell transplantation strategies have enjoyed success in bone tissue engineering A major limitation in engineering of many tissue types, including bone tissue, is the inability to induce rapid vascular ingrowth during tissue development This study was undertaken to develop a scaffold that combines the degradability, biocompatibility, and osteoconductivity of a mineralized PLG scaffold with the tissue inductive properties of a bioactive polypeptide growth factor. Specifically, the goal was to grow bone-like mineral on the inner pore surfaces of a scaffold containing a growth factor without compromising factor bioactivity or scaffold porosity. Vascular endothelial growth factor was specifically chosen for these studies because it is a potent mitogen for human micro and macrovascular endothelial cells, but does not exhibit mitogenic effects on other cell types Poly(lactide-co-glycolide) pellets with a lactide Certain scaffolds were mineralized via a 5 day incubation in a simulated body fluid (SBF). Simulated body fluid (SBF) was prepared by dissolving the following reagents in deionized H To analyze mineral growth on gas foamed PLG scaffolds, sets of three scaffolds were incubated in SBF for periods ranging from 0 to 10 days. Samples were removed from solution, lyophilized to dryness, and analyzed after 0, 2, 4, 8, and 10 day incubation periods. The dry mass of each scaffold was measured before and after incubation in SBF, and percent increases in mass were calculated and compared using ANOVA, and a Student's The amount of phosphate present in the scaffolds after the aforementioned incubation times was determined using a previously described colorimetric assay In order to assess the incorporation efficiency of VEGF into the PLG scaffolds and to track the VEGF release kinetics from the scaffolds, receptor-grade To determine the effects of mineral growth on factor release, release kinetics were measured both in SBF during mineral formation and in phosphate buffered saline (PBS). Scaffolds prepared with radiolabeled VEGF were placed in 4 The biological activity of VEGF incorporated into, and released from, polymer matrices was determined by testing its ability to stimulate the growth of cultured human dermal microvascular endothelial cells isolated from neonatal dermis (HMVEC(nd), Cascade Biologics; Portland, OR). HMVEC(nd) were cultured to passage 7 in MCDB 131 media (Cascade Biologics) supplemented with Cascade Biologics’ microvascular growth supplement (5% fetal bovine serum, hydrocortisone, human fibroblast growth factor, heparin, human epidermal growth factor, and dibutyryl cyclic AMP) prior to use. Cells were plated at a density of 5×10 Incubation of gas foamed 85 After a 6 day incubation, estimation of the mass of mineral on the scaffold using phosphate mass data gives 0.10 Vascular endothelial growth factor was incorporated into PLG scaffolds with an efficiency of 44±9% and released in a similar manner over a 15 day period in SBF and PBS solutions. An initial burst release of the incorporated growth factor was observed over the first 36 Vascular endothelial growth factor released from mineralized and non-mineralized scaffolds had a mitogenic effect on human dermal microvascular endothelial cells (HMVECs). Cells were grown in wells containing three different scaffold types: (1) A dose-response curve ( Bone-like mineral can be formed on the inner pore surfaces of PLG scaffolds using a five day incubation in simulated body fluid, and the mineral does not lead to an appreciable decrease in total scaffold porosity. Sustained release of a bioactive factor was achieved from PLG scaffolds during the mineralization process. The mineral presence slightly slowed the release of the growth factor from the scaffold, resulting in release of less VEGF during the 36–60 A 5 day incubation in SBF is sufficient for growth of bone-like mineral on the inner pore surfaces of a porous PLG scaffold. Quantification of percent mass gain and phosphate content suggests that the majority of mineral growth occurs between days 2 and 4 of incubation. Previous studies of bone-like mineral formation on polyester surfaces have shown varying mineral growth results after 5 day incubations in SBF. Incubation of poly(methyl methacrylate), and poly(ethylene terephthalate) in a solution with 1.5 times the ionic concentrations of SBF for 6 days resulted in no trace of mineral formation Sustained release of bioactive VEGF from PLG scaffolds can be achieved in the presence of a bone-like mineral. During the foaming process the factor and a factor-containing alginate hydrogel component are incorporated into the PLG scaffold as previously shown The growth of mineral on the surface of porous PLG does not change the overall shape of the VEGF release profile when compared with control samples incubated in PBS, although there are slight differences in release characteristics. The release profiles from both mineralized and non-mineralized scaffolds display a sustained release of VEGF for up to 15 days in vitro ( Formation of a mineral layer within the pores of PLG scaffolds had little effect on the ability of released growth factor to stimulate proliferation of human dermal microvascular endothelial cells. The possibility of protein denaturation and aggregation upon exposure to moisture is a justified concern in the controlled release of proteins from polymer systems In this study, a system has been developed for sustained release of polypeptide growth factors from mineralized PLG scaffolds for orthopaedic tissue engineering. The presence of a bone-like mineral has been shown to be beneficial for conduction of osteogenic cells into various porous synthetic constructs The authors are grateful for financial support from the NIH (R01 DE13033). They also would like to acknowledge the NIH for a cellular biotechnology training Grant (T32 GM 08353) to WLM and the Whitaker Foundation for a graduate fellowship to MCP.