L. Borghi, T. Schianchi, T. Meschi, A. Guerra, F. Allegri, U. Maggiore and A. Novarini, Departments of Clinical Sciences, and Internal Medicine and Nephrology, University of Parma, Parma, Italy N Engl J Med, Background A low-calcium diet is recommended to prevent recurrent stones in patients with idiopathic hypercalciuria, yet long-term data on the efficacy of a low-calcium diet are lacking. Recently, the efficacy of a low-calcium diet has been questioned, and greater emphasis has been placed on reducing the intake of animal protein and salt, but again, long-term data are unavailable. Methods We conducted a five-year randomized trial comparing the effect of two diets in 120 men with recurrent calcium oxalate stones and hypercalciuria. Sixty men were assigned to a diet containing a normal amount of calcium (30 mmol per day) but reduced amounts of animal protein (52 g per day) and salt (50 mmol of sodium chloride per day); the other 60 men were assigned to the traditional low-calcium diet, which contained 10 mmol of calcium per day. Results At five years, 12 of the 60 men on the normal-calcium, low-animal-protein, low-salt diet and 23 of the 60 men on the low-calcium diet had had relapses. The unadjusted relative risk of a recurrence for the group on the first diet, as compared with the group on the second diet, was 0.49 (95 percent confidence interval, 0.24 to 0.98; P = 0.04). During follow-up, urinary calcium levels dropped significantly in both groups by approximately 170 mg per day (4.2 mmol per day). However, urinary oxalate excretion increased in the men on the low-calcium diet (by an average of 5.4 mg per day [60 μmol per day]) but decreased in those on the normal-calcium, low-animal-protein, low-salt diet (by an average of 7.2 mg per day [80 μmol per day]). Conclusions In men with recurrent calcium oxalate stones and hypercalciuria, restricted intake of animal protein and salt, combined with a normal calcium intake, provides greater protection than the traditional low-calcium diet. For the first time stone former with a radiopaque calculus (that is presumed calcium oxalate stone), normal serum chemistries and no urinary tract infection the initial recommendations might well be 2.5 to 3 l. fluid intake per day, animal proteins restricted to 52 gm. per day and sodium restricted to 50 mmol. per day. This regimen is far easier and certainly less expensive than considering a metabolic evaluation and the common initiation of thiazide or citrate therapy. The old recommendation of adhering to a low calcium diet is gone and has been gone for quite some time now. It is interesting that in this long-term study stone recurrence rates decreased by 50%. In addition, urinary calcium and oxalate levels decreased with this diet. It is noteworthy that this diet appears to be quite reasonable. Indeed, the study participants apparently remained on the recommended diet for the 5-year period of the study. Dietary instructions can be found in the full text of the article at T. Murayama, N. Sakai, T. Yamada and T. Takano, Department of Urology, Sagamihara National Hospital, Sagamihara, Japan Int J Urol, Background: We previously reported that the urinary excretion of calcium and the diurnal variation of urinary pH were important for stone formation in hospitalized inpatients with hospital standard diet. Because almost all urinary stones are formed in outpatients with ambulatory free diet, it is essential to investigate these factors in outpatients. Methods: We examined the urinary excretion of calcium, oxalate, uric acid, phosphate and magnesium in 96 male outpatients and 142 male inpatients. We also studied the relationship between the stone composition and the diurnal variation of urinary pH in 32 male outpatients (five uric acid stones (UA), 13 pure calcium oxalate stones (CaOX) and 14 mixed calcium oxalate and calcium phosphate stones (CaOX-CaP)) and 53 male inpatients (nine UA, 15 CaOX and 29 CaOX-CaP). Results: There was a significant difference in the urinary excretion of calcium among outpatients with UA, CaOX and CaOX-CaP (133 ± 96 vs 219 ± 97 vs 268 ± 102 mg per day, P <0.05). In outpatients with UA, urinary pH was constantly low throughout the entire day. In contrast, outpatients with CaOX and those with CaOX-CaP had diurnal variation of urinary pH that was low in the early morning, followed by elevation in the daytime and was lowered in the night. The pHs in the early morning, afternoon and night were significantly higher in outpatients with CaOX-CaP than in those with CaOX. Conclusion: The diurnal variation of urinary pH and the urinary calcium are important for stone formation. Some interesting points are made in this article. First, uric acid stone formers do not necessarily have increased serum or urine uric acid levels. Indeed, in this study the urinary uric acid levels were normal and were routinely lower in the uric acid stone formers than among the calcium oxalate or calcium oxalate/calcium phosphate stone formers! It is the pH that matters: among the uric acid stone formers the normal diurnal variation of urinary pH disappeared and the pH remained at a level of 5. In contrast, for calcium oxalate and calcium oxalate/calcium phosphate stone formers the diurnal variation was seen (that is more alkaline during the day). However, in the latter group the entire pH curve was shifted upward into the greater than 6.0 range of pH, whereas the calcium oxalate stone formers had pH levels in the 5 to 5.5 range. In difficult to control cases of calcium oxalate stone formation it might be worthwhile to obtain a pH diary for each void. Judicious use of citrate to alkalize the urine at specific periods during the day may be worthwhile, most notably at bedtime and on arising. P. Zhong and Y. Zhou, Department of Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina J Acoust Soc Am, To reduce the potential of vascular injury without compromising the stone comminution capability of a Dornier HM-3 lithotripter, we have devised a method to suppress intraluminal bubble expansion via in situ pulse superposition. A thin shell ellipsoidal reflector insert was designed and fabricated to fit snugly into the original reflector of an HM-3 lithotripter. The inner surface of the reflector insert shares the same first focus with the original HM-3 reflector, but has its second focus located 5 mm proximal to the generator than that of the HM-3 reflector. With this modification, the original lithotripter shock wave is partitioned into a leading lithotripter pulse (peak positive pressure of 46 MPa and positive pulse duration of 1 μs at 24 kV) and an ensuing second compressive wave of 10 MPa peak pressure and 2 μs pulse duration, separated from each other by about 4 μs. Superposition of the two waves leads to a selective truncation of the trailing tensile component of the lithotripter shock wave, and consequently, a reduction in the maximum bubble expansion up to 41% compared to that produced by the original reflector. The pulse amplitude and −6 dB beam width of the leading lithotripter shock wave from the upgraded reflector at 24 kV are comparable to that produced by the original HM-3 reflector at 20 kV. At the lithotripter focus, while only about 30 shocks are needed to cause a rupture of a blood vessel phantom made of cellulose hollow fiber (i.d. = 0.2 mm) using the original HM-3 reflector at 20 kV, no rupture could be produced after 200 shocks using the upgraded reflector at 24 kV. On the other hand, after 100 shocks the upgraded reflector at 24 kV can achieve a stone comminution efficiency of 22%, which is better than the 18% efficiency produced by the original reflector at 20 kV (p = 0.043). All together, it has been shown in vitro that the upgraded reflector can produce satisfactory stone comminution while significantly reducing the potential for vessel rupture in shock wave lithotripsy. In this fascinating study the authors have, by simply placing an insert in the basic ellipsoid of the Dornier HM-3 lithotriptor (Dornier Medical Systems, Inc., Marietta, Georgia), created a primary and a 4 microsecond “trailing” shock wave. The latter appears to control the bubble expansion of the former while not adversely affecting the fragmentation of calculi in vitro. Testing of a phantom vessel in vitro showed no damage to the vessel. While in vivo testing has yet to be done, the concept appears sound. Indeed, there are now 2 lithotriptors using dual shock wave propagation in production. The unit with which I am familiar, the twin heads, appears to do in vivo exactly what the authors have predicted, causing minimal renal damage while providing excellent in vitro stone fragmentation. However, in this model 2 separate but nearly simultaneous shock waves are generated by 2 separate generators. Perhaps this is the beginning of a long overdue renaissance in lithotripsy, the development of a new generation of “double shock wave” lithotriptors that may provide results better than or equivalent to the original HM-3 with even fewer adverse tissue effects. K. A. B. Fowler, J. A. Locken, J. H. Duchesne and M. R. Williamson, Department of Radiology, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, University of New Mexico Health Sciences Center, Albuquerque, New Mexico Radiology, PURPOSE: To determine the sensitivity and specificity of ultrasonography (US) for detecting parenchymal and renal pelvis calculi and to establish the accuracy of US for determining the size and number of calculi. MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 123 US and computed tomographic (CT) examinations were compared retrospectively for the presence of renal calculi. The sensitivity of US was determined for individual calculi and at least one calculus per examination. Retrospective findings were compared with the original US interpretation. The sizes of calculi in longest axis were compared on US and CT images, and the US detection of calculi in the left and right kidneys was compared. The use of US for detecting the full extent of calculus burden was evaluated in patients with multiple calculi. RESULTS: US depicted 24 of 101 calculi identified at CT, yielding a sensitivity of 24% and a specificity of 90%. There was no substantial difference for the detection of calculi in the right and left kidneys. The sensitivity of US for any calculi in a patient was 44%, equal to that of the original US interpretation. US enabled identification of 39% of patients with multiple calculi and demonstrated all calculi in 17% of these patients. The mean size of calculi detected with US was 7.1 mm ± 1.2 (95% CI); 73% of calculi not visualized at US were less than 3.0 mm in size. Calculus size based on US and CT measurements was concordant in 79% of cases and differed by a mean of 1.5 mm ± 0.7. CONCLUSION: US is of limited value for detecting renal calculi. M. Patlas, A. Farkas, D. Fisher, I. Zaghal and I. Hadas-Halpern, Departments of Radiology and Urology, Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel Br J Radiol, The aim of our study was to compare the accuracy of non-contrast spiral CT with ultrasound (US) for the diagnosis of ureteral calculi in the evaluation of patients with acute flank pain. 62 consecutive patients with flank pain were examined with both CT and US over a period of 9 months. All patients were prospectively defined as either positive or negative for ureterolithiasis, based on follow-up evaluation. 43 of the 62 patients were confirmed as having ureteral calculi based on stone recovery or urological interventions. US showed 93% sensitivity and 95% specificity in the diagnosis of ureterolithiasis; CT showed 91% and 95%, respectively. Pathology unrelated to urinary stone disease was demonstrated in six patients. Although both modalities were excellent for detecting ureteral stones, consideration of cost and radiation lead us to suggest that US be employed first and CT be reserved for when US is unavailable or non-diagnostic. The debate on using ultrasound instead of computerized tomography (CT) for the detection of urolithiasis continues. CT is more expensive and provides a higher dose of radiation than ultrasonography. However, newer scanners are now capable of reducing the amount of x-ray exposure to that which one would receive with a 3 image excretory urogram. Overall, in the United States CT has become the number 1 test for evaluating the patient with flank pain. The rationale for this choice is well corroborated in the study by Fowler et al, in which the detection rate of renal urolithiasis with CT was far greater than that of ultrasound. Indeed, the sensitivity of ultrasound for renal calculi was only 24%. Most of the stones missed were smaller than 3 mm. In the ureter it had been my impression that CT was better than ultrasound. However, in the study by Patlas et al the accuracy of ultrasound was equal to that of CT. One possible reason that CT did not perform better in this study could be due to the use of an older CT scanner with 6.5 mm. cuts (instead of the more commonly used 5 mm. cuts, and now in some centers 3 mm. cuts). It is noteworthy that 18 of the patients in this study had no associated ureterectasis or hydronephrosis, yet the authors were still able to detect the calculi with ultrasonography. This skill seems to be greater than the ultrasonographic expertise that is available at many centers in the United States. Again, in the United States CT has largely supplanted ultrasound for the detection of ureteral and renal calculi. A. String, E. Berber, A. Foroutani, J. R. Macho, J. M. Pearl and A. E. Siperstein, Department of General Surgery, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, and Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, Mount Zion Medical Center, San Francisco, California Surg Endosc, Permission to Publish Abstract Not Granted M. Catarci, M. Carlini, P. Gentileschi and E. Santoro for the Lap Group Roma, Gruppo Laparoscopico Romano, Rome, Italy Surg Endosc, Permission to Publish Abstract Not Granted What is the safest way to obtain a pneumoperitoneum? The open approach (for example Hasson or blunt tip cannula). The incidence of injury with this approach is half that seen with a Veress needle (0.09% versus 0.18%). It is interesting that the optical access trocar, which has become popular of late, had a higher injury rate of 0.27% in the survey by Catarci et al, which was nearly identical to the results of the Cleveland Clinic (0.3%). While I have seen the optical access trocar used, it did concern me as it seemed a bit difficult to identify clearly each of the layers as it was passed. These 2 articles only serve to corroborate that initial impression. For the novice laparoscopic surgeon the open approach is safest. If you are experienced with a Veress needle, I would recommend staying with it. For me the optical access trocar will remain where it already resides in my armamentarium, as the third choice. W. J. Lee and Y. S. Chae, Department of Surgery, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea Surg Laparosc Endosc Percutan Tech, We report a case of digital nerve (superficial branch of the radial nerve) compression injury in the thumb caused by repeated compression at the proximal phalanx level by a finger grip of a laparoscopic instrument during laparoscopic surgery. R. Berguer, D. L. Forkey and W. D. Smith, School of Medicine, University of California–Davis and VA Northern California Health Care System, Martinez and Biomedical Engineering Program, California State University–Sacramento, Sacramento, California Surg Endosc, Permission to Publish Abstract Not Granted Laparoscopy hurts the surgeon but spares the patient. As Wolf et al have documented, laparoscopic instrumentation in its current design continues to punish the surgeon. The bottom line when working laparoscopically is that if your port placement results in early fatigue, consider placing additional 5 mm. ports so you can optimize the angles and thereby decrease the strain on your body. This you can do for yourself. The more complicated problem is convincing the manufacturers to provide us with more ergonomic, surgeon friendly instrumentation. I still find it puzzling that I have to buy a million dollar robot to obtain an end effector with 6 degrees of freedom! M. A. van Veelen, D. W. Meijer, R. H. M. Goossens and C. J. Snijders, Faculty of Design, Engineering and Production, Subfaculty Industrial Design Engineering, Delft University of Technology, Delft and Laboratory for Experimental Surgery, AMC Hospital/University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands J Laparoendosc Adv Surg Tech A, Background: The shape of laparoscopic instrument handles can cause physical discomfort. This problem may be ascribed to a lack of standards for instrument design. In this study, new ergonomic requirements for the design of laparoscopic dissection forceps were created. Three representative handles (a Karl Storz [click-line] scissors handle, an Access Plus scissors handle, and an Aesculap cylindrical handle) currently available on the market were evaluated according to the new list of ergonomic criteria. Materials and Methods: The handles were subjectively (questionnaire) and objectively (video analyses) tested in order to find out whether the new requirements are valid for the evaluation and design of instrument handles. Results: The outcome of the subjective and objective tests matched the predictions by the new criteria list. New criteria were introduced (neutral wrist excursions), and existing general criteria were specified (e.g., a minimal contact area of 10 mm). Significant differences were found among the three handles. The Storz handle met 8 of the 10 requirements, the Access handle met 5, and the Aesculap handle met only 4. Conclusions: The new list of ergonomic requirements is a valid tool to determine the ergonomic value of a handle for laparoscopic dissecting tasks. It gains its strength from its specialized character. Significant differences were found among the three tested handles. Cylindrical handles were inferior to scissors handles. T. A. Emam, T. G. Frank, G. B. Hanna and A. Cuschieri, Department of Surgery, and Molecular Oncology and Surgical Skills Unit, Ninewells Hospital and Medical School, University of Dundee, Dundee, Scotland Surg Endosc, Permission to Publish Abstract Not Granted After nearly 14 years of intense interest in laparoscopic surgery, articles are finally beginning to appear to tell us what every laparoscopic surgeon knew all along: the instruments are still not optimally designed with regard to ease of use and surgeon comfort. In the study by van Veelen et al the standard loop handles of 2 major manufacturers were studied for 10 criteria: handle angle between 14 and 50 degrees, neutral wrist excursion for precision and force grip, grip opening between 60 and 80 mm., lack of friction, minimum width of 10 mm., switches for rotation manipulated easily with thumb or forefinger, equal left or right-handed manipulation and finger rings at least 30 mm. in length and 24 mm. in width. The best score was an 8 out of a possible 10. In the study by Emam et al the loop handle itself was taken to task with regard to its use for needle holders. Of 3 possible designs (rocker, ball or loop handles) the loop was found to be the worst, primarily because it required excessive shoulder motion. With the ball or rocker handle there was less shoulder motion and more elbow motion, which was better controlled and slower in nature. It is noteworthy that when performing laparoscopic suturing, the grip strength needed is 2.5 times greater than with conventional open surgical needle holders. Furthermore, if while suturing the laparoscopic surgeon flexes his or her wrist more than 15 degrees, marked decrease in grip strength occurs. So we continue with our aches, pains and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, awaiting the arrival of better, ergonomically designed instrumentation. There is little doubt that if every engineer were to have to use the instrumentation he or she designed for a 4 to 5-hour period before it was marketed to the surgical public, things would improve a lot faster. D. Rosin, J. Kuriansky, R. J. Rosenthal, O. Brasesco and A. Ayalon, Section of Laparoscopy, Department of General and Vascular Surgery, Cleveland Clinic Florida, Fort Lauderdale, Florida, and Department of General Surgery and Transplantation, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel Surg Endosc, Permission to Publish Abstract Not Granted What to do when things become difficult laparoscopically? Check to make sure you have not lost the pneumoperitoneum pressure, consider adjusting the table position so gravity helps “retract,” add a port to help with exposure or access and now this suggestion, consider placement of a retraction suture. Others have reported using this approach, and it is a handy technique to keep in your back pocket. For example, I learned this technique from Claude Abbou who would commonly run a suture through an appendix epiploica to retract the colon out of the pelvis during laparoscopic radical prostatectomy. Likewise, we have used this technique to suspend either end of a pyelotomy incision during stone extraction from a pelvic kidney or to suspend the uppermost edge of a pyelotomy incision during reduction pyeloplasty. The authors recommend using 2-zero polypropylene. While they do not specify the length of the needle, we have routinely used a 2-inch straight Keith needle. M. L. Da Costa, H. P. Redmond and D. J. Bouchier-Hayes, Department of Surgery, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, Beaumont Hospital, Dublin, Ireland J Surg Res, Background. Surgical trauma is partly responsible for enhancing tumor growth through a variety of mechanisms that are still not fully elucidated. The use of perioperative immunostimulants may modulate these effects. This study examined the effect of administration of taurolidine after laparotomy or laparoscopy on the growth of solid tumor, the establishment of hepatic and lung metastases, and effects on natural killer (NK) and lymphokine-activated killer (LAK) cell function. Methods. B16 melanoma right flank tumors were established in mice (n = 180). These animals underwent anesthesia only (control) or laparotomy or laparoscopy (n = 60 per group) and were randomized to receive either saline or taurolidine (n = 30 per group) at specific time points. Survival was determined in each group, and in a further 90 mice tumor growth was followed over 10 days postoperatively. The experiment was repeated in 540 mice, which underwent one of the three procedures and were treated with either saline or taurolidine. NK and LAK cell cytotoxicity (NKCC, LAKCC) was determined at several time points postoperatively. In a further experiment, B16 melanoma tumor cells were delivered via tail vein injection (n = 180) and intrasplenic injection (n = 180). The effect of saline or taurolidine administration on survival after the establishment of metastases was determined, and again in a further 180 mice the establishment of metastatic deposits in the liver or lungs was determined after 8 days. Results. Survival appeared to be significantly decreased in both the solid-tumor model and the metastatic models undergoing laparotomy compared to laparoscopy and controls (P <0.0001) and to a lesser extent in the laparoscopy group compared to controls (P <0.001). Flank tumor growth and metastatic tumor formation were more significant in laparotomy groups compared to laparoscopy groups and controls, but also to a lesser extent in laparoscopy groups compared to controls (P ≤0.05). NKCC and LAKCC were significantly decreased in the same patterns (P ≤0.03). However, treatment with taurolidine abolished these effects, restoring NKCC and LAKCC (P ≤0.04) and laparoscopy groups (P ≤0.001). Conclusion. It appears that changes that occur after the trauma of laparotomy, and to a lesser extent, after laparoscopy, significantly enhance the growth of primary tumors as well as the development of metastases from circulating tumor cells and are associated with a suppression of host antitumor surveillance mechanisms. This not only affected tumor progression in the immediate postoperative period, but also ultimately affected survival. Taurolidine, a known immunostimulant, appears to abrogate the effects of surgical trauma on primary and metastatic tumor growth and also enhances survival. This may have significant value in the management of tumor-bearing patients undergoing resection. Taurolidine, a nontoxic by-product of the amino acid taurine, has documented immunostimulant actions. In this series intraperitoneal administration at 1, 5 and 24 hours and at 2, 3 and 4 days after tumor cell inoculation into the flank of mice or into the tail vein resulted in a marked decrease in tumor size and development of metastases after laparotomy and laparoscopy, respectively. It would appear that the taurolidine preserved natural killer cell and lymphokine activated killer cell activity. One wonders if the day is not too far distant when patients with an intra-abdominal tumor will be treated similarly to those with an intra-abdominal abscess. Specifically, will we be giving a preoperative and postoperative immunostimulant in our surgical cancer cases much as we now administer an antibiotic before surgery for a localized bacterial problem to prevent systemic spread? Would this type of approach perhaps favorably impact the 5-year survival of those patients with T2 renal cancer who, despite a “surgical cure,” all too commonly have macroscopic metastatic disease within 5 years of their operation? R. N. Cacchione, P. Sayad, A. M. Pecoraro, Jr. and G. S. Ferzli, Department of Surgery, Staten Island University Hospital, Staten Island, New York Surg Endosc, Permission to Publish Abstract Not Granted After medical school, the only avenue one has to observe anatomy is “live” surgery, be it open or laparoscopic. The autopsy room has, for the most part, disappeared as an anatomical forum for surgical residents due, in part, to constricted working hours and tighter schedules but also because fewer autopsies are performed. The authors report that offering family members the possibility of laparoscopic autopsy has more than tripled the acceptance rate (from 7% to 25%) at their institution. In this study the accuracy of the laparoscopic autopsy was excellent. Indeed, in only 1 of 9 cases was additional abdominal pathology discovered when laparoscopic and conventional autopsies were performed, and these lesions were of a benign nature (colonic polyps and a liver hemangioma). Meanwhile, the funeral directors have noted that with a classic autopsy, upwards of 80% of the time there are resulting problems that make preparation of the body difficult. Using a 4 port approach, the average time for the laparoscopic abdominal inspection ranged from 1.5 to 3.5 hours and was completed in a well planned order. Needle or wedge biopsies, under laparoscopic direction, are taken of the solid organs of the abdomen. The potential for resident teaching provided by this model is unlimited. I see this as a win-win situation: a phenomenal learning experience for the residents, less work yet equal information for the pathologist, a better specimen for the funeral director, and improved cosmesis and less “perceived” suffering for the deceased in the eyes of the family members. M. Milad, R. Kim and B. Cohen, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol, Laparoscopic techniques were originally confined to female sterilization. As both instrumentation and methodology improved, gynecological endoscopy was applied to more complex processes, including salpingostomy or salpingectomy for ectopic pregnancy, and ovarian cystectomy or oophorectomy for benign conditions. Now, the laparoscopic treatment of adhesions, endometriosis and hysterectomy is almost commonplace. More sophisticated endoscopic procedures include the management of pelvic floor disease, incontinence and malignancies. However, at least two problems have become readily apparent: (i) there is often limited basic laparoscopic and hysteroscopic teaching during residency and fellowship training; and (ii) there is no standard by which to privilege or train physicians who may not have had any significant endoscopic training during residency. In this article we describe current learning theories and identify goals and specific objectives for residents in implementing a successful training program. We also discuss the mechanisms by which to privilege attending staff for gynecological procedures and the important clinical outcomes that can be improved. Finally, we raise concerns about creating algorithms by which to renew clinical privileges in endoscopic procedures. As our practice changes, so must our methods of training. The advent of laparoscopic surgery has presented new challenges to training programs and the system of postgraduate education. In this excellent article dealing with laparoscopy in gynecology the importance of developing a curriculum to teach laparoscopic skills within each residency program is stressed. Such a program would include didactic sessions, inanimate laboratory sessions and live animal procedures. Programs of this nature would span a 7 to 10-week period. It is sobering to learn that in 1 report, before institution of a formal resident training program in laparoscopy, the mortality rate from intraoperative hemorrhage in the animal laboratory was 17%! The other issue is that of postgraduate education and hospital privileging. The standard to date has been for the surgeon to take a course and, on the basis of that experience, wade into the laparoscopic milieu. It is becoming more and more apparent that this single exposure is likely not sufficient. Additional courses and/or a planned preceptorship at one’s hospital are important in providing for a smooth transition from open to laparoscopic surgery. Lastly, hospital privileging and recertification are becoming ever more important issues. Our gynecological colleagues have established the Accreditation Council for Gynecologic Endoscopy to review applicants’ case lists and accredit surgeons in advanced endoscopy. The recommendation for privileging from the council carries with it an understanding that the individual hospital has in place a preceptorship program in which the applicant’s skills are monitored by an experienced laparoscopic surgeon, usually for 3 to 5 cases at a given level of procedural complexity. Education is the answer and, failing this, litigation and regulation are the consequences. T. P. Grantcharov, L. Bardram, P. Funch-Jensen and J. Rosenberg, Department of Surgical Gastroenterology L, Aarhus University, Kommunehospitalet, Aarhus, Denmark BMJ, No Abstract We get tired, and when we get tired we just do not perform as well. After a night on call during which the residents got 0 to 3 hours of sleep, performance of 6 standard laparoscopic tests deteriorated. In all 3 categories measured (time, number of errors and unnecessary movements) the outcome was statistically significantly worse. Unfortunately no data were provided with respect to how much sleep the resident had before performing the baseline tests. Perhaps the new ruling for surgical residents of a 10-hour break after a night on call is not so unreasonable. As a rather sage chief resident instructed me during my internship, “Anything done in the middle of the night is better done during the day.”