Three-dimensional electrochemical reactor (3DER) is a highly efficient technology for refractory wastewater treatment. Particle electrodes filled between anode and cathode are the core units of 3DER, determining the treatment efficiency of wastewater. However, particle electrodes deactivation due to catalytic sites coverage seriously impedes the continuous operation of 3DER. In this work, granular sludge carbon (GSC) particle electrodes being resistant to deactivation are fabricated by pyrolyzing the mixture of waste sludge, polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA), and copper tailings, whose performances are evaluated by degrading rhodamine B (RhB) wastewater in a continuous-flow 3DER. Results indicate that hierarchical-pore structure comprising macro-, meso-, and micropores is developed in GSC-10-CTs by doping 10 g PMMA and 5 g copper tailings into 100 g waste sludge. PMMA contributes to construct macropores, which is essential for the mass transfer of RhB into GSC particle electrodes of centimeter-size. Copper tailings promote the formation of meso- and micro-pores in GSCs, as well as improving the electrochemical properties. Consequently, GSC-10-CTs packed 3DER exhibits the highest removal efficiency and lowest energy consumption for RhB treatment. In addition, the compressive strength of GSC-10-CTs is enhanced by copper tails, that is crucial to fill into 3DER as particle electrodes. The high-efficient and cost-effective GSC-10-CTs fabricated by waste materials have the potential of substituting commercial granular activated carbon catalysts in the future, consequently promoting the application of 3DER in wastewater treatment.Treatment of industrial refractory wastewater is a great challenge in China. Various physical-chemical approaches have been applied to deal with these wastewater, among which three-dimensional electrochemical reactor (3DER) is a highly efficient and environmental friendly technology ( Currently, multifunctional carbon materials converted from waste sludge exhibit potential in electrochemical energy storage and pollutants adsorption/catalytic oxidation ( The adsorption property of GSCs is highly dependent on porous structure, which can be regulated by adding pore-forming agents ( In this study, GSCs particle electrodes being resistant to deactivation were fabricated by pyrolyzing the mixture of waste sludge, PMMA, and copper tailings. The performances of the prepared GSCs were evaluated by degrading rhodamine B (RhB) wastewater in a continuous-flow 3DER. The roles of PMMA and copper tailings in improving the properties of GSCs were investigated, from the aspects of porous structure and electrocatalytic activity of the materials. Herein, we report a strategy of fabricating porous GSCs as high-efficient and cost-effective particle electrodes, consequently promoting the application of 3DER in wastewater treatment. The dewatered waste sludge obtained from Tianshan wastewater treatment plant (Shanghai, China) was pretreated with FeSO The GSCs were fabricated referring to our previous work with a few modifications ( Themogravimetric (TG) analysis was carried on a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA/SDTA851e, Mettler toledo, Switzerland). Compressive strength of GSCs was measured by an automatic particle strength tester (YHKC-3A, Jiangyan, China). The conductivity of GSCs were measured by four-point probe method on a resistivity meter (ST2722-SZ, Suzhou Jingge Electronics, China). The bulk chemical compositions of GSCs were determined via an X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, Axios, PANalytical, Netherlands). Microscopic structure of GSCs were observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, HITACHI S-4800, HSD, Japan). The pore characteristics of GSCs were investigated combining nitrogen adsorption (Auto-sorb-6, Quantachrome, USA) and mercury intrusion method (AutoPore IV 9500, Micromeritics Instrument, UAS). The crystal structure of GSCs was analyzed on a powder X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Ultima-IV, Rigaku, Japan). Chemical species of Zn, Fe, C, and O in GSCs were analyzed by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic patterns (XPS, Escalab 250Xi, Thermo, USA). RhB was utilized as a target contaminant, being quantified by a UV–visible spectrophotometer at the wavelength of 554 nm (MAPADA, China). Radicals generated during the treatment process were detected by electron spin resonance (ESR, EMX-8/2.7, Bruker, Germany). The electrochemical properties of GSCs were analyzed on an electrochemical workstation (CHI 660E, Chenhua, China) using a three-electrode system. A glassy carbon disk (3.0 mm in diameter) coated with various GSCs was used as the working electrode, with Pt wire as the counter electrode and Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode ( The configuration of the continuous-flow 3DER was displayed in Energy consumption (EC, kWh/g RhB) of 3DER was calculated as follows ( The removal efficiency of RhB in continuous-flow 3DER is shown in Current is another important parameter to characterize the electrocatalytic process in 3DER. Current for all the GSCs were relatively stable during the treatment process in the presence of 8 V voltage ( The superiority of GSC-10-CTs was ascribed to hierarchical-pore structure and better electrocatalytic properties. GSCs particle electrodes taken effect on RhB removal in 3DER by adsorption and electrocatalysis. The adsorption capability of the GSCs made considerable contributions to RhB removal, as shown in Thermal analysis in SEM in N The distribution curves of pore size further figured out the porous structure of the prepared GSCs ( The electrochemical property of prepared GSCs was evaluated by CV measurement with 20 consecutive cycles of scan in RhB and K The interfacial electron-transfer properties of different GSCs were evaluated by EIS measurement, with the Nyquist plots in The physical and chemical properties of GSCs were listed in XRD results in Electrocatalytic generation of radicals played important roles in indirect oxidation of contaminants in the 3DER ( The mechanisms for radicals production were distinct for different GSCs. GSC-10 generated radicals while GSC not, that was highly related with the macropores in GSC-10. More catalytic sites interior could participate reactions due to enhanced mass transfer by macropores. Radicals generated by GSC-CTs were mainly due to the increased catalytic components from copper tailings. Therefore, the peak intensity of GSC-10-CTs in ESR spectrum was the strongest by improving mass transfer and catalytic components simultaneously. GSC-10-CTs was efficient catalyst for radicals generation and hence for the indirect oxidation of pollutants. To demonstrate the contributions of radicals to RhB removal, tertbutyl alcohol was added into the influent as radical scavengers. As shown in The porous structure of the GSCs greatly influenced wastewater treatment performance of 3DER. There appeared significant attenuation in RhB removal efficiency after 8 h treatment for GSC and GSC-CTs ( Sewage sludge is an inevitable by-product from wastewater treatment plants produced in large amounts. Fabricating sludge-derived GSCs offers a new strategy for wastes recycling, exhibiting obvious environmental significance. Production of commercial GAC catalysts generally comprise two steps, fabricating GAC from coal/biomass and loading metals such as Pd and Cu on GAC to enhance the catalytic properties ( The fabrication cost of GSCs could be evaluated based on sludge-pyrolyzed activated carbon, which is about RMB 620–1240/ton considering transportation, energy consumption, chemicals, and other processes ( In this study, GSCs were fabricated by pyrolyzing the mixture of waste sludge, PMMA and copper tailings, and filled into 3DER as particle electrodes for RhB wastewater treatment. Results indicated that GSC-10-CTs performed the highest removal efficiency and the lowest energy consumption during RhB treatment process. Superior hierarchical-pore structure comprising macro-, meso- and micropores was established in GSC-10-CTs, being more resistant to deactivation during wastewater treatment. PMMA constructed macropores were essential for the mass transfer of RhB into GSCs of centimeter-size. Copper tailings facilitated the formation of meso- and micro-pores during sludge pyrolysis, as well as improving electrochemical activity of GSCs. In addition, the compressive strength of the porous GSC-10-CTs were enhanced in the presence of copper tails, that was crucial to fill into 3DER as particle electrodes. The environmental friendly and cost-effective GSCs might substitute commercial GAC catalysts in the future. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors wish to thank The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at