Introduction
                  Existing various classification systems for distal clavicle fractures have low interobserver and intraobserver reliability and provide limited information for treatment decision. The objective of this study was to determine interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the new classification system and the associated treatment choice for distal clavicle fractures.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The new classification system has good reliability.
               
                  Methods
                  Eight observers including 4 experienced shoulder specialists and 4 orthopedic fellows independently reviewed routine plain radiographs of 74 patients with distal clavicle fractures. They were asked to determine the fracture type according to the new classification system and the treatment choice for each case through web-based survey. Images from each case were randomly presented to the observers in 2 rounds 4 weeks apart. Reliability was assessed on the basis of Fleiss κ values.
               
                  Results
                  Interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the classification system were moderate (κ
                     =0.434) and substantial (κ
                     =0.644), respectively. Interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the treatment choice were moderate (κ
                     =0.593) and substantial (κ
                     =0.698), respectively. There were no significant differences in the level of reliability between experienced shoulder specialists and orthopedic fellows for any κ values (all p
                     >0.05).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Our study demonstrated moderate interobserver and substantial intraobserver reliability of the new classification system and the associated treatment choice for distal clavicle fractures. We believe that our novel classification system will help physicians to choose treatment and implants.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  III, Cohort study, Diagnosis study.Although distal clavicle fractures are less common than clavicle shaft fractures, they are encountered more frequently by shoulder specialists and are often challenging to manage An ideal classification system should be reliable, reproducible, all-inclusive, and clinically useful In this study, we devised a new classification system for distal clavicle fractures, which takes into account fracture displacement and stability as well as fracture location. We also tried to include fracture types that could not be categorized by the modified Neer classification system and to provide a treatment algorithm according to the subtypes of distal clavicle fractures. The objective of this study was to determine the interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the new classification system and the associated treatment choice for distal clavicle fractures. We hypothesized that the new classification system for distal clavicle fractures and associated treatment choice have good reliability. Seventy-four consecutive patients with distal clavicle fractures enrolled during a period of 7 years at a single university hospital were included. Inclusion criteria were acute fracture within 4 weeks after initial trauma and the availability of readable plain radiographs taken at the time of initial injury. Exclusion criteria were any other concomitant shoulder injury on the affected side, and a history of shoulder trauma or surgery. The mean age of the patients was 47.4 Plain radiographs included an anteroposterior and oblique view of the acromioclavicular joint and an axial view of the shoulder were taken with the patient in the supine position. Eight independent observers including 4 experienced shoulder specialists and 4 orthopedic fellows from 4 different residency training hospitals completed the survey. The shoulder specialists’ experience was 12.3 years on average (range, 8 to 19 years). A web-based survey was designed using the Google Docs survey tool (Google Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA). Images from 74 patients and information on their age and sex were randomly presented to the observers. For each case, 2 questions were asked: “What is the type of this fracture according to the new classification system?”; “What would be your treatment of choice for this fracture, conservative or operative?”. To evaluate intraobserver reliability, the observers repeated the same procedure with randomization 4 weeks after the first round of assessment. Interobserver reliability was assessed to determine the reliability between the opinions of different observers for each case. Intraobserver reliability was assessed to determine the reliability of individual observers by comparing the first and second survey for each case. Interobserver and intraobserver reliability was assessed by calculating the Type I fractures are stable and involve no or minimal displacement (< Interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the new classification system were moderate ( Interobserver and intraobserver reliability of the treatment choice were moderate ( The current study demonstrated moderate interobserver and substantial intraobserver reliability of our new classification system for distal clavicle fractures and the associated treatment choice. These results revealed an improvement on the Neer and modified Neer classification systems, which have been shown to have fair to moderate interobserver and intraobserver reliability. Ideally, a classification system should be reproducible with a high level of interobserver and intraobserver reliability, should help appropriate treatment, and be able to predict the outcome The Neer classification for distal clavicle fractures, which is based on the location of the fracture in relation to the CC ligaments, has been widely used since the 1960s Bishop et al. Although the current literatures describe many procedures for the treatment of these unstable fractures, there has been no consensus or gold standard determined This study had several limitations. First, this was only a reliability study and not an accurate study. Because definite type of some fractures may be controversial among even experienced shoulder surgeons, sensitivity and specificity for our classification system could not be assessed. Second, we classified fractures into type II if the displacement was ≥ Our study demonstrated moderate interobserver and substantial intraobserver reliability of the new classification system and the associated treatment choice for distal clavicle fractures. Because our new classification system dealt with fracture stability and unclassifiable fracture types by the Neer classification as well as fracture location, it will help physicians to choose appropriate treatment and implants. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. Following are sources of funding for this work: support was received from the National Research Foundation of Korea, funded by the Korean government (grant number 2017R1D1A1B03035113 and 2014R1A5A2010008). Chul-Hyun Cho: designing the study, collecting the data, writing the manuscript. Beom-Soo Kim: writing and editing the manuscript. Du-Han Kim: statistical analysis, collecting the data. Chang-Hyuk Choi: designing the study, collecting the data. Jinmyung Dan: collecting the data, critical review. Ho Min Lee: collecting the data, critical review. We thank Eun-Ji Jeon for their support with data collection. Investigation was performed at the Pain Research Center, Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Dongsan Medical Center, School of Medicine, Keimyung University, Daegu, South Korea.