Objectives
                  All acetabular fractures are difficult to treat surgically, but there are four types involving two columns that are particularly challenging. The choice of surgical approach is crucial. The purpose of the study was to determine and evaluate the factors influencing the choice of surgical approach for two-column acetabular fractures. We hypothesised that more accurate preoperative planning, sophisticated technical capabilities, and evolution of surgeon experience will result in more consistent use of non-extensile single surgical approaches. We also evaluated the outcomes of surgical treatment and the correlation with the surgical approach used.
               
                  Design
                  Retrospective cohort study.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A total of 156 patients with 157 acetabular fractures involving two columns (Letournel T-types and both-column) treated surgically in a 25-year period (1988–2013) were included in the study. The acetabular fractures in this study were divided into two groups according to the date of surgery: 81 in Group 1 (1998–2002) and 76 in Group 2 (2003–2013). All fractures were classified preoperatively according to the Judet and Letournel classification system and Matta's categorisation of surgical approach. Four surgical approaches were used: single Kocher–Langenbeck (KL), single ilioinguinal (II), combined Kocher–Langenbeck and ilioinguinal (KL+II), and extended iliofemoral (EIF). The efficacy of the surgical approach utilised was assessed using three parameters: anatomical reduction, surgical time and intraoperative complications.
               
                  Results
                  There was no statistical difference between Group 1 and Group 2 in the distribution of T-type (p
                     =0.424) and both-column (p
                     =0.425) fractures. In Group 2 more acetabular fractures were treated through single non-extensile approaches compared with Group 1 (90.8% vs. 54.3%, p
                     <0.001). Increase in single approach surgery resulted in shorter mean surgical time (p
                     <0.001) and significant increase in anatomical reduction (p
                     =0.039). The frequency of intraoperative complications was not statistically different (p
                     =0.07) between the two groups, but there was a trend to fewer complications in Group 2.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The surgical approaches chosen for acetabular fractures that involve two columns (Letournel T-types and both-column) should become more consistent. The results of this study indicate that the majority of such acetabular fractures can be treated successfully through single surgical approaches.Accurate classification of acetabular fractures is vital when choosing the correct surgical approach to enable the most effective surgical treatment. The anatomy of the acetabulum is complex and various classification systems have been proposed, most of which are based on the anatomical concept that the acetabulum is composed of two columns. One such system is the Judet–Letournel classification system, which is the most widely accepted today The choice of surgical approach is generally primarily dictated by the type of acetabular fracture and by the requirements for reduction. For a single column fracture and/or single acetabular wall fractures, the decision is relatively simple, but the choice of the most appropriate surgical approach becomes challenging when both columns are affected, particularly when they involve acetabular wall fractures Judet and Letournel emphasise a significant correlation between the success of surgery and proper determination of the type of acetabular fracture according to preoperative X-rays Letournel recommended single non-extensile approaches for simple acetabular fractures Other authors suggest non-extensile single surgical approaches for two-column fractures. In certain situations single surgical approaches cannot provide adequate visualisation and reduction of the fracture. In such cases additional surgical techniques and a wide variety of specialised reduction tools should be used to improve visualisation and reduction of fractures. “Flip” or traditional trochanteric osteotomy, “T” anterior extension or digastric slide osteotomy, with or without hip dislocation, could be preformed to enable indirect reduction According to the Judet and Letournel Surgical approaches to acetabular fractures could be divided and classified as represented in There is no consensus regarding the appropriate surgical approach for transverse fractures (Tr), transverse A total of 303 patients with 304 displaced acetabular fractures underwent surgery in two Trauma level 1 and three Trauma level 2 hospitals in Croatia during a 25-year period (1988–2013). All patients were operated on by a single surgeon (GN). Plain X-rays, including Judet oblique views, were performed as part of preoperative planning, and CT, 3-D CT and advanced preplanning software EBS (Ekliptik, Ljubljana, Slovenia) were introduced when available. All acetabular fractures were classified according to the Judet and Letournel anatomical classification system and Matta's categorisation based on surgical approach decision-making. A total of 147 patients were excluded from the study: 69 of these patients had combined acetabular/pelvic fractures and different surgical tactics were used; 10 patients died postoperatively due to polytrauma complications, and 68 patients had a Letournel one-column/one-wall fracture and the choice of surgical approaches was not in doubt. Finally, 156 patients (98 male and 58 female, male-to-female ratio 1.7:1), with 157 acetabular fractures (one patient had a bilateral acetabular fracture) of fracture type Tr, Tr Acetabular fractures were caused by motor vehicle accident (MVA) in 92% of patients and by falls from a height in the remaining 8% of patients. Surgery was performed between 1 and 23 days after injury (mean 8.3 days). Patients were divided into two groups according to the date of surgery: from 1988 to 2002 (Group 1) and from 2003 to 2013 (Group 2). The following were available to patients in Group 2: 3D-CT, a radiolucent operating table, advanced mobile C-arm, advanced computerised planning modules (EBS), a wide variety of specialised reduction tools and the help of an experienced radiologist. These were not available to patients in Group 1. All surgeries were performed by a single surgeon and the experience of the surgical team improved with time. The surgeon used four surgical approaches in both groups: single KL, single II, combined KL In certain cases where the surgical goal could not be achieved through a single non-extensile approach, appropriate modifications were made to surgical approaches and advanced indirect reduction techniques were applied. In the KL approach, the gluteus maximus tendon was resected to enable wider exposure of the acetabular fracture. Trochanteric “flip” osteotomy, which includes the insertion of gluteus medius and the origin of vastus lateralis, was also used on occasions: the trochanter was retracted anteriorly and, following capsulotomy, the femoral head was dislocated. For this purpose a contralateral decubitus position was mandatory. This was useful when a high transverse fracture component and femoral head fractures needed to be addressed. When there was a significant rotational fracture displacement, Schantz pins were used as joysticks to manipulate the fracture fragments. Many direct reduction techniques were applied to achieve fracture reduction in the KL approach: specific reduction forceps and clamps in various sizes, angle and offset were used to accommodate manipulation of a wide variety of fracture patterns. Form-fitting plates and screws, particularly anterior column screws, were used for fixation. Some extensions were used in the II approach to enable additional access to the outer table of the innominate bone. An uncommon extension was the iliofemoral, which enabled greater access to the anterior hip joint and the outer table of the iliac crest. The second extension involved a longitudinal extension based on the anterior superior iliac spine. Similar direct and indirect reduction techniques were used as in the KL approach. When this approach was used, the collinear distractor was very useful. Form-fitting plates and screws were used for fixation, particularly posterior column screws and spring plates and screws for stabilising the quadrilateral plate. Both the KL and Il approaches required special instruments and good quality intraoperative fluoroscopy views to confirm perfect reduction and correct placement of hardware. No primary total hip replacement was performed. The efficacy of surgical approaches was assessed using three parameters: anatomical reduction of displacement, surgical time, and intraoperative complications. Two experienced surgeons independently performed radiographic measurements of the accuracy of fracture fragment reduction. In Group 1 this was measured using archived X-rays (plane and oblique views), whereas in Group 2 the measurements were performed immediately after the operation. The maximum displacement observed on any of the normal radiographic lines of the acetabulum or the innominate bone was recorded in millimetres. The highest of three values was used to grade the reduction. Displacement of 0 to 1 The differences in the frequency of the various types of acetabular fractures, surgical approaches, achievement of anatomical reduction and intraoperative complications in Group 1 (1988–2002) and Group 2 (2003–2013) were analysed using the chi-squared test. The mean surgical time was analysed using the independent A total of 101 (64.3%) of the 157 acetabular fractures in the study were Letournel transverse types (Tr, T-shape, Tr A single approach (II or KL) was used in 44 (54.3%) of 81 fractures in Group 1 and in 69 (90.8%) of 76 fractures in Group 2, which is significantly more often ( The efficacy of the surgical approach in both groups was assessed using three parameters: anatomical reduction of displacement, mean surgical time and intraoperative complications. There was a statistically significant improvement in anatomical reduction from 64.2% in Group 1 to 80.3% in Group 2 ( Comparing the results of cases where a single approach (II or KL) was used, there was a statistically significant increase in the rate of anatomical reduction from 63.6% in Group 1 to 81.2% in Group 2 ( Analysing the results of cases where extensile approaches (combined and EIF) were used, there were no significant differences between groups in the rate of anatomical reduction ( There were also no statistically significant differences between the two groups when the quality of reduction was compared between single (II or KL) and extensile (combined and EIF) approaches ( There were 19 (12.1%) intraoperative complications reported among the total 157 operated acetabular fractures. In Group 1 there were 14 (17.3%) complications: six neural injuries, six vascular injuries and two inadequate reductions. In Group 2 there were five (6.6%) complications: three neural injuries, one vascular injury and one inadequate reduction. Intraoperative lesions of the sciatic nerve were reported in two cases, both of which were in the first period. Revision surgery was performed in two cases in Group 1, and in one case in Group 2 because of secondary dislocation. The treatment of acetabular fractures in general and the ones that involve two columns, and particularly the choice of surgical approaches for the Letournel T-types and BC-types, has been a considerable challenge to surgeons over recent decades Matta analysed the Letournel classification of acetabular fractures regarding general consensus about surgical approaches In a German multicentre study including 1266 patients, Ochs et al. All of the patients in the current study were operated on by a single surgeon; therefore, this study was conducted to analyse whether the increase in surgical experience and the adoption of new equipment and surgical techniques significantly reduced the number of combined and extensile approaches to acetabular fractures that involve two columns. Anatomical reduction is significantly associated with excellent or good results and any malreduction is associated with poor functional outcome. Surgeon experience is important to achieve anatomical reduction, and several large studies report a significant long learning curve with poor results at the start of their studies There is no consensus in the literature on the choice of approaches in complex acetabular fractures. Some authors prefer a single non-extensile approach Ochs et al. Matta's categorisation of acetabular fractures with regard to the consistency of surgical approaches has not been used in the literature. Therefore, the comparison of the frequency of different surgical approaches in our study with the data from the literature was difficult. The surgeon's focus on the single approach in the second period of the current study resulted in a significant decrease in the number of combined and extended approaches for acetabular fractures that involve two columns. In the second period, 90.8% of these fractures were managed through a single approach, compared with 54.3% in the first period ( The most commonly used approach for Tr fractures in the current study was the Tannast and Siebenrock Most patients with Tr The KL approach is recommended for T-shape fractures. If the surgeon expects unusual difficulties with reduction, the EIF should be selected The most complex acetabular fractures are BC fractures. Matta stated that BC fractures are most frequently treated through the II approach, Our results in terms of rate of anatomical reduction, surgical time and intraoperative complications are similar to those reported by others Based on the experience and presented results, we can offer the following recommendations for surgical approach to T-type fractures ( A single II approach is recommended for all BC fractures apart from BC Based on the results of our study, we concluded that good preoperative planning, proper equipment, advanced surgical techniques and surgical experience in the treatment of acetabular fractures that involve two columns (Letournel T-types, and BC) can lead to a more consistent view of the selection of the surgical approach. This can significantly reduce the number of combined and extensile surgical approaches, which are associated with a greater number of complications. T-type (Tr, T-shape, Tr All authors have no financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence the work.