Ultrasonic synthesis has shown great potential applications in preparing varieties of nanostructured materials. However, fabrication of nanomaterials with tunable structures and desirable properties is still challenging because of the instability and nonuniform distribution of cavitation effect in liquid phase. In this study, a novel aeration tuned ultrasonic synthesis approach is proposed for optimizing the cavitation effect in both time and space scales and fabricating SiO2@PNIPAm NPs. By alternation of ultrasonication and N2 aeration, more and more gas bubbles are formed in the reaction liquid, and the collapse of those bubbles is further enhanced by the reactants of solid SiO2 and intermediate functionalized SiO2 NPs. As a result, SiO2@PNIPAm NPs with various grafting ratios are successfully synthesized simply by changing the number of ultrasonic synthesis cycle. The SiO2@PNIPAm NPs are subsequently used as stabilizer to form Pickering emulsions with different temperature response. This work provides a potential facile sonochemical synthesis method with high efficiency in obtaining inorganic/organic NPs of well determined structures.The transmission of ultrasound wave through liquid induces acoustic cavitation effect, which corresponds to the nucleation, growth and collapse of gas bubbles. The instantaneous local high pressure of GPa magnitude and temperature up to 3000 K produced during bubble collapse significantly accelerate the rate of chemical reactions In present work, a novel nitrogen-aeration tuned ultrasonic synthesis (US) method is proposed, and a series of SiO Tetraethyl orthosilicate (Si(OC As shown in In a typical synthesis for SiO For preparing Pickering emulsions, the aqueous suspension was firstly prepared by dispersing 25 mg of NPs into water (5 mL) with the aid of ultrasonic at 10 °C for 10 min. Afterward, the Pickering emulsion was prepared by emulsification of the aqueous suspension and 5 mL of isopropyl myristate through homogenizer (18,000 rpm) at room temperature (24 ± 3 °C). The total emulsification time was kept for 3 min. The emulsion type was determined by placing a drop of emulsion in the oil or water, the emulsion well dispersing in water is O/W type and vice versa   In order to identify the morphology and structure of SiO Poly (N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) is one of the polymer with temperature-responsive property, which undergoes a reversible lower critical solution temperature (LCST) phase transition between a hydrophilic to hydrophobic states due to its coil-to-globule conformational transition The mechanism of N Although the benefit of stimuli-responsive Pickering emulsion has been proved by previous studies A novel ultrasonic synthesis approach is proposed to fabricate SiO This work is supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: