Crop production is facing the increase of salinity in soils and irrigation waters. This is a widespread problem that affects crops with high economic importance and reduces yields. Salinity causes oxidative stress in plants which induce complex defensive mechanisms involving the antioxidant system and osmoprotector compounds. Ca2+ plays a pivotal role in counteracting salt stress, and the modification of the Ca2+ vacuolar transporter CAX1 could represent a potential method to improve tolerance to salinity. Three new CAX1 variants in Brassica rapa (BraA.cax1a) were generated using TILLING strategy. The objective of this work is to evaluate the tolerance of these mutants to saline conditions. For this, BraA.cax1a mutants and the parental line R-o-18 were grown in pots under control and saline conditions (150 mM NaCl). Parameters of biomass, ions accumulation, antioxidant compounds concentration and antioxidant enzyme activities, heat shock protein 70 (HSP70) occurrence, and proline (Pro) levels were measured. According to the results, BraA.cax1a-4 mutation provided a higher tolerance to salinity stress. Thus, BraA.cax1a-4 plants showed higher biomass; higher Ca2+ and K+ accumulation in the shoot, a lower Na+/K+ ratio, an enhanced ROS scavenging (increased superoxide dismutase and catalase activities) and an enhanced ascorbate redox state. BraA.cax1a-4 and BraA.cax1a-12 showed higher K+ transport to the shoot which could contribute to their lower lipid peroxidation. In contrast, BraA.cax1a-7 showed a lower antioxidant response. Besides, an increased occurrence of cytosolic and chloroplastic HSP70 isoforms and Pro levels could contribute to protect these B. rapa mutants from saline stress. Therefore, this study identifies a potential useful genotype that could be used to enhance salt tolerance of crops.Salinity in crops occurs when the soil or the crop medium presents high concentrations of soluble salts, such as sodium chloride (NaCl) ( One of the main symptoms of saline stress is the occurrence of oxidative stress reflected in ROS accumulation ( Plants mainly use two mechanisms to cope with salinity: the distribution and compartmentalization of toxic ions (Na Calcium (Ca  Treatments were applied 30 days after germination and were maintained for 21 days. The choice of these times was based on the results obtained in previous cultures with Plant leaves were rinsed using distilled water, dried on filter paper, and weighed to obtain the fresh weight (FW). A part of all the sample material was frozen at −30 °C to employ it for biochemical assays and another part was lyophilized to determine the dry weight (DW) and the mineral ions concentrations. Total DW was calculated by the sum of leaf and root DW and salt tolerance index (STI) was calculated using the following formula ( Ca K The SOD activity was assayed according to the method described by Electrolyte leakage (EC) was determined by the electrolyte loss test ( LOX enzyme activity was recorded according to Oxidized GSH (GSSG), and total GSH (reduced GSH + GSSG) were analyzed according to the method of In immunoblottings, proteins were extracted and separated by SDS-PAGE according to the methodology described by The method of Data were subjected to a simple ANOVA at 95% confidence, using the Statgraphics Centurion XVI software. A two-tailed ANOVA was used to determine whether the saline treatment (S), the mutations (M), or the interaction (S * M) significantly affected the results. Means were compared by Fisher’s least significant differences (LSD). The significance levels for both analyses were expressed as * P < 0.05, ** P < 0.01, *** P < 0.001, or NS (not significant). The different genotypes used in the experiment did not show different leaf DW when were grown under control conditions. The application of 150 mM NaCl reduced both leaf and root DW in all lines. However, leaf biomass reduction was lower in Salinity application reduced Ca In roots we observed a different tendency, No different EC and LOX values were found under control conditions in all tested lines. On the other hand, salinity caused an increase in EC, MDA concentration and LOX activity in comparison to controls. However, Salinity increased O The application of NaCl increased APX activity in all plants compared to control conditions. Salinity did not induce significant effects on GR and GPX activities in comparison to control conditions. NaCl application caused a lower occurrence of Cyt-HSP70 in Salinity caused a remarkable increase in Pro accumulation in Salinity causes a reduction in growth and thereby leads to lower biomass as observed in several Brassicaceae crops ( Saline stress leads to the accumulation of Na is negatively correlated with salt tolerance in many plant species. Hence, plants restrict Na MDA concentration and LOX activity are indicators of lipid peroxidation caused by salinity ( Salt stress leads to oxidative stress determined by ROS accumulation. Thus, higher O⁠ AsA/GSH cycle is one of the main systems for recycling antioxidants and to scavenge ROS to maintain the redox state in plant cells. Thus, several studies showed increments in the overall or some components of the AsA/GSH cycle as a consequence of salinity. Besides, genotypes with enhanced AsA/GSH present higher salinity tolerance ( Heat shock proteins represent an important mechanism of protection against stress. The most important and preeminent HSP is HSP70 that under abiotic stress binds to misfolded or truncated proteins protecting cells ( Pro usually is accumulated after the onset of saline stress and is a key indicator of the stress response. Hence, Pro accumulation is one of the main indicators of saline stress ( Our results indicate that the different JMR and BB conceived and designed research. ENL, DLTA, and FJLM conducted experiments. SE contributed new reagents and analytical tools. ENL and SE analyzed data. ENL wrote the manuscript. JMR, BB, and SE did a critical revision of the article. All authors read and approved the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the We thank Dr. Martin R. Broadley and Dr. Neil Graham from Nottingham University for providing us the seeds employed in this experiment.