The work identifies parameters and proposes mechanisms that are crucial in making smart containers with encapsulating agents by Pickering emulsion route for anti-corrosion coating and advanced materials applications. We demonstrate the unmodified graphene oxide (GO) particles as potential stabilizers for oil-in-water emulsions not requiring any modification to the properties of the emulsion phases. The model system, GO stabilized styrene in water, was used to explore the mechanistic details of the stable emulsion formation and subsequent formation of polystyrene/graphene oxide (PS/GO) containers after emulsion polymerization. The results indicate a clear size effect during packing of GO at oil-water interface and smaller GO sheets produced homogenous emulsion without any residual water volume. The emulsion droplet size distribution changes from bimodal to monomodal with the increase in GO concentration and it reverses with oil–water phase ratio. For the first time, a correlation was developed between these variables and the size, polydispersity index (PDI), morphology, conversion, and yield of the containers produced by emulsion polymerization. The parametric controls required for preparing PS/GO containers with narrow size distribution (PDI = 0.23), smaller size and various morphologies are discussed, with a probable mechanism. All these studies were carried out in presence of a corrosion inhibitor, 8-Hydroxyquinoline (8-HQ), to be encapsulated in the container. The containers were produced with 75% encapsulation efficiency.Encapsulation is a process to entrap active agents into containers. It is a smart way to meet various demands by delivering ingredients at a right time and location. Smart materials produced from these processes are associated with tailored features for many applications in industries such as food Various inorganic particles such as ZnO One of the important applications of the GO stabilized oil in water emulsion is targeted towards creating containers for localized surface protection such as in anti-corrosion coatings. The container size is a crucial factor in such applications, as it requires a statistically large number of containers at random locations. Therefore, a large population of smaller containers with high encapsulation efficiency is desired. In this respect, factors affecting the emulsion droplet size and the containers obtained after emulsion polymerization are important. In the literature, the effect of the particle size, particle concentration and volume fraction of dispersed phase on the emulsion droplet size have been reported Though many researchers reported the use of GO as a colloidal stabilizer for the formation of PS/GO composites via Pickering emulsion polymerization method, a systematic study on the processing mechanism does not exist, especially in the presence of a corrosion inhibitor. For controlling the quality of the hybrid material, the process mechanistic study is important to understand the conversion and yield, container size and its dispersity, the morphology of the containers and finally encapsulation efficiency. PS/GO container size and size distribution are governed by a complex process, which is a combined effect of colloidal phenomena during the polymerization process. In this report, we demonstrated that GO particles can be used to prepare stable, homogeneous and continuous oil-in-water emulsions, without requiring any surface modification or adjusting the solution properties of the continuous phase. A series of experiments were performed to investigate the role of the GO particle size, particle concentration and volume percentage of dispersed oil phase in determining size and dispersity of the emulsion droplets and hence of the containers produced after subsequent emulsion polymerization. This was used to evaluate the emulsification efficiency of unmodified, as–prepared GO. By using a novel UV-Vis spectroscopic method the percentage conversion of the monomer and the yield of the containers were quantified. The percentage conversion of the monomer and the yield of the containers were correlated to the concentration of GO and the oil volume fraction. Eventually, encapsulation efficiency of the GO stabilized PS containers were established with respect to various oil fraction. All these studies were performed in presence of 8-HQ in the oil phase, which is a corrosion inhibitor. The controlling factors for preparing smaller PS/GO containers with narrow size distribution and various morphologies were identified. A probable mechanism was suggested based on the experimental findings. Graphite powder, sodium nitrate (NaNO In the present study, scalable synthesis of highly exfoliated graphene oxide (GO) nanosheets was carried out by simply controlling the oxidation and chemical exfoliation procedure Oil-in-water emulsions were prepared by using a high-shear mixer (Ultra Turrax T18 Homogenizer) for 20 min at 5000 rpm. The oil phase contained styrene, initiator AIBN, and 8-HQ. To get well dispersed aqueous GO suspension, initially ultrasonic bath was used for 10 min and then the suspension was probe sonicated for 10 min. Emulsions were produced at a different ratio of GO to oil (M After emulsification, GO-stabilized emulsion was transferred into a three-necked round bottom flask and flushed with nitrogen gas for 10 min. An oil bath was used to control polymerization temperature inside the flask. Then emulsions were kept for polymerization under a nitrogen atmosphere at the 95 °C for 12 h under magnetic stirring. After completion of the reaction, the solid product was collected by centrifugation followed by drying at room temperature. The particle size distribution of GO suspension, emulsions, and polymerized containers was determined by dynamic light scattering (DLS) using a particle size analyzer (Beckman Coulter). The Raman spectra of the dried GO were recorded using confocal Raman microscope (Horiba HR 8000) from 1000 to 3000 cm Morphology of the sub-micron PS/GO containers were characterized by using field emission gun scanning electron microscopy (FEG-SEM) (JSM-7600F, JEOL, USA). Samples for FEG-SEM were prepared by drop casting method, dried under an infrared lamp and then sputter coated with platinum for 120 s. Quantification of GO present in PS/GO composites were carried out by using UV-spectroscopy. The encapsulation efficiency was measured by differential scanning calorimetric (DSC) measurement. The study was carried using thermo-gravimetric/differential thermal analyzer (SDT Q 600) under a nitrogen atmosphere in the temperature range of 50–120 °C at a heating rate of 5 °C/min. Progressive oxidation with a strong oxidizing agent (chemical exfoliation) changes the size and chemical functionality of the GO produced. The size of GO sheets after progressive oxidation was about 25 times smaller than that produced in a typical Hummer's procedure (ca. 1 day treatment). From the DLS analysis, the average size of synthesized graphene oxide is found to be around 267 ± 19.79 nm, compared to 6.75 ± 20.47 μm obtained in a normal Hummer's procedure. The synthesized sub-micron GO sheets show a bimodal particle size distribution where most of the GO sheets are in the range of 90–300 nm ( The styrene in water emulsions stabilized by as-prepared GO sheets was homogeneous throughout the bulk and are stable for several months ( The effect of oil volume fractions on the Pickering emulsion was also studied ( To understand the mechanistic details of emulsion polymerization, key aspects of emulsion polymerization process and morphology of the containers were discussed with parameters such as (i) variation in M Though Pickering emulsion polymerization method is well known, obtaining smaller sub-micron and/or nano-sized containers with a controllable particle size distribution is challenging. This is because the formation of containers is affected by both emulsion polymerization and colloidal phenomena The average size and PDI of the emulsion and containers prepared from emulsions with various M The average size and PDI of the emulsion and containers prepared from emulsions with various oil volume percent are presented in The morphological characterization of PS/GO containers prepared using various M Containers obtained at various volume percent of oil at a fixed M Based on the foregoing results and discussions before, a possible mechanism for the formation of 8-HQ encapsulated PS/GO containers is proposed by using a schematic shown in As mentioned above, M To determine the extent of conversion and yield, it is important to determine the quantity of GO present in PS/GO container. The quantity of GO present in the PS/GO container was determined by using UV spectroscopic method. Briefly, the quantity of GO sheets present in the supernatant obtained after centrifugation of the polymerized product at various M The percentage conversion and yield was found to vary with M At lower ratios of M With respect to oil volume fraction, the maximum conversion and yield were observed at the optimum M The extent of encapsulation of 8-HQ into PS/GO containers was determined by comparing the DSC measurements of pure 8-HQ and encapsulated PS/GO containers, as shown in The measured average encapsulation efficiency was found to be around 75% (±) 3.5 for all containers formed at various oil contents. The relatively high encapsulation ratios for all compositions are attributed to high emulsification efficiency of GO sheets and efficient stabilization during polymerization. In addition to this, the encapsulation of 8-HQ into PS/GO containers was also confirmed by FTIR spectroscopy ( In conclusion, as-synthesized small sub-micron sized GO sheets produced by progressive oxidation steps has suitable amphiphilicity to produce stable emulsions throughout the bulk phase. Using such GO sheets an understanding on the effect of the process parameters on the size, morphology, PDI and population of containers obtained after Pickering emulsion polymerization process was developed. A possible mechanism for the formation of PS/GO containers with different morphologies was proposed based on the experimental data. The width of the size distribution of containers is found to be narrow at optimum GO to oil phase ratio and at a low volume percentage of the oil phase. The extent of sphericity of containers was found to be more at an optimum ratio of GO content to the oil phase and at a lower volume fraction of oil content. The sub-micron sized PS/GO containers with 75% of encapsulation efficiency of 8-HQ were successfully prepared via Pickering emulsion polymerization. This work was supported by financial assistance from the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at