We present a study of uranium (VI) adsorption in aqueous solutions by magnetic oxine (ferroferric oxide/oxine composite). Batch experiments of uranium (VI) adsorption were conducted, investigating the significance of solution pH, contact time, ionic strength, and temperature on uranium sorption efficiency. The results suggest that maximum adsorption capacity is 125mgg−1 when the initial uranium (VI) concentration is 50mgL−1 at 298K, displaying a mass transport property of the magnetic oxine for the removal of uranium (VI). The sorption was strongly dependent on pH and independent of ionic strength, indicating that the sorption was mainly dominated by inner-sphere surface complexation. The experimental data are analyzed using sorption kinetic models, revealing that the process follows a pseudo-second-order kinetic model. The thermodynamic parameters show that the process is endothermic and spontaneous. We demonstrate a fast, efficient and convenient material for the removal of uranium (VI) from aqueous solutions.Uranium is an element of the crustal material and is generally distributed at low levels within many rocks, soils and sea water Many kinds of adsorbents have been researched and applied for the recovery of uranium (VI) from aqueous media In this study, a new extractant is synthesized from immobilized oxine on surfactant-coated Fe Fe 50 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was performed on a Rigaku D/max-IIIB diffractometer with CuKa irradiation ( The loading capacity and rate of uranium uptake into the magnetic oxine were tested under pH ranging from 2.0 to 12.0, adjusted by 0.01 The recovery of the adsorbent is the important factor in designing an adsorption procedure. In order to estimate the reversibility of uranium (VI) sorption, desorption experiments using 0.2 The morphologies of Fe XRD patterns of Fe The magnetic properties of Fe In order to identify the modification with oxine functional groups, FT-IR patterns of the magnetic oxine (A) and the Fe The physical properties of Fe The influence of pH on the adsorption of uranium (VI) on magnetic oxine is investigated at different NaCl concentrations. As shown in When pH value higher than 7, various hydrolyzed species exist in equilibrium with UO Also shown in In seawater and wastewater systems, electrolyte anions may display complexation toward metal ions while electrolyte cations may compete with the binding sites of sorbents, both of which would greatly influence the sorption process. We studied the effect of contact time on adsorption capacity, under the conditions of 0.02 To study the controlling mechanism involved during the adsorption process, the adsorption data is tested using kinetic models of pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order The pseudo-second-order model considers the rate-limiting step as the formation of a chemsorptive bond involving the exchange of electrons between adsorbate and the adsorbent. The model is defined as: To investigate the significance of temperature on the adsorption process, adsorption studies are carried out at 25, 35 and 45 The adsorption standard free energy Δ The isothermal adsorption experiments of magnetic oxine for uranium (VI) at different temperatures are conducted, as shown in To clarify the adsorption behavior of the adsorbents, the equilibrium data are analyzed using the Langmuir and Freundlich equilibrium models to get the best fitting isotherm. The Langmuir equation has the form: The results of uranium (VI) adsorption on magnetic oxine are also analyzed by using the Freundlich model. The Freundlich equation is Desorption studies is important to help regenerate the spent adsorbent. In this study, 0.2 A comparison of Surfactant-coated ferroferric oxide immobilized with oxine functionality is prepared. We found that magnetic oxine can be used for the effective adsorption of uranium (VI) ions. Furthermore, magnetic oxine is easily separated by the use of an external magnetic field. In this way, we solve the problem of phase separation using traditional adsorbents. From our adsorption experiment, a series of conditions for adsorption are optimized: the pH value is 7.0, and contact time is 4 This work was supported by