The influence of the properties of a slurry on the flocculation behaviour of fine particles in water upon the application of a DC electric field was investigated. In addition, the mechanism whereby particles in water can be flocculated through the application of the DC electric field was clarified. The particle flocculation efficiency was determined for aqueous and non-aqueous slurries to which a DC electric field was applied, by measuring the change in the turbidity of the sampled slurry.
                  It is shown that, for aqueous slurries, the particle flocculation could be enhanced by applying a DC electric field provided the particles carried a charge and were surrounded by an electric double layer. It was also found that there was no enhancement of the flocculation for those slurries for which pH = pHIEP, as well as for non-aqueous slurries using rapeseed oil as their solvent, in which case the particles were not charged. In addition, merely stirring the slurry (thus increasing the number of particle collisions) did not cause the particles to flocculate, although the particle flocculation could be enhanced by applying a DC electric field while stirring the slurry, thus maintaining a constant particle concentration.
                  These findings lead to the conclusion that the enhancement of the particle flocculation in an aqueous slurry through the application of a DC electric field is caused by the charged particles and their counter ions in an electric double layer forming an electric dipole due to the deformation of the electric double layer, thus creating an electrostatic attractive force between the particles.particle mobility (m medium viscosity (Pa·s) permittivity of free space (F·m relative permittivity (–) zeta potential (V) inverse Debye length (m particle diameter (m) Boltzmann constant (J·K absolute temperature (K) elementary electric charge (C) Avogadro's number (mol concentration of ion valency of ion Gravitational sedimentation has been widely used for solid–liquid separation in water treatment, mining, and material-recycling processes. The efficiency of the sedimentation separation process is closely related to the size of the particles in the treated suspensions, that is, the efficiency increases with the particle size due to the higher settling velocity. Thus, a flocculant is usually added to a slurry to cause larger flocs to form, and these settle more quickly than the original particles ( The addition of flocculants is normally effective from the viewpoint of separation efficiency. However, their use is undesirable from the standpoint of recycling the collected particles because the flocculants remain in the collected particles as a contaminant, that is, they adversely affect the purity of the collected particles. For example, the excess sludge discharged as a result of the activated sludge treatment of livestock manure is generally separated into a supernatant and condensed sludge. However, the condensed sludge can only be discarded due to the chemical content originating in the flocculants, even though the sludge itself could be used as a fertilizer ( As a means of overcoming this issue, we have developed a flocculation technique that does not depend on the use of flocculants but instead uses a DC electric field ( Aqueous and non-aqueous slurries were used in this study. The materials were Al To prepare aqueous slurries, these powders were mixed with deionised water to give a particle concentration of 0.01 vol% (100 vol ppm). The mixed slurry was dispersed using an ultrasonic homogeniser for 5 min. The pH of the prepared slurry was adjusted, by adding HNO To prepare non-aqueous slurries, the powders were mixed with rapeseed oil to give a particle concentration of 0.01 vol% (100 vol ppm). Again, the mixed slurry was dispersed using an ultrasonic homogeniser for 5 min. The zeta potential of a powder is a value that allows us to understand the particle dispersion in aqueous slurries. Therefore, the pH dependency of the zeta potential of the powder used in the present study was determined using an electrophoretic-type zeta potential analyser (Model502, Nihon Rufuto, Japan). A trace amount of the powder was mixed with 400 mL of deionised water, after which the pH was adjusted by adding HNO  In addition, after the DC electric field had been applied, the slurry was sampled at a point 15 mm below the surface, and its turbidity was measured using a turbidity meter (TR-55, Kasahara Chemical Instruments, Japan). The measured turbidity was converted into the particle concentration using a calibration curve, which was determined by measuring the turbidity of slurries with a known particle concentration in advance. As explained below, one possible means of enhancing the flocculation of particles in a slurry through the application of a DC electric field is to increase the number of particle collisions by increasing the particle concentration near the electrode. Therefore, the following experiments were carried out to clarify the flocculation mechanism. Similarly, another sample of the slurry was stirred for 60 min in the acrylic container shown in    As a result, it was found that a settling velocity could not be determined for all the slurries used in the present study, since the interface between the supernatant and the slurry was not clear in some cases. However, a thorough investigation of the deposition behaviour at the bottom of the acrylic cylinder revealed that the application of a DC electric field caused the particles to flocculate even in the case of a slurry which did not exhibit a clear interface. Therefore, to qualitatively analyse the flocculation efficiency for all the slurries, regardless of whether they exhibited a clear interface, we compared the particle concentration from the turbidity measured at a specific point in the container. The particle concentration of the slurry at a point 15 mm below the surface, 60 min after pouring the slurry into the container, both with and without the application of a DC electric field, was determined from the turbidity measurement.    In One possible reason for the particles in an aqueous slurry flocculating upon the application of the DC electric field is the pH shift of the slurry due to chemical reactions. Previous studies of the electrophoretic deposition (EPD) of aqueous slurries(  Given that the particles carry a charge, one reason for the application of the DC electric field enhancing particle flocculation is the local particle concentration near the electrode increasing due to electrophoresis, since the number of particle collisions increases with the particle concentration. If the electrophoresis of the particles is the main reason for the improvement in the particle flocculation, it might seem reasonable to assume that particle flocculation would be much more pronounced near the electrode due to the existence of electrophoresis. However, as shown in In addition, the same conclusion can be derived from the results shown in Given the above, we can conclude that the main cause of particle flocculation when a DC electric field is applied to a slurry is other than the increase in the local particle concentration due to electrophoresis. Given that charged particles in an aqueous solution appear to be necessary to the enhancement of flocculation by the application of a DC electric field, and given that the changes in the pH and local particle concentration in the slurry were not the cause of the flocculation enhancement, it is very likely that the enhancement is a result of the deformation of the electric double layer surrounding the particle in water, as shown in   Consequently, particles in water can be flocculated by applying a DC electric field provided the particles are charged and are surrounded by an electric double layer. This flocculation enhancement is a result of an electric dipole being formed by the charged particle and counter ions in the electric double layer, thus creating an attractive inter-particle force. The present study set out to investigate the particle flocculation efficiency of various aqueous and non-aqueous slurries when a DC electric field was applied to the slurries. The following conclusions were reached: For aqueous slurries, the particle flocculation could be enhanced by applying a DC electric field provided the particles in the water carried a charge and were surrounded by an electric double layer. No enhancement effect in the particle flocculation was observed for a slurry for which pH = pH For non-aqueous slurries for which the solvent was rapeseed oil, the application of a DC electric field to the slurry could not enhance the particle flocculation. The particles did not flocculate as a result of merely stirring the slurry, that is, increasing the number of particle collisions. In addition, the particle flocculation could be enhanced by applying a DC electric field even when stirring the slurry. That is, the particle concentration remained constant. Given the above, it can be is concluded that the enhancement of particle flocculation by the application of a DC electric field to an aqueous slurry was the result of the charged particles and counter ions in the electric double layer forming an electric dipole due to the deformation of the electric double layer, thus creating an electrostatic attractive force between the particles. This work was in part supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (B), No.