Numerous reagents for the elution of metal cyanide complexes from ion exchange resins have been proposed previously. However, a simple and cost-effective elution procedure has not been developed that is able to selectively strip metal cyanide complexes from the resin. The results of the current study show that highly saline solutions can be used to selectively elute copper cyanide and iron cyanide complexes from a variety of anion exchange resins containing different quaternary ammonium functional groups. It was found that for most resins an elution efficiency of greater than 80% copper and 99% iron was achieved within 12 bed volumes (BV) of a concentrated KCl or MgCl2 eluant containing 200 mg/L free cyanide. Gold cyanide and zinc cyanide complexes were not eluted from any of the resins studied. Poor elution of metal cyanide complexes was observed when a concentrated MgSO4 eluant containing 200 mg/L free cyanide was used. It is proposed that the chloride anion successfully competes with copper cyanide and iron cyanide complexes for active sites on the resin. Furthermore, the stereochemistry and degree of hydration of these complexes facilitate their selective elution by highly saline solutions. It is proposed that a highly saline elution stage followed by a conventional thiocyanate or zinc cyanide elution stage for strong base resins will produce a very simple and efficient elution procedure for the selective recovery of gold cyanide from strong base ion exchange resins. Furthermore, the selective elution procedure allows for the recycling of cyanide that is bound to the copper and iron cyanide complexes.The world's first commercial application of resin-in-pulp (RIP) technology for gold recovery was implemented at one of the largest gold mines in the former Soviet Union in 1978 The adoption of the carbon-in-pulp (CIP) process in the Western World can be partly attributed to the complicated and time-consuming stripping and regeneration procedure that was required for the recovery of gold from ion exchange resins Resins are more versatile substrates than activated carbon because specific functional groups can be introduced onto the resin matrix during synthesis to alter their sorptive properties. Consequently, several resins have been developed that are able to selectively sorb the gold cyanide complex The recovery of gold cyanide from anion exchange resins has been the focus of many investigations in the Western World The behaviour of ion exchange resins in highly saline solutions is of interest to Australian mining companies because of the unusually highly saline process water used on the goldfields of Western Australia. The salinity of the available ground water at these locations is reported to be 200 g/L of total dissolved solids. Recent work has shown that the synthesis of a gold selective resin is unnecessary if highly saline solutions are used during sorption The current study shows that highly saline solutions can be used to selectively elute copper cyanide and iron cyanide from a variety of strong base resins that have also been loaded with gold, silver and zinc. It is proposed that the concentrated copper cyanide and iron cyanide eluate can be fed to a conventional AVR (acidification–volatisation–reneutralisation) or Cyanisorb process for the recovery and recycling of cyanide. Furthermore, a sequential elution procedure is proposed whereby the elution of copper and iron cyanide is achieved by highly saline water, and conventional eluants such as thiocyanate or zinc cyanide are used to efficiently elute the gold cyanide complex. The resin can then be regenerated using conventional acid treatments. Macroporous chloromethylated polystyrene (D2780) spherical beads (the polymer substrate) were obtained from Purolite International, UK. The beads were off-white in appearance and had a particle size of between 500 and 800 μm. The beads had a reported chlorine content from the manufacturer of 22% and the crosslinking by divinylbenzene of approximately 10%. Based on elemental analysis, the chloromethyl group content was determined to be 6 mmol/g of dry resin. Ion exchange resins were synthesised by reacting the appropriate amine reagent with the polymer substrate in a stirred vessel for 48 h. Tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as the solvent to swell the resin beads. A temperature of 40°C was used for the synthesis of trimethylamine and the dimethylamine resin. The synthesis of tripropylamine and the dipropylamine resin was performed at the reflux temperature of the THF solvent. Limiting the amount of secondary amine reagent used during synthesis facilitated the formation of a small percentage of strong base groups on the dimethylamine and the dipropylamine resin. Following synthesis, the ion exchange resins were washed twice with THF, methanol and distilled water to remove reagents that were entrained within the resin bead pores. Unless otherwise stated, all ion exchange resins were in the chloride form following synthesis. The commercial strong base resin Amberjet 4400 (chloride form) was obtained from Rohm and Haas, France. Amberjet 4400 contains trimethylamine functional groups affixed to a gelular polystyrene–divinylbenzene matrix. Amberjet 4400 has superceded Rohm and Haas' resin IRA 400. The strong base capacity (the number of quaternary ammonium groups) of each resin was determined by the procedure previously described Sorption tests were performed in baffled 1 L PVC containers that were attached to an overhead stirrer bench that had the capacity to stir 28 containers. Each container was immersed in a water bath at a constant temperature of 22°C. Each resin was loaded with gold, silver, copper, zinc and iron as cyanide complexes by contacting 5×20 mL portions of wet settled resin with 1 L of solution. The excess free cyanide concentration in each container was adjusted to approximately 200 mg/L prior to sorption. Each container was stirred for 72 h at 200 min Unless otherwise stated, eluant solutions were prepared from the following salts obtained from Ajax Laboratory Chemicals: KCl, MgCl All elution experiments were conducted in a glass column with an internal diameter of 12 mm. The piping and associated connections were made from polyethylene tubing. A water jacket was used to maintain a constant and uniform temperature of 22°C throughout the resin bed. The resin (15 mL wet settled volume) was dropped into the glass column containing half a bed volume (BV) of distilled water at the elution temperature. This minimised the air bubbles in the column. Subsequent removal of air bubbles that formed in the column was achieved by using a thin glass rod. The resin bed was washed with distilled water for 1 h in situ prior to elution. No loss of metal was reported during this time. The eluant was passed downwards through the column at a flowrate of 1.4–1.5 mL/min by a positive displacement pump. This corresponds to 5 BV/h (where 1 BV is defined as the empty volume of the reactor that is occupied by the packed bed of ion exchange resin). This flowrate was chosen because it enabled adequate sampling of the eluate to fully determine the elution profile of each element. Unless otherwise stated, samples of the eluate were taken over a 2-min time period. The flowrate of the eluant was monitored periodically and no change was observed throughout the course of the elution experiment. The concentration of each metal in solution was determined by ICP-OES. Metal cyanide solutions were prepared using the method described previously and were used as metal calibration standards The elution curves obtained for each ion exchange resin using a 2 M KCl eluant are presented in The differences in the percentages of metal eluted from the trimethylamine and Amberjet 4400 resin can be explained by considering the structure of the resin matrix as well as the strong base capacity of each resin. Amberjet 4400 has a gel-type polystyrene–divinylbenzene resin matrix and as a result the diffusion of anions into or out of the resin bead is slower compared to the trimethylamine resin that has a macroporous structure. As observed The elution profiles of the dimethylamine and dipropylamine experimental resins are presented in The rapid elution of iron cyanide from the dimethylamine resin occurs because this resin has a low strong base capacity and a sterically bulky functional group. As a consequence, the resin cannot easily accommodate the iron cyanide complex because it requires at least four functional groups in close proximity for sorption to occur. Furthermore, the structure of the functional group on the dimethylamine resin can vary significantly unlike that of simple alkyl amine type functional groups such as trimethylamine and tripropylamine. The chemical structures shown in To determine the effect of the cation on the selective elution of the ion exchange resins studied, similar experiments were performed by increasing the salinity of the eluant to an ionic strength of 3 M using MgCl To determine the effect of multiple cations on the elution of Amberjet 4400 and the experimental dipropylamine resin, actual process water obtained from the New Celebration gold mine in Western Australia was used as an eluant To further investigate the role of the anion on the ability of highly saline solutions to selectively remove iron cyanide and copper cyanide complexes from the resins studied, similar elution experiments were performed using MgSO The loading of iron and copper on the tripropylamine, dipropylamine and dimethylamine resins as the elution for each resin progressed is shown by It is shown by The results presented in this study show that iron cyanide is significantly eluted from all resins studied using each saline eluant. However, it appears that for the elution of copper to proceed, iron must first be eluted from the resin. As mentioned previously, this trend is more readily observed for the MgSO In the current study, it has been established that the speciation of the copper cyanide complex sorbed onto the resin affects the ability of highly saline water to elute the copper cyanide complex. It is proposed that the elution of copper from the Amberjet 4400 resin is rapid using KCl or MgCl The elution of copper cyanide from the trimethylamine resin does not occur as rapidly because this resin predominantly loads the trigonal planar [Cu(CN) This elution mechanism can be extended to take into account the dependence of the elution of copper on the elution of iron. It is proposed that for [Cu(CN) The results presented in the current work and that of previous investigations The results presented in this study show that highly saline solutions can be used to selectively elute iron cyanide and copper cyanide complexes from a variety of ion exchange resins that have a polystyrene–divinylbenzene matrix. Negligible elution of gold cyanide and zinc cyanide complexes with highly saline eluants was observed. It was found for all resins that greater than 90% of iron was recovered within the first 8 BV of eluant. It was proposed that the rapid elution of iron has been observed because it is octahedral in structure and also requires at least four functional groups in close proximity for sorption. Therefore, chloride anions are able to successfully compete for active sites on the resin via an ion exchange mechanism. The elution of copper cyanide from the ion exchange resins studied has been shown to be dependent upon the speciation of the copper cyanide complex loaded onto the resin as well as the elution of iron cyanide. It has been shown that a significant amount of copper is eluted from resins that have a high ionic density using highly saline solutions containing chloride anions. This is due to the ability of the chloride anions to compete with the tetrahedral [Cu(CN) It has been proposed that the elution of copper cyanide in highly saline solutions is partly due to direct ion exchange with chloride anions and also due to the formation of the tetrahedral [Cu(CN) The results of this study demonstrate that existing non-selective resins containing trimethylamine functional groups can be used for the efficient recovery of gold. These resins are commercially available and stable under alkaline conditions. These resins non-selectively sorb metal cyanide complexes from solution. Using a highly saline eluant, the copper cyanide and iron cyanide complexes loaded on the resin are selectively eluted. Conventional eluants such as thiocyanate or zinc cyanide can then be employed to recover the gold from the resin with a high degree of purity. To increase the capacity of the resin for gold cyanide, the sorption stage can also be performed using highly saline water because a previous study has shown that under these conditions the resin will preferentially load the gold cyanide complex. This two-stage elution process is cost-effective particularly in areas where the salinity of available ground water is 200 g/L (Western Australia). In this instance, the reagent cost is considerably decreased because only a small portion of thiocyanate would be required to recover the gold. Furthermore, the selective elution procedure allows for the recycling of cyanide that is bound to the copper and iron cyanide complexes. This leads to a significant reagent cost reduction. The authors express their sincere gratitude to Dr. Ratan Chowdhury and Mr. Redmond Lloyd for their assistance in part of the experimental work. The financial support of part of this study was provided by the Advanced Mineral Products Centre (AMPC), a Special Research Centre of the Australian Research Council (ARC).