Introduction
                  Hemiarthroplasty (HA) using standard-length femoral stem with reconstruction of femoral calcar or using calcar replacing prosthesis for unstable intertrochanteric fractures in elderly patients is a viable option. However, both of the techniques increase the complexity of procedure, operative trauma and complication. This study evaluated the clinico-radiological results of the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis without reconstruction of femoral calcar for unstable intertrochanteric fracture in patients aged 75 years or more.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  Bipolar HA using the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis for unstable intertrochanteric fractures in patients aged 75 years or more, do not need to reconstruct the femoral calcar.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Forty-two patients (42 hips) underwent bipolar HA using the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis for unstable intertrochanteric fractures from January 2008 to January 2012. Five (11.9%) patients were lost to follow-up. The 37 remaining patients (37 hips) were available for evaluation. The mean age was 83.9±5.2 years. Their clinico-radiological data were prospectively gathered.
               
                  Results
                  All of 37 patients, 4 patients (10.8%) died within 1 year postoperatively. At the final follow-up, 31 (83.8%) out of 37 patients were regained preoperative ambulatory status; the mean Harris hip score (HHS) of the 15 patients who died during the follow-up period of 7–59 months, was 84.5±2.4 points; the 22 healthy patients were followed for 68.6±14.7 months, with mean HHS of 84.6±2.8 points. Radiologically, none of stems had evidence of loosening; 16 stems had subsidence of 2–3mm without clinical significance; the bone in-growth fixation was achieved in 24 patients and stable fibrous fixation in 13 patients.
               
                  Discussion
                  Bipolar HA using the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis for unstable intertrochanteric fractures in patients aged 75 years or more, without reconstruction of the femoral calcar, may achieve a satisfactory clinico-radiological outcome, and could regain preoperative ambulatory status in most patients (83.3%).
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  IV, Retrospective study.For unstable intertrochanteric fracture in the elderly, the majority of patients could achieve satisfactory clinical outcomes with internal fixation, however, there have been poor outcomes in patients with osteoporosis and femoral calcar fractures, which could result in excessive weight loading of implant and resultant complications, such as cut-out of femoral head, “cut-through” phenomenon, the “Z” and “reverse Z” effects, and femoral head collapse Therefore, hemiarthroplasty (HA) is an alternative solution for unstable intertrochanteric fracture in these patients, as it avoids complications in the fracture site, and allow for immediate postoperative weight bearing. When using HA, some authors suggest reconstruction of femoral calcar simultaneously, which may maintain the initial prosthesis stability and avoid subsidence of the femoral stem We are not aware of any study evaluating the results of treatment with HA without reconstruction of femoral calcar or treatment without calcar-replacement HA. We report the mid-term results of the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis without reconstruction of femoral calcar for unstable intertrochanteric fracture in patients aged 75 years or more. Our primary hypothesis was that bipolar HA using the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis for unstable intertrochanteric fractures in patients aged 75 years or more, do not need to reconstruct the femoral calcar. Institutional review board approval was obtained for this prospective cohort study. The criteria for inclusion: patients who have sustained an unstable intertrochanteric fracture (A2.2–A2.3 according to the AO/OTA classification) treated with HA and who are at the age of 75 years or older at the time of injury, were able to ambulate independently with or without crutches, were assigned ASA class I–III status, have follow-up information (completed information for a minimum of 60 months or death). The criteria for exclusion: patients who have contraindication of anesthesia, associated fractures, head injury or polytrauma, bilateral intertrochanteric fractures and pathological fractures. Between January 2008 and January 2012, a total of 346 patients were admitted to our hospital with an unstable intertrochanteric fracture over the four-year study period. Of which, 149 (43.1%) were at the age of 75 years or older, 42 patients (42 hips) underwent bipolar HA using the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis. Of the 42 patients, 5 (11.9%) patients were lost to follow-up at an average of 7.2 months (range 3 to 11 months) after surgery. The 37 remaining patients (37 hips) were available for evaluation ( All surgeries were performed by the senior author at an average of 2.7 All patients were operated under general anesthesia and performed through posterior approach to the hip. The fracture fragments including the femoral head, neck, calcar (posteromedial fragment) and lesser trochanter were removed from the wound. The femoral canal was identified and prepared using a broach in the usual fashion, and then insertion of a MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular femoral stem (Waldemar Link, Hamburg, Germany) was done. A trial reduction was performed and then the appropriate neck length and bipolar head diameter were selected. All of the displaced greater trochanter fracture fragments were reduced and fixed by locking plate and screws. The capsule and the short external rotators were reattached to the posterior border of the gluteus medius muscle. The wound was closed in layers and a closed suction drain was placed. Patients received cefazolin or vancomycin antibiotic prophylaxis within 30–60 The patients were followed up at 6 weeks, 6 months, 1 year, and annually thereafter for clinical and radiological examinations. If the patient was too far from the hospital or not willing to come, the clinical outcomes were evaluated by telephone, and the radiological outcomes were evaluated by X-ray films which were obtained at their local hospital. The patients were clinically evaluated on the basis of operation time, intraoperative blood loss, postoperative drainage, total blood loss (intraoperative blood loss The patients were radiographically evaluated in terms of the osteolysis The mean operative time was 90.9 All of patients could ambulate independently with a walker at hospital discharge. At the final follow-up, 31 (83.8%) out of 37 patients were regained preoperative ambulatory status. 6 patients ambulated independently without crutches before injury, while they require a walker for ambulation after surgery. 4 (10.8%) out of 37 patients had the limb length discrepancy with a range of 3–7 No patient died within 6 months after surgery. Of all 37 patients, 15 (40.5%) died during a 7–59 months follow-up period. Of the 15 patients, 4 patients died within 1 year postoperatively ( All of the 37-femoral stem achieved press-fit at the isthmus; bony union of the greater trochanter were observed in all patients at a mean follow-up of 4.3 Two patients (5.4%) experienced mild groin pain on ambulation. There were no pressure sores, cardiac, pulmonary, deep venous thrombosis, dislocations, hip pain, infection, and peri-prosthetic fracture. 6 hips (16.2%) demonstrated heterotopic ossification, including 5 hips in Grade I and 1 hip in Grade II. The most important finding of the present study was that bipolar HA using the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis without reconstruction of femoral calcar for unstable intertrochanteric fracture in patients aged 75 years or more: (1) could achieve satisfactory clinical outcomes with 83.8% of patients recovery of preoperative ambulatory status and a low one-year mortality rate (10.8%); (2) may achieve stable initial fixation of the femoral stem, and could be early weight bearing ambulation of the patients. The goals of treatment of unstable intertrochanteric fracture in the elderly are to regain preoperative ambulatory status with the lowest possible rate of surgical and medical complications, permitting immediate mobilization is important to achieve these Considering the limited immediate weight-bear mobilization and the higher risk of complication of internal fixation for unstable intertrochanteric fracture in elderly patients, many authors In this study, none of patients had evidence of loosening or subsidence of femoral stem Reconstruction of femoral calcar in HA has always been emphasized as an important factor for reducing the subsidence of the femoral stem Our study has some certain limitations. First, it is a prospective non-comparative study that did not compare HA with internal fixation, or reconstructed femoral calcar with non- reconstructed, or non- reconstructed femoral calcar with calcar replacing prosthesis. Considering the high risk of internal fixation related complications and restriction of immediate weight-bear mobilization, internal fixation was not performed in the senior author for the unstable intertrochanteric fractures in patients aged 75 years or more. Additionally, giving an increasing complexity of surgical procedure of reconstructed femoral calcar and the calcar replacing prosthesis, only the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis was performed in the senior author. Therefore, it was difficult to recruit a comparison group. Secondly, the follow-up period is short. However, a long-term follow-up is barely possible in typically very senile patients (mean age was 83.9 years in our study) and has little clinical relevance considering the remaining life expectancy. In conclusion, bipolar HA using the MP-Link cementless distal fixation modular prosthesis for unstable intertrochanteric fractures in patients aged 75 years or more, without reconstruction of the femoral calcar, may achieve a satisfactory mid-term clinical and radiographic outcome, and could regain preoperative ambulatory status in most patients (83.3%). The authors declare that they have no competing interest. This study was funded by the Jiangsu Provincial Medical Youth Talent (QNRC2016800), The Science and Technology Planning Project of Xuzhou (KC16SL111), and The Foundation of Jiangsu Province commission of Health and Family Planning (H2017081). Guo-Chun Zha did the study, analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript. Guo-Chun Zha, Jun-Ying Sun, Yong Wang, Jia Liu, Shuo Feng, Xiang-Yang Chen, Kai-Jin Guo was involved in the design, data management of the study. Guo-Chun Zha, Jia Liu, Yong Wang, Shuo Feng, Xiang-Yang Chen, Kai-Jin Guo, Jun-Ying Sun contributed to the study analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.