Sinterable uranium dioxide powders prepared through the ammonium diuranate route are prone to agglomeration causing difficulty in compaction and sintering. UO2 powder after light (short duration and low ball to charge ratio) attrition has been found to require lower compaction pressures and resulted in higher yields after sintering and finish grinding. Details of an in-house-built attritor are given. Experimental results concerning the effects of attrition on powder characteristics, green density, green strength, sintered density and recovery are presented and explained on the basis of green strength theory. The process is especially suited for low or room temperature precipitated (and hence fine or loosely agglomerated) powders. Even though only uranium dioxide powders have been handled, the principles are applicable to other ceramic powders.The word ‘attrition’ is used in two ways. Undesirable dust formation and size reduction when powdered materials are being handled or transported is called ‘attrition’ In this paper, details of an attritor (for the purpose of deagglomeration of UO Details of the attritor used in this work are given in  The mean compressive stress of failure for the lightly attrited category is significantly higher than that for the unattrited category. Green strength is important not only for handling the compacts but also to minimize defects, such as endcapping and lamination in the compacts The experimentally obtained failure load frequency distribution (shown in The presence of flaws and defects of varying sizes and orientations in a green compact leads to the scatter in the value of axial compressive stress of failure even in the pellets derived from the same lot of powder. It is possible to estimate a measure of failure stress under this kind of variation with adequate confidence with the use of the Weibull statistic A simple attritor and a hydraulic compressive strength testing rig have been built in-house and used for UO We thank Mr. R.M. Kartha for carrying out UO