Introduction
                  Care of polytrauma patients is complex and requires that a particular treatment sequence be followed during what is typically a short period of time. Early, temporary stabilization of injuries (damage control orthopedics [DCO]) is a validated strategy for the care of polytrauma patients. Application of this concept to spinal fractures has also led to good outcomes for patients. The recent development of percutaneous thoracolumbar fixation could improve the initial care of these vulnerable patients even more. The purpose of this study was to evaluate preliminary results in a series of polytrauma patients presenting with thoracolumbar fractures without neurological deficits who were treated according to DCO principles using early percutaneous fixation.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  All severe polytrauma patients admitted with a thoracic and/or lumbar spine fracture without neurological deficit were included in this prospective study. The care was standardized according to the degree of urgency of the initial injuries, with percutaneous spinal fixation being performed as early as feasible. The outcomes were evaluated using clinical parameters (duration of stay in intensive care unit, surgical data, blood loss) and radiographic parameters measured during a systematic postoperative CT scan (traumatic deformity, placement of pedicle screws, fusion rate). If needed, an anterior intervertebral graft was performed during a secondary procedure.
               
                  Results
                  In all, 10 patients (average age of 40years) were included, corresponding to 18 vertebral fractures. During the initial assessment, at least one peripheral bone fracture was found in 90% of cases and at least one organ was injured in all patients (thoracic in 80% of cases, cerebral in 50%, facial area in 40% and abdominal-pelvis in 30%). The average time elapsed between admission and spine surgery was 4days (80% of cases before day 7). There were no cases of deep infection in any of the patients. An additional anterior procedure was needed in three patients within 1month of the initial surgery.
               
                  Discussion
                  The strategy for treating thoracolumbar fractures in polytrauma patients is still not widely accepted. The presence of associated lesions could make it difficult to perform conventional spine surgery early on. Development of percutaneous techniques that reduce perioperative morbidity seems to be an alternative approach well-suited to DCO, as long as there are no neurological deficits. However, a secondary evaluation of the anterior spine is essential to determining if an anterior graft remains needed.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV.Thoracolumbar spine fractures are common injuries; the estimated annual incidence in Western countries is 64 per 100,000 people In parallel, the recent development of percutaneous spinal fixation techniques has allowed surgeons to treat various types of vertebral injuries while reducing the invasive nature of conventional posterior surgery. Recent studies have shown that percutaneous posterior fixation is a viable alternative to open fixation Thus, it is reasonable to think that the benefits of these percutaneous surgical techniques could be even more significant in the context of the initial care of thoracolumbar fractures in patients with one or several associate organ-related failures During this prospective study conducted from August 2011 and April 2012, all the patients admitted for treatment of severe trauma who presented with single- or multi-level thoracic and/or lumbar spinal fracture without signs of neurological deficit were included. Severe trauma was defined according to the criteria proposed by the French Society of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care (SFAR): presence of at least one potentially lethal organ injury in association with an Injury Severity Score (ISS) of 25 or more and predicted mortality rate of 10% or more. Since the presence of medullary compression or nerve root injury is a contraindication for percutaneous posterior fixation, this finding was an exclusion criterion for the study. For each patient, the initial injury assessment was performed using whole body CT scan and MRI of the entire spinal cord. The ISS and predicted mortality were calculated upon the patient's arrival by the anesthesiologist. The treatment sequence for patients was standardized and determined according to degree of urgency of the initial lesions. Any life-threatening injuries were cared for first. Spinal injuries were then treated second, as quickly as possible after admission. The same treatment strategy was used for all the patients enrolled in the study: percutaneous posterior fixation (CD Horizon Longitude To determine the benefits of this treatment strategy, patients were evaluated based on the following clinical criteria: time between accident and procedure, operative time, intraoperative fluoroscopy duration, estimated intraoperative blood loss (evaluated by comparing preoperative and immediate postoperative hemoglobin), PAFI (PaO In parallel, CT scans were carried out immediately after the surgery, then 3 Once the acute phase of injury had passed, the need for an additional anterior intervertebral graft procedure was determined based on the postoperative CT scan. The indication was made based on the percentage of bone loss in the fractured vertebral body after reduction, instability of the fracture site and severity of any disc injuries. In cases where anterior stabilisation was deemed necessary, this procedure was performed through a video-assisted mini-incision. It consisted of right thoracotomy for upper thoracic vertebrae (> Between August 2011 and April 2012, 10 severe polytrauma patients presenting with single or multiple thoracic and/or lumbar spine fractures without neurological signs were included prospectively. The average age was 40.3 The 18 spine fractures cared for within this protocol were distributed in the following manner: 6 upper thoracic spine fractures, 8 lower thoracic spine fractures, 3 thoracolumbar junction fractures and 1 lumbar spine fractures. Three patients had a single-level fracture, four patients had a two-level fracture and three patients had a three-level fracture. During the initial evaluation, every patient had one or multiple associated lesions. Thoracic injury ( The average ISS score was 35.5 (range 14–64) with a predicted mortality rate of 24.9% (range 1.7–75). One patient required preoperative red blood cell transfusion. The average PAFI was 319 (range 54–530) before the surgery and 362 (range 185–570) after the surgery. The average duration of mechanical ventilation was 89.4 In the overall series, no postoperative transfusion was needed during the recovery from spine surgery and no deaths were reported in the period after vertebral stabilisation. Two patients had postoperative respiratory complications: one residual pneumothorax requiring a new drain and one pneumonia that was treated with antibiotics. The average time between hospital admission and the vertebral fracture fixation was 3.9 The highest pedicle screw insertion was made at T2 and the lowest at S1. The average operative time was 1 In the early postoperative recovery, one case of superficial surgical site infection was detected that required wound excision and oral antibiotics therapy; the outcome was favourable and the instrumentation did not need to be removed. At the last follow-up, no cases of delayed surgical site infection were found. The radiology evaluation showed that percutaneous fixation had corrected the fracture deformity ( No instances of poorly positioned pedicle screws (pedicle breach There is currently no clear consensus about the optimal time frame and treatment methods for spinal fractures in severe polytrauma patients without neurological deficits During the last decade, the damage control orthopedics concept, which consists of quickly stabilising bone injuries, has been shown to be effective in caring for polytrauma patients. Taeger et al. In parallel, with the emergency fixation concept for thoracolumbar spine fractures, indications for percutaneous techniques have broadened with the development of instrumentation that can be used to correct fracture deformity and perform long-span fixation The results of the current study confirm the hypothesized limited postoperative complications and satisfactory fracture reduction. The latter finding is especially relevant because 89% of fractures were in the thoracic spine, which are typically difficult to reduce because of the stiffness of the rib cage. This fixation technique is relatively fast, causes minimal blood loss (generally below 150 Our findings are in accordance with the Schmidt et al. study Use of A-P and lateral fluoroscopy also ensures safe insertion of the pedicle screws, notably in the upper thoracic area. In the current study, none of the patients had pedicle cortex breach However, percutaneous fixation is not the solution to all clinical problems and has several limitations. It is a simple spinal fixation technique that does not allow the surgeon to add a posterior graft or perform neurological decompression. Thus, careful selection of indications is crucial to obtaining the best possible clinical outcomes. The presence of a neurological deficit is a contraindication to isolated percutaneous fixation. This can be problematic in a polytrauma patient who is admitted to intensive care already intubated and ventilated, as it would be impossible to perform a reliable neurological exam. Another fundamental requirement is the need to perform a detailed radiological evaluation of thoracolumbar injuries, in particular the bone quality in the anterior spine. After initial percutaneous stabilisation has been performed, the condition of the anterior spine structures must also be evaluated. The presence of an unstable injury with disc or ligament involvement or injury with significant vertebral body comminution will require an additional anterior approach that can be performed secondarily after the associated lesions have been treated. Technical requirements of percutaneous fixation require that a certain amount of radiation be delivered to the patient and to the surgical team, which justifies the need for strict radiation-protective measures. Percutaneous surgery requires three times more radiation (effective dose) than conventional surgery, but this is still less than the radiation received by the patient during a postoperative CT scan Percutaneous posterior fixation is a treatment method adapted to the damage control concept during the initial care of non-neurological spine fractures in severe polytrauma patients. It can be an alternative to direct fixation in this indication, as it allows for quick stabilisation of spinal injuries with deformity correction in the sagittal plane and less complicated postoperative recovery The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.