For the homogeneous recycling of actinides from spent nuclear fuels, within the future nuclear fuel cycle based on a transition to fast neutron reactors, a new GANEX (Grouped Actinide Extraction) process is under development. This potentially provides a simpler, more proliferation resistant hydrometallurgical process for recycling actinides. The so-called EURO-GANEX process is based on liquid–liquid extraction into an organic phase comprising 0.2mol/L TODGA and 0.5mol/L DMODHEMA in an odourless kerosene diluent. Before testing the EURO-GANEX process with dissolved fast reactor spent fuel, data are required on the distribution ratios of likely problematic fission products (Fe, Sr, Zr, Mo, Tc, Ru, Pd) under typical extraction and scrubbing conditions. Also, suitable conditions must be defined for the selective backwashing of the transuranic actinides (specifically plutonium and americium) in the presence of extracted lanthanide elements.
                  Distribution ratio data obtained indicate that conditions can be defined that prevent iron and strontium break through whilst maintaining actinide extraction across the extract-scrub contactors although some accumulation may occur. Zirconium and palladium extraction can be effectively inhibited by a polycarboxylate ligand: CDTA. However, technetium and molybdenum are likely to be extractable in the first contactor due to high distribution ratios and no significant suppression with CDTA. Ruthenium may be partially extracted but behaviour is complex in nitric acid. It was also shown that plutonium and americium can be efficiently separated from lanthanides by stripping with a combination of a sulphonated bis-triazinyl pyridine (BTP) ligand and acetohydroxamic acid (AHA) for plutonium concentrations ranging from <1mg/L to 10g/L plutonium solvent loading.To meet future demands on nuclear energy generation as well as improved management of the long lived and heat generating radionuclides within spent nuclear fuels, a number of countries are engaged in strategic research and development programmes to assess the feasibility for closing the fuel cycle through the introduction of fast reactors with recycle of uranium and plutonium ( Three options for the GANEX 2nd TRU cycle are currently under consideration in Europe. The “CEA-GANEX” process (developed by CEA, France) uses N,N'-dimethyl-N,N'-dioctylhexylethoxy-malonamide (DMDOHEMA) and di(2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (HDEHP) to co-extract actinides and lanthanides with citric acid, N-(2-hydroxyethyl)-ethylenediamine-N,N′,N′-triacetic acid (HEDTA) and a reducing agent to then selectively co-strip the actinides away from the lanthanides but at a rather high pH (pH CEA-GANEX and EURO-GANEX follow the same basic concepts as described above ( Previous papers have reported the formulation of the solvent system (0.2 Prior to the next stage of testing with real spent fuel solution, however, we needed basic information on the likely process behaviour of some of the fission and corrosion products that are present in a dissolved solution of spent nuclear fuel but were not included in the spiked test. Specifically, iron, strontium, zirconium, molybdenum, palladium and ruthenium are already known to extract into TODGA and DMDOHEMA based solvents to some degree ( The second area of uncertainty remaining after the spiked flow sheet test was related to conditions for the efficient and selective co-stripping of plutonium and americium at process concentrations. The use of the hydrophilic SO This paper now reports batch distribution data obtained on potentially problematic fission products under extract-scrub conditions and actinides under backwash conditions. In some cases the individual effects of TODGA and DMDOHEMA have been looked at as well as the full GANEX solvent. These data are used to enhance our understanding of the basic GANEX process chemistry and to inform the design of the EURO-GANEX flow sheet to be tested with spent nuclear fuel solution. The standard organic phase (“GANEX” solvent) was a solvent consisting of 0.2 Standard methods for batch distribution experiments were used with only minor variations between sets of experiments. For instance, for actinide stripping experiments at trace concentrations 500 Americium was analysed by gamma spectroscopy using the net count area from the 59.54 For solutions with macro-quantities of plutonium, the concentration was measured by gamma spectroscopy using the gamma peak for The metal distribution ratios, D Highly Active Raffinate (HAR) solutions were made up from metal salts in HNO The most important data in designing solvent extraction processes are equilibrium distribution ratios (ratio of concentration of species [X] in the organic phase to its concentration in the aqueous phase at equilibrium with a solvent to aqueous ratio of one, Eq. The extraction of Due to the steep increase in the distribution ratio of iron with HNO In the GANEX process an initial extraction of actinides and lanthanides from a 4–5 Efficient decontamination from heat generating caesium and strontium isotopes in reprocessing is essential. Whilst caesium removal should be straightforward, TODGA is known to extract strontium ( Although technetium distribution ratios (D Molybdenum showed distribution ratios in the range 3–11 in batch distribution experiments which were slightly suppressed by CDTA ( Ruthenium distribution ratios were generally found to be low ( The extraction of Zr and Pd into the GANEX solvent has been described in an earlier publication where it was shown that CDTA was an effective “hold back” or “masking” agent ( Distribution ratios of lanthanides, Pu(IV) and Am(III) ions in the GANEX solvent, in the presence of SO Stripping using a mixture of 0.02 As previously found in the extraction of actinides and lanthanides into the GANEX solvent ( Increased initial plutonium concentrations in the organic phase increased the observed distribution ratios of both Pu and Am, as can be seen in The effects of BTP concentration for Pu solvent loadings of 1, 5 and 10 The effect of nitric acid concentration is crucially important in finding effective stripping conditions. The effect of AHA is interesting. Whilst at trace concentrations Pu extraction seems to be very effectively suppressed with BTP without AHA, at 5 Prior to flow sheet testing it is advisable to conduct a process-like batch study to predict likely performance ( Following successful spiked testing ( The simple batch tests and HAR simulant experiments confirm that species such as Ag, Cs, Ni, Rb, Rh, Sn, Sb, Te and Cu will not be extracted by the solvent and will be routed directly to the aqueous raffinate. Addition of CDTA to the active feed has also been shown to effectively suppress the co-extraction of Pd and Zr. However, other fission product species such as Sr, Fe, Mo, Ru, Tc and to a lesser extent Se, Cd and Ba will be extracted by the solvent. The flow sheet uses a low acid scrub to prevent strontium being extracted into the backwash contactors, where it would probably contaminate the actinide product. This work indicates that this will remain an effective barrier for strontium, particularly in plutonium loaded conditions. The low acid scrub will also effectively remove Cd, Ba and probably Mo from the solvent phase prior to the strip contactors. The extraction of neptunium is promoted by high acidities in the extract section (~ These data suggest that the flow sheet will not decontaminate technetium and ruthenium particularly well. They will be extracted and may remain with the organic phase through the flow sheet. If so, a solvent clean up step that deals with technetium and ruthenium would be required. However, the main radioactive isotope of ruthenium, As indicated previously ( The effectiveness of SO Nitric acid concentration AHA concentration BTP and plutonium concentrations (i.e. BTP/Pu ratio which is related to the free BTP concentration). As the plutonium and free BTP concentrations are changing through the backwash contactor the optimum conditions for actinide backwashing are changing. However, nitric acid concentration of ~ Based on known behaviour with TODGA and DMDOHEMA extractants, it was expected that some of the major fission product elements may potentially interfere with efficient actinide separation in the EURO-GANEX process. The problematic fission products identified were Sr, Zr, Mo, Tc, Ru and Pd, together with Fe from corrosion or steel cladding materials. Previous development of the GANEX process had basically ignored these elements. Following a spiked test of the EURO-GANEX flow sheet ( Distribution data obtained indicate that conditions can be defined that prevent Fe and Sr break through whilst maintaining actinide extraction across the extract-scrub contactors, although some accumulation may occur across the contactor bank. As noted previously, Zr and Pd extraction can be effectively inhibited by CDTA. However, Tc and Mo are likely to be extractable in the first contactor due to high distribution ratios under these conditions and no significant suppression with CDTA. Ru may be partially extracted but behaviour is likely to be complex and further specific studies are required. Batch tests show that extracted Ru is not readily scrubbed or backwashed and appears to be retained in the solvent phase. Whilst this may not be a particular issue in terms of the Pu and minor actinide products it will be a concern for a solvent clean-up step to prevent accumulation in the recycled solvent. It was also shown that Pu and Am can be efficiently separated from lanthanides by stripping with a combination of SO Together with previously reported results, these data now enable the flow sheet to be designed for the EURO-GANEX hot test which will process some long cooled fast reactor fuel pieces (ex-Dounreay). It is anticipated that the feed to the EURO-GANEX test, following dissolution and uranium extraction, will contain ca. 10 Financial support for this work from the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at