Wave-plate mist eliminators are among the most effective devices to separate liquid from the gas. Liquid separation efficiency in these devices is largely dependent on the gas superficial velocity. However, the upper limit of gas throughput is restricted by the re-entrainment of the deposited liquid from the separator surfaces into the gas stream. There is some knowledge available of re-entrainment phenomena in vertical wave-plate separators. This paper presents experiments that have enabled the mechanisms of entrainment to be identified and the boundaries for air and liquid rates at which entrainment starts for horizontal wave-plate separators to be characterised. It is supported by modelling using an extension of earlier work.It is sometimes important to remove small quantities of drops from gas streams as this liquid could cause upset or damage to downstream equipment. Mist eliminators are devices that can remove entrained liquid from a gas flow effectively, usually by inertial impingement. In mist eliminators of the wave-plate type, the gas is forced to travel in a zig-zag manner between pairs of appropriately shaped plates. Drops with their higher inertia cannot follow these changes in direction and so impinge on to the solid surfaces. There they adhere, coalesce and, when the amount of liquid is sufficiently high, form a film which drains away under gravity. For wave-plate units where the gas flows vertically upwards, this drainage is counter-current to the gas flow. Where the gas flows horizontally through the unit the drainage is perpendicular to the gas flow. The inertia of the drops and the drag of the gas control the motion of drops through the zig-zag passages. This led For vertical wave-plates (gas upflow, downwards drainage of the liquid) the mechanism for the decrease in efficiency has been attributed to flooding of the draining film by the upward shear of the gas ( Though there is information on critical conditions for re-entrainment for vertical wave-plate mist eliminators, no such information exists for horizontal types. This paper reports on part of a wider study, which has also measured overall efficiency, variation of drop sizes along the demister and pressure drop ( Two series of experiments are reported. The first considers the effect of a horizontal gas flow across a film flowing under gravity on one wall of a straight channel. This provides underlying information on the interfacial features of this type of cross-flow. The second employed one passage between two wave-plates where the effect of the exact geometry could be observed. The cross-flow experiments were carried out in a once-through wind tunnel. A pair of axial flow fans drew air though a calming section and then the test section, both of whose walls were made of plate glass. This section was Quantitative data of the spatial variation of film thickness was obtained using a liquid absorption technique. A camera and light source were placed on either side of the test section. A soluble dye, nigrocine, was dissolved in the water to increase the absorptivity. The photographs were developed and grey scales measured using a densitometer. Grey scale was related to film thicknesses using a calibration curve obtained on a wedge cell, which contained films of known thicknesses. Full details can be found in These experiments were carried out in a simple, open-circuit wind tunnel. Air from a blower passed through a calming section of rectangular cross-section and then through a small-angle convergent section before entering the single channel wave-plate. This had a height of Normally liquid films in wave-plate mist eliminators are formed by deposition of drops with the flow rate of the gravity-driven film having a cumulative value dependent on the vertical position. Now, industrial wave-plate mist eliminators can be Observations were made of the behaviour of the interface using photography with backlighting. At low gas flow rates, the surface is covered by waves travelling vertically downwards as shown in The existence of striations and their behaviour can be explained by stability analysis and other physical arguments. Estimations of the vertical and lateral velocities showed that the film flow downwards was larger than that across. Because the film thickness was close to that from Nusselt theory, it could be assumed that the effects of gravity and shear are uncoupled. In this case, a digital camera (Kodak DC120) and high-speed video were used to record the behaviour of the liquid film falling down the plate. Liquid flow rates were set and the gas velocity through the zig-zag was increased slowly until disruption of the liquid film occurred. The mean air velocity is varied from 2 to Here, the Weber number is defined as The events recorded in The adhesion or detachment of a liquid film travelling around corners has been studied by This compressive force becomes negative when Examples of the dependence of the critical gas velocity on liquid flow rate is given in Studies of the falling film on a flat surface with a horizontal gas flow have indicated that the flow can be treated as uncoupled, i.e., that the thickness is determined from the Nusselt equation for gravity flow. Moreover, given the characteristic spacing of the striations reported in The locus of conditions at which detachment of the film is expected from the predictions of the model described in The effect of physical properties on the re-entrainment limit can be examined using the data of A mechanism for the re-entrainment of liquid deposited on the walls of wave-plate mist eliminators operating in the horizontal mode has been identified and quantified. The disruption of the film was seen to occur at the downstream corner. The work was carried out under EPSRC Research Grant GR/K52911.