Auxiliary ventilation is performed by carrying intake or return air in ducts. The complete elimination of air leakage from or into the ducting system is impossible due to duct quality and numerous joints in ducting system. The auxiliary ventilation systems for long drivages often require the use of multiple fans. Fans are installed in series and separated from each other in fixed or variable lengths. There are many methods proposed for the analysis air flow problems in leaky ducts. Due to the lengthy calculations, computers are often needed to conduct the analyses. In this study, a method known as “series–parallel combination of the duct and leakage path” has been introduced and a computer program has been developed based on this method.
                  In order to design the conditions of an auxiliary ventilated drivage, in situ measurement have been made in Western Lignite Enterprises (GLI) OMERLER underground coal mine (Turkey) and the related data necessary for this study was collected. The presently developed program was tested using these data, and it was found that the measured and calculated values are quite close.
                  The effective operational parameters governing auxiliary ventilation have been investigated and the effects of these variables on the volume rate of air flow reaching long drivage face have been examined by using linear regression analysis. Finally, it was concluded that the increase of duct diameter has prime importance in achieving the adequate air flow to the face and that for the auxiliary fans considered in this study the selection of fan does not greatly affect the volume rate reaching the face in a long duct line.The best way to ventilate a dead-end working area is to use auxiliary fans and ducting. In the selection of an auxiliary ventilation system, it is necessary to consider the volume rate of air flow that will be required at the face, the maximum length of drivage, the size and type of fan that are needed and the requisite size and type of duct ( The aim of an auxiliary ventilation system is the delivery of an adequate quantity and quality of fresh air to the working face to support life and the rapidly dilute contaminants to below statutory threshold limits ( When a ventilation duct in a development end is extended, as the face advances, the air quantity reaching the face gradually decreases due to both the increasing resistance of the duct and increasing leakage ( If a ducted ventilation system for dead-end tunnel does not deliver the required air flow to the working place, the options are to either install a more powerful fan or make modifications to the ducting ( In this study theory is given to analysis of the flow in a leaky duct, and a computer program based on this theory has been developed. In addition, in situ measurements have been made in Western Lignite Enterprise (GLI) The rate of airflow in a leakless duct can be calculated using Atkinson’s formula. But in a leaky duct, in addition to the variation of pressure, the flow rate varies along the duct and the calculations are complex. In 1983, Vutukuri introduced an approach to design an auxiliary ventilation system for long drivages. Here, the duct and leakage paths were assumed as a series–parallel combination. The air enters the duct at (a) and leaves it at (f). Points b–e are joints, and the leakage is at these points. For example, the equivalent resistance ( Based on the The fan The duct resistance curve is represented by the equation The points of intersections of these two curves gives the operating data for the fan.  Maximum duct length of a single fan that will be able to supply the required volume flow rate of air at the face can be calculated as follows: Begin by assuming an arbitrary length ( Fan characteristics curve is represented by The duct resistance curve is represented by The point of intersection of these two curves gives the Calculation of the volume rate reaching the face by Eq. If the calculated value is bigger than volume rate required at the face, iteration procedure will be repeated using increasing duct segment length. Iteration procedure is continued until the volume rate reaching the face is lower than the volume rate required the face. This means that the resistance of duct ( In this condition, the fan flow output ( In order to find the reduced duct length, it is used a design parameter called added resistance ( Because the fan flow output ( For a given duct, the Atkinson’s resistance equation is Therefore, optimum duct length for the fan can be estimated, and then the fan operating point is determined by updating the duct effective resistance and solving the corresponding network. The volume increase ratio (VIR) and pressure increase ratio (PIR) can be determined as follows ( If it is required to use the second fan, the required flow rate will be changed to volume rate handled by the first fan. The same approach is used to determine the location of the remaining fans. When the total distance exceeds the total duct length, the last fan can be located at the beginning of the duct. The methods used in the design of the long auxiliary ventilation systems require long and complex calculations. The probability of making errors during the process of calculations is quite high and the use of computers for the design of the long duct line provides easiness and accuracy to the ventilation engineer. For these reasons, a package computer program has been developed ( For the design of a simple auxiliary ventilation system, the fan flow rate and pressure have to be determined to give the required volume flow rate at the face of the drivage. To operate the program the duct line is characterized by its length, the resistance coefficient of the leakless duct line and leakage coefficient (or the resistance coefficient of the leakage paths) of the leaky duct line ( Maximum length of the duct line. Air quantity requirements. Characteristics of the duct (i.e., diameter, friction factor and resistance coefficient of leakage paths). Fan characteristics. The detailed applications are given in the following design application. The data necessary for this study was collected from Western Lignite Enterprise (GLI) OMERLER Mine which is located on the mid-west of Turkey. The currently applied method in OMERLER Underground Mine is the fully mechanized retreating longwall mining method and length of panels is 450–600 The auxiliary ventilation is forcing system with exhaust overlap and it is used in the preparation of panel drivages. The auxiliary system within the drivages is shown in The auxiliary fans used in enterprise is bifurcated axial type and have 18.5 The fan with the characteristic curve is given in The effective resistance of a leaky duct is obtained when the resistances of duct and leakage paths are combined. Combination of the effective resistance curve of the duct with the pressure – volume characteristic curve of the fan permits the operating data for the fan to be calculated. The volume rate of air flow at the face is calculated by the method mentioned above ( The equivalent resistance of duct line The fan characteristic curve is The simplest form of nonlinear relationship is the quadratic equation and the quadratic equation is The point of intersection of these two curves have been given in Volume rate handled by the fan: 3.68 Fan operating pressure: 1660 Volume rate reaching the end of 534 In order to compare the obtained results from the calculation, in situ measurement have been made at the given positions in The controlling factor used to determine the maximum length of leaky duct connected to a single fan is the required volume flow rate at the face. In this case, the required air flow is 2.4 The length of auxiliary ventilated drivage was 632 In order to reduce the capital and running cost of an auxiliary ventilation system the factors having effect on volume rate reaching to the face should be examined. By studying the effect of duct diameter, friction factor, resistance coefficient of leakage paths, duct length and air flow entering the duct, the optimum equipment for a given situation can be selected. Under these conditions, it is always necessary to determine “Which are the most important factors have to be considered?”. A linear regression analysis has been carried out to identify components of the model that are potentially important contributors. If a small change in a parameter results in relatively large changes in the outcomes, the outcomes are said to be sensitive. The sensitivity analysis consists of the following steps: Selection of the parameters to be tested (all the above mentioned parameters). Determination of the test range of each parameter (between −50% and 50% with an increments of 10%). For each selected parameter ( Determination of the most sensitive parameters. By using these data, graphic given in The effect of different fans (B20, B40, B70 and B100) on the volume rate reaching the face has been examined for the 0.6 Volume rate reaching the face versus duct length plots for various fan is given in The other fans tested in this study did not deliver a very different range of air flow to the face of a very long drivages. However, significantly different flows were delivered for short lengths of ducts and shorter duct lengths could become more significant. If the ducts of different diameters are equally well made and maintained, it will be expected that as the duct diameter increases, volume flow rate reaching to the face increases. According to this study, following interpretations can be withdrawn: A computer program was written to design of the auxiliary ventilation systems and tested for a case study. The obtained results were compared and it was shown that the program used in the design of the long auxiliary ventilation system may well be successfully applied to determine the conditions at the end of the duct length. In addition, it was found that the data using for the design of auxiliary ventilation in The study showed that a large proportion of the power was wasted through the duct line. The factors that have effect on volume rate reaching to the face should be examined in order to reduce the capital and running cost of an auxiliary ventilation system. Duct diameter and fan flow output could be accepted as the most effective parameters on the volume rate of air flow reaching to the long drivage faces. The other parameters could be put in an order as, duct length, friction factor and resistance coefficient of leakage paths. Volume rate reaching to the face decreases as the duct length increases. The selection of fan did not greatly affect the volume rate reaching to the face in a long duct line studied here. However, in the case of shorter lengths it could have a significant effect. The volume rate reaching to the face increases as the duct diameter increases for a given fan. It was found that the increase of duct diameter had prime importance in reaching to the adequate air flow to the face.