In situ observations of the reaction between solid Cu in contact with molten Sn–0.7wt.% Cu were achieved using a synchrotron X-ray imaging technique. It was found that, upon wetting, the rapid dissolution of Cu adjacent to the solid–liquid interface was followed by near-instantaneous interfacial intermetallic compound (IMC) formation. The kinetics of IMC formation were also elucidated. The results provide direct experimental evidence of the sequence of events in the dissolution reaction and subsequent diffusion, and in particular of the growth mechanisms of the IMC layer. Recent in situ real-time imaging of IMC and solder void growth by Qu et al. The experiments were performed at BL20XU beamline in the SPring-8 synchrotron using an in situ X-ray real-time solidification observation setup developed from previous research The moment of interfacial IMC formation during solder wetting and subsequent IMC growth was observed by the in situ real-time imaging technique. To further study the IMC formation mechanisms, in situ real-time imaging was conducted at high magnification, and the results are shown in To further investigate the mechanisms of IMC growth, the thickness is plotted against the reaction time in In conclusion, we have successfully obtained evidence of the mechanisms occurring during the reaction of Sn–0.7 The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the University of Queensland (UQ)–Nihon Superior (NS) collaborative research program. The authors thank Dr. K. Uesugi of SPring-8 beamline scientist and support staff and students from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Kyoto University and the Department of Adaptive Machine Systems, Osaka University for experimental assistance. In situ observation experiments were performed at the SPring-8 BL20XU (Project ID: 2014A1540, 2014A1541 and 2014A1114) while SEM imaging was performed at the Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis (CMM), University of Queensland. This work is also supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (S) (Project ID: 24226018) from JSPS, Japan. We acknowledge travel funding provided by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 