We have applied more advanced imaging modalities for the management of proximal interphalangeal joint (PIPJ) fractures by using Cone Beam Computed Tomography (CBCT). In this short communication we discuss the technique of CBCT and its use as a preoperative guidance tool. The principle behind the technique is a cone shaped x-ray bundle with the X-ray source and detector rotating around the field of interest. The conical shape of the beam distinguishes it from helical CT, which has a fan-shaped beam. As a result 2D axial, coronal and sagittal projections are acquired throughout the rotation. These images can then be received by the detector and compiled into a 3D volumetric format. CBCT was developed as an alternative to helical CT to provide a more rapid scan time with a comparatively less expensive radiation detector. There are no regulations for the use of CBCT for hand surgery in the UK. Although there are no regulations in place radiation protection must be followed by keeping radiation exposure ‘As Low As Reasonably Achievable’, the ALARA principle. CBCT is commonly used in orthodontics and data from studies has shown the radiation exposure to be several to one hundred times higher than the effective dose from conventional radiographic examination. The effective radiation dose range of CBCT can be anywhere from 20 to 1025 μSv. CBCT has the advantage of providing optimal information and understanding of the precise character of PIPJ fractures. Plain X-rays are limited in evaluating articular involvement e.g. the number, size and location of bone fragments. CBCT is particularly useful in evaluating fractures of the middle phalanx base where it can sometimes be difficult to ascertain the degree of comminution and the extent of the articular involvement of palmar lip fractures. CBCT can clearly reveal the percentage of the articular surface involved as described by Kang et al. ORIF may be challenging or contraindicated when there is severe comminution shown on CBCT. In unstable comminuted fractures of the palmar lip we often use External Dynamic fixation systems such as the Suzuki frame. Faccioli et al. In summary we have found CBCT to be a reliable and much valued preoperative assessment tool in PIPJ fractures; it is CBCT images rather than plain X-ray's that typically determine our treatment choices in such cases. None. This research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial or not-for profit services.