Both Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans and Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans attached to pyrite rapidly, reaching the adsorption equilibrium in 20–25min. Furthermore, the adsorption content of substrate-grown bacteria was larger than that of solution-grown ones. Zeta potential studies revealed that isoelectric points (IEP) of pyrite shifted to lower pH after interacting with bacteria.
                  Iron solubilisation by the mixed culture was faster than that for the A. ferrooxidans. There was no close relation between iron recovery and fineness. Circular, square and elongated etch pits were visible by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Moreover, jarosite in the leaching of 3%(w/v) pulp density was detected by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy(FTIR) and X-ray diffraction(XRD), though the pH of the solutions declined to below 1.00. S was not detected in the leaching residues. Furthermore, the contact angles showed there was no S produced. These results point to a thiosulfate mechanism in pyrite bioleaching, where the thiosulfate leads to sulphate without S formation.Pyrite is the most widely distributed sulfide mineral on the earth ( Since The mechanism can lead to elemental sulfur through a series of complex reactions ( In the present paper, the changes in surface properties of both the pyrite and the cells are observed with respect to their interaction, by means of the experiments of adsorption, Zeta potential and wettability. Furthermore, bioleaching of pyrite with high purity by the pure culture of The following strains of Hand-picked pyrite obtained from Yunfu, Guangdong Province, was used in all the experiments. The total chemical analysis displayed an iron and sulfur composition of 44.15% and 51.05%. An XRD spectrum of the sample was typical for pyrite and indicated trace of SiO 50 Polished pyrite coupons were sterilized with 75% ethanol and rinsed with distilled water prior to use. One plate was incubated in 75 Zeta-potential measurements were performed using a Coulter Delsa440sx instrument. NaCl solution (10 Bioleaching tests were carried out in Erlenmeyer flasks with 150 Each abiotic control was not inoculated, and 2 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis of samples was performed with a Nicolet Nexus 670 FTIR Spectrometer. The samples were prepared by dispersing 2  Data from wettability experiments are shown in Zeta-potential of cells grown on different substrates is portrayed in Interaction with cells decreased the IEP of pyrite ( The pH values of the solutions with pyrite sized − In all the bioleaching solutions, Fe The mixed culture exhibited a favorable effect on the leaching rate of pyrite in the initial leaching stage ( FTIR spectra of pyrite before and after interaction with The XRD patterns of the original mineral and pyrite of − The surface features of pyrite planes before and after interaction with cells of There were not obvious changes observed on the surface of sample ( Growth substrate has a direct relationship to the surface properties of bacteria and their interaction behavior with pyrite. Solid substrate grown bacteria have a stronger affinity to pyrite in contrast to the solution grown bacteria. The mixed culture of The financial support by the