A novel process was developed to markedly increase silver cyanidation performance from a refractory gold–silver ore in Beiya, Yunnan province, China. Before cyanidation, the process employs a pretreatment step that aims at liberating the silver grains by destroying the crystal lattices of manganese minerals. The pretreatment step could be described as a reductive sulfating leaching technology to preferentially dissolve the manganese minerals, with silver remaining in the leaching residue for subsequent cyanidation, and the most important finding of the study is that pyrite could be used as a reductant through the process. The result indicates that the recovery of silver has a remarkable 43.92% increase compared to a direct cyanidation process without pretreatment step.Gold- and silver-bearing ores are typically classified as either free milling or refractory based on their metallurgical response to cyanide leaching. As free milling gold- and silver-bearing mineral resources are rapidly depleted, one of the most pressing problems facing the gold and silver industry is to develop efficient and effective processes to extract these precious metals from their refractory ores. The refractoriness of silver-bearing ores results primarily from such inherent mineralogical features as silver inter-locking with sulphide, complete inclusions or isomorphism in the bearing minerals, and from reactive gangue mineralogy (e.g. preg-robbing carbonaceous constituents). To effectively extract silver from silver-bearing refractory ores, pretreatment of these ores prior to cyanide leaching is necessary to render the silver contained therein readily amenable to cyanidation. Among all the silver refractory ores, the silver–manganese type is perhaps the most common because the silver grains are very finely disseminated as isomorphism in the crystal lattices of manganese minerals. Silver cyanidation from the refractory silver–manganese ore is always unsatisfactory either by mechanical beneficiation methods or by conventional cyanidation. Given the importance of refractory manganese–silver ores as highly valued mineral resources for both silver and manganese, there has been a great deal of research interest in developing efficient cyanidation process for these ores. As the silver grains are very finely disseminated as isomorphism in the crystal lattices of manganese minerals, destroying the lattice structures of the manganese minerals is essential to liberate silver grains and, thus, enhance silver cyanidation effectiveness. One of the routes is to reduce the MnO At present, most of the reported researches have focused on the reductants employed in the reductive leaching pretreatment process. These reductants include sulfur dioxide, sodium sulfite ( It should be noted, however, that most of the reported reductants with the related reduction processes are still in the testing stage because of the long reaction time and the high chemical consumption to effectuate the liquid/solid reaction. For some Au–Ag deposits, the level of manganese contained therein may not reach an economic value, but it is still an impurity affecting the silver cyanidation. Thus, in order to completely recover silver minerals, a pretreatment process is also required to remove manganese before cyanidation. For the refractory gold–silver ores associated with manganese minerals, this study has developed a reductive sulfating leaching pretreatment process to dissolve manganese minerals before gold–silver cyanidation, and pyrite has been proved that could be used as an effective reductant in the pretreatment step. The ores used in this study were from Beiya, Yunnan province, China. The ore sample was crushed down to − Accurate characterization of an ore is essential to identify the mode and occurrence of gold and silver minerals, and hence, a mineralogical examination of the ore sample was performed, during which various techniques including optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and mineral liberation analyzer (MLA) were used. Based on the chemical and mineralogical analysis of the sample, a comprehensive recovery process was developed: grinding was first performed to obtain a fixed fineness of grind d80: − The mineral composition of the ores determined by mineral liberation analyzer (MLA) was shown in To better establish the distribution of silver in the major minerals, a balanced distribution result below 36 The selected SEM images of silver presence and association are shown in The direct cyanidation tests were first conducted to recover gold and silver from the as-received ores, and the results are shown in Based on the mineralogical characteristics of the ore in Beiya, the silver grains mainly occur as complete inclusions or isomorphism hosting in the crystal lattices of coronadite, which makes the silver minerals hardly accessible to cyanide. Thus, how to destroy the above mentioned crystal lattices of coronadite to liberate the silver grains before cyanidation has been a tough issue. MnO and MnO After the reductive sulfating leaching step under different conditions, cyanidation was performed to its residue, and A comparison between direct cyanidation and pretreatment-cyanidation is presented in Finally, under the optimal conditions, the stable tests of direct cyanidation and pretreatment-cyanidation were conducted, respectively, and the comparison is shown in The refractoriness of silver-bearing ores results primarily from inherent mineralogical features, and manganese has always been an impurity because the silver grains always occur as isomorphism hosting in the crystal lattices of manganese minerals, making silver minerals hardly accessible to the cyanide leaching. For these silver–manganese ores, destroying the lattice structures of the manganese minerals is essential to enhance silver cyanidation. In this study, a novel process of reductive sulfating leaching using pyrite as a reductant has been developed and shown to be an effective pretreatment process step. The result shows that the cyanidation of silver has a remarkable 43.92% increase, and the recommended process also has a positive effect on gold cyanidation. The reagents of the whole process cost approximately 17 dollars per ton, and sulfuric acid occupies more than 50%. Although the chemical cost is a little high, there is still a new output of 23 dollars per ton by increasing the silver recovery. For future works, how to reduce the reagents cost still has a lot of work to do, and we have noticed that the refractory silver minerals are mainly disseminated in manganese minerals, which have weak magnetism. Therefore, the emphasis of future research is how to introduce magnetic separation operation for pre-concentration of the refractory silver and manganese minerals before leaching, and the latest cost of the reagents has been reduced to 9 dollars per ton. Sincere thanks and appreciation go to the