Ni-WC composite are ideal protective coatings against wear that are often fabricated using laser cladding. However, high temperature of laser cladding and associated materials melting may result in non-homogenous distribution of WC particles, as well as decarburization and considerable residual stress and a deterioration of the wear resistance. An alternative is to use cold spray to deposit WC based composite coatings. The lower temperature allows one to retain the composition of initial WC feedstock but the cold spray process is only recently being researched for development of composite coatings. In this study, Ni and Ni-WC coatings were fabricated by cold spray. The WC and Ni powders were fed to a de Laval nozzle from separate hoppers with independent feed rates. By adjusting feedrates, a blend of Ni-36.2vol% WC was sprayed, which resulted in a composite coating of Ni-10.5vol.% WC. The influence of WC on Ni deposition was examined via microstructural characterization, including morphology of the coating's top surface and polished cross sections. Mechanical properties of coatings were improved by incorporation of WC into the Ni matrix. The wear behavior of coatings was studied with reciprocating sliding wear tests using a 6.35mm diameter WC-Co ball. All tests were conducted in dry air with a sliding speed of 3mm/s, a track length of 10mm, and normal load of 5N. WC-Ni coatings were more wear resistant than cold-sprayed Ni coatings. The correlations between worn surface morphologies, subsurface microstructure induced by wear and the wear behavior of the coatings was discussed. Microstructural analyses showed a mechanically mixed layer (MML) on the top of worn surfaces consisting of compacted oxides. It was revealed that the presence of hard particles in the Ni-WC coating facilitated fast development of the MML, as well as stabilized the MML, characterized by less plastic flow, fewer cracking and higher hardness.Metal matrix composites (MMCs) have long been used to enhance the wear resistance in demanding engineering applications Several researchers have deposited composite coatings containing WC by cold spray Metallic materials, including MMCs, will develop third bodies Mild steel plates with thickness of 3 Cold-sprayed coatings were cross-sectioned perpendicular to the gun traverse direction, mechanically ground, and polished to a final step by 0.05 Sliding wear tests on the coatings were performed in dry air (0% relative humidity) using a custom built ball on flat reciprocating tribometer. Prior to wear test, coatings were polished to a final step by 0.05 In order to reveal wear mechanisms, worn surfaces and cross sections of wear tracks were examined using an SEM (Hitachi, SU-8230, Japan) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). Nano-indentation was performed on worn surfaces to measure mechanical properties of third-bodies. Commercial pure Ni powders exhibited spherical morphologies and had an average powder particle size of 7   As can be seen from the top-view image of the sprayed composite shown in The deposition efficiency of Ni-WC was 20%. Low DE in cold sprayed MMCs is often due to low retention of the hard phase, WC in this case. A reduction in deposition efficiency of Ni was also indicated by the fact that the feed rate of Ni particles was kept same in both Ni and Ni-WC coatings, yet WC added to Ni led to a thickness reduction. This can be due to WC fragments which avoid close contact and bonding between Ni splats. Lower porosity of cold-sprayed Ni-WC composite coating compared to Ni coating (1.1% vs 3.8%) was due to continuous high velocity impact of dense WC particles, which produced the tamping effect, and results in densification of deposited coating The coefficient of friction (CoF) was plotted vs number of cycles for Ni and Ni-WC coatings in The wear rates at the end of the 10, 50, 100, 500, and 1000 SEM micrographs of worn surfaces were used to study the materials removal mechanisms of cold-sprayed Ni and Ni-WC coatings. Short and intermediate cycle's data were used to evaluate the formation of tribolayers. As the tests progressed to further sliding cycles, the formation of MMLs became more evident ( The wear track of the Ni-WC composite coating after 1000 Greater contrast between the Ni and WC was achieved from backscattered electrons (BSE) imaging in Significant improvement in sliding wear resistance with only small concentration of WC in Ni matrix was also reported in a previous study on laser cladded Ni-WC with 10 A transition to three-body abrasive wear was found at higher WC concentrations, where WC particles can be easily dislodged from surface and trapped in contact due to cracking at interfaces  During initial contact of the WC-Co ball on the coatings surface, high contact stress is expected to occur. The initial Hertzian contact stress  The hardness of the MML of cold-sprayed Ni and Ni-WC composite coatings were measured using nano-indentation. In the unworn Ni and Ni-WC coatings, the average hardness of the pure Ni was 4.6 Elemental microanalysis of the unworn and the wear tracks of coatings revealed increased oxygen in the worn surfaces. Representative EDX spectra were collected from the regions of interests. In the EDX spectra, the relative intensities of Kα peaks of oxygen and Ni are centered at 0.53 and 0.85 Using the cold spray process, Ni and Ni-WC coatings were deposited and their tribological behavior during dry sliding wear was studied and compared. Inclusion of WC resulted in a reduction in coating porosity. However, the presence of WC particles decreased deposition efficiency and also reduced bonding between Ni particles. Much less WC particles were retained (10.5 The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Canadian Foundation for Innovation (CFI) project No. 8246 for the cold spray equipment, the CFI Leader's Opportunity Fund project No. 13029 for the tribometer and nanoindentation equipment, and the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) Strategic Grants Program for the operational funding of this project. Thanks are also due to Tekna Inc. of Sherbrooke, QC for providing the Ni and WC powders.