Support vector regression (SVR) modeling was used to predict the coal flotation responses (recovery (R∗
                     ) and flotation rate constant (k)) as a function of measured particle properties and hydrodynamic flotation variables. Coal flotation is a complicated multifaceted separation process and many measurable and unmeasurable variables can be considered for its modeling. Therefore, feature selection can be used to save time and cost of measuring irrelevant parameters. Mutual information (MI) as a powerful variable selection tool was used through laboratory measured variables to assess interactions and choose the most effective ones for predictions of R∗
                      and k. Feature selection by MI through variables indicated that the best arrangements for the R∗
                      and k predictions are the sets of particle Reynolds number-energy dissipation and particle size-bubble Reynolds number, respectively. Correlation of determination (R2) and difference between laboratory measured and SVR predicted values based on MI selected variables indicated that the SVR can model R∗
                      and k quite accurately with R2
                     =0.93 and R2
                     =0.72, respectively. These results demonstrated that the MI-SVR combination can quite satisfactorily measure the importance of variables, increase interpretability, reduce the risk of overfitting, decrease complexity and generate predictive models for high dimension of variables based on selected features for complicated processing systems.Processing of fine coal particles due to growth of demand for high quality products is being inevitable Generation of a robust model that can estimate metallurgical responses (recovery ( This study is going to introduce ‘mutual information (MI)’ as one of the most important methods of VIMs which can be used for VS between various coal flotation parameters. MI can compute both the linear and nonlinear dependency between variables and has been extensively used for inter-correlation measurements and VS A total of sixty-four flotation experiments were performed by coal samples ( Variable selection (VS) based on variable importance measurements (VIMs) can be a preprocess approach for modeling to significantly reduce the dimension of the original dataset by ignoring redundant variables, increase interpretability, and improving the training accuracy If X and Y be random variables, p(x) and p(y) are probability density functions, and p(x, y) represents the joint probability of a given stimulus. The MI can determine the reduction of uncertainty (measured by the entropy) on the values of Y once X is known. One of the most advantages of MI is that it can provide a direct measure to decide whether to add additional variables or not Support vector regression (SVR) as an intelligent soft computing method used nonlinear kernel based regressions to develop a comprehensive model with lowest structural risk for the prediction of a target The dependency of various measured flotation variables as inputs versus their representative To build the SVR models for the prediction of Coal flotation is the most efficient technique for removing impurities (sulfur and mineral matters) and upgrading fine and ultrafine coal qualities. Flotation separation of coal as a heterogeneous material is quite complicated and many variables are involved. Modeling and variable selection can help to a complete understanding of the process and measure the relevant features to save time and cost. This investigation introduced the ability of mutual information (MI) method to assess the importance of measured variables (VIMs) on flotation responses (recovery and flotation constant rate), quantify their interactions and select the most effective ones. VIMs by MI through various coal particle characters and hydrodynamic flotation conditions indicated that the best arrangements for the