Extensive sampling campaign was performed around the cement grinding circuit of a cement plant in Turkey, for different production types of cement, as CEM I 42.5, CEM II 32.5/42.5/52.5, for the modelling and simulation purposes. During the sampling surveys; samples were collected from around the circuit for the steady state condition of the operation and, following a crash stop, from inside the mill. The size distributions of the samples were determined down to 2μm by the combination of sieving and laser sizing methods. By using the size distributions around the circuit and control room data mass balance studies were performed. Then equipments in the circuit; ball mill, air-classifier and filter, were modelled individually by using the appropriate model structures. After modelling the circuit, simulation studies were performed for capacity improvement, mainly by the ball size optimization. By implementing the proposed optimization, the capacity of the circuit was increased up to 12.7–20.5% for different production types, hence; the overall specific energy consumption of the circuit was reduced, as predicted in simulation studies.Cement production is an energy intensive process. It consumes 2% of the global primary energy and 5% of the total global industrial energy. Grinding is a high-cost operation consuming approximately 60% of the total electrical energy expenditure in a typical cement plant. The electrical energy consumed in the conventional cement manufacturing process is in the order of 110 The cost of energy as part of the total production costs in the cement industry is significant, warranting the attention for energy efficiency to improve the bottom line. Substantial potential for energy efficient improvements exist in the cement industry and in individual plants. The cement industry is targeting technologies focusing on increasing the mill throughput; energy savings; and minimizing the production costs without negatively affecting product yield or quality. The increasing demand for “finer cement” products, and the need for reduction in energy consumption and green house gas emissions, necessitate the optimization of grinding circuits. Opportunities exist at cement plants to improve energy efficiency while maintaining or enhancing productivity. Several technologies and measures exist that can reduce the energy consumption of the various process stages of cement production including raw and finish milling. This paper presents the capacity improvement and specific energy reduction in the finish milling stage of a cement plant in Turkey by adjusting the ball size and modifying the intermediate grate design using modelling and simulation tools. Conventional cement grinding ball mills, operated in closed circuit with air separators, have usually two grinding chambers, which are separated from each other by a slotted diaphragm through which the particles finer than the size of the slots pass to the second chamber for further size reduction. Cement grinding mills are modelled by using the modelling approach described for closed cement grinding circuits ( The model for steady state operations includes two sets of model parameters, i.e. the breakage function The breakage function is a material characteristics and defines the size distribution of the product formed after the breakage of the parent size fraction. It is determined by laboratory tests using twin pendulum ( The ball mill model is calibrated by determining the The important variable for each mill is Schematical representation of the modelling approach ( In above model structure ( The efficiency curve model is capable of defining the fish hook and used for separators. The general form of the equation is presented below: In cases where the efficiency curve does not exhibit fish hook behaviour, the parameter The calibration of the air-classifier model involves the calculation of the best fit values Prior to sampling surveys, steady state conditions are verified from the control room data and then sampling around the circuit is performed. After completing circuit sampling, ball mill is crashed–stopped for mill inside sampling. Mill content sampling is carried out in both compartments along the mill axis. In the first compartment sampling is started at the feed-end and the final sample is taken in front of the diaphragm. In the second compartment the same procedure is applied. Sufficient amount of samples are taken from each stream and mill inside as for the representative sampling. During the sampling survey, the required operating parameters, observed in control room, are recorded if available. The samples collected from mill inside and around the circuit including the fresh feed are analysed by dry sieving as connected with laser diffractometer sizing technique for the particle size determination. The particle size distributions of the samples are determined starting from the top size of the material down to 2 Four different sampling campaigns were performed for different product types. The details of the sampling is given in For cost-effective operations and quality improvement in cement industry, additives exhibiting cementitious properties are blended in different ratios refer to the cement type ( By using the particle size distributions and the control room data, a comprehensive mass balance study was carried out around the circuit. Mass balance calculations were performed to determine adjusted size distribution values and tonnages required in the further modelling studies. After mass balance calculations, the experimental sizing data was adjusted statistically. Two-compartment ball mill modelling approach was used for ball mill while Whiten efficiency curve model is used for air-classifier and filter at model fitting stage. Modelling studies were performed separately for each equipment in the circuit using JKSimMet software. During the modelling studies, the calculated and fitted values are checked to get the best fit. Then, the simulation studies were performed for the optimization purpose. During the ball mill modelling, mill inside particle size data was used to calculate the mill content ( By applying the efficiency curve model to the air-classifier and filter, modelling of the whole circuit was completed. During the simulation studies capacity improvement was the main concern for the same product quality in terms of the fineness. For this purpose ball size optimization was considered together with the intermediate grate aperture size. By detailed analysis of the mill inside sizing data for both 1st and 2nd chambers, new ball size distribution was determined for each chamber. By using in-house “ball size distribution and breakage rate” model which is based on more than hundred sets of industrial scale data, new breakage rates were calculated for the simulation purposes. The in-house model data base consists of survey data acquired from ball mills which are different in diameter, length, ball charge composition and processed cement type. Modelling those ball mills, using Benzer’s (2000) approach, results in different breakage rates which are a function of various design and operational variables. A statistical analysis of the data set let to identify the relationships between the design or operational variables and breakage rate. By using these relations new breakage rates were calculated and simulation studies were performed. Simulation results showed that the capacity of the circuit can be improved up to 10–17% for different product types with the new ball size distribution. Regarding the simulation results, plant implemented the new ball charge and intermediate grate design to the mill. After the implementation couple of sampling surveys were performed to see the change in circuit performance. It was noticed that the capacity of the circuit is increased up to 12.7–20.5% for different cement types with the proposed optimization. The ball mill modelling approach for two-chamber dry grinding mill is a perfect tool for the cement grinding modelling. By mill inside sampling the breakage rate is separately calculated from the discharge function. Ball size adjustment was the major optimization for the capacity improvement for that case study. Higher production rate, reduced overall specific energy consumption and lower wearing cost have been the main benefits of the capacity improvement in the circuit.