The purpose of this research was to investigate the mechanism of intensifying coal fly ash flotation by pretreatment of the non-ionic surfactant Triton X-100 (TX100). Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, and energy dispersive spectroscopy were used to analyze the characteristics of the unburned carbon samples to clarify why unburned carbon floats with difficulty. An attachment time analyzer and surface free energy measurement were used to analyze the surface characteristic changes of the unburned carbon before and after pretreatment with TX100. A Foamscan analyzer was used to study the synergistic effects of TX100 and 2-Octanol on the foam properties. The obtained results demonstrate that the unburned carbon surface is strongly hydrophilic owing to the abundance of oxygen-containing functional groups as well as its rough and porous surface. The pretreatment of TX100 can improve the hydrophobicity of the unburned carbon surface significantly in order to improve the unburned carbon recovery. Moreover, the compound of TX100 with 2-Octanol can improve the foamability and foam stability, as well as decrease the bubble size, which can further promote the coal fly ash flotation performance.As the main solid waste in thermal power plants, coal fly ash (CFA) mainly consists of unburned carbon and inorganic materials. Numerous environmental problems have been resulted from the storage of CFA in ash banks. CFA is also an ideal raw material for use in cement production. However, the existence of unburned carbon (UC) can weaken concrete strength, thus limiting CFA utilization The hydrophobicity of UC is worse than that of high-rank coals owing to the abundant hydrophilic functional groups on the UC surface, which are produced by the significant oxidation during the combustion process. Similarly, low-rank and oxidized coal exhibits poor hydrophobicity as a result of its surface comprising a large amount of hydrophilic functional groups Flotation reagents play an important role in improving the flotation efficiency. In the case of these reagents, the collector can expand the physicochemical differences between the objective and unobjective mineral surfaces to promote the flotation efficiency. Numerous researchers have found that the flotation efficiency of low-rank coal and oxidized coal can be improved by certain oxygen-containing functional groups in some specific collectors caused by the formation of hydrogen bonds between the oxygen-containing functional groups in the collector and the oxygen functional groups on the coal surface Moreover, effective fly ash flotation performance can be ensured with suitable foam characteristics, such as bubble size and foam stability In this study, an analytical purity non-ionic surfactant, namely, TX100 (C The CFA used in this study was obtained from a thermal power plant in Hunan province, China. The samples for this study were smaller than 0.5 mm. The samples were blended and placed in plastic buckets. The loss on ignition (LOI) of the CFA was approximately 22%. The LOI distribution of the different CFA density fractions was measured via sink-and-float testing in the presence of solutions of various densities, and the obtained results are presented in FTIR was used to identify the UC functional groups. The UC was mixed with KBr, with a UC sample to KBr ratio of 1:100. A pressure of 28 MPa was applied to the mixture to form thin circular plates. The FTIR spectra of the samples were recorded over the range of 4000–400 cm Flotation tests were conducted in a 1-L XFD flotation cell with a solid concentration of 100 g/L. The pH of the slurry in the flotation tests was 7. The 2-Octanol dosage was 800 g/t in all the flotation experiments. During the flotation process, TX100 was first added into the pulp and agitated for 6 min. The diesel oil was then added into the pulp and conditioned for 7 min. The 2-Octanol was then added into the pulp and agitated for 3 min. Thereafter, air was introduced into the pulp at a rate of 0.2 m The attachment time measurements between the air bubbles and UC particles before and after the pretreatment with different TX100 dosages were conducted by means of the 2015EZ induction timer instrument, which is illustrated in During the flotation process, the surface free energy of the coal and minerals, which is composed of the polar components In terms of the Dupre equation, the interfacial free energy of the solid–liquid can be expressed as follows: On combining Eqs. The interfacial tension of the three-phase system comprising the solid, liquid, and gas reaches a balance, and the Young equation is obtained as follows: Combining Eqs. In terms of Eq. The Foamscan analyzer can be used to determine the properties of frothers for producing foam effectively and can be used to measure foamability and foam stability The FTIR experiment was used to obtain information regarding the functional groups of the UC. where ( The XPS experiment was performed to obtain the element information of the UC surface. The XPS wide-energy spectrum of the UC is illustrated in The SEM experiment was conducted to observe the morphology and element distribution of the UC surfaces. The SEM result of the UC is illustrated in  The attachment time was applied to characterize the UC floatability before and after the pretreatment with TX100. Flotation recovery is highly dependent on the attachment time, which can be used to elucidate the flotation performance The contact angles of the three probe liquids and surface free energy components of the UC samples pretreated with various TX100 dosages are presented in The changes in the total surface free energy The foam half-times for the solutions are illustrated in As the TX100 concentration increased, additional TX100 molecules were dispersed and adsorbed on the air-water interface, and the surface tension decreased, thus resulting in small bubble sizes. With the increased TX100 concentration, the hydration interaction of the TX100 molecules with the water molecules was enhanced owing to the increasing density of the adsorbed TX100 molecules on the air–water interface. Therefore, the liquid-carrying capacity of the froths was improved, and the liquid volume between the bubbles increased. When the foam shifted into the decay stage, the bubbles coalesced and collapsed, and liquid drained from the foam owing to gravity and capillary force The effects of TX100 on the UC surface properties and foam characteristics during CFA flotation were investigated. The major conclusions drawn from this study can be summarized as follows. The FTIR, XPS, and SEM results indicate that the UC samples contain a considerable amount of oxygen functional groups. Moreover, the rough and porous UC particle surfaces enable the adsorption of many hydrophilic ultra-fine ash particles. These two factors make UC particle surfaces quite hydrophilic. The RUC of the flotation can be improved significantly by the non-ionic surfactant TX100 owing to the hydrophobic modification of the UC surface. With the increasing dosage of TX100, the attachment time decreased significantly; the surface polar energy and total surface energy on the UC surface decreased, while the surface non-polar energy increased. The foamability and foam stability can be improved significantly by using a combination of TX100 and 2-Octanol. The half-time of the foams first increased for TX100 concentrations less than 12 mg/L and then decreased as the TX100 concentration increases. With the increase in the TX100 concentration, the foamability and the liquid volume in the foam increased, while the bubble sizes decreased. This research was supported by “the