Jorge Filippi and German Joannas Christian Bastias and Leonardo Lagos The tibial pilon fracture is a complex lesion, which requires experienced clinical judgment and adequate planning to achieve good results. Treatment concepts enunciated by Rüedi and Allgöwer remain valid but have undergone modifications. The reconstitution of the fibular length is not always the first step to be performed. In the reconstruction of the articular surface, the prognosis is already sealed by the initial cartilage damage, and it is better to achieve stability and alignment. The stabilization of the medial column is essential, but it must be associated with the stabilization of at least one other column in complex fractures. Michael P. Swords and Brian Weatherford External fixation is an essential tool in the management of high-energy pilon fractures. Reduction techniques using the external fixator and fixation constructs for use with external fixation as a part of stage management are reviewed. The concepts of external fixation with limited articular fixation is discussed. The use of circular external fixation in both acute management of high-energy pilon fractures, as well as the indications and technique for acute ankle arthrodesis as part of primary treatment of pilon fractures are outlined. Paul Andrzejowski, Alain Masquelet, and Peter V. Giannoudis Bone defects to the distal tibia, foot, and ankle can be challenging to reconstruct. The induced membrane (Masquelet) technique has become an established method of repair for challenging areas of bone loss. It has been applied in acute open fractures, chronic nonunion, osteomyelitis, and gout erosion. This article presents a systematic review of distal tibia, foot, and ankle results using the Masquelet procedure, which should be considered in cases of challenging critical bone loss. Further work is needed to present large studies of the procedure on foot and ankle patients to consolidate current knowledge. Guillermo Martin Arrondo and German Joannas Anatomic reduction of the posterior malleolus is mandatory for a good functional outcome. Preoperative planning with a computed tomography scan’s axial view helps to decide which approach and surgical position we should choose. Based on posterior malleolus fracture anatomy, a guideline is suggested to facilitate decision making on which approach seems to give the best exposure with minimum complications. Gonzalo F. Bastias and Jorge Filippi There is no consensus on whether the deltoid ligament must be repaired in ankle fractures. Recent studies have shown better early radiologic results when the deltoid ligament is repaired, but no differences in long term functional outcomes. However, there is evidence suggesting that patients with high fibular fractures or injuries with concomitant syndesmotic instability may benefit from repair. The authors recommend repairing the deltoid ligament complex in bimalleolar equivalent fractures associated with syndesmotic or gross multiligamentous instability as well as in heavier patients with greater mechanical requirements. Derek S. Stenquist and John Y. Kwon Nearly half of surgically treated ankle fractures may have associated syndesmotic disruption, and the quality of reduction has been shown to affect functional outcomes. Malreduction ranges from 15% to 50% in the literature, and achieving anatomic reduction remains a significant challenge, even for experienced surgeons. Keys to success include having a stepwise plan and an understanding of reliable fluoroscopic parameters to help achieve reduction in both the coronal and sagittal planes. This article summarizes the literature on syndesmotic reduction and provides the authors’ preferred reduction technique using fluoroscopy. Stefan Rammelt and Andrzej Boszczyk Chronic syndesmotic injury covers a broad range of symptoms and pathologies. Anterolateral ankle impingement without instability is treated by arthroscopic debridement. Subacute, unstable, syndesmotic injuries are treated by arthroscopic or open debridement followed by secondary stabilization using suture button device or permanent screw placement. Chronic syndesmotic instability is treated by a near-anatomic ligamentoplasty supplemented by screw fixation. In case of poor bone stock, failed ligament reconstruction, or comorbidities, tibiofibular fusion with bone grafting is preferred. Malleolar malunions and particularly anterior or posterior syndesmotic avulsions must be corrected in order to achieve a stable and congruent ankle mortise. Florencio Pablo Segura and Santiago Eslava Correct approach selection in talar neck injuries is crucial to obtain adequate access to the entire fracture site avoiding malreduction and angular deformity. The major concern about a single incision technique is lack of visualization. Combined lateral and medial approaches are strongly recommended in complex talar neck fractures providing better control of dorsal and varus displacement of the talar head. Gabriel Khazen and Cesar Khazen Rassi Displaced intra-articular calcaneal fractures are among the most difficult articular fractures to treat, with a high rate of potential complications. Is important to restore calcaneus posterior facet anatomy as well as calcaneus width, length, and height. The extensile lateral approach provides excellent fracture visualization and allows reduction of the displaced fracture fragments, but high complication rate has been described with this approach, so many studies favor the sinus tarsi approach. Recent evidence favoring sinus tarsi rather than the extensile lateral approach has shifted opinion toward this less invasive approach, which can be considered the new gold standard. Tim Schepers The quest for the best treatment of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures continues. The open reduction and internal fixation of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures yields the best results if anatomic reduction is obtained and complications are avoided. The sinus tarsi approach is becoming the new gold standard. In cases with severe comminution or when anatomic reduction cannot be obtained, a primary subtalar arthrodesis is a valuable option, if the overall anatomy of the calcaneus is corrected first. This review discusses the open reduction and internal fixation of displaced intraarticular calcaneal fractures and the indications and technique of the primary arthrodesis. German Joannas and Jorge Filippi Misdiagnosed Lisfranc injuries can be as high as 50%, leading to chronic pain, functional impairment, and posttraumatic arthritis. Subtle or incomplete lesions are the most problematic group for an adequate diagnosis. Conventional non–weight-bearing radiographs can overlook up to 30% of unstable cases. Abduction stress radiographs and anteroposterior monopodial comparative weight-bearing radiographic views are very useful to identify instability. Computed tomography gives detailed information about fracture patterns and comminution. MRI can predict instability but it is expensive and not readily available in the acute setting. Jorge Briceno, Anna-Kathrin Leucht, Alastair Younger, and Andrea Veljkovic The management of Lisfranc injuries is challenging considering the broad spectrum of energy involved and highly variable clinical presentation. Despite the advances in surgical techniques, subtle Lisfranc injuries can lead to chronic pain and permanent disability. Surgical treatment is mandatory for all the unstable injuries; however, the best surgical technique remains controversial. The most predictive factor for a successful outcome is the maintenance of anatomic alignment; therefore, the selection of the appropriate surgical technique is of paramount importance. This article reviews the current treatment options and describes the selection of the surgical technique based on the different clinical presentations. Alexandre Leme Godoy-Santos and Cesar de Cesar Netto The reported incidence of Lisfranc injuries is 9.2/100.000 person-years; two-thirds of the injuries are nondisplaced. Tarsometatarsal injuries range from minor sprains and isolated ligamentous injuries to grossly unstable and multiligamentous lesions. High-energy injuries are usually linked with mechanical energy dissipation through the soft tissues. Operative treatment options include open reduction and internal fixation, open reduction with hybrid internal and external fixation, closed reduction with percutaneous internal or external fixation, and primary arthrodesis. Treatment goals are to obtain a painless, plantigrade, and stable foot. Anatomic reduction is a key factor for improved outcomes and decreased rates of post-traumatic arthritis. Michelle M. Coleman and Gregory P. Guyton Fractures of the proximal fifth metatarsal are common injuries with a unique history. Treatment of these fractures is controversial partly because of confusion regarding fracture subtype nomenclature. Today “Jones fracture” refers to proximal fifth metatarsal fracture in zones 2 or 3. Zone 2 fractures are acute injuries, and their optimal treatment is unclear. Zone 3 fractures commonly occur in the presence of a chronic stress reaction. Because of poor healing potential, zone 3 fractures typically require operative treatment. Zone 1 fractures have excellent healing potential and may be treated nonoperatively with a weightbearing as tolerated protocol.