DEM simulations of AG and SAG mills indicate that breakage in a single impact is almost certainly a rare event. However, there are many events which might cause some damage. Hence it becomes important to be able to model how damage might accumulate and with what severity a particle is likely to break after accumulating sufficient damage.
                  An investigation of incremental impact breakage of a well characterized ore sample has been carried out by Whyte (2005) [Whyte, R., 2005. Measuring incremental damage in rock breakage by impact. BE (honours) Thesis, The University of Queensland (unpublished)]. The outcomes of this work are encouraging. A modified version of a JKMRC developed equation – which relates severity of breakage to specific energy input – also provides a good description of the degree of incremental breakage for each size range of particles which was tested when breakage does occur.
                  The other factor of interest for a DEM model is the probability of survival after a number of impact events. The work of Vogel and Peukert (2004) [Vogel, L., Peukert, W., 2004. Determination of material properties relevant to grinding by practicable labscale milling tests, International Journal of Minerals Processing, 74S, S329–S338] provides a useful model for multiple impacts with identical energies. This model has been modified and extended to different input energy levels.
                  This model proposes a minimum specific impact energy E
                     0 below which no damage is accumulated by the body of the particle.
                  Perhaps the most important insight from this work is a way to quantify energy inefficiency of breakage in comminution devices. Each successive impact after the first one fails to utilize E
                     0 because the particle must be loaded again to E
                     0 before any further damage can be achieved.
                  For the ore tested, achieving a similar degree of severity of incremental breakage using multiple impacts typically required substantially more total energy than was required for a single impact. However, even very small interactions will still cause some surface damage and generate fine progeny.Substantial (and continuing) increases in low cost computational power have resulted in several discrete element method (DEM) codes which are sufficiently powerful to be applied to comminution processes. Testing DEM models against experimental data and ore characterization techniques has exposed where our current understanding is adequate – and where it is not. For devices which comminute rocks in a single event such as conventional crushers or impact crushers, the existing JKMRC energy based breakage and progeny estimation techniques ( However, based on DEM estimates ( This paper presents the results of a project set up to investigate incremental breakage by low energy impact events. Low energy breakage by attrition seems to be well correlated with DEM predictions of frictional interactions ( There are three relationships which are necessary for use in a DEM model: The probability of breakage or survival of a rock after a series of impacts of known energies. The severity of breakage when it does occur. The size distribution of the resultant progeny. The second and third relationships seem to be similar. However, the severity of breakage is usually modeled by considering a single point on the cumulative size distribution. For this study, we have used the With more powerful computers and numerical codes, the shape distribution of the progeny will also become of interest. The JK Drop Weight Tester (DWT) described by The standard JK DWT typically uses minimum levels of energy which are high enough to guarantee breakage in a single impact. The DW test was extended to use multiple inputs of energy which were a fraction of the level which would only just cause breakage. The initial tests were carried out on two size fractions of a well characterized copper gold ore. Each size fraction was divided into randomly selected groups of 30 particles. Particles within one group were subjected to impacts at 20% of the energy which would just cause breakage in a single impact. Particles which were not broken were counted and set aside for another round of impacts. The progeny of those particles which were broken after one impact was combined and sized as a measure of severity of breakage ( The survivors were subjected to a second set of impacts and the process repeated. Each of the groups of particles was subjected to impacts of 30%, 40% and 50% of the energy which would just cause breakage in a single impact. The results of these repetitive tests ( There is a substantial body of literature concerning the survival of particles after a number of similar impacts – although very few of these researchers have considered the severity of the resulting breakage or the full size distribution of the progeny.  The Vogel and Peukert denoted The probability of survival after The effect of particle size on the probability of survival is quite clear. The model parameters in (Eq. The best fit results are shown for each size range in Despite the scattered data, largely due to insufficient particles being tested, the trend is clear. At a specific energy about twice of the threshold energy, i.e., approximately 0.02 (Eq.  As noted earlier, a DEM model generates a wide range of energies for particle interactions; hence a modified version of (Eq. After the initial work, The influence of particle size (over the measured size range) on the severity of breakage is clear in  For a breakage model to be useful for DEM, it must also provide an estimate of the complete size distribution of the progeny. As a first pass check, the progeny from the breakage in a single impact (of the same size fraction) can be compared with progeny produced by multiple impacts which resulted in a similar degree of severity as measured by In addition to use as an ore parameter for DEM, the existence of a well defined From published DEM results ( The incremental breakage process implies that an AG or SAG mill which appears to be at steady state is highly likely to have many particles at various stages of incremental breakage. The particles which are in a “partially broken” state would not be apparent as a result of measurement of their size distribution as the energy input by a laboratory screen should be much too small to cause additional breakage (unless the ore is very friable). The damaged particles would only be revealed by a device which could measure the quantity of energy required for further breakage by a defined number of impacts. Where an outcome depends on the accumulation of a difference function, the process will be sensitive to small changes. If the ore becomes a little harder (that is if “ Another interesting example is that many researchers have claimed throughput improvements with the addition of large balls to SAG mills. The relatively small number of balls – compared with ore particles – suggest that very many direct interactions are unlikely. If however, the presence of steel balls, is causing a slight increase in the resistance of the charge to deformation (particularly at the toe), a slight improvement in the difference between Testing these implications provides interesting possibilities for research into process improvement. For this particular ore type, it has been demonstrated that there is a minimum specific energy requirement for damage by impact breakage. This minimum specific energy can be estimated from the probability of survival of a particle after successive impacts or from the severity of breakage after successive impacts. Impacts at lesser energy levels may contribute to shear wear of the particle but not to damage that may eventually propagate to the core of the particle. The JKMRC breakage model can be extended to include incremental impact breakage in a straight-forward manner by summing the net accumulated damage. The progeny which results from impact breakage by multiple impacts can be described by a The probability of survival (or breakage) after up to 10 arbitrary impacts can be reasonably well modelled using a modified version of the approach developed by With regard to impact breakage, the requirements for a model which can interface with DEM simulation results have been largely achieved. For shear interactions alone, a DEM based frictional model works well ( Work is continuing on linking the DEM simulations and breakage models together. This kind of experimental study should be extended to other ore types. It will be interesting to see if any of the ore types with proven, poor amenability to SAG milling have unusually high or variable minimum impact energy requirements. This project is carried out under the auspices and with the financial support of the Centre for Sustainable Resource Processing (CSRP), which is established and supported under the Australian Government’s Cooperative Research Centres Program. The undergraduate project which carried out the test work was funded in part by a CSRP scholarship and assistance with travel costs which are gratefully acknowledged.