This review summarises all trauma and related papers published in the British Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (BJOMS) from January 2010 to December 2011. In total 45 articles were published, of which 42% (19) were full-length articles. These articles primarily focused on the management of mandibular condyle and orbital fractures, with several papers discussing maxillofacial surgery by the British military. There were no articles discussing midfacial fractures or massive facial trauma. The remaining papers included short communications, technical notes, and letters; and provided discussion of interesting cases, new surgical techniques and fracture classifications.
                  The number of trauma papers published in BJOMS appears to be less than other sub-specialties such as head and neck oncology. The number of prospective and randomised studies remains low, highlighting a need to foster further research within maxillofacial trauma.This paper continues the tradition of providing readers with 2-yearly reviews of papers published in the Management of mandibular condyle fractures remains an area of interest and controversy within maxillofacial surgery. Of the nine papers that addressed management of mandibular fractures, seven discussed condylar fracture management. Abdel-Galil and Loukota provided an excellent systematic review of current evidence relating to condylar fracture management. In a review of 187 published cases of iatrogenic mandible fracture secondary to exodontia, Bodner et al. further highlighted the need for thorough patient risk assessment prior to surgery. Four full-length articles discussed orbital trauma. In a retrospective review of 70 pure orbital blow-out fractures, Gosse et al. reviewed treatment outcomes in relation to pattern of ocular defect at presentation. Although a rarely encountered presentation, isolated posterior orbital floor fractures require immediate surgical intervention to optimise functional outcome and manage acute symptoms. A review of seven such cases (age range 10–23) highlighted the nature of presentation, noting minimal evidence of other facial trauma. Diplopia and activation of the oculocardiac reflex (causing orbital pain, nausea, vomiting and vertigo) were present in all patients. If surgical intervention is indicated, the use of an alloplastic implant remains the accepted standard for orbital repair, however the use of autologous grafts is a recognised alternative. In a randomised trial, Bayat et al. compared nasal septal and conchal cartilage for the surgical repair of pure and impure orbital blowout fractures in 22 patients with enophthlamos of greater than 2 With Britain's on-going involvement in the Afghanistan war, it was topical that four articles discussed maxillofacial trauma during military combat. A systematic review by Breeze et al. reported 6–20% of combat injuries in the 21st century involve the face, 2–11% involve the neck, with 0.5–13% involving the eye. The Royal Centre for Defence Medicine (RCDM) based at Queen Elizabeth University Hospital, Birmingham, continues to serve as the treatment centre for injured military personal evacuated from overseas. Maxillofacial surgery has an increasing role in their management, with an increase from 7% (10/145) in 2005 to 18% (57/315) in 2007. One other trauma related full-length article included a retrospective study of maxillofacial fractures sustained by unmounted equestrians. There were 10 trauma-related short communications Eight trauma-related letters Seven technical notes In summary, BJOMS continues to publish interesting papers relating to maxillofacial trauma. During 2010–2011 the research in full-length articles appeared to be confined to certain areas, with no research being published involving midfacial fractures or ‘massive trauma’. As a sub-specialty topic, trauma still accounts for significantly lower numbers of articles within BJOMS when compared to other sub-specialities such as the 127 head and neck oncology articles published in a similar overlapping time frame (2009–2010). None.