Mesoporous In2O3 nanorod arrays were synthesized directly on a porous ceramic substrate via a one-step hydrothermal method. The morphology and structure of the obtained In2O3 nanorod arrays were characterized by X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. The results revealed that In2O3 nanorod arrays with cubic phase were densely distributed on the porous ceramic substrate, showing the diameter of 120–200 nm and length of 0.5–1 μm. Especially, the nanorod was assembled by aggregated In2O3 nanoparticles with the diameters of 10–30 nm, and its large specific surface ensured the highly gas sensing performance for ppb-level NO2 detection. The response value of the mesoporous In2O3 nanorod arrays to 800 ppb NO2 was 14.9 at room temperature of 25 °C with a short response time of 14 s, and the ultraviolet light was loaded in the recovery process to shorten the recovery time to about 32 s. The growth and gas sensing mechanisms of the mesoporous In2O3 nanorod arrays were discussed. It demonstrates that this work provides a low-cost route for the fabrication of room-temperature NO2 gas sensor with high performance through in-situ growth of the sensing materials on a porous ceramic substrate.Nitrogen dioxide (NO However, the problem of poor recoverability at room temperature still hinders the practical applications of metal oxide semiconductor gas sensors. Thus, various approaches have been investigated to enhance the recovery speed, including surface modification, noble metal doping, and application of UV illumination or external heating during the recovery step [ Indium oxide (In In this work, the mesoporous In The porous ceramic substrates were prepared by a pore-forming method with metakaolin powders (Kemiou, China) as the source material and poly methyl methacrylate microspheres (PMMA, Soken, China) as the pore former. The additive content of PMMA microspheres with the diameter of 30 μm in metakaolin powders was 25 wt%. Experimental details on the fabrication of the porous ceramic substrates can be found in the previous study [ All reagents were commercially available from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. as analytical grade and were used without further purification. 0.35 g of InCl The crystalline structures of the samples were recorded by an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, PANalytical X'Pert Pro, Holland) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) in the range of 15–70°. The morphologies and microstructures of the samples were examined by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi-S4800, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 2 kV and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEM-2100F, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. The chemical composition of the products was characterized by an X-ray photoelectron spectroscope (XPS, ESCALAB 250XI, America). The presence of functional groups in the products was evaluated by a Fourier transform infrared spectroscope (FTIR, NICOLET 380, America). A home-made test chamber was used to measure the gas sensing properties of the sensors at room temperature of 25 °C. As depicted in   The morphology of the as-synthesized In The low-magnification TEM image of single In XPS analysis was conducted to verify the surface chemical composition of In It is generally accepted that In To visually investigate the formation mechanism of In In the hydrothermal process, the substrates are always used for the preparation of nanostructures due to that the energy barrier of heterogeneous nucleation on the substrate is smaller than that of homogenous nucleation in the solution [ NO  To investigate the repeatability, seven reversible cycles of the gas sensor upon exposure to 800 ppb NO The responses of the sensor toward different gases at room temperature were estimated to investigate its selectivity, and the corresponding results are shown in To compare NO As an n-type metal oxide semiconductor material, the sensing mechanism of In NO In this study, the enhanced room-temperature NO However, when NO Then, the UV-induced O In summary, massive mesoporous In The project was supported by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at