Forearm instability is a complex and debilitating condition. The term The injury occurs when a longitudinal force is transmitted through the forearm, resulting in fracture of the radial head possibly with dislocation and disruption of the IOM and DRUJ ( Essex-Lopresti injuries and LRUD are uncommon. The forearm requires stability in order to maintain its function as a lever arm while allowing for motion at the wrist, elbow, and forearm. An illustration of relevant forearm anatomy is provided in The IOM fibers align from the proximal radius to insertion on the ulna distally and are loaded when the radius is displaced proximally. With an axial load applied to the forearm, the IOM stabilizes bending forces to prevent bowing or splaying of the radius and ulna. The forearm IOM provides both longitudinal The IOM plays an important role in load transmission. Lack of forearm stability causes a multitude of impairments including ulnar-sided wrist pain and compaction, elbow pain, limitation in wrist extension, and forearm rotation. Essex-Lopresti injuries have been classified by Edwards and Jupiter Forearm and wrist imaging should be obtained in addition to elbow films, with repeat wrist films at follow-up to check for ulnar migration (increasing positive ulnar variance) and ulnocarpal impaction. Wrist imaging may also show palmar and dorsal DRUJ dislocations, which have been reported. Ultrasound has been shown to be a technique to diagnose IOM lesions that is accurate in up to 96% of cases in a cadaveric study. Goals of operative treatment are to create a stable forearm with restoration of native DRUJ. Radial head excision in the presence of IOM injury can lead to progressively worse shortening. The acutely diagnosed injury treatment strategy includes restoration of the radial head through fixation or arthroplasty, restoration of the radius and ulna relationship with fixation of the DRUJ by pinning in the acute setting. Complications of metallic arthroplasty include implant loosening, dislocation, and capitellar wear. The long-term results of capitellar erosion after radial head arthroplasty are unknown. Excellent results (60%) at long-term follow-up have been reported with the use of radial head arthroplasty in unstable elbow fractures. The goal when the injury is observed in the acute setting is to provide a pain-free and stable forearm with maintenance of the radioulnar relationship and maintenance of the load-sharing responsibilities of the radius and ulna at the wrist and elbow. The surgeon should strive in the acute setting to accomplish these goals. Our preferred treatment of the acute Essex-Lopresti injury is to include wrist examination and imaging in all radial head fractures and elbow fracture-dislocations to look for associated injury. In cases with nonoperatively treated radial head fractures, repeat wrist imaging is obtained at 3 to 4 weeks. In the presence of an operative radial head fracture, preservation of the radial head is performed when possible. Internal fixation is performed for large fragments or fragment excision is performed for small fragments. In cases where radial head preservation is not possible due to comminution, metallic arthroplasty should be performed. We recommend using a press-fit anatomic arthroplasty to achieve stable fixation and establish a more anatomic contour for the radiocapitellar relationship to theoretically minimize wear; however, long-term data for this relationship has not been established in the literature. This is performed in conjunction with pinning of the DRUJ to maintain the radioulnar relationship. This pin is then removed at 4 weeks. Despite increased awareness of these injuries, the subtle findings at presentation may be missed leading to LRUD. In cases where proximal migration has occurred, the surgeon should establish the reducibility of the DRUJ. Those reducible injuries may be treated similar to the acute injury. Examination under fluoroscopy may help determine reducibility. In fixed deformity, no definitive option is yet defined. Nearly all treatments include metallic radial head arthroplasty to restore load at the elbow and to protect any reconstructions performed. Surgical options include performing an ulnar shortening osteotomy or IOM reconstruction. Alternatively, a distal ulnar resection or Sauve-Kapandji procedure may be performed in conjunction. Distal ulnar resection may be reserved for the low-demand patient. In chronic settings with a fixed deformity, restoration has been performed using ulnar shortening or with an Ilizarov frame with poor results. The IOM has poor capacity for healing, and restoration of the radial head is essential to share load and prevent proximal migration. Bone-patellar tendon-bone autograft does have preferential quality as graft choice. The native IOM has three to eight times the stiffness of reconstructions with various grafts, with bone-patellar tendon-bone being the closest option. Good results were seen in a case report at 2 years in a reconstruction with bone-patellar-bone autograft, TFCC repair, and metallic arthroplasty for chronic radioulnar dissociation. Our preferred treatment for the chronic injury is based on whether or not there is motion between the radius and ulna when examined intraoperatively with stress testing. In our experience, there is significant limitation of longitudinal motion between the radius and ulna in almost all chronic cases. In this case we question the value of radial head replacement in helping to improve the length of the radius. In addition, in patients with radial head resection, when they come late after injury, the cartilage covering the capitellum usually becomes progressively thinner over time because of the unloading, which in turn may increase the risk of painful arthritis with increasing load on the capitellum by the artificial radial head. Most patients who we see with chronic Essex-Lopresti injuries have symptoms distally at the level of the DRUJ secondary to ulna impaction syndrome. These patients may benefit from ulna-shortening osteotomy if the DRUJ is not grossly unstable. However, if the DRUJ is unstable and/or it is associated with arthritic changes, then Sauve-Kapandji might be a good option. However, lately, we have been performing an APTIS DRUJ (Aptis Medical, Glenview, KY) joint replacement with very rewarding results. However, the number is still small with short-term follow-up, which does not allow us to consider this procedure as reliable. We are awaiting for a bigger number of patients with longer follow-up to come up with better and more significant conclusion about this approach of treatment. For continued LRUD despite previous surgical treatment, the creation of a one-bone forearm (radioulnar synostosis or radioulnar arthrodesis) is a salvage procedure to create a stable lever arm to facilitate hand function but sacrifices forearm rotation. This procedure is performed with internal fixation either by an end-to-end fusion of the distal radius and ulna or a side-to-side juxtaposition of the distal radial shaft and proximal ulna. There is a high rate of complications with up to 32% nonunion and is generally not recommended as the primary treatment of chronic LRUD. Essex-Lopresti injuries are an extremely complex problem especially when recognized late. Early awareness and recognition can lead to improved results. Although the biomechanics and anatomy of the IOM have been well researched, reconstruction techniques have been largely cadaveric, and clinical knowledge on results of these reconstructions is lacking.