This study evaluated the functional outcomes of proximal humeral fractures treated with locking plates and determined the prognostic factors for successful clinical outcomes. We included 44 patients with 45 unstable proximal humeral fractures. There were 19 two-part, 22 three-part, and 4 four-part fractures. Outcomes were analyzed by use of multivariate linear regression with several different combinations of 7 independent variables: age, fracture pattern, osteoporosis, calcium sulfate graft, rotator cuff suture loop, head-neck shaft angle, and comorbidity. The mean head-shaft angle was 132.4° after the operation and decreased to 127.7° at final follow-up. Five patients showed considerable loss of fixation. The analysis showed that delay in rehabilitation because of comorbidities and decreased head-neck shaft angle induced by lack of medial support were the primary prognostic factors that led to poor outcomes. The absence of comorbidity and the restoration of the medial metaphysis were the most reliable predictors of successful clinical outcomes.The prevalence of proximal humeral fractures shows a bimodal pattern according to age. Three fourths of the patients are believed to be aged older than 60 years. Furthermore, the incidence of fractures associated with osteoporosis in elderly persons has been increasing as the elderly population expands. Surgical treatment of proximal humeral fractures aims to achieve anatomic reduction and stability for a satisfactory functional outcome. In selecting an optimal treatment, many patient factors, including general health condition, rehabilitation compliance, activity level, and quality of bone stock, are taken into account, in addition to fracture configuration. Various techniques, such as percutaneous pinning, tension-band techniques, plate osteosynthesis, intramedullary nailing, and hemiarthroplasty, have been described to restore biomechanical stability. Although locking-plate fixation has shown promise in the treatment of osteoporotic fractures, the functional outcomes and complication rates of the technique, when applied to proximal humeral fractures, have shown variable results. This study included 44 consecutive patients with 45 unstable proximal humeral fractures that had undergone surgery between April 2004 and May 2006. All patients were treated by open reduction and stabilized with an LPHP. Patients with unstable 2-part fractures and 3- or 4-part fractures of the proximal humerus were examined. There were 14 men and 30 women, with a mean age of 64.4 years (range, 35-85 years). At the time of diagnosis, 25 patients (57%) were aged 60 years or older. Of the patients, 22 were injured as a result of motor vehicle accidents, 18 as a result of falls from a standing height, and 4 as a result of falls from a height. Seven patients had comorbidities, of whom four had associated injuries and three had senile dementia. One patient had a complex facial bone fracture and bilateral open pilon fractures. Another sustained a third-degree burn on his torso and an intracranial hematoma. Two others had forearm bone fractures and both proximal humeral fractures, respectively. Three patients had previously undergone failed surgeries. Two patients, with 2-part fractures, had fixation failure after closed reduction with Kirschner wire fixation, and the other patient, with a 3-part fracture, had nonunion after intramedullary nailing. Of the 44 patients, 41 had fixation of their fractures within 3 weeks of injury, whereas 3 patients underwent revision surgery; all were available for follow-up. The mean follow-up was 27.8 months (range, 24-48 months). The standardized preoperative surgical workup included conventional radiography in 2 planes (anteroposterior and axillary), as well as 3-dimensional computed tomography. Three-dimensional computed tomography scans were also used to evaluate the extent of articular surface involvement and the degree of tuberosity displacement. Fracture pattern was classified according to the Neer classification. A deltopectoral approach was used in all patients. The medial cortex of the metaphyseal junction was reduced indirectly by use of an elevator and the degree of reduction confirmed with an image intensifier. In patients with greater or lesser tuberosity comminuted fractures, fracture fragments were reduced in an anatomic position and secured to separate holes in the plate via nonabsorbable sutures. If restoration of the cortical contour of the medial metaphysis failed, the humeral head was impacted into the medial comminuted area of the shaft in a slightly varus position ( The presence of associated osteoporosis was determined by the femoral neck bone mineral density measured by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (Hologic, Bedford, MA) and defined as a T-score of less than −2.5, according to World Health Organization criteria. Clinical outcomes were evaluated by use of the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) shoulder score at the final follow-up visit and were categorized as excellent (34-35), good (29-33), fair (20-28), or poor (<20). To identify the influential prognostic factors, multivariate linear regression analysis with several combinations of 7 independent variables (age, fracture pattern, osteoporosis, calcium sulfate graft augmentation, rotator cuff suture loop augmentation, head-neck shaft angle, and comorbidity) was performed, with a significant threshold of There were 19 two-part, 22 three-part, and 4 four-part fractures, as defined by the Neer classification. The mean UCLA score in the 45 shoulders was 30.9 (range, 20-35). Scores were recorded as excellent in 18 (40%), good in 22 (49%), fair in 3 (7%), and poor in 2 (4%). According to fracture pattern, the mean UCLA shoulder scores of 2-part factures and 3- or 4-part fractures were 30.2 and 31.2, respectively, and this difference was not statistically significant ( The mean head-shaft angle was 132.4° (range, 123°-142°) on radiographs obtained immediately postoperatively and decreased to 127.7° (range, 115°-140°) on the radiographs obtained at the last follow-up. Changes in the head-shaft angle of greater than 10° were observed in 5 patients (11%). The mean UCLA score of patients who had a reduction loss was 25.4 (range, 20-29), whereas that of patients without a loss of reduction was 31.4. This difference was statistically significant ( Of the 44 patients, 9 (20%) had postoperative complications, with a loss of fixation in 5 (1 malunion included), adhesive capsulitis in 3, and deep infection in 1. In 5 patients, a loss of fixation was found within 1 month after operation. The mean age of patients with a reduction loss was 54 years. In 2 patients, the head-shaft angle decreased without any buckling of the plate or protrusion of the screws, and they attained complete healing with good clinical outcomes, albeit with a slightly varus position of the humeral head. Buckling of the plate with screw protrusion occurred in 2 patients. In 1 male patient, the buckling did not progress, and the fracture was completely healed with a good clinical outcome in a slightly malaligned varus position. In 1 female patient, however, screw protrusion through the articular surface and the varus malalignment progressively worsened until she had to undergo revision surgery, after which she recovered a good range of motion. Plate breakage occurred in the young patient with third-degree burns and an intracranial hematoma ( No subacromial impingement due to the plate occurred postoperatively. At a mean of 12 months after the operation, 15 patients underwent plate removal after union. In 2 of these, parts of the locking screws were broken during plate removal despite the use of torque-limiting screwdrivers during the first operation. Three patients had a frozen shoulder postoperatively and underwent arthroscopic capsular release combined with plate removal. Although a consensus has been reached on the need for surgical treatment of unstable fractures of the proximal humerus, the preferred modality remains controversial. To obtain better functional outcomes and to overcome the limitations of conventional surgical modalities, angular stable devices such as a locking plate have been developed. Locking plates are well-contoured and low-profile devices. They offer the benefits of a fixed-angle device with divergent screws in the humeral head and increase the failure load by superior stability, especially in osteoporotic bone. Biomechanical studies have confirmed the potential advantages of locking plates over conventional plates. Some factors, such as anatomic reduction of the medial metaphysis and early rehabilitation, affect surgical outcomes more than other factors, such as age, osteoporosis, bone graft, fracture pattern, and rotator cuff suture loop. Several investigators have recommended commencing a motion exercise program early to prevent contracture and facilitate functional recovery. Mechanical LPHP failures, which usually resulted from medial column support failure, are also closely related to successful clinical outcomes. The failure to achieve medial cortex contact and re-create the medial buttress may lead to an early loss of reduction and varus deformity of the proximal humerus. It seems that laterally placed locking plates are unable to support the comminuted medial column without medial cortex contact. A subsequent analysis showed a 25% incidence of varus deformity and 23% incidence of screw cutout in patients with proximal humeral fractures treated with an LPHP. Some investigators advocate that the re-creation of a medial buttress at the metaphysis at the proximal humerus is the most important prognostic factor concerning the use of an LPHP. Surgical treatment for unstable proximal humeral factures by use of an LPHP achieved satisfactory clinical results, even in elderly patients with comminuted fractures. The absence of comorbidities and the restoration of medial metaphyseal continuity were found reliably to predict successful clinical outcomes. When anatomic restoration of the medial column fails, slightly varus impaction of the humeral head is one method by which to achieve firm support at the medial buttress of the proximal humerus.