Because of their selective depressing power, sodium silicate and lignosulfonate have been widely used as depressants in rare-earth mineral flotation to separate minerals from specific types of gangue minerals. In this project, the microflotation of a xenotime pre-concentrate and pure samples of the selected gangue minerals ilmenite, zircon, schorl and staurolite was carried out. This utilized octano-hydroxamic acid and sodium oleate as the collectors and the research was conducted in a Partridge-Smith microflotation cell. The flotation of the mixed samples (weight ratio=1:1) of xenotime and each one of its gangue minerals was also investigated at both room temperature and 80°C, using sodium silicate or ammonium lignosulfonate in the presence of octano-hydroxamic acid and sodium oleate respectively. The flotation results are described and compared with those observed by previous researchers. The effects of sodium silicate and ammonium lignosulfonate on weight recoveries and grade of xenotime are also discussed and compared.Sodium silicate, widely used as a depressant in rare earth mineral flotation to separate minimally soluble minerals from siliceous gangue minerals ( In 1965, using sodium silicate as depressant in the presence of sodium oleate, Viswanathan et al. selectively separated monazite from its associated gangue minerals ( Lignosulfonate, a byproduct from the production of paper using sulfite pulping, is also well known as a depressant in the flotation of rare earth minerals. In 1968, Helmut et al. found that lignosulfonate possessed the power to depress silica in froth flotation ( More importantly, is utilization of the depressing power of lignosulfonate on iron-bearing gangue minerals. In 1986 Weir et al. successfully recovered gold from refractory auriferous iron-containing sulphidic concentrates by using lignosulfonate as a depressant ( While sodium silicate and lignosulfonate have been widely investigated and used in rare-earth mineral flotation, their application in the flotation of xenotime has apparently been minimal, when compared to that of bastnaesite and monazite. So, in order to better understand the effect of sodium silicate and ammonium lignosulfonate on xenotime flotation, in this research, a pre-concentrated xenotime sample and four common gangue minerals (ilmenite, zircon, schorl and staurolite) were used in lab-scale microflotaion tests. These were conducted in a Partridge-Smith microflotation cell. Comparisons were made between the performance of sodium silicate and ammonium lignosulfonate as the depressants in experiments conducted under differing conditions. This was also studied in the presence of octano-hydroxamic acid and sodium oleate collectors. The pre-concentrated xenotime sample used in this project was obtained from a Chinese rutile mining plant in Hainan Province, China. Xenotime is a byproduct of beach placer deposits and it had been separated and concentrated from rutile ores by washing, Wilfley table concentration, electrostatic separation and finally magnetic separation. As shown in The two collectors used, sodium oleate (C In this research, zeta potential measurement was conducted with the Stabino, produced by Microtrac. Before performing Stabino testing, the equilibrium time of samples in solution was determined first through adsorption tests. Then the samples for Stabino tests were prepared for a longer time. In this case, the samples for zeta potential measurements were first ground in a pulverizer to 200 In the research more than 300 microflotation tests were conducted using a Partridge-Smith microflotation cell. Replicate tests were conducted on each benchmarking test and the reproducibility was excellent. In each benchmarking test, 0.5 In each test with depressant addition, 0.5 The pH in the tests was modified with either NaOH or HCl. The pH was measured before conditioning with a pH meter. Elevated temperature tests were performed by heating the samples to 80 After the pulp was transferred, it was stirred with a magnetic bar in the cell at 600 Using different reagents, the experimental variables evaluated in the microflotation tests included pH, temperature and reagent concentration. Other variables like gas flow rate and particle size were not tested in this project. The error bars presented represent the standard deviation of the experimental data gained from the benchmarking tests. The magnitude of experimental error was within the allowable range, having no effect on qualitative analysis. In benchmarking tests, no depressants were used. Octano-hydroxamic acid (HXM) and sodium oleate (SOT) collectors were tested with varying conditions. A plateau of maximum weight recovery was observed in the range of pH 5–9. Sharp drops in weight recovery were observed when the pH was lower than 5 or greater than 9 and when the concentration of HXM was relatively low. Similar observations were also made by Pradip in 1981 when using K-octyl hydroxamate as the collector in bastnaesite flotation (  In addition, as evaluated by Pradip in 1981 ( Similar weight recovery patterns were also observed in the flotation of pure gangue minerals, as show in Further tests were conducted to evaluate the selectivity of octano-hydroxamic acid at pH 9. The results are shown in Previous literature had concluded, even though maximum recoveries were observed throughout the range of pH 5–9, pH 9 was likely more favorable for hydroxamic acid ( Comparative flotation tests were also conducted by using sodium oleate collector. As shown in The results of previous surface chemistry studies correlated well with the results of zeta potential determination in this project, as shown in This provides further evidence sodium oleate collector is chemisorbed onto the surface of these minerals. Otherwise poor recoveries would occur in alkaline conditions for anionic collectors like sodium oleate ( In this research, the xenotime recovery was found to be lowered when using sodium oleate with pH lower than 7 and higher than 9. This can likely be explained using the same hypothesis used to explain the sharp drops in recoveries when using hydroxamic acid. It is interesting to note that the recovery of zircon when either using octano-hydroxamic acid or sodium oleate was not sensitive to pH changes. Hosten also observed maximum recoveries of zircon over a wider pH range ( In this research, a series of experiments was also performed between the effect of octano-hydroxamic acid and sodium oleate collectors on xenotime flotation. This was done as a function of pH both at room temperature and at 80 It was observed that at a high temperature, small bubbles merged into big ones during floatation and readily broke at the surface of solution. In contrast, the bubble stability when using octano-hydroxamic acid collector remained high even at enhanced temperatures and bubbles appeared to be generated much faster than at room temperature. So, as a result, more xenotime is floated in 2  First, a comparison of the selectivity between octano-hydroxamic acid and sodium oleate in the absence of depressants was conducted by using mixed samples of xenotime and gangue minerals (weight ratio The original grade of xenotime in each mixed sample was 33.85%, and the weight recovery and grade of each concentrate after flotation was measured and calculated. As shown in In further research conducted, the depressants sodium silicate (SS) and ammonium lignosulfonate (ALS) were used in the flotation of mixed samples. They were added before the addition of octano-hydroxamate acid (HXM) or sodium oleate (SOT). Analysis was carried out and comparisons were then made based upon the recoveries and grades. As seen in The testing of depressants using sodium oleate as the collector resulted in mixed success. As shown in Accordingly, when using sodium oleate collector, the addition of depressants, especially in the use of ammonium lignosulfonate, appeared to decrease bubble stability. Many bubbles broke before they could be floated out of the cell. This, resulted in an abundance of xenotime particles in the flotation tailings. Clearly, these results display one shortcoming of using only single collector, sodium oleate. In this case, when in the presence of depressants, it helps to explain why other modifiers are necessary to enhance the stability of froths in the cell. Some flotation experiments studying this very issue have been done by previous researchers. In 2010, Wiese et al. tested the effect of the combination of reagents (collectors, activators, depressants and frothers) on froth stability in batch flotation cells. He suggested that when replacing a short chain-length collector with a longer chain collector results in decreased froth stability ( In this research, ammonium lignosulfonate depressant worked less efficiently than sodium silicate depressant when using sodium oleate collector. Even though the changes in concentrate grade of xenotime found when using ammonium lignosulfonate was slightly higher than those found when using sodium silicate, the final recoveries were much lower. Presumably this is because ammonium lignosulfonate appeared to decrease the stability of the bubbles more than sodium silicate did in the presence of sodium oleate. However, it is important to note, sodium silicate and ammonium lignosulfonate both helped the sodium oleate collector to separate xenotime from ilmenite. Again, this may be due to the Fe This resulted in the ilmenite surface remaining hydrophilic. Overall, in this research in the presence of sodium oleate collector, the ammonium lignosulfonate depressant had the best depressing power for the iron-bearing mineral ilmenite. The flotation of xenotime at 80 According to For the mixed samples of xenotime and ilmenite, sodium silicate did not demonstrate any depressing power when using octano-hydroxamic acid collector or sodium oleate collector. As stated before, this is probably because the compounds formed with Fe As well, when this result is compared with the mixed samples of xenotime and zircon floated very well in the presence of any reagents when at pH 9 and at room temperature. The weight recoveries were all over 90% and the grades of xenotime were above 15%. As well, when this is result compared with the mixed samples containing schorl or staurolite gangue, relatively higher floatability of xenotime was shown. The effect of temperature in froth flotation has been evaluated. In 1981, Pradip used higher temperatures in Denver flotation cell tests of bastnaesite ore obtained from Mountain Pass. He found that after the addition of soda ash and lignosulfonate as depressants, the concentrate recoveries and grades were both enhanced significantly at high temperatures in the presence of hydroxamate. In the case of the use of fatty acid collectors, the concentrate recoveries and grades were only slightly better ( In order to confirm this theory, adsorption density tests with xenotime were also conducted by using octano-hydroxamic acid as the collector. For the adsorption testing, the “ferric hydroxamate method” was used to measure the adsorption density ( As shown in In this research, flotation conducted when using sodium oleate collector and ammonium lignosulfonate depressant, the flotation results showed a similar effect. In In addition, the bubble stability noted with use of a sodium oleate collector was lower at elevated temperature than at room temperature. It was witnessed that small bubbles merged into big ones when floating at elevated temperature and then broke at the surface of solution. In contrast, the bubble stability with octano-hydroxamic acid collector remained good even at higher temperatures. Also, with the use of octano-hydroxamic collector, the bubbles appeared to generate faster at high temperature. In the microflotation tests of xenotime and the selected gangue minerals, ilmenite, zircon, schorl and staurolite, several conclusions can be made based on the results. Both octano-hydroxamic acid and sodium oleate are effective collectors in the flotation of xenotime. The maximum weight recoveries of xenotime found when using octano-hydroxamic acid collector in the absence of depressants occurs in the pH range from 5 to 9. Conversely, sodium oleate collectors have a narrower effective pH range of 7–9. Hence, in this research, the optimum pH found to separate xenotime from the selected gangue minerals was deemed to be pH 9. At a pH of 9 and room temperature, the grades of concentrate produced when using sodium oleate collector are comparatively higher than those found when using octano-hydroxamic acid. All recoveries are close and all are above 93%. However, in the absence of a depressant, sodium oleate collector seems to have better selectivity than octano-hydroxamic acid collector in xenotime flotation recovery from the selected gangue minerals. The depressants, sodium silicate and ammonium lignosulfonate work well along with octano-hydroxamic acid collector to float xenotime from the selected silicate gangue minerals. This is seen at either room temperature or 80 The bubbles formed in with the use of octano-hydroxamic acid collector appear more stable than those formed when using sodium oleate. This appears to play an important role in the better weight xenotime recoveries obtained when using octano-hydroxamic acid as the collector. The stability of bubbles is a significant factor in the performance of flotation. Extreme pHs, enhanced temperature and the addition of depressants can all partially affect the stability of bubbles and affect the weight recoveries of xenotime. Ammonium lignosulfonate is a better depressant than sodium silicate in the depression of ilmenite when using sodium oleate collector. It results in a higher grade concentrate. However, in this case, the xenotime recoveries are worse when using ammonium lignosulfonate as the depressant. The reason behind this most probably due to active Fe Temperature plays an important role in the flotation of xenotime from selected gangue minerals. While temperature appears to decrease the bubble stability when using sodium oleate collector alone, temperature also enhances the performance of ammonium lignosulfonate in the presence of sodium oleate. In this case, the recoveries of xenotime are increased significantly and the grades of the concentrate also remain high. However, temperature enhances the grades but decreases the recoveries when using octano-hydroxamic acid as the collector in the presence of depressants. Based upon this research, to float xenotime from Fe-bearing gangue minerals, a combination of sodium oleate collector and ammonium lignosulfonate depressant at an elevated temperature would be the best. In order to float xenotime from silicate gangue minerals, a combination of sodium oleate collector in conjunction with sodium silicate depressant at room temperature would be best. This research has been supported by the