To reduce the cost of the complex separation process of nickel, cobalt or manganese from the leaching liquid, a high value-adding process for the direct synthesis of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2, LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2 and LiNi0.33Co0.33Mn0.33O2 as active cathode materials by the hydroxide co-precipitation method is developed in this paper. The structure, morphology and composition of the regenerated LiNixCoyMn1-x-yO2 cathode materials are determined with X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry (ICP–AES) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy system (EDXS), respectively. The results show that the regenerated cathode materials have a well-defined layered structure and retain the characteristics of their corresponding hydroxide precursors with a spherical morphology and a particle size in the range from 9 to 12μm in diameter. Electrochemical tests show that the regenerated cathode materials have good electrochemical performances. The initial discharge capacities (0.1C, 2.7–4.3V) of the regenerated LiNixCoyMn1-x-yO2 are 197.7mAhg−1, 174.3mAhg−1 and 168.3mAhg−1 for x=0.8, 0.5 and 0.33, respectively. The discharge capacities of all materials decrease with increasing discharging current densities and the capacity retention ratios of LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2, LiNi0.5Co0.2Mn0.3O2 and LiNi0.33Co0.33Mn0.33O2 are 86.3%, 95% and 96% respectively after 50cycles. Overall, the results show that the performances of regenerated LiNixCoyMn1-x-yO2 are similar to those of the materials prepared from mixed solution of virgin nickel, cobalt and manganese chemicals.With the increasing shortage of primary resources and the pressure of environmental protection, the recovery of cobalt, nickel and other valuable metals from scraps of nickel and cobalt such as spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and catalysts, has received much attention. A range of hydrometallurgy based recovery processes involving crushing, dismantling, sieving, acid leaching, solvent extraction, chemical precipitation and electrochemistry have been developed ( Investigations have also been carried out to recover nickel and cobalt from spent catalysts using different methods such as adsorption, ion exchange, precipitation and solvent extraction. The spent catalysts were first leached by HCl ( One of the most prominent and common problems in the recovery of nickel and cobalt from spent LIBs and catalysts is the separation of nickel and cobalt from their mixed leaching liquor. Due to the similar physical and chemical properties of transition metals of nickel, cobalt, complete separation of each individual metal from their mixed leaching liquid needs high-cost flowsheet and involves a loss of materials ( In this paper, through adjusting solution components and pH value of the leaching liquid from the recovery process, LiNi The active cathode materials of LiNi The process of regeneration is illustrated in Spherical cathode materials with a generic formula of LiNi In order to avoid rapid nucleation and control crystallization of Ni In Eq. Active cathode materials of different compositions were prepared with slightly different procedures, in addition to the obvious different compositions. For all three cathode materials, an excess 5 The concentrations of metal ions were determined by Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS, analytikjena, ZEEnit 700p). The thermal decomposition of the regenerated materials was tested with TG-DSC analysis (NETZSCH STA449F3) at a heating rate of 10 CR2032 type coin cell was assembled to test the electrochemical performances of the regenerated materials. On weight basis, the active cathode electrode consisted of 80% regenerated materials, 10% acetylene black as the conductor and 10% polyvinylidene fluoride as the binder. The electrode was pressed into a thin plate and punched into the shape of a pellet. The as-prepared electrode film was dried in vacuum at 120 The morphology of regenerative Ni The thermodynamic behavior of the regenerated Ni  The SEM images of regenerated LiNi The initial charge and discharge curves of the regenerated LiNi The specific capacities of the regenerated LiNi  Results from this paper demonstrate that mixed transition metal oxides of different compositions as active cathode materials in a LIB can be regenerated directly from nickel and cobalt scraps by co-deposition method without separating the individual metals. The composition can be varied through adjusting the solution composition and pH value of the leaching liquid. The mixed metal hydroxide Ni This work is supported by the