Secondary platinum scrap from the glass industry with iridium, rhodium and palladium additions arising from alloys or enrichment due to multiple recycling of the construction elements was used to study the refining behavior and to define and control parameters influencing the selectivity and yield. Dissolving this material in boiling aqua regia, diluting with water or hydrochloric acid and precipitating with ammonium chloride (NH4Cl), then separating the mother liquor gives a precipitate, where the accompanying platinum group metals (PGMs) iridium, rhodium and palladium are separated from the platinum matrix. Calcination of the precipitate gives a sponge of high purity (>99.90%). The influence of the dilution of the solution with water and/or hydrochloric acid, as well as the temperature of the precipitation, has been investigated.The separation of additions of iridium, palladium and rhodium from a platinum matrix has been investigated. The material used is a typical secondary scrap arising from the glass industry and is less polluted with base metals such as Fe, Ni or/and Cu. The concentrations for iridium, rhodium and palladium of the investigated scrap were 8636 mg/kg Ir, 5455 mg/kg Rh and 168 mg/kg Pd; the one of iron, nickel and copper below 100 mg/kg per element. Construction components in the glass industry are commonly pure platinum, but PtIr1 and PtRh10 are also extensively used. Depending on the temperature in the glass process, Pt is used for lower, PtIr1 for higher and PtRh10 for highest process temperatures up to 1650 °C. As these materials are not always “separated” completely due to their composition before refining, the scrap for refining has a composition as described above. The investigations were made to prove the quality of a separation by precipitation with ammonium chloride, as example for a simple process. A solution was prepared by dissolving the scrap in boiling This scrap consisted of cuttings from sheets and facings from castings and had a specific surface of about 150–200 mm The preparation of the solution comprised furthermore the step of destroying the nitric compounds and driving off nitric gases from the solution, distilling of the residue HCl and diluting with water and/or HCl. The precipitation was done by adding ammonium chloride to the metal solution. The mother liquor was filtered off and the precipitate was calcined under inert gas atmosphere, washed with pure water, separated and dried After the dissolution process has reached its optimum (time), the metal solution was heated to 453 K, then cooled to 403 K for adding hydrochloric acid to destroy any nitric compounds and drive off nitric gases. This was repeated several times, until no nitric gas was formed and seen in the waste-gas stream. Residues of nitric gases will reduce the yield of precipitation. The solution was then evaporated in order to reduce the volume and to distil any HCl remaining from the dissolution process. The distillation temperature was varied between 453 and 463 K in order to study its influence on purity and yield during precipitation. The hot solution was diluted with water to a concentration of about 600 g Pt/l to obtain a platinum concentrate which can be stored. The solution was filtered to separate etching products from the glass balloon flasks and PtCl The precipitation process was carried out by adding an ammonium chloride solution (NH Calcination of the precipitate was carried out at a temperature of 693 K in a furnace with a fused silica muffle. This gave a metallic sponge of platinum of high purity (>99.90%) and particle sizes in the range of 1–10 μm. The sponge was washed several times with hot distilled water in order to remove any residues of reaction products. In this process the sponge disintegrated into a fine powder. The platinum powder was then dried to constant weight. The sponge was characterized by SEM and analyzed with ICP/AES for residue concentrations of base metals and iridium, rhodium and palladium. The process step of precipitation has the main influence on the purity and yield. For the refining effect, the different solubilities of the metal complexes in the HCl and NH With increasing NH In an optimum process, the platinum precipitates completely; the base metals and the PGMs are in the mother liquor. But in reality, yield and purity are competitive: the higher the yield, the lower the available purity of the platinum precipitate and the subsequent platinum powder. But yield and purity are essential for the economic efficiency of an industrial process. The following experiments demonstrate the parameters controlling the process. The separation of PGMs—rather than base metals—is more complicated because of their noble condition, the atomic and chemical similarity between platinum and PGMs. The preparation for the precipitation was investigated—diluting with water or HCl—to assess influence on yield and the remaining PGM content in the precipitate and calcined powders. The distillation temperature in The experiments show clearly the dependence of the separation effect of rhodium, iridium and palladium from the HCl concentration in the metal solutions. Diluting with water (HCl concentration=0 in It can be noticed that during the dilution of the distilled solution with water a reaction occurs, which causes the enormous refining effect during the following precipitation step. The reaction can only be the hydrolysis reaction (Cl It can be anticipated that both yield and degree of purity can be also influenced by the precipitation temperature. Because of the better solubility of the precious metal salts in the mother liquor at higher temperatures, a prevention of a coprecipitation of iridium, rhodium and palladium, as well as a reduction of the platinum yield can be expected. The solution was the same as used in the above experiments. Minimum values for iridium and rhodium can be achieved with precipitation temperatures from 313 to 333 K and diluting with water Temperatures below 313 K show increasing values for iridium and palladium. Lower values of palladium are obviously influenced by higher precipitation temperatures. A higher distillation temperature again reduces the content of iridium, rhodium and palladium. The results shown in A higher precipitation temperature reduces the iridium, rhodium and palladium concentrations slightly for the case of diluting with 2 M HCl. Such platinum powders would not fulfill the general industrial requirements on purity (>99.90%). The dependence of yield and purity of all experiments on the precipitation temperature can be explained by a superimposition of the solubility temperature dependence by an inversion of the Pt complex hydrolysis. Due to the precipitation HCl is released With the described procedure, 8636 mg/kg Ir, 5455 mg/kg Rh and 168 mg/kg Pd can be separated in one refining step to form platinum powders with a purity of >99.90%. The influences of temperatures and the preparation of the solutions for the precipitation have been investigated. This preparation for the precipitation influences both yield and degree of purity immensely. In order to distil the remaining HCl from the dissolution process, the solution has to be reduced in volume until a temperature of about 453 K is reached. Otherwise, the refining degree will be low, especially in the presence of iridium. If the HCl is removed completely, hydroxide complexes of the precious metals are formed while diluting the solutions with water. This hydrolysis reaction takes place primarily with iridium, rhodium and palladium. This yields very pure precipitates but also decreases the yield because also a part of the platinum exists as hydroxide complex. As the efficiency of a process is important, the precipitation has to be optimized for high yields and high purity. For highest purity, the distilled solutions should be free from remaining HCl and should be diluted with water before the precipitation. Although yield is low with this procedure, industrial applications require a compromise between purity and yield. Acceptable values can be achieved by adjusting a low HCl concentration in the solution, an optimal concentration is about 1 M HCl. In this case, the inversion of the hydrolysis of the Pt complex during the precipitation occurs and the precipitate has an acceptable low concentration of iridium, rhodium and palladium. Increasing precipitation temperatures increase the yield, but decrease the separation of iridium, rhodium and palladium, even when the solutions are diluted with water. This phenomenon can also be explained by the inversion of the hydrolysis effect because HCl is released during the precipitation. The HCl starts the inversion of the hydrolysis of the precious metal complexes. The higher the precipitation temperature, the faster this reaction proceeds, so that the contact time during the precipitation and the separation of the mother liquor is sufficient for the inversion. This results in an overall increase of yield and iridium, rhodium and palladium concentrations in the calcined powders. The content of iridium and rhodium is lowest for precipitation temperatures between 313 and 333 K. Above and below, the precipitate has higher concentrations. It can be supposed that at higher temperatures the iridium, rhodium and palladium concentration is determined by the kinetics of the inversion of the hydrolysis reaction, whereas at lower temperatures, the solubility of all complexes is so small that the iridium, rhodium and palladium concentrations in the precipitate and subsequent powders decrease.