Five tannin extracts from different trees were used to improve jamesonite flotation in the Changpo plant in Nandan, China. The flotation results demonstrated that the larch tannin extract was the best for improving jamesonite flotation. Compared to flotation without larch tannin extract, industrial trial results indicated that the Sb and Pb grade in the final concentrate increased from 13.1% and 14.8% to 17.6% and 19.9%, respectively, as the Zn grade decreased from 9.1 to 6.5%. In addition, the Sb and Pb recovery of 84.5% was achieved with the larch tannin extract (84.2% without larch tannin extract). Larch tannin extract depressed not only marmatite, but also to some extent pyrrhotite, arsenopyrite, pyrite, calcite and quartz.The Dachang Tongkeng Mine in Nandan, China is well known for Sn–Pb–Sb–Zn polymetallic deposits containing cassiterite, jamesonite, marmatite, pyrrhotite, arsenopyrite and pyrite. Among these, jamesonite (Pb Tannin extract has been primarily used as depressants for calcite in the flotation of fluorite as well as depressants for sulfide flotation ( In this study, five tannin extracts from different trees were tested at the Changpo plant in Nandan, China, to improve jamesonite flotation and to reduce the consumption of NaCN. Among the tannin extracts, the optimal tannin extract depressant for jamesonite flotation was selected and tested in a laboratory and at an industrial scale. The jamesonite ore samples were obtained from the Dachang Tongkeng Mine in Nandan, China. The main sulfide minerals were jamesonite, marmatite, pyrrhotite, arsenopyrite and pyrite, and the main gangue minerals were calcite and quartz. The elemental composition was 0.2% Pb, 0.2% Sb, 1.8% Zn, 0.1% Sn, 7.4% S, 6.3% Fe, and 0.2% As. The tannins were extracted from the bayberry, valonia, acacia mangium and emblic and were obtained from the Guangxi Wuming Tannin Extract Factory in China, and the larch tannin extract sample was obtained from Forest Industry Products Co., Ltd. in Neimenggu, China. Some characteristics of the tannin extracts are given in Before the Sb–Pb rougher flotation, the Sb–Pb–Zn–S bulk concentrate was reground to 81% (w/w) below 74 After the open-circuit laboratory test, a closed-circuit laboratory test was performed, and an industrial test was then performed at the Changpo plant (Nandan, China). The Sb(Pb) concentrates were analyzed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku D/MAX-2500 The effect of five tannin extracts on the Sb grade and Sb recovery in the concentrate is shown in The tannins from bayberry and valonia are hydrolysable tannins containing carboxyls and hydroxyls, and the tannins from acacia mangium, emblic and larch are condensed tannins containing flavonoids. As illustrated in In view of the positive effect observed for larch tannin extract on jamesonite flotation, a closed-circuit laboratory test was performed. The results show that the larch tannin extract could improve the selective flotation of jamesonite. After one rougher, three cleaners and two scavengers, the Sb content in the concentrate improved significantly in the presence of larch tannin extract (up to 23.5% compared to 18.5% in the absence of larch tannin extract), and the Sb recovery remained the same (86.3% with larch tannin extract and 86.4% without). Also, the addition of NaCN was reduced by about 25% (160 Industrial scale flotation trials were performed at the Changpo plant, which has a production capacity of 2000 The X-ray diffraction patterns of the concentrates in the presence and absence of larch tannin are shown in Bayberry, valonia, acacia mangium, emblic and larch tannin extracts were used as a depressant to improve jamesonite flotation. The laboratory tests demonstrated that the condensed tannins that were more easily oxidized and contained higher content of tannin species would have a favorable effect on improving the flotation of jamesonite, while the hydrolysable tannins were not suitable for improving the jamesonite flotation. The larch tannin extract, which was the optimal depressant for jamesonite flotation, was selected and tested in a laboratory and at an industrial scale. It was demonstrated that the addition of larch tannin extract could improve the selective flotation of jamesonite and significantly decrease the amount of NaCN used. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of minerals indicated that the larch tannin extract had a depressing effect on marmatite, pyrrhotite, arsenopyrite, pyrite, calcite and quartz but no depressing effect on the jamesonite.