The shaft furnace plays a very important role in the quantity and quality indexes of the COREX process. However, research on burden distribution in the COREX shaft furnace is still immature and in need of further development and improvement. For instance, only a single ring charging process rather than multiple rings or a burden matrix process has been simulated for the shaft furnace in practical operation. Therefore, a three dimensional model of the upper part of COREX shaft furnace is developed in the present study. The model simulates the charging process with multiple rings and is then used to investigate the effects of different bottom base shapes on the burden profiles and radial size distributions. Results show that the last rings (the inner rings) in the burden matrix needs be carefully chosen, especially for the middle mode. The bottom base shape affects the burden size distribution a great deal but the surface burden profile very little at a fixed burden matrix. A bottom base of M shape is strongly recommended to obtain a uniform burden size distribution. The burden matrix and bottom base shape need to be well matched in order to obtain desired gas distributions.The COREX process is a non-blast furnace smelting reducing ironmaking technology. It is designed to use non-coking coal to meet resource and environmental demands The COREX process is a two-stage process consisting of two reactors, the pre-reduction shaft furnace and the melter gasifier Research has been undertaken on the burden distribution in the COREX shaft furnace. Li et al. studied the binary size burdens’ movements through a geometric model based on the discrete element method (DEM) Hence, in the present work, a three dimensional model with multiple ring charging system in the upper part of the COREX shaft furnace is established based on DEM. The model is then used to investigate the effects of bottom base shapes on burden profiles and radial size distributions. And some suggestions are made as to how to obtain a more uniform radial size distribution in order to provide guidance for the operation of COREX-3000. In the DEM, particles’ movements are described using an inter-particle contact model wherein a particle may collide with neighboring particles or the wall Similar to the chute in the blast furnace, the GIMBAL distributor is adopted in Baosteel’s COREX-3000 shaft furnace to discharge burdens from the hopper in a circumferentially uniform manner. Since this paper mainly focuses on the burden distribution in the shaft furnace after falling from the GIMBAL distributor, the model in the simulation is not the whole shaft furnace, but only the upper part with the charging system. Thus, as shown in The shaft furnace is charged with a mixture of pellet, ore, coke and flux from the hopper and the distributor. The simulation time and the load will be huge if the simulation is carried out based on the actual sizes of the burdens due to the wide ranges of burden sizes. For simplicity, some assumptions are made in this work including that: (1) Average diameters of specific surface areas are used to represent the sizes of different burdens. (2) The sizes of burdens are enlarged by four times in the simulation in order to reduce the number of particles used in the calculation, thus saving simulation time The time step is 2.5 × 10 The simulation process is as follows. Firstly, four kinds of well-mixed burdens are generated in the hopper. Then the gate at the bottom of hopper is opened in order to discharge burdens from the hopper. The GIMBAL distributor works at the same time. Finally, the simulation stops once all the 50,000 kg of particles have been charged into the shaft furnace. In the Baosteel COREX process, the burden is charged according to the target radius, which is shown in The above burden matrices are frequently used in the COREX-3000 process. BM1, BM2 and BM3 represent different burden modes, which are the central mode, middle mode and peripheral mode, respectively. The charging process is from outer to inner, which means from large to small radius. The total burden discharging time is 260 s. The rotating speed of the distributor is 0.523 rad s The above model is applied to simulate the effect of different bottom base shapes on burden profiles and burden size distributions. In practical operation, there are mainly four kinds of bottom base shapes, which are flat shape (F), V shape (V), M shape (M), and “Platform + Funnel” shape (PF), as shown in The flat bottom is used to investigate the burden profiles at different burden matrices. In order to acquire the burden profile after discharge, a slide with a defined width is extracted from the shaft center vertical to the horizontal plane. The burden profiles after simulation are presented in It can be seen that the burden profiles for BM1 and BM2 are more like an inverted V except that there is a small pit at the top of the BM2 burden shape, while the shape for BM3 has a double peak at about 2 m for BM3. The desired burden profile is an invert V shape, M shape and “platform + funnel” shape for BM1, BM2 and BM3, respectively. It can be seen that the desired burden shape is formed for BM1 but not for BM2 and BM3. For BM2, It can be seen from The effects of different bottom base shapes on the burden profile are then investigated, and the result for BM1 is shown in It can be seen from The burden size segregations at different bottom base shapes for BM1 are illustrated in It can be seen from Then the standard deviation of different burdens’ SI along the radius is introduced to compare the segregation degree for different bottom shapes. The smaller the standard deviation, the lighter the radial size segregation. The standard deviations of SI at different bottom shapes for BM1 are listed in The deviation of SI The COREX-3000 shaft furnace is a countercurrent reactor of burden and gas. Therefore, gas distribution also needs to be evaluated. Since the burden distribution is circumferentially uniform, the gas distribution can be simplified as a one dimensional interpretation of the pressure drop. It is better to evaluate the permeability of the shaft furnace from the total packed structure. However, it would take at least 3000 h to simulate the whole packed bed just based on the simulation time in the present work, let alone the much greater time it would take to simulate an increasing number of particles. Based on the previous work Unit pressure drop is introduced to represent the gas distribution inside the shaft furnace, and it can be calculated by Eq.  It can be seen that the unit pressure drop decreases gradually for F, V and PF shape bottom bases while it increases at first and then decreases after reaching maximum at 0.5R along the radius for M shape bottom bases. The pressure drop distribution indicates that BM1 helps to develop peripheral gas, but central gas is developed in the case of the M shape bottom base. This also proves that gas distribution is not only determined by burden matrix but also by bottom base shape. It should be noticed that the unit pressure drop at 0.9R for the V shape bottom base is 0 Pa·m The burden profiles for BM2 at different bottom base shapes are compared in It can be seen that the burden profiles are almost all inverted V shapes except that there is a small pit at the top for the bottom base of the F shape. This implies that the burden matrix is designed based on earlier examples of flat bottoms to obtain a double peak burden profile. Therefore, we strongly recommend that the burden matrix be designed taking into account the bottom shape. The burden size segregations and standard deviations of SI at different bottom base shapes for BM2 are shown in It can be seen from It can be seen from  The burden profiles and size segregation for BM3 at different bottom base shapes are compared in It can be seen from It can be seen from It can be seen from Comparing SI and its standard deviation, it can be seen that the standard deviations of SI for BM3 are almost the smallest among all the burden matrices at different bottom base shapes. This means the burden size segregation for BM3 is the slightest. It indicates that BM3 is a better burden matrix to obtain a more uniform size distribution along the radius.  It can be seen that the unit pressure drop almost shows a tendency to first increase and then decrease for different shape bottom bases except that it just increases from 0.7R to 0.9R for the M shape bottom base. This indicates that BM3 generally helps to develop both peripheral and central gases. It should be noticed that the surface profile of BM3 is an M shape, so the gas distribution at BM3 for the M shape bottom base can be regarded as a stable and continuous operation in practice. BM3 is designed to prevent the gas flow at about 0.5R and to develop both central and peripheral gases in practice. However, central gas and peripheral gas are not well developed in this condition. The F shape bottom base may be relatively better for BM3 to prevent middle gas flow and develop central and peripheral gas flows to some degree. Therefore, another burden matrix should be used to form an F shape bottom base and BM3 should be used alternatively to form an M shape bottom base. In this way, central and peripheral gas can be developed and middle gas can be prevented. Therefore the burden matrix should be well matched with the bottom base shape in order to obtain a desired gas distribution. V shape can be regarded as the extreme condition of M shape with moving the apex of M to the maximum radius, but it can be found that the particle size segregation for V shape base is heavier than that for M shape base. This indicates that the apex position of M shape should not be too large. PF can be regarded as the slope angle of outer part beyond the M shape apex being 0°, but the particle size segregation in the case of PF base is heavier than that in the case of M base. This indicates that the slope angle of the outer part beyond the M shape apex should not be too small. Therefore, the ideal parameters for M shape are that the apex position should not be too close to the wall and the slope angle of the outer part beyond M shape apex should not be too small. Based on the present simulation, taking BM3 as example, the M shape apex is at 1.82 m, which is within the radius range of burden matrix. This indicates that the apex of M shape can “separate” burdens into two parts along radius, which narrows the space for burden rolling and further limits the particle size segregation. Therefore, the apex of M shape should be in the middle of the radius range of burden matrix, which can help to obtain a uniform burden distribution. The burden stream width should be taken into account as well because smaller size particles locate at the inner part of burden stream while larger ones are at the outer part of burden stream The paper establishes a three dimensional model of the upper part of the COREX-3000 shaft furnace based on DEM. The model simulates the charging process in order to investigate the effects of different bottom base shapes on the burden profiles and radial size distributions. The conclusions can be summarized as follows. The shape of the bottom should be taken into account when deciding the burden matrix. The last rings (the inner rings) in the burden matrix should be carefully chosen if a middle burden distribution is needed. Coke segregates most due to its good rolling ability, while pellet nearly segregates the smallest amount. The bottom base shape affects the burden size distribution a great deal but the surface burden profile only a little at fixed burden matrix. The bottom base of the M shape is most strongly recommended to obtain a uniform burden size distribution, and followed by the bottom base of F shape. BM3 is also recommended for practical operation because it has the smallest segregation index of all the burden matrices. Gas distribution is determined by both burden distribution and bottom base shape. The burden matrix and bottom base shape need to be well matched in order to obtain desired burden and gas distributions. This work focuses more on burden profile and size distributions in the charging of multiple rings charging while only studying the gas distribution by a one dimensional interpretation of pressure drop for the sake of simplicity. Therefore three dimensional gas distribution and the effect of burden distribution on gas distribution still need to be considered. Research on this direction is already underway. Further simulation needs to be also carried out to take into account the effects of particle softening and shrinkage, and multiphase flow including thermo-chemical behavior inside the entire shaft furnace. This will provide a comprehensive understanding and a good guide for the practical operation of the COREX-3000 shaft furnace. This work was supported by the