Introduction
                  The treatment of fractures involving the lumbar spine has been controversial. Laminae lesion may be complete or of the greenstick type (incomplete). Dural tears and nerve root entrapment may accompany these laminae fractures. The aim of this study is twofold, to assess the effect of different types of laminae fractures on the anteriorvertebral height restoration in upper lumbar burst fractures and to determine the incidences of the intraoperatively detected dural tear and neural entrapment in complete and incomplete laminae fractures to choose the optimal treatment.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective review was conducted on 112 patients with 114 lumbar burst fractures treated operatively, age ranged from 17 to 55years (mean age 32). Male to female ratio was (93%/7%), 8 females. Patients were divided into three groups, group 1 patients without lamina fracture, group 2 patients with complete type lamina fracture and group 3 patients with (percutaneous) incomplete type lamina fractures. All clinical charts and radiologic data of these groups were analyzed for their association with dural tears, neural entrapment and the impact of lamina fracture (complete and incomplete types) on the efficacy of anterior vertebral height restoration. The severity of injury was determined using the ASIA (Modified Frankel scale).
               
                  Results
                  Out of 114 upper lumbar burst fractures, lamina fracture occurred in 34 patients (29.8%), complete lamina fracture occurred in 21 patients (61.7%), whereas incomplete lamina fracture occurred in 13 patients (38.3%). Dural tear was detected in 16 patients (47%) and was predominantly higher in complete type lamina fracture 12 patients (57%) when compared to 4 dural tears (30%) in incomplete lamina fractures. Analysis of the data revealed no significant difference in the preoperative anterior vertebral height loss and local kyphotic angle between the three groups. However the anterior vertebral height and local kyhpotic angle restoration were found to be affected by the presence of complete lamina fracture when compared to other groups with incomplete lamina fracture and without lamina fracture (P
                     =0.001).
               
                  Conclusion
                  In upper lumbar burst fractures, complete lamina fracture is an indicator of injury severity. When detected preoperatively on CT or MRI scanning, it should be operated by open book laminectomy even if the patient is neurologically intact since it carries a high risk of neural entrapment, and its presence affects the intraoperative postural and instrumental trials for anterior vertebral height restoration.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV. Retrospective study.Lumbar burst fractures Denis type A, B, C and D often result from a combination of acute hyper-flexion and rotational forces, and are usually unstable Our study on the upper lumbar burst fractures series was designed to assess the incidences of lamina factures with its both types (complete and incomplete), the dural tear and the neural element entrapment, and the correlation between the presence of the two types of laminae fractures and the efficacy of postural and instrumental reduction manoeuvres on anterior vertebral height restoration. This retrospective study was carried out for 112 patients (8 females and 104 males) with 114 lumbar burst fractures, mean age was 32 The neurologic status was determined according to ASIA modification of the Frankel classification at the time of injury and the follow-up. The Frankel method, which grades neurological function impairment, was used to compare preoperative and latest follow-up patient status. In this retrospective study 112 patients with 114 upper lumbar burst fractures were treated from February 2007 through August 2012. Each patient had anteroposterior and lateral radiographs, computed tomography and/or magnetic resonance imaging scans. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs were used for the determination of loss of anterior vertebral height. The type of lamina fracture was also predicted from the CT scan and was recorded. According to the preoperatively obtained CT scanning, patients were divided into three groups. Group 1 consisted of 78 patients who had upper lumbar burst fractures without lamina fracture, group 2 involved 21 patients who had burst fractures with complete type lamina fractures, and group 3 consisted of 13 patients with incomplete (percutaneous type) lamina fractures. Fracture types and their demographic distribution were explained in ( All patients underwent surgery in the prone position and under general anesthesia. The midline incision was centered at the injury level and completely exposed the injury with two adjacent levels above and tow levels below. All the patients with lamina fractures were carefully explored using the open book laminectomy technique with the posterior approach; if there was any dural tear and nerve root entrapment, it was then reduced and repaired The Frankel method, which grades neurological function impairment, was used to compare preoperative and latest follow-up patient status Lamina fracture was detected in 34 (29.8%) out of 114 upper lumbar burst fractures, complete lamina fracture was detected in 21 patients (61.7%) and incomplete lamina fracture (greenstick fracture) was detected in 13 patients (38.3%). In group 2 in our upper lumbar burst fractures series complete lamina fracture was detected mostly at the level of L2 in 57% (12 patients), in L1 complete lamina fracture was detected in 9.5% (2 patients), and it was detected in 28% of the L3 burst fractures (6 patients), dural tear was detected in 57% (12 patients) mostly at the level of L2 (38%) (8 patients) and neural entrapment was detected in 33% mostly at the level of L2 (19%) (4 patients). Whereas in group 3 of the incomplete lamina fracture it was detected mostly in L2 (61.5%) (8 patients), L3 (23%) (3 patients) and in L1 (15.5%) (2 patients). Dural tear was detected in 30% (4 patients) mostly at the level of L2 (23%) (3 patients) and neural entrapment was detected in 15% one in L2 level and another one in L3 level ( Anterior segment height measurement was done preoperatively by measuring the anterior body height on a true lateral decubitus thoraco-lumbar views for all patients. And it was measured one weak postoperatively in the same position. The preoperative mean of anterior vertebral height loss was (42%) in all patients range (24–69%). All data were analysed using SPSS v. 15 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL.). The non-parametric Man Whitney Anterior vertebral height restoration was significantly influenced by the presence of complete lamina fracture in upper lumbar burst fractures (group 2) when compared to upper lumbar burst fractures without lamina fracture and with incomplete lamina fracture, group 1 and group 3, respectively ( The local kyphotic angle was measured preoperatively on a true lateral decubitus thoraco-lumbar view for all patients. And it was measured one weak postoperatively in the same position. Preoperatively, there was no statistical significance between the three groups, whereas postoperatively, the local kyphotic angle of group 2 is affected significantly when compared to group 1 and 3 ( The severity of injury was determined using the ASIA (Modified Frankel scale). In group 1 (without lamina fracture), there were 78 patients, their preoperative neurological status was evaluated according to the Modified Frankel scale [A, B, C, D, E], patient distribution was [4,13,13,20,28] respectively, whereas postoperatively the distribution of patients has changed to [2,4,16,26,28] respectively. In group 2 (with complete lamina fracture), there were 21 patients, the preoperative patient's neurological status distribution was [1,2,4,7,7], changed postoperatively to [1,0,3,12,5] respectively, and in group 3 (with incomplete lamina fracture), there were 13 patients, their preoperative patient's neurological status distribution was [0,2,1,7,3], changed postoperatively to [0,0,2,5,6] respectively ( The functional outcome of the entire study group was assessed using the Smiley-Webster Scale. Good to excellent results were obtained in 93 (83%) out of 112 patients. The burst fracture is an injury characterized by anterior vertebral body height loss and retropulsion of the posterior aspect of the vertebral body into the spinal canal. The vertebral body injury frequently is associated with fractures through the neural arch. Using a three-column concept of instability the division of these fractures into stable and unstable injuries is difficult Posterior dural tears associated with lumbar burst fractures were first reported by Miller et al. Under axial loading (fall from a height) the pedicles and the posterior elements splay laterally and the bone is retropulsed from the vertebral body, which can cause the dura to protrude between the lamina fracture fragments. After dissipation of axial loading, the nerve roots and the dura are entrapped There is a correlation between the level of the spinal fracture and the probability of neurological deficit. More cranial levels of fracture have a higher probability of neurological deficit We found that there is an association between the occurrence of compete lamina fracture and the dural tear (57%, 12 patients) with neural entrapment ratio (33.3%, 7 patients). Whereas the association of incomplete lamina fracture and dural tear was (28.5%, 4 patients) with neural entrapment ratio (15.3%, 2 patients). This finding may alert the surgeon if he or she observes a complete lamina fracture in an upper lumbar burst fracture. Through intact spinal ligaments and discs, a partial fracture reduction will be induced when the patient is put in a supine position during initial care and transport. Extension does not widen the spinal canal in an unfractured spinal column In the literature many patients develop progressive instability characterized by progressive kyphosis, back pain and neurological squeal The improvements observed in the radiological parameter (anterior vertebral body height, local kyphotic angle) measured in the immediate postoperative period and at the final follow-up are, with a few exceptions, comparable with those reported elsewhere Any reduction manoeuvre will close the lamina fracture and crush the entrapped neural elements. Therefore, it is important to evaluate whether there is any neural entrapment This study consisted of 112 patients and included all upper lumbar burst fractures involving the middle column, not just Denis Type B fractures, so even though this study is retrospective it expands on the current knowledge of this treatment. In this upper lumbar burst fracture series, no significant differences were found in vertebral height restoration and local kyphotic angle between incomplete lamina fracture patients group 3 and patients without lamina fracture (group 1). However a significant association between the presence of a complete lamina fracture (group 2) and the insufficiency of anterior vertebral height and local kyphotic angle restoration when compared to other groups (group 1, 3) and this is maybe due to the high axial trauma accompanying complete type lamina fractures which leads to a disruption in the effectiveness of ligamentotaxis to restore the vertebral height while performing reduction. This finding can be added as a severity marker to the complete type lamina fracture in upper lumbar burst fractures and may alert the surgeon to decide the appropriate surgical intervention required to restore the spine chain in a proper way. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.