 Ankle fractures are described by the number of malleoli involved: Single malleolar fracture is a lateral or medial malleolar fracture. Bimalleolar fracture is a fracture of both the medial malleolus and the lateral malleolus. Trimalleolar fracture is a fracture of the lateral malleolus, medial malleolus, and posterior aspect of the distal tibial articular surface. There are two major classification systems for ankle fractures: the Weber/AO classification and the Lauge-Hansen classification (more complex). Fractures are classified in order to dictate treatment, simplify communication between medical personnel treating the fracture, and predict outcome. The Weber/AO classification is the simplest method to classify ankle fractures: Weber A—below the level of the syndesmosis Weber B—at or near the level of the syndesmosis; 50% have disruption of the syndesmosis Weber C—above the level of the syndesmosis; <50% have disruption of the syndesmosis The four Lauge-Hansen classes are (the first term in parentheses refers to the foot position and the second term describes the external force applied to the ankle): Supination-Adduction (SA, 10% to 20%)  Pronation-Abduction (PA, 5% to 20%) Pronation-External Rotation (PER, 5% to 20%)  Intra-articular displacement of the distal tibial surface of 2 mm or more requires surgical intervention. Distal tibiofibular ligament rupture causing widening of the ankle mortise is an indication for surgery. Any injury that causes two breaks in the ankle joint “ring” requires surgery. The ankle is a hinge joint in which the malleoli are connected to the talus through the collateral ligaments. Bimalleolar fractures are inherently unstable and require surgical stabilization. A fibular fracture combined with a deltoid ligament tear is a bimalleolar equivalent fracture and also requires surgery. Any fracture that allows the talus to shift laterally or medially in the mortise is treated surgically. Ankle fractures that involve only one malleolar disruption and do not disturb the stability of the ankle mortise are treated nonoperatively; the patient wears a short-leg walking cast or fracture boot for 4 to 6 weeks.   Tibiofibular clear space should be <5 mm Tibiofibular overlap should be <10 mm  Assess joint line, talus, calcaneus, and posterior tibial fracture  Tibiofibular line should be continuous Talocrural angle—normally 8 to 15 degrees or within 2 to 3 degrees of opposite side Talar tilt—0 ± 1.5 degrees; talus may tilt upward to 5 degrees in a normal ankle with inversion stress Medial clear space—normally equal to the superior clear space (should be <4 mm) Tibiofibular overlap should be <1 mm  Mortise view with inversion stress—talar tilt is normally <5 mm; twofold difference from uninjured ankle is abnormal; tear <10 to 15 degrees indicates tear of the anterior talofibular ligament (ATFL) and calcaneofibular ligament (CFL) Lateral view with anterior drawer—anterior talar shift <8 to 10 mm indicates ATFL tear  Potential complications after open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) include nonunion (about twice as common in diabetic patients), malunion, wound breakdown (2% to 3%), infection (2%), reflex sympathetic dystrophy, and arthritis (10% in anatomic reductions, 90% with malreduction).  Maisonneuve—pronation-external rotation fracture with fracture of the proximal fibula Curbstone—isolated posterior malleolus fracture Le Fort-Wagstaffe—anterior fibular avulsion, supination-external rotation injury Tillaux-Chaput—anterior tibial avulsion  Nutcracker fracture—avulsion fracture of the navicular with comminuted compression fracture of the cuboid Pilon—high-energy compression fracture through tibial plafond (≈50% develop arthrosis or other major complication; ≈26% require fusion)  Talar neck fractures usually result from hyperdorsiflexion injury, as in a motor vehicle accident or fall from a height. Hawkins classified the different types of fracture patterns as follows: Type I—vertical nondisplaced talar neck fracture Type II—displaced fracture with subluxation or dislocation of the subtalar joint Type III—type II with talotibial dislocation Type IV—type III with talonavicular dislocation  Treatment is usually surgical in light of problems with late displacement and prolonged immobilization. The risk of avascular necrosis (AVN) increases with Hawkins type (type I = 0% to 13%, type II = 20% to 50%, type III = 20% to 100%). Approximately 40% to 90% of patients suffer late arthritis.  This radiographic view provides optimal visualization of the talar neck. The radiograph is taken with the foot in maximal plantar flexion and pronated at 15 degrees; the x-ray tube is directed 15 degrees cephalad to the vertical.  Broden's view—foot in neutral and leg internally rotated 30 to 40 degrees. Views are angled 10, 20, 30, and 40 degrees cephalad. Broden's view allows visualization of the posterior facet but has largely been replaced by CT scan. Bohler's angle—first line from anterior calcaneus to highest posterior articular surface and second line from posterior articular surface to posterior tubercle. The normal angle is 25 to 40 degrees. A decreased angle indicates posterior facet collapse. Angle of Gissane—formed by the two cortical struts, one along the posterior facet and the other to the anterior process of the calcaneus. The normal angle is approximately 140 degrees. An increased angle indicates posterior facet collapse.  Surgical treatment generally provides better outcomes than nonoperative treatment. Nonoperative treatment includes casting and strict non–weight-bearing for 6 to 8 weeks, followed by progression of weight-bearing. Surgical treatment is ORIF. Complications include arthritis, peroneal impingement (10% to 20%), widening of heel, decreased dorsiflexion, weak plantar flexion, leg length discrepancy, wound dehiscence, and sural nerve injury. Approximately 65% of patients are limited in vigorous or sports activities, 50% are able to ambulate over any surface, and 40% are unable to return to previous employment.  Bipartite sesamoids occur in 10% to 30% of the population and may be easily confused with an acute fracture. Bipartite sesamoids are bilateral in 85% of cases, have smooth sclerotic borders, and exhibit no callus after several weeks of immobilization.  A pilon fracture is an intra-articular fracture of the distal tibia produced by dorsiflexion and/or axial loading forces. The term The Ruedi-Allgower classification describes pilon fractures as follows: Type I—nondisplaced Type II—displaced Type III—displaced with joint surface comminution and impaction The recommended treatment of displaced fractures is surgery. In low-energy fractures without significant soft tissue energy and swelling, ORIF is indicated 10 to 14 days after soft tissue swelling subsides.  The most frequent complication following pilon fracture treatment is posttraumatic arthritis (50% to 70%). Other complications include wound healing problems, dehiscence, nonunion, malunion, and pin tract infections. In type III fractures, the goal is often to achieve soft tissue healing and sufficient bony healing of the metaphyseal bone to allow fusion at a later date.  Talar osteochondral fracture (a divot fracture involving bone and cartilage usually from the anterolateral or posteromedial talar dome) Lateral talar process fracture Anterior calcaneal process fracture Posterior talar process fracture “Flake fracture” of the posterior distal fibular rim, indicating a tear of the superior peroneal retinaculum and peroneal tendon dislocation Navicular fracture Lateral or medial malleolar fracture  A stress or fatigue fracture is a break that develops in bone after cyclical, submaximal loading. In states of increased physical activity, bone is resorbed faster than it is replaced, which results in physical weakening of the bone and the development of microfractures. With continued physical stress these microfractures coalesce to form a complete stress fracture. Middle-aged and older adult patients with osteoporosis, diagnosed with a T score of lower than −2.5 on dual photon spectrometry (DXA scan), are also at risk for stress fractures. Amenorrheic athletes are predisposed to stress fractures; amenorrhea is present in up to 20% of vigorously exercising women and may be as high as 50% in elite runners and dancers.  Common locations for foot stress fractures are the metatarsals, calcaneus, and navicular. Distal tibial stress fractures and lateral malleolar fractures are less common. Symptoms of stress fracture are localized pain and swelling with weight-bearing of insidious onset. A thin sclerotic line may be seen in a stress fracture of metaphyseal bone. Although initial radiographs may be negative, a technetium bone scan is positive as early as 48 to 72 hours after onset of symptoms.  Any displaced calcaneal fracture should be evaluated with a CT scan to determine the degree of posterior facet displacement and comminution. The Sanders' classification uses CT scanning in the coronal plane to describe the number of posterior facet fragments and their location. Sanders  The calcaneus is the most fractured tarsal bone. Approximately 75% of calcaneal fractures are intra-articular. Approximately 10% of patients have associated fractures of the spine, 25% have extremity injuries, 10% are bilateral, and 5% are open.  Nondisplaced fracture—Six weeks of splinting, elevation, non–weight-bearing, and early motion typically yield excellent results. Open calcaneal fractures—Immediate operative debridement, intravenous antibiotics, and splinting are the course of treatment. No internal fixation or limited percutaneous fixation is used in open fractures because of the significant risk of wound dehiscence, infection, chronic osteomyelitis, and amputation. Contraindications include insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, neuropathy, vascular dysfunction, venous stasis, and localized dermatitis. Relative contraindications include cigarette smoking, poor bone quality, and older or inactive patients.  Young, active patients with closed noncomminuted fractures are potential candidates for ORIF through an extensile lateral L-shaped incision. Surgery is performed 10 to 21 days after fracture to allow time for edema reduction. Type II and III fractures have shown good to excellent results in 70% to 85% of patients following this protocol. This compares favorably to 40% to 60% acceptable results following nonoperative management. A splint is used postoperatively until wound healing is documented; then early motion is begun. Weight-bearing is delayed for 8 to 10 weeks.  In the foot the bones at risk for AVN are the talus and the navicular. The talus is 60% to 70% articular cartilage and has no tendinous attachments. Most of the talar body blood supply enters the undersurface of the talar neck and flows posteriorly. The talus is at particular risk for osteonecrosis with displaced fractures of the talar neck. The weakened bone of the osteonecrotic segment of the talar dome may then collapse, causing pain and arthritis in the ankle and subtalar joints. In some instances, talar osteonecrotic segments will heal spontaneously over a course of 2 to 3 years in a process known as “creeping substitution,” in which the dead bone is resorbed and replaced by live bone. The large articular surface area of the navicular also limits blood supply to the dorsal and plantar aspects. Blood perfusion is diminished to the central third of the navicular. AVN with late partial collapse of the navicular is common in comminuted navicular fractures.  The Lisfranc joint, or tarsometatarsal joint, consists of the articulations between the five metatarsals, three cuneiforms, and cuboid. Stability is enhanced by the archlike configuration of the joint in the coronal plane and by the dorsal and plantar tarsometatarsal and intermetatarsal ligaments. The recessed second metatarsal base is connected to the medial cuneiform by the important Lisfranc ligament. Most Lisfranc injuries occur by forceful external rotation and pronation of the foot. A fall onto a maximally plantar-flexed foot can cause dorsal displacement of the metatarsals. Direct crushing injuries are less frequent causes of Lisfranc injury.  Lisfranc injuries are classified into three injury patterns: Homolateral—All metatarsals are displaced in the same direction. Divergent—Metatarsals are displaced in both sagittal and coronal planes in differing directions. Isolated—One or more metatarsals are separated from the remaining Lisfranc complex. An anatomic reduction is required for the best result. Despite anatomic fixation, some patients will develop posttraumatic arthritis requiring fusion at a later date. Fifty percent of patients will have some long-term disability.  A Jones fracture is a fracture of the fifth metatarsal base at the metaphyseal-diaphyseal junction. Because this fracture occurs in a watershed area of blood supply, these fractures are notorious for delayed unions and nonunions. Acute, nondisplaced fractures are treated with 4 to 6 weeks of non–weight-bearing cast immobilization followed by protected weight-bearing in a fracture boot until complete healing occurs. Delayed union and nonunions are treated with percutaneous intramedullary screw fixation. Acute, displaced fractures are treated with open reduction and internal fixation. Avulsion fractures of the metatarsal tuberosity proximal to the fourth to fifth articulation predictably heal with a weight-bearing fracture boot or hard-soled shoe. Intra-articular fractures displaced more than 2 to 3 mm may require surgery in high-demand patients.  A Charcot or neuropathic arthropathy is a process of chronic, noninfective, painless joint destruction. Charcot first described this condition associated with tabes dorsalis in 1868. Approximately 0.1% to 0.5% of diabetic patients will develop a neuroarthropathic joint. Two theories explain the development of a Charcot joint. The neurotraumatic theory states that decreased protective sensation and cumulative mechanical trauma lead to fracture and joint destruction. The neurovascular theory states that a neurally initiated vascular reflex leads to increased resorption by osteoclasts. Studies have shown increased osteoclastic activity without a concomitant increase in osteoblastic bone formation in the feet of diabetic patients. The presenting symptoms of a Charcot foot include the spontaneous onset of a warm, swollen foot associated with no pain or vague pain. The midfoot is most commonly involved followed by the hindfoot and ankle. The midfoot will lose its arch over time and the forefoot will dorsiflex and abduct, producing a rocker-bottom foot deformity. The patient is then predisposed to plantar ulceration of the prominent plantar arch. The ankle will develop a significant varus or valgus deformity with eventual corresponding pressure ulceration over the prominent malleolus. Early radiographs may show osteopenia with intact joints. Later radiographs will show fractures, joint subluxation or dislocation, bone destruction and fragmentation. The following clinical and radiographic stages of Charcot joints have been described: Stage 0—neuropathic patient with a history of sprain or fracture Stage 1—inflammatory stage with edema, hyperemia, erythema, and bone fragmentation on x-ray Stage 2—reparative stage with less swelling and erythema; radiographs show new bone formation at site of fracture and dislocation Stage 3—consolidation phase with resolution of swelling; radiographs show bony healing of fractures and dislocations  Fractures of the talus are characterized by location. The different types of fractures are talar body fractures, fractures of the lateral talar process, fractures of the posterior talar process, osteochondral fractures of the talar dome, and talar neck fractures. Any of these fractures may be misdiagnosed as an ankle sprain.  Type I—nondisplaced vertical fracture of talar neck Type II—displaced talar neck fracture with subluxation or dislocation of the subtalar joint Type III—displaced talar neck fracture with dislocation of both subtalar and ankle joints Type IV—type III fracture with talonavicular subluxation or dislocation  Type I fractures of the talar neck are treated with immobilization for 3 months. Type II to IV fractures are treated with closed reduction. If an acceptable reduction is achieved, non–weight-bearing cast immobilization is used for 3 months. In the case of displaced fractures, which are irreducible, open reduction and screw fixation is indicated. Outcomes related to talar fractures treated with ORIF have demonstrated an incidence of osteoarthritis of up to 100%, osteonecrosis 50%, and nonunion 12%.  Hawkins sign is the appearance of talar dome subchondral atrophy or lucency on the ankle AP view at 6 to 8 weeks following talar fracture. This indicates that the talar body is vascular and excludes the diagnosis of osteonecrosis. If the talar body appears more dense and sclerotic than the surrounding bone, then osteonecrosis is present.  Osteochondral talar dome fractures or talar osteochondritis dessicans lesions are believed to be caused by trauma, although idiopathic avascular necrosis may also be a factor. Location in the talar dome is either posteromedial or anterolateral. The classic Brendt and Harty classification is based on plain radiographic appearance and is most commonly used to classify these lesions: Type I—compression of subchondral bone Type II—incomplete fracture Type III—complete, nondisplaced fracture Type IV—completely detached, displaced fragment These lesions are best evaluated by CT scan or MRI. More recent CT classifications include subchondral cystic lesions in the talar dome.  Initial treatment is immobilization of nondisplaced acute lesions (types I to III); type IV fractures require surgery. Ankle arthroscopy allows inspection and treatment of the lesion with removal of loose cartilage or bone and drilling of the subchondral bone to stimulate growth of fibrocartilage. In cystic lesions with intact articular cartilage, drilling and bone grafting can be achieved through the talar body. For lesions larger than 1 cm  When a foot is subjected to significant blunt trauma, crush injuries, or high-energy fracture, swelling occurs that leads to increased compartment pressure. Pressures greater than 30 to 40 mm Hg for longer than 8 hours result in permanent muscle injury, loss of sensation, and muscle contractures. The foot has five muscle compartments—medial, central, lateral, interosseous, and calcaneal. Classic signs of compartment syndrome are swelling, pain out of proportion to injury, pain on passive stretch of toes, and paresthesias or sensory loss. Loss of pulse or poor capillary refill is not a sign of compartment syndrome, but of vascular compromise. Definitive diagnosis is made by