This paper describes a novel sensitivity analysis method, able to handle dependency relationships between model parameters. The starting point is the popular Morris (1991) algorithm, which was initially devised under the assumption of parameter independence. This important limitation is tackled by allowing the user to incorporate dependency information through a copula. The set of model runs obtained using latin hypercube sampling, are then used for deriving appropriate sensitivity measures.
                  Delft3D-WAQ (Deltares, 2010) is a sediment transport model with strong correlations between input parameters. Despite this, the parameter ranking obtained with the newly proposed method is in accordance with the knowledge obtained from expert judgment. However, under the same conditions, the classic Morris method elicits its results from model runs which break the assumptions of the underlying physical processes. This leads to the conclusion that the proposed extension is superior to the classic Morris algorithm and can accommodate a wide range of use cases.Suspended particulate matter (SPM) is composed of fine-grained particles of both inorganic and organic origin, which are suspended in the water column. This material plays an important role in the ecology of coastal areas, as it influences the underwater light conditions (directly connected to the phytoplankton growth), the amount of nutrients in the water, the material transfers to the seabed and other environmental processes. As such, the SPM concentration plays a crucial role in the dynamics of aquatic ecosystems. At the same time, the increasing number of human activities along the shorelines (fishing, sand and gravel extraction, tourism, industry) often disturb the natural equilibrium of the sediment transport processes. To assess and monitor the possible impacts on the sediment transport patterns, models are used to estimate and forecast their movement, under the combined action of both natural factors and human interference. The current study concerns the southern North Sea area, a marine system significantly affected by SPM, since it receives the run-off from major rivers and coastal industries. This area has seen rising interest in the scientific community ( However, calibrating this model is made difficult by the large number of input parameters, some of which are strongly correlated, due to physical constraints. Also, the high running time for one simulation - approximately 11 h in full resolution and 3 h on a coarse grid - imposes additional restrictions on the calibration efforts. This gave rise to the question of whether the model parameters can be ranked, such that the calibration process can be focused on only the subset to which the output is most sensitive. The remaining parameters can be fixed to their maximum likelihood values (determined, for example, using an expert judgment exercise). According to This paper proposes an extension to Morris' method which opens the possibility to control the sampling pattern of the necessary model runs for sensitivity analysis, based on prior information about dependencies between model parameters. More specifically, this work incorporates this information into the sampling strategy of the elementary effects in the Morris method. The dependencies can be specified in terms of parameter correlations or, more precisely, by providing their joint distribution. This leads to the construction of the corresponding copula The application on the computationally expensive Delft 3D-WAQ sediment transport model confirms that the method is able to provide physically sound results regarding the parameter ranking, even in cases where the feasible number of simulations is limited. This confirms the relevance of the method in identifying the parameters having the strongest impact on the variability of the model predictions. The content of the paper is structured as follows. First, the Delft3D-WAQ sediment transport model and the dependence relationships between the governing model parameters are introduced. Next, the classic Morris sensitivity analysis method is reviewed, which presents the opportunity to devise a geometrical reinterpretation of its elementary effect sampling strategy, separating it into three successive stages. This new insight leads to the formulation of mechanisms to constrain each stage of Morris method, by incorporating the prior information about parameter dependencies in the form of a joint distribution with corresponding copula. In Section With an extensive history of maritime commerce, the North Sea is one of the most intensively traversed sea areas. It is bordered by highly industrialized and densely populated countries, which are actively engaged in mineral extraction, diking, land reclamation and other activities. The main sources of sediments are the Dover straits, the Atlantic Ocean, river bed and coastal erosion ( For example, the breaking waves in the near-shore areas, together with various horizontal and vertical current patterns are constantly transporting beach sediments. Sometimes, this transport results in only a local rearrangement of sand. However, under certain conditions, extensive displacements of sediments along the shore take place, possibly moving hundreds of thousands of cubic meters of sand along the coast each year. During calm weather conditions, the SPM settles and mixes with the upper bed layers. Subsequently, strong near-bed currents, generated by tides or high surface waves, can trigger the resuspension of the SPM from the seabed into the water column. The Delft3D-WAQ ( Recently, Delft3D-WAQ has been extended with an improved parametrization of the resuspension and buffering of the silt fractions (related to both The buffer model contains two bed layers, each interacting with the water column in a specific way ( The deposition towards the layers Under certain conditions, resuspension events from the two layers occur. For the fluffy mud layer These parameters and their relationships are further detailed in the next paragraph. The results presented in this paper were obtained using version 4.5208 (released on 12-08-2010) of the Delft3D-WAQ model. The Delft3D-WAQ model captures the effect of complex mechanical, chemical and biological processes involved in the sediment transport system. Consequently, a total of 71 input parameters need to be specified in order to setup a simulation scenario. However, for the purposes of the current study, only the 14 parameters which govern the deposition/resuspension processes described earlier, will be considered for sensitivity analysis. They are listed in The values of the 14 parameters need to respect the physical laws and empirical relations governing the fluxes of sediment within and between the water column and the seabed. More specifically, the long term equilibrium between the buffer capacity (sediment in the an increase in parameter the parameters parameters This leads to the specification of 7 pairs (as given in are completely rank-correlated vary in the same or opposite directions (according to the rank-correlation) vary simultaneously Correlations between parameters belonging to different pairs are considered by experts as insignificant, hence independence is assumed. This amounts to a very sparse correlation matrix, with 7 non-zero correlations. The purpose of the sensitivity analysis is to identify the most important deposition/erosion parameters to be later used to calibrate the model against measured data. For this purpose, this paragraph will introduce a suitable sensitivity objective function. The model computes the total SPM concentration in each water surface grid cell on an hourly basis (calculated as the summation of the concentration of the three sediment fractions). In addition to this, SPM measurements retrieved from the optical remote sensing system ESA MERIS are available. This system supplies data from the visible, upper part of the water column, during the overpass of the Envisat satellite over the North Sea, occurring nominally once per day between 9:00 and 12:00 a.m. UTC. As SPM is a natural constituent of water, it affects the color of the sea. Therefore, the SPM concentrations in the water surface layer (several meters) can be derived from satellite snapshots, using the VU-IVM HYDROPT algorithm ( This allows the model error, The results of the sensitivity study will be detailed in the following paragraphs. In this section, the concept of the classic Morris method is briefly presented, followed by a detailed discussion on the interpretation of the Morris sensitivity measures. Given a model, This technique enables the identification of the model parameters After performing the sensitivity analysis, efforts can then be focused on calibration and fine-tuning of the parameters in category (c), while keeping the other parameters fixed to predefined values. Therefore, in its classic formulation, the Morris method is, essentially, a screening technique. The Morris method ( In order to measure the The interpretation of The analysis described above implies performing a total of The choices for A short introduction to copulas is presented in the next section. A copula is a joint distribution, defined on an The joint cumulative distribution function The most popular copulas used in practice are Gaussian, Student-t and copulas from the Archimedean family. In The Morris method ( As discussed before, the elementary paths are the building blocks of the Morris method. Without loss of generality, consider the case when the Morris step is equal to one cell, i.e. The copula-based method relies on the key observation that the sampling of a path can be done, equivalently, in the following three steps:    For example, the path in If the Morris step is higher than one grid cell (7), the only difference is that the path is drawn on the contour of a This geometric interpretation allows us to compute the total number of possible paths on the unit hypercube as: The position of the grid block containing an elementary path gives the range of values within which the parameters are varied sequentially to compute elementary effects. Previous studies state that having the paths sufficiently spread within the unit hypercube is vital for the results of the analysis. For this purpose, The goal of the new method is to constrain the sampling of the blocks in accordance to the available information about parameter dependencies. To this end, the first step is to specify a copula ( For example, in Finally, the vector containing the coordinates of the origin of the target cell (i.e. its lower-left corner) is determined as: Note that, by the nature of LHSD, the number of samples needs to be a multiple the size of the hypercube. However, sensitivity studies may require an arbitrary number of samples. To maintain the flexibility of the Morris method, the LHSD algorithm can be repeated several times, until there is a sufficient number of samples (the excess can be discarded). For each sampled grid block, The advantage of using a copula is that the marginal distributions of the factors are removed through marginal transformation or linear scaling. The marginal probability of each factor Hence when Consider the This procedure can be used to compute distributions of corner points for each cell on the grid. However, for large Finally, after the starting corner is determined, the corresponding elementary path will end in the opposite corner, since it is composed of one elementary effect for each parameter. For convenience, each of the grid cell's corners are assigned a binary representation, starting with (0,0,0) in the origin (see The order of traversal is given by a randomly sampled permutation To conclude, the copula-based Morris method follows the following outline:  A model that takes A copula The number of levels, The number of desired paths,  Define the grid as a Sample Compute the rank statistics (12). Compute the LHSD samples (13), which represent the grid blocks. For each grid block, determine the start and corresponding end point, as explained in paragraph 5.2. Determine the order of traversal of the path's segments by sampling a permutation, Evaluate the model at each point along the paths and compute the elementary effects (6). Compute and interpret the sensitivity measures The methodology proposed in section Since the Delft3D-WAQ model is computationally expensive (3 h run time on a coarse grid and 11 h for a fine grid), the number of simulations that can be performed for sensitivity analysis is limited. Therefore, the parameter space (unit hypercube) was divided into For the sake of comparison, a separate set of simulations was performed, where the parameters were sampled using Morris' classic algorithm (thus, assuming complete independence). The comparative results are depicted in The results of the copula-based Morris method match the expectations induced by the physics of the system and defined during the expert judgment exercise. The parameters to which the model is most sensitive to (presented in pairs) are, in this order:    As seen in On the other hand, the results of the classic Morris method rank the first-order resuspension rate for medium particles The comparison shows that, under the assumption of independence, the dominant process is the resuspension from layer Computer-based models for real-life processes often consist of systems of numerous nonlinear equations, with deterministic, as well as stochastic variables. Increases in the level of detail or accuracy within these models often imply an explosion in the number of degrees of freedom, sometimes to the point where a high number of simulations becomes unfeasible even on modern computing hardware. This paper explored the prospect of performing sensitivity analysis on the Delft3D-WAQ sediment transport model, aiming to identify the parameters that have the strongest effects on the variability of the model predictions. The complexity and non-linearity of the model, along with the engagement of a great number of parameters, led to the application of the Morris method, due to its versatility and computational efficiency. An extension to Morris' classical method was proposed, allowing it to incorporate prior information about the dependence structure between model parameters into the sampling strategy. The extended method introduces copulas, which can accommodate a wide range of dependence constraints and are generally applicable. The sensitivity analysis results correspond well with the expected behavior and dynamics of sediment transport in shallow waters. More specifically, the analysis revealed that the critical shear stress and the factor responsible for re-suspension from the sandy layer The results of the sensitivity analysis applied for a set of dependent parameters demonstrate the potential use of the extended Morris method in determining the key driving factors of a complex model. The method may be representative for similar studies of complex models worldwide and has been implemented in a generic approach. To that end, the Matlab code used to obtain the results presented in this paper is openly available ( The dependence structure of parameters in the Delft3D-WAQ sediment transport model was very specific (complete positive/negative dependence between pairs of factors). This type of dependencies lead to exactly the same sensitivity behavior of these factors. However the method can accommodate other dependence structures, as well as complicated joint distributions of factors in the model. It would be of great importance to test the methodology presented in this paper for different types of models. The authors would like to acknowledge Deltares for their openness in providing access to the Delft 3D-WAQ sediment transport model and their approval and technical support for the simulations necessary to obtain the results presented in this study.