The effect of physicochemical factors on laterite ore leaching in hydrochloric acid was investigated in this study. The results showed that the valuable metals such as nickel and cobalt could be extracted effectively at the leaching conditions as follows: acid concentration was 8mol/L, the particle size of samples were 100% passing 0.15mm, the stirring speed was 300rpm, leaching temperature was 353K, S/L ratio was 1:4 and leaching duration was 2h. The extraction of nickel and iron presented a linear correlation, which demonstrated nickel associated in iron ore, and cobalt dissolution was not consistent with iron dissolution which indicated that the distribution of cobalt were not uniform in the iron oxide crystals and existed in other minerals, and this result had also been demonstrated by mineralogical studies. To investigate the stability of different minerals in the leaching condition listed above as well as the influence of nickel and cobalt on their dissolution in such condition, the minerals dissolution order was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) according to determination of the leaching residues and chemical composition of the leaching solution, and the result order was goethite>lizardite>magnetite>hematite.Nickel was a strategic metal and mainly used in the preparation of stainless steel and non-ferrous alloys with impact strength, corrosion resistance and other electrical, heat and magnetic properties. Nickel was also used in batteries, fuel cells, electroplating and etc. ( Several leaching methods using various acids were studied ( In this study, the leaching conditions of laterite using hydrochloric acid at atmospheric pressure were investigated. In particular, the impact factors on the dissolution of nickel, cobalt, manganese, iron and magnesium, such as reaction time, temperature, particle size, S/L (solid/liquid) ratio (wt./vol), stirring speed and hydrochloric acid concentration were studied. Mineralogical analyses of the raw laterite and the leaching residues, which were an essential step to investigate the leaching mechanism, were used to study the observed metal dissolution behavior. The dissolution order of minerals was also studied to investigate the stability of different minerals and the influence of dissolution of nickel and cobalt under the proposed leaching condition. The ores tested in this study originated from Yunnan province in China. Chemical analyses of the dried lateritic ores carried out with chemical analysis, Inductively Coupled Plasma (ICP) and X-Ray Fluorescence (XRF), the result were given in A computerized X-ray diffraction equipment (XRD, Rint-2000, Rigaku) using Cu K-alpha was employed to identify components of raw ore from 5° to 85° ( 50 The prepared hydrochloric acid as leach solutions in desired concentration were placed into the glass balloon. Once the desired temperature was achieved, the ore sample was added from the feed opening, kept stirred at a constant speed by a Teflon coated magnet at the desired temperature for the required duration. At the end of leaching process, the leached ore was filtered and washed with distilled water using a Büchner funnel. Pregnant and wash water were collected and kept constant volume. The concentration of magnesium was analyzed by Mg-Ca joint titration, and the concentration of iron was titrated in potassium permanganate methods. Nickel, cobalt and manganese were analyzed with the help of atomic absorption techniques type of Ruili-wfx120. Leach residues were dried at 105 A series of leaching experiments were carried out under following conditions, temperature (353 It could be seen in  Hematite in the residue was detectable by XRD at 2θ angle of 33.6° and 54.1°. Some hematite peaks were only observed after goethite partially dissolved. In In order to determine the effect of particle size on metals extraction, the lateritic ore samples ground to 100% − In order to study the extraction of metals at different temperatures, 323 According to the results given in As shown in  Different S/L ratios for ores were also tested under the following conditions, such as acid concentration (8  Different leaching duration for ores were tested under the following optimized conditions, acid concentration (8  The results suggested that nickel and cobalt could be recovered from laterite at atmospheric pressure in hydrochloric acid. The dissolution of nickel, cobalt manganese, magnesium and iron were 92.3 The project was sponsored by