Although many aspects of the fracturing process of concrete are now well understood and successfully simulated with various models, it is still very difficult to properly simulate the different failure mechanisms observed in a concrete structure induced by ballistic impact. In this paper, an enhanced version of the effective-rate-dependent nonlocal damage model [Eng. Fracture Mechanics, 176 (2017)] is proposed to simulate the response of concrete in such events. Hydrostatic damage has been added to the formulation in order to take the damage of the material matrix observed while porosity reduces during compaction into account. Besides controlling the evolution of the nonlinear volumetric response of the material, this new damage variable contributes to the deterioration of the material stiffness upon confinement.
                  It is demonstrated that the description of the nonlinear volumetric response of concrete by an equation of state (EOS) as a plasticity phenomenon, as it is commonly done in hydrodynamic constitutive modeling, is unrealistic for concrete. Such formulations fail to represent the effect of the loss of cohesion observed during compaction on the deviatoric response of the material. By taking this phenomenon into consideration, the proposed model systematically predicts the relevant failure modes (cratering, tunneling, radial cracking and spalling) observed during ballistic impact on a concrete plate as a function of the projectile velocity and plate thickness.Extraordinary actions such as blast loadings and high velocity impact are rare, but usually have devastating effects. Thus, making critical infrastructures, such as military and governmental facilities, power-plants, dams, bridges, hospitals, etc., more resilient against these hazards is one of the best ways to protect ourselves and our societies. Since concrete is a very common construction material, the development of realistic numerical tools to efficiently simulate its failure behavior under extreme dynamic loading conditions is of paramount importance, but still a major challenge The capacity of a concrete structure to withstand these impulsive loads is mainly dictated by how it dissipates the incoming energy. For example, in the particular case of ballistic impact, a pressure wave is induced which expands radially through the structural element, leading to a complex process of interfering stress waves. Consequently, the material is exposed to rapidly changing multiaxial stress states and strain rate conditions. The material may fail locally Many aspects of the fracturing process of quasi-brittle and brittle materials, such as the propagation and branching of individual cracks and spalling, are now well understood and successfully simulated with various models (e.g. plasticity It is well known that concrete behavior is highly affected by both pressure and strain rate. But, considering the complexity and short duration of these events, it is technically impossible to separate the contributions of each to the fracturing processes and strength increase Experimental evidences suggest that, above a critical strain rate (10 s  The hydrostatic tests in the same studies also help to explain the mechanisms behind the nonlinear volumetric behavior of concrete, and divide it in two stages. First, the strong volumetric deformation observed immediately after the elastic phase (zone These results highlight the fact that it is not realistic to separate the hydrostatic and deviatoric response of the material, as it is commonly done in most models used for impact problems A new isotropic damage model is proposed to simulate the response of concrete under ballistic impact. Three damage variables are used to describe the evolution of failure as a function of the stress state of the material (see After the description of the model in the following section ( The model presented hereafter is an extension of the recently proposed In the following section ( The damage laws for tension ( The equivalent strains are scalar variables which characterize the local strain state in tension and compression, respectively: It is important to notice that, compared to the previous version of the model When concrete is subjected to high confining pressures, compaction occurs by reducing the voids (air) in the mixture and the physical connections between aggregates are ruptured irreversibly. These two combined mechanisms lead to the observed nonlinear volumetric deformation of material and the variation of the tangent stiffness (i.e. bulk modulus In the absence of a full understanding of when these processes start and finish, for simplicity, both hydrostatic damage and compaction are described by identical power laws with the only difference being the exponent. The implementation of this formulation takes advantage of the used explicit computation scheme to determine the evolution of the effective pressure ( As described before, when a concrete-like material is subjected to pure hydrostatic loading, crushing and compaction may occur (see As schematically represented in The conceptual approach followed in this paper is schematically represented in As it is well known, concrete is a highly rate-dependent material. The observed variation of strength and fracture energy with rate is mainly caused by three phenomena: ( From the three damage modes described by the model proposed above, only Unlike what is commonly done in To overcome spurious mesh sensitivity, typical for standard ‘local’ damage models, a regularization scheme is needed. In this study, only the equivalent strains for tension and compression are regularized. These quantities are independently weight averaged considering the same interaction domain, determined according to an updated version of the stress-based nonlocal regularization scheme presented by Giry et al. As in any other nonlocal formulation of integral type, the stress response at a material Gauss point ( In a stress-based nonlocal formulation, the influence of the neighboring elements stress state is introduced in the description of the nonlocal interactions by updating the interaction length between the Gauss point In this section, a series of single finite element analyses is used to evaluate whether the quasi-static triaxial-compression and hydrostatic response of concrete improves with the addition of the new damage mode, The material was calibrated with the information available in the original publication  It is worth noting that these results are identical to the ones obtained with other models used for concrete based on plasticity or plastic-damage theories where the deviatoric and hydrostatic phases are treated separately. For example, see the simulated results of the same experiments in Fig. 6 in Pontiroli et al. Finally, It is important to notice that the response of the model in purely hydrostatic loading (see These results also suggest that the failure mode under triaxial loading conditions changes considerably with confinement. It can be seen that, although the contribution of For obvious practical reasons, when studying ballistic impact, researchers focus primarily on the influences of the concrete grade/quality, target geometry and impact velocity on the penetration depth or residual velocity of the projectile. Very few studies are dedicated to the analysis of the initiation and evolution of the different failure modes taking place during such events Although the targets are squared, the experiments were simulated with two dimensional axisymmetric models, as described in Considering the limited information about the mechanical properties of both projectile and target, some assumptions had to be made in order to calibrate the models. The parameters used to simulate the concrete target are summarized in The calibration of the nonlocal model is not a trivial task and therefore not discussed in this paper. For consistency with the authors previous work The projectile was simulated with two different material models: a rigid model ( The interaction between impactor and target was modeled by a penalty-based contact algorithm with a coefficient of friction  From the mesh sensitivity analysis shown in  These results show that a proper characterization of the impactor and the target are equally important. By comparing the final damage profiles of the rigid and elastoplastic projectiles, on the left and right of   In contrast to the good predictions of the failure modes, the model always overestimates the penetration depth (see Finally, as it was done in the single element triaxial study in These results (  In this contribution, a new isotropic damage model was used to investigate the dynamic response of concrete in ballistic impact situations. This formulation is an enhanced version of the Single element analyses of triaxial and hydrostatic tests, revealed that the description of the nonlinear volumetric response of concrete by an EOS as a plasticity phenomena disconnected from the deviatoric damage (or plastic-damage) formulation of the model, as it is commonly done in hydrodynamic constitutive modeling of concrete, is unrealistic. Such formulations fail to represent the effect of the loss of cohesion observed during compaction on the deviatoric response of the material. Although the deviatoric and hydrostatic parts of the model are treated separately in the proposed formulation, their interdependence is taken into account. This leads to a very realistic description of the triaxial and hydrostatic response of concrete. In the second part of the paper, a set of impact test were used to evaluate how the added damage mode ( This research is supported by the grant