Low-grade ultramafic nickel ores, while representing a large potential nickel resource, are difficult to process due to their high serpentine content. Serpentine is anisotropic and the mineral particles tend to be non-spherical, resulting in challenging slurry rheology. In general, suspensions of serpentine minerals have high viscosity and yield stress, which can be detrimental in comminution and flotation operations. It is proposed that ultramafic nickel ores be treated with microwave radiation prior to grinding in order to reduce slurry viscosity and yield stress. The rheology of two different ultramafic nickel ores, before and after microwave pre-treatment, was characterized in this work. Serpentine minerals were found to dominate the rheology of the untreated ultramafic nickel ores, with the ore containing minor chrysotile exhibiting higher viscosity and yield stress than the ore containing strictly lizardite serpentine. Microwave pre-treatment was found to greatly reduce the shear viscosity (average 80% reduction at 200s−1) and direct yield stress (peak yield stress reduced by 92–93%) of ultramafic nickel ore slurries. The reduction in slurry viscosity and yield stress of the ore slurries as a result of microwave pre-treatment was attributed to the conversion of serpentine to olivine.Interest in low-grade ultramafic nickel ores has increased in recent years as traditional high-grade nickel sulphide deposits are being depleted and laterite ores have proven technically difficult and costly to process ( Serpentine minerals are anisotropic and have three different surfaces that can be exposed in solution ( In mineral processing, high pulp viscosity and yield stress can be detrimental to comminution and flotation. The presence of serpentine minerals in ores has been shown to reduce grinding efficiency, necessitating that grinding be conducted at lower densities ( A new method of reducing the viscosity and yield stress of ultramafic nickel ore slurries is proposed: microwave pre-treatment. Microwave radiation is electromagnetic radiation with frequencies of 0.3–300 Upon exposure to microwave radiation, ultramafic nickel ores are heated, resulting in the dehydroxylation of serpentine and the formation of olivine (Eq. Olivine is a mineral composed of isolated SiO Two different ultramafic nickel ores were studied. The first ore was from the Okanogan nickel deposit in Washington State, USA (referred to as “OK ore”). The second was from the Vale-owned Pipe deposit located in the Thomson Nickel Belt (referred to as “Pipe ore”). The ores were crushed and sieved to isolate the 0.425–1 A 1000 100 After grinding, the solids content of the slurry samples was adjusted by adding or removing 10 Rheogram data was collected at 20 Direct yield stress measurements were collected using a rotational rheometer (TA Instruments ARES-2G) with the vane concentric cylinder attachment. Yield stress measurements were collected at varying pH values (pH 4-11) with constant slurry solids content (10 Shear stress and shear viscosity versus shear rate for microwave pre-treated and untreated OK and Pipe ores at pH 10 and 10, 20 and 30 For both the Pipe and OK ores, the shear stress and viscosity values observed at a given shear rate, as well as the modelled plateau (zero-shear) viscosities ( The shear stress and viscosity values observed at a given shear rate for the microwave pre-treated OK and Pipe ores were significantly reduced compared to those observed for untreated ores. Modelled plateau viscosities ( Direct yield stress measurements were conducted to further explore the rheology of ultramafic nickel ore slurries and the effect of microwave pre-treatment on slurry rheology. Yield stress as a function of slurry solids content for untreated and microwave pre-treated OK and Pipe ores is shown in Yield stress as a function of pH for untreated and microwave pre-treated OK and Pipe ore slurries are shown in The yield stress versus pH curves for chrysotile and lizardite are shown in Serpentine minerals have three different faces: a magnesium hydroxide basal plane, a silica basal plane and an edge, consisting of both magnesium and silica groups (  The direct yield stress values measured across the pH range for the microwave pre-treated OK and Pipe ores were greatly reduced compared to that observed for untreated ores. For the Pipe ore, microwave pre-treatment significantly reduced the yield stress of ore slurries across the pH range. The microwave pre-treated Pipe ore plateau yield stress was 93% lower than for the untreated material. Even with the reduction in yield stress, the microwave pre-treated Pipe ore yield stress versus pH curve was reflective of the chrysotile yield stress versus pH curve, indicating that even at very low concentrations, chrysotile still dominates slurry rheology. Microwave pre-treatment also reduced the yield stress of OK ore slurries at low and high pH (92% reduction at pH 10). At pH 8, where peak yield stress was observed for microwave pre-treated OK ore, yield stress values observed for untreated and microwave pre-treated material were of similar magnitudes. The peak yield stress of the microwave pre-treated OK ore at pH 8 appears to be due to the aggregation of olivine, which is negatively charged ( The rheology of two ultramafic ores, both primarily composed of serpentine, before and after microwave pre-treatment was studied. The serpentine present in the OK ore was of the lizardite form. The serpentine present in the Pipe ore was also mostly lizardite, although it also contained 1 This research was supported by Vale and a Collaborative Research and Development (CRD) Grant from