Suspension-firing enjoys the great popularity in biomass-fired heat and power generation. Since it has the strictest requirement on fuel quality and particle size, cares must be taken in biomass handling. This paper reviews, combined with concrete cases, the development in biomass preparation methods for suspension-firing: the processes and their impacts on critical issues in biomass suspension-firing. The first-generation preparation method, based on raw biomass, was successfully used for biomass suspension co-firing at low shares and nowadays is mainly used for other combustion technologies, due to the large particles it produces. The second-generation method, based on biopellets, is commonly used in existing suspension-firing plants. It can reduce biomass particle size to 85% < 1 mm (maximum 3 mm), ensuring good ignition and particle burnout. 100% biomass suspension-firing is mainly for high-quality biomass and often uses additives to mitigate corrosion. To improve fuel rangeability, the third-generation method will be prevailing. It includes extra thermal pre-treatment for increasing the energy density and grindability of the feedstock. Suspension-firing trials of torrefied biopellets are performed at several power plants. It is too costly in the present energy market and can be promoted by a future regulatory condition change in favor of alternative solid fuel sources.The depletion of fossil fuels, environmental pollution and global warming make it imperative to substantially increase the use of renewable energy sources. As the 4th largest global primary energy carrier following coal, oil and natural gas, biomass is the most abundant renewable energy source. Biomass for energy continues to be the main source of renewable energy in the EU with a share of 60% [ To date, biomass firing has been applied in more than 240 power plants globally. Biomass-fired heat and power generation involves activities throughout its entire value chain from biomass handling and storage, to biomass-firing system, and to ash and flue gas treatment, each of which imposes various scientific and technological challenges, as shown in Due to annual or seasonal fluctuations in biomass supply and great diversities in biomass properties, appropriate biomass handling to meet the requirement of the combustion system and safe storage to buffer the fuel supply is crucial for large-scale biomass deployment. Biomass is subject to intrinsic self-heating, caused by exothermic microbial reactions and chemical oxidation processes, which may lead to spontaneous ignition [ Among all biomass-firing systems, suspension-firing enjoys the popularity, which is used in approximately 50% of the biomass-fired power plants worldwide. Compared to other firing technologies, suspension-firing is characterized by high combustion temperatures, intensive mixing and very short residence time of fuel particles in furnaces. As a result, suspension-firing has the highest requirement on fuel quality (e.g., high calorific value, low ash and moisture content) and fuel particle fineness. However, solid biomass fuels often have relatively low calorific value and high ash and moisture content and are non-friable, which can induce various operation problems in pulverized fuel-fired plants, e.g., corrosion and ash utilization [ Among different groups of biomass, the mean ash yields increase in the following order: Wood and woody biomass < Herbaceous and agricultural biomass < Contaminated biomass and industrial biomass wastes < Aquatic biomass < Animal and human biomass wastes [ DT: Bituminous coal (1251 HT: Bituminous coal (1404 FT: Bituminous coal (1423 The higher the ash melting temperatures, the less severe the ash-induced operation problems will be. Because of the low ash content and high ash melting temperatures, wood and woody biomass and some herbaceous and agricultural biomass have a good potential of becoming the feedstock of suspension-firing boilers if they can be properly handled or prepared. With the development in biomass feedstock handling and ash-related problems mitigation, suspension-firing of biomass has recently advanced from co-firing to 100% biomass dust-firing in utility boilers. For example, Drax power plant, which is the largest power plant in the UK and consists of six 600 MW pulverized coal-fired units, has successfully converted four of its six units to 100% biomass firing, starting in 2013 and through August 2018 [ This paper presents a state-of-the-art review of the development in biomass preparation methods that have witnessed successful applications in power plants. Their impacts on some critical issues in suspension-firing, such as fuel particle size, particle burnout, ash usability, deposition and corrosion, are elaborated in combination with concrete cases. These issues will become increasingly critical when the biomass shares in suspension co-firing increase towards 100%. In order to facilitate suspension-firing of 100% biomass and accommodate biomass of various qualities, more efforts on biomass handling and preparation are needed, for which promising preparation methods are also briefly discussed. Biomass requires much more cares in handling/preparation and storage than coal does. For example, the fuel must be milled down to a certain size for suspension-firing, which is a challenging task for fibrous biomass material. Biomass must be kept dry all time: the pellets need to be scrapped if they become wet. The dust created during biomass preparation can be explosive. This paper mainly focuses on biomass preparation for particle size reduction as well as some relevant critical issues. In the first-generation preparation method, it is the raw biomass that is delivered to a power plant. Then the raw biomass is handled before being transported to the furnaces for combustion. When used for suspension-firing, this method is mainly for co-firing of biomass at low shares. The raw biomass received by the power plants passes through a handling system as sketched in For suspension co-firing of straw, the large straw bales, ca. 500 kg each, are first shredded automatically in a shredder to obtain a continuous flow of straw, which then passes through a hammer mill after stones and the likes are separated. In the hammer mill (with a usual screen or mesh size of 50 mm), the straw is crushed and fragmented by the rotating hammers on the rotor, as shown in The particles out of such a preparation process are much larger than those usually fired in pulverized fuel boilers. Even though biomass fuels often contain higher volatiles and less char and are more reactive than coals, so large particles may not be able to flow and mix with the gas and burn out within short residence times in a furnace. The use of this biomass preparation method for suspension co-firing biomass in utility boilers and the pros and cons are presented and discussed below. To co-fire wheat straw with natural gas in the 675 MW After the retrofit in May 2001, a 2-month demonstration of straw and natural gas co-firing was initiated. Straw feeding through the modified burners was tried at all the three burner levels with the aim to find the most effective way in terms of burnout and deposit formation. The co-firing tests started with the co-fired burner at the top level, then the middle and finally the bottom level. The main conclusions from the demonstration include: (i) co-firing straw and natural gas is not the most efficient way to utilize straw for electricity production, primarily due to the high flue gas temperatures at the furnace exit in natural gas-fired units and the low melting temperatures of straw ash, which can induce severe deposition and corrosion problems. (ii) The large straw particles prepared by the process in Comparatively, co-firing straw with coal is a more efficient way to produce electricity from straw. The silicon (Si) and aluminum (Al) in coal fly ash, as well as the sulfur (S) in coal, can bind the alkali from the straw and thus mitigate deposit formation and corrosion. Suspension co-firing straw and coal has been commercialized in utility boilers worldwide. In Denmark, there have been quite some co-firing campaigns, as reviewed in Ref. [ Unit 1, built in 1968, is a two-pass 150 MW After successful demo in unit 1, both unit 3 and unit 4 were converted to co-firing: unit 4 in 2002 and unit 3 in 2005. Units 3/4, originally built in 1985, are two 350 MW The biomass handling/preparation method sketched in Primarily because of the large particle sizes, the first-generation preparation method was only used in suspension co-firing of biomass at very low shares. When co-firing biomass at high shares or suspension firing of 100% biomass, the combustion system needs to be substantially modified, and/or the biomass preparation process needs to be greatly improved, in order to assure a good burnout and good ash usability. As a result, the second-generation biomass preparation method emerges and is commonly used nowadays. In most current retrofits for suspension co-firing of biomass, it is often biomass pellets (or briquettes occasionally) that are handled in power plants. The second-generation preparation includes pellets production in a pellet plant and then pellets milling and firing in a power plant. This preparation method can be used for suspension-firing of 100% high-quality biomass. Wood pellets production from raw biomass is well elaborated in Ref. [ To produce fine enough particles that can be burned out in pulverized fuel furnaces, the biomass pellets undergo a secondary milling at power plants in mills as sketched in A horizontal roller mill comprises of several conical rollers which are hydraulically pressed onto a horizontal rotating grinding table. The roller axis is inclined at 15 Though biomass pellets have a better grindability index [ In biomass suspension-firing trial in a power plant, commercially available wood pellets from different suppliers are mixed and ground in the traditional coal roller mills without reconfiguring their settings. The milled samples are collected from the pipeline to the burners. In the roller-milled wood pellet samples, two groups of large particles (nominal d In suspension-firing of 100% biomass, the size distribution and burnout of the fuel particles is much more critical than co-firing biomass at low shares. Efforts are made to characterize the ignition and burnout of biomass particles under conditions close to real pulverized fuel flames. For example, an experimental study is performed to investigate the ignition and burnout times of single biomass particles of various sizes and shapes in a gas burner flow reactor shown in  As mentioned previously, the largest power plant in Denmark – Avedøre power plant – has switched to 100% biomass-firing. The main boiler of unit 2 is an 800 MW The boiler has 16 circular low-NO Another critical issue in 100% biomass dust-firing, which is significantly different from suspension co-firing biomass with coal at low biomass shares, is deposition and corrosion. As explained above, when co-firing biomass with coal, the coal ash (mainly Si and Al in coal fly ash) and S in coal can effectively bind the alkali from biomass and thus mitigate deposit formation and corrosion. Such synergy effects were also confirmed in comprehensive testing [ Therefore, cares must be taken in design and operation to mitigate deposition and corrosion during 100% biomass dust-firing. Particulate matters emissions, deposition and corrosion in biomass-firing, and the corresponding mechanisms and/or measures to mitigate such operation problems, have been extensively researched in literature, as reviewed recently. For instance, modeling methods of ash formation and deposition during biomass combustion is reviewed in Ref. [ In principle, the ash-related problems in biomass combustion can be readily solved by cutting the relevant pathways (i.e., the red lines in feedstock leaching to remove alkali metals (K and Na) and Cl in the feedstock; use of additives, binding the alkali into larger particles with higher melting temperatures whilst releasing Cl into the gas phase as HCl, via chemical reactions such as Al Use of effective shedding techniques. For example, modern dedicated biomass dust-fired boilers use “slagging” super-heaters, which have a large spacing between super-heater tubes (e.g., 400 mm) for the ash to build up. For the 800 MW In future when coal is phased out and no coal fly ash is available, other solid additives can be used during 100% biomass dust-firing in industrial utilities [ CFD has been proven to be a powerful and cost-effective tool in design, trouble-shooting and optimization of industrial pulverized coal-fired furnaces. Similarly, CFD can be effectively deployed to increase the understanding of the underlying physics and key problems, explore unfamiliar operation conditions, optimize and examine the sub-processes and their interactions, and propose innovative conceptual designs for suspension-firing of biomass. Pilot-scale tests have been performed recently for turbulent swirling combustion of biomass dust to characterize the effects of the shares of biomass dust, combustion atmosphere and so on. In the tests, flame parameters, such as in-flame species [ Biomass torrefaction is a promising preparation method for suspension-firing of biomass in large-scale utility boilers, which has been widely investigated as reviewed in Ref. [ Biomass torrefaction is being commercialized in a few countries, focusing on two major technical developments. One is to reduce the additional energy input required for drying and pyrolyzing the feedstock. The other is to optimize the degree of torrefaction and the production of the pellets with the required durability for bulk handling, transportation and storage [ Torrefied biomass pellets have not yet regularly used for suspension-firing in power plants. However, trials with the cofiring of several thousand tonnes of torrefied biomass pellets have been performed at several power plants. At Amer power plant, a co-firing trial was performed during November and December 2013. 2300 tons of Topell torrefied pellets were co-fired at a co-firing ratio of 5 wt%. No adverse effects on milling and burning were detected in the tests. The trial confirms that high-quality torrefied biopellets can be produced and co-fired at large commercial scales, suggesting torrefied biopellets a potential better alternative to conventional wood pellets to substitute fossil fuels [ At Studstrup power plant, 200 tons of torrefied spruce pellets were co-fired in an 8-h co-firing trial in 2014 in unit 3. As shown in The first-generation preparation method produces large, highly irregular biomass particles. When it was used for suspension-firing, it was only for suspension co-firing of biomass at very low biomass shares. Currently it is mainly used to prepare biomass for grate-firing or fluidized bed combustion, which are not as sensitive to particle size or shape as suspension-firing. The second-generation preparation method is commonly used nowadays in suspension-firing plants. It is capable of reducing the wood particle size to approximately 85% < 1 mm, with the maximum size of about 3 mm, and thus ensuring good ignition and particle burnout (<5% carbon in ash). The second-generation method can be used for suspension-firing of 100% high-quality biomass such as wood pellets. When suspension-firing 100% biomass, additives such as bituminous coal fly ash and quartz are often used to mitigate the corrosion problem. In order to further improve the rangeability of solid biomass fuels and the performance of suspension-firing plants, the third generation method will be prevailing. It includes additional thermal pre-treatment processes such as torrefaction, which not only increase the energy density and grindability of the feedstock but also facilitate their long-term storage. All these are critical for large-scale suspension-firing. Suspension-firing trails of torrefied biopellets have been successfully performed at several power plants. However, it is considered too costly in the present energy market. The future economic or regulatory conditions change in favor of alternative solid fuel sources (e.g., for the pressing target of coal phase-out) will largely promote the development and widespread application of the third-generation preparation method. When used for suspension-firing, biomass needs dedicated handling and preparation, which largely affects the resulting biomass particle size distribution and thus the overall combustion performance. The paper reviews the development in biomass preparation for suspension firing, in combination with application examples, not only facilitating the understanding of the methods and the relevant key issues but also providing good models for other pulverized fuel-fired power plants that will be converted into biomass-firing. Some useful take-home messages are: When suspension-firing of 100% biomass in utility boilers, it is necessary to properly mill the feedstock to reduce the maximum particle size down to 3 mm and to reduce the portion of large particles (e.g., <10–15 wt% particles in the size range of 1–3 mm), in order to achieve good burnout and ash usability. The use of additives such as coal fly ash, quartz and kaolinite can effectively bind the alkali into larger particles with higher melting temperatures and release Cl into the gas phase as HCl, largely mitigating deposition and corrosion in pulverized biomass-fired utility boilers. This is particularly important for 100% biomass suspension-firing in utility boilers. To accommodate low-grade biomass (rather than wood or straw) in suspension-firing units, more dedicated pretreatments are needed to update the fuel quality of the feedstock, in which the thermochemical pretreatment such as torrefaction can be combined with the use of additives and pelletization. The author gratefully thanks the Review Papers Committee (Prof. Soteris Kalogirou, Prof. Neven Duic and Prof. Henrik Lund) of the 14th Conference on Sustainable Development of Energy, Water and Environment Systems (SDEWES) for their invitation to prepare this review paper as well as the valuable comments from them and other SDEWES reviewers. As one of the two accepted review papers, out of 16 received in total, this paper was presented as a session keynote during the conference in October 1–6, 2019 in Dubrovnik, Croatia.