Aim
                  The aim of this study was to evaluate the long-term clinical outcomes and complications following an acetabular fracture associated with a posterior hip dislocation compared to those without dislocation.
               
                  Patients & Methods
                  A retrospective cohort study of 113 patients (mean age 42 (14–95), 77% male) with acetabular fracture dislocations compared to 367 patients with acetabular fractures without dislocation (mean age 54 (16–100), 66% male) treated from 1988 to 2010. Patient characteristics, complications, reoperations, and conversion to total hip arthroplasty (THA) were recorded. Long term patient reported outcomes (Oxford Hip Score and SF-12) were measured at mean follow up 9.7 years (5–26).
               
                  Results
                  At long-term follow up 12/113 (11%) patients had died and 22/113 (19%) were lost. Isolated posterior wall fracture was the most common fracture associated with dislocation. Patients with dislocation were more likely to be younger and male with higher Injury Severity Scores (ISS). There was no significant difference in radiographic post-traumatic osteoarthritis development between fractures with and without dislocation (p = 0.246). Sciatic nerve palsy (12% Vs 1%, p < 0.001) and avascular necrosis (AVN) (11% Vs 1%, p < 0.001) were more common when dislocation was present. AVN was associated with increasing age and hypotension on arrival to the emergency department. Ten-year native hip survival was worse following fracture dislocations compared to fractures without dislocation: 75.1% (65.7–84.5 95% CI) Vs 90.7% (87.0–94.4), p < 0.001. Significant predictors of THA requirement were older age, particularly age >55 years at fracture, and increased ISS. Long-term OHS was worse in fractures with dislocations (33.6 ± 13.1 Vs 37.0 ± 14.0, p = 0.016).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Acetabular fractures with an associated dislocation have worse long-term functional outcomes with higher rates of complications and conversion to late THA compared to acetabular fractures without a dislocation.Acetabular fractures are uncommon injuries with an incidence of approximately 3 patients/100 000 per year for a UK population [ Less than one-third of acetabular fractures are associated with a dislocation of the femoral head usually in association with a posterior wall fracture [ The aim of this study was to evaluate the effect of native hip dislocation at acetabular fracture on complication rates and long-term native hip survival and patient reported outcome measures. Our unit provides definitive orthopaedic treatment for all major trauma with a catchment population of 1.2 million. Data on all patients admitted to the trauma unit is collected prospectively at time of presentation including: age, gender, mechanism of injury, Injury Severity Score (ISS), fracture classification (Letournel system [ The department policy was that all fracture dislocations were reduced on arrival to the Emergency Department or in theatre by closed reduction following resuscitation. Sciatic nerve status was documented before and after reduction. Patients with displaced fractures or joint incongruity of >2 mm on plain radiograph were considered for fixation if there were no contraindications. Non-operative management was considered for fractures following closed reduction with a small posterior wall pattern, transverse, low anterior column or both columns with secondary congruence. Elderly patients with unreconstructable fractures due to quadrilateral plate comminution were considered for acute THA or were managed non-operatively. Medical and operation notes were reviewed for all patients. Hypotension on presentation to the Emergency Department, a history of alcohol excess and approach at ORIF were noted. Patient characteristics, early and late complications (avascular necrosis (AVN), infection, heterotopic ossification) and the requirement for reoperation were recorded. Final follow up pelvic radiographs were examined by one author who had no clinical contact with the patients. The Matta criteria [ Statistical analysis was performed using Statistical Package for Social Sciences version 21.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Parametric (unpaired T-tests) and non-parametric (Mann-Whitney U, Kruskal-Wallis) tests were used as appropriate to assess continuous variables for significant differences between groups. Nominal categorical variables were assessed using a Chi square or Fisher’s exact test. Survival analysis was undertaken using Kaplan Meier analysis with the endpoints conversion to THA. A p value of less than 0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. A total of 523 patients with unilateral acetabular fractures were treated at our institution from 1988 to 2010 ( Mechanism of injury differed significantly between those with and without an associated hip dislocation ( A closed reduction of the hip dislocation was undertaken within 12 h of injury in all cases. Following this ORIF was performed in 96/113 (85%). Sixteen patients were managed non-operatively: 7 (6%) with undisplaced fractures (displacement <2 mm on plain radiographs); 4 (6%) displaced fractures with severe quadrilateral plate comminution in patients >70 years of age; and the reason for non-operative management was unknown in 4 (4%). Two elderly patients (77 and 88 years) were treated with acute total hip arthroplasty (THA). Patients who underwent ORIF were significantly younger than those managed non-operatively (median 41 (15–87) Vs 51 (14–95), p = 0.024, Mann Whitney U Test). The Kocher-Langenbeck approach was used in the majority of cases (84/96, 88%). Complications are detailed in Avascular necrosis was significantly more common following fractures with dislocations compared to those without: 11% Vs 1%, p < 0.001, Chi Squared test. Univariate analysis was performed to identify risk factors for AVN development ( THA was required in 29/113 (26%) of patients with acetabular fracture dislocations. Of these THAs, 2/29 (7%) were performed acutely; 26/29 (90%) were performed as late conversions following initial ORIF; and 1 (3%) had initially been managed non-operatively. Median time to late THA was 3 years (range, 0.5–25). Those who went on to require late THA were significantly older than those who did not (48 ± 17 Vs 39 ± 17, p = 0.022, Mann Whitney U Test). The indication for late THA was AVN in 10/29 (34%) cases and secondary PTOA in 19/29 (66%). Long term native hip survival was significantly worse following acetabular fracture dislocations compared to fractures without dislocation: 10 year survival 75.1% (65.7–84.5 95%CI) Vs 90.7% (87.0–94.4 95%CI), p < 0.001 Log rank ( Follow up radiographs were available for 44/72 (61%) of patients who were alive with retained native hip joints following fracture dislocation and for 106 patients without dislocation. According to the Matta Criteria, anatomic reductions were obtained in 39/44 (89%), imperfect in 3/44 (7%) and poor in 2/44 (5%). Radiographic post traumatic osteoarthrirtis (PTOA) was present in 26/44 (59%) cases, including severe PTOA in 12/44 (27%) ( At long term follow up, PROMs were available on 63/101 (62%) patients with dislocation who were still alive. There was no significant difference in OHS between those who had undergone THA (30.2 ± 14.5) and those who retained their native hip (35.1 ± 12.2, p = 0.174, Kruskall Wallis Test). Nor were there significant differences in SF-12 PCS and MCS scores ( Nearly a quarter of acetabular fractures presenting to our department over a 22 year period had an associated native hip dislocation. Compared to fractures without dislocation, acetabular fractures with dislocations were associated with younger age and higher energy injuries. Twelve percent of patients with dislocations had associated sciatic nerve injuries and 11% went on to develop femoral head AVN. Native hip survival was worse when dislocation was present and 26% of this group required conversion to THA over the course of the study giving a ten year survival of 75% compared to 91% when no dislocation was present. The difference in THA rate appears to be driven by AVN as opposed to a difference in incidence and severity of PTOA between those with and without dislocation. Acetabular fracture dislocations are serious hip injuries and this is reflected by our conversion to THA of 26%. Conversion to THA was associated with increased age at injury and was highest in the first two years following injury. We observed a high rate of residual disability in those who retained their native hip after injury and in those converted to arthroplasty. This is one of the few studies to present the long-term outcomes of a large patient cohort following an acetabular fracture dislocation from a prospectively gathered series. Our centre is the sole orthopaedic provider for both elective and trauma services for a well-defined catchment population of 1.2 million which helped facilitate long-term follow up. The incidence of complications is lower compared with other published series on posterior fracture dislocations. Our sciatic nerve palsy incidence was 12%, which is much lower than the 40% incidence reported in a meta-analysis [ A fracture dislocation is a known risk factor for AVN with the current incidence estimated at 9.2% [ Many acetabular fracture dislocations involve posterior wall comminution and articular surface impaction [ In patients who retained their native hip following acetabular fracture-dislocation, half reported ‘normal’ hip scores (OHS ≥ 40), a fifth scored full-marks and a third required walking aids. This did not correlate with age at injury or fracture classification. The explanation for the poor hip scores is unclear and was not simply associated with the development of post traumatic osteoarthritis. No patients required further surgery for loss of reduction or recurrent dislocation. Our study revealed a higher rate of conversion to THA (26%) in acetabular fractures associated with native hip dislocation compared to those without dislocation. This is worse than that reported for all acetabular fractures by a recent meta-analysis (8.5%) [ Higher failure rates following ORIF in older patients raises the question of whether acute combined reconstruction and THA would be better [ The limitations of this study include its retrospective nature. A number of plain film radiographs that predated modern digital images had been destroyed and were therefore unavailable for review. The Oxford Hip Score was used as a hip specific PROM. Though this score is well validated for use in osteoarthritis, which many of the cohort had developed, it is not specifically validated for use in acetabular fractures. Acetabular fracture patients are a heterogeneous group of elderly and young patients and selecting a PROM appropriate and sensitive for all is difficult. The Merle d’Aubigne score which is commonly reported for this population was not utilised. It measures three criteria only (pain, walking ability and hip range of motion) and requires clinical examination for accurate range of motion data. PROMs were not available for all patients and a number had been lost to follow up which may distort the results. This was a historical cohort over a twenty-year period and we would expect some loss to non-responders, migration and death. Every effort was made to contact patients for follow up and data was cross checked with an up to date reviews of the medical notes to ensure accuracy. Almost a quarter of acetabular fractures have an associated native hip dislocation. Acetabular fractures with associated dislocations have poorer long-term functional outcomes, a higher complication rate and greater risk of conversion to late THA when compared to acetabular fractures without dislocation. Despite the high prevalence of post-traumatic osteoarthritis in our cohort this did not predict patient reported outcomes and was not more prevalent in those following dislocation. Failure following surgical fixation was strongly associated with increasing age and the development of avascular necrosis. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. There is no funding source. This article does not contain any studies with human participants or animals performed by any of the authors. Ethical approval was obtained for this study (covered by the arthroplasty database ethics)