The bonded-particle model (BPM) is commonly used in numerical analysis of the mechanical behavior of rock samples. Constructing a BPM model requires specification of a number of microstructural parameters, including the parallel-bond tensile strength, parallel-bond cohesion strength, parallel-bond effective modulus, parallel-bond friction angle, and parallel-bond stiffness ratio. These parameters cannot be easily measured in the laboratory or directly related to either measurable or physical material parameters. Hence, a calibration process is required to choose the values to be used in simulations of physical systems. In this study, response surface methodology along with the central composite design approach is used to calibrate BPMs. The sensitivities of the microparameters related to the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and elasticity modulus (i.e., the macroscopic responses of the models) are thoroughly scrutinized. Numerical simulations are performed to carefully assess the performance of the model. It is found that the elasticity modulus is highly correlated with the parallel-bond effective modulus. In addition, the parallel-bond tensile and cohesion strengths are the two most significant microparameters with a considerable effect on the UCS. The predicted values determined by the proposed approach are in good agreement with the observed values, which verifies the applicability of the proposed method.The discrete element method (DEM) or so-called distinct element method is regarded as an effective approach for engineering problems in granular and discontinuous materials. It has been widely used for granular flows, powder mechanics, rock mechanics, and comminution ( The DEM is used to solve Newton’s equations of motion, based on which particle motion can be effectively handled. Based on the contact law, the forces in interparticle contact can be determined ( Different methods are used to model rock material breakage in the DEM. The population balance replacement model is the most commonly used approach. In this approach, if a load constraint is exceeded, a particle is replaced by a set of progeny particles. The size distribution of these particles is calibrated based on the breakage test data ( A recent report by The BPM has been used to investigate the mechanical behavior of rocks ( The basic concept of the traditional BPM is to represent the rock as densely packed disks or spheres that are bonded together at their contacts, and then simulate its mechanical behavior. If an adequate control action is performed on the strength and mechanical properties of the bonds, it results in similar behavior to that of the mechanical properties of the rock material ( The bond is represented by a thin finite area plate ( The particle movements and the resultant forces and moments follow Newton’s law of motion. The change of the contact forces and moments owing to the relative particle movements are determined by The maximum tensile and shear stresses, In DEM analysis, it is crucial to select appropriate parameters for accurate simulation of real and physical systems ( In the calibration process, two main steps need to be performed. The first step is parameter identification ( Only a limited number of researchers have focused on developing methods for parameter quantification. Most of the studies using the DEM give the parameters used for the materials without mentioning the calibration process. It has been found that the trial and error approach is commonly used with the corresponding limitations ( In this study, we used response surface methodology (RSM) to both identify and quantify the important micromechanical parameters. The established approach also considers the possible interactions between the micromechanical parameters in BPM calibration. Central composite design (CCD) was chosen as the design matrix because it allows reliable identification of the first-order interaction between the factors and provides a second-order polynomial model to predict the optimum levels of these parameters ( The mechanical properties (UCS and elasticity modulus) of natural limestone obtained from the Gheshlagh quarry in Iran were experimentally evaluated. Standard compression tests were performed on ten cylindrical specimens with a diameter of 54 Three-dimensional simulations of the UCS test were performed using the Particle Flow Code in three Dimensions (PFC3D) based on the DEM which was provided by Itasca Consulting Group, Inc. in USA. This software package is an industrial implementation of the DEM algorithm proposed by RSM is a collection of statistical and mathematical methods for modeling and analyzing engineering problems. In this technique, the principle goal is to optimize the response surface influenced by diverse process parameters. RSM determines the relationship between the controllable input parameters and the obtained response surfaces ( Design a series of experiments for sufficient and reliable measurement of the desirable response. Develop a mathematical model with a second-order response surface and maximum fitting. Determine the most desirable set of experimental parameters that produce a maximum or minimum value of the response. Express the direct and interactive effects of the process parameters as two- and three-dimensional plots. In the case where all of the running variables are measurable, the response surface can be expressed as The experimental design methods that are commonly used for process modeling and analysis are mainly categorized as full-factorial, partial-factorial, and central composite design approaches. For full-factorial design, at least three levels per variable are required to estimate the coefficients of the quadratic terms in the response model. Therefore, concerning the three independent process variables mentioned in Section Introduction, a number of experiments as well as replications should be performed ( By obtaining the response data from the test work, a regression analysis technique is performed to determine the coefficients of the response model, namely, ( Linear terms in each variable ( Squared terms in each variable First-order interaction terms for each paired combination ( Therefore, for the three variables under consideration, the response model is The The coefficients, namely, the main effect ( Half replicate CCD was chosen to design a series of experiments to provide suitable data to determine the relationship between the response (i.e., the UCS and elasticity modulus) and the five microparameters. Considering the relationships in With five factors, the total number of possible combinations with three main levels is 3 The calibrated parameters are determined by matching the calculated macroscopic strength ( The response data were analyzed using Design Expert software to calculate the effects of all of the model terms. Statistical parameters, including the In view of the existing effects between the main factors and the interactions between the two factors, Eq. Considering the experimental design process in In the design process of this experiment, the response factor can be calculated by Eq.  The parallel-bond normal effective modulus The parallel-bond normal to shear stiffness ratio ( The parallel-bond tensile strength is defined as the normal strength of the cement-like material, which is characterized by the parallel-bond model. It is shown that the value of the parallel tensile strength slightly affects the initial linear elastic behavior of the sample. In contrast, its influence on the peak strength of the sample is remarkable, as shown in As shown in  In this study, we used the response surface methodology (RSM) and central composite design (CCD) to analyze the possible influence and interactions between microparameters in a bonded particle model (BPM) calibration process. The investigated parameters included the parallel-bond tensile strength, parallel-bond cohesion strength, parallel-bond effective modulus, parallel-bond friction angle, and parallel-bond stiffness ratio. Numerical simulations were performed and the obtained results were carefully analyzed. Using a set of experimental data and a mathematical software package (Design Expert), a mathematical model equation was derived for the The parallel-bond stiffness has a direct influence on the peak strength behavior of the sample. This also reveals an inherent effect on breakage of parallel bonds. The existent friction coefficient in the contact bond has little influence on the behavior of the sample. Considering the influence of the remaining parameters, simple mechanical indicators, such as the elasticity modulus and peak strength, are not affected by a single parameter. Specifically, the elasticity modulus is related to both the particle normal shear stiffness and the parallel-bond normal shear stiffness. Furthermore, fluctuation of the peak strength seems to be related to all five parameters. The two most significant microparameters that affect the The elasticity modulus is highly correlated with the particle-scale contact modulus.