Thermochemical cycles where metal oxides are reduced and the elementary metal is reoxidized with water, thus generating hydrogen has been proposed for conversion of solar energy to chemical energy and fuels. The two steps of the cycle can be separated in time and place, thus providing also means for storage of solar energy in chemical form. The second step of these cycles involves the oxidation of the elementary metal in water vapor where hydrogen is generated and the metal oxide is recovered and recycled. Reduction of zinc oxide is a typical reaction used for such cycles. Therefore, the oxidation of liquid zinc with water, specifically, becomes an important part of such a cycle. The kinetics of oxidation of bulk of liquid zinc at 450–500°C, with water vapors bubbled through the liquid, was studied. The water vapor was introduced into the liquid using argon as a carrier gas. The water vapor partial pressure was in the range of 65–560 mb. The gas mixture was fed through a tube dipped in the liquid. The diameter of the tube and its depth were varied as parameters of the experiments. The results of the experiments show that the specific reaction rate (hydrogen production per cm2 of surface area of the bubble), W
                     sp, increases, as the water partial pressure is increased. The order of the reaction, with respect to water partial pressure, is 0 < n < 1. As a result of the experiments, the kinetic expression W
                     sp=kP
                     H2O/(1+ b·P
                     H2O) was found: k = 1.86×10−3·EXP(−40376/RT) mole·cm−2·s−1bar−1, b = 1.55×10−10·EXP(146330/RT) bar−1. The main stages of the reaction are interaction between elementary zinc and water vapor on the interface between the gas and the solid oxide layer, and the diffusion of zinc atoms through the film of solid zinc oxide.average surface area of the growing bubble before break off from the tip of the tube, cm average surface area of the rising bubble, cm constant in kinetic equation, bar diameter of the dip tube, cm flow rate, ml/min acceleration of gravity, cm·s weight of the oxide film, g enthalpy, kJ/mole rate constant in kinetic rate constant in parabolic law rate constant in parabolic law equilibrium constant number of bubbles/min partial pressure of the water vapor, bar radius of the bubble, cm gas constant, kJ·mole time, s time of formation of the bubble, s time of rising of the bubble, s time needed for formation and rising of the bubble, s rate of the reaction, mole/s specific reaction rate, mole·s thickness of the oxide film, cm In recent years, thermochemical cycles, using concentrated solar energy for the reduction of metallic oxides and reoxidation of the metals for hydrogen production and storage of solar energy, have been investigated by Steinfeld et al. A pattern of thermochemical cycle for production of zinc and hydrogen using solar energy involves the following basic processes: (i) solar carboreduction of zinc oxide at high temperatures (1100–1300°C),(ii) cooling of the Zn and CO gas mixture, condensation of zinc and its separation from the CO, and (iii) oxidation of liquid zinc in water vapor. Thermodynamic analysis shows that the ZnO cycle is very attractive for conversion and storage of solar energy. Enthalpies for each step of the cycle are given in The first stage of the two-stage cycle can be presented as follows: In the second stage, the liquid metal can be reacted with water to form molecular hydrogen, according to the following expression: The first stage is well known in the pyrometallurgy of zinc. In this case, surplus of carbon is burned in air to supply energy to the process. In the solar process the heat is supplied externally with no addition of air. Murray et al. There is a lack of information on the kinetics of the second stage of the cycle. There are only few published data regarding the oxidation of liquid zinc with oxygen and air, even that they are scattered over a wide range. General information on oxidation of liquid metals can be found in the reviews by Kubaschevski and Hopkins Mechanism of oxidation of solid zinc involves transport of the oxidant to the gas–solid interface, adsorption of the oxidant on the surface of zinc or zinc oxide, surface oxidation, formation of oxide film, diffusion of the Zn through the film and desorption of the product from the surface. The limiting step is apparently diffusion of zinc through the barrier of the oxide film. Therefore, only very small Zn particles (size about 1–10 μm) can be oxidized with high reaction rate The rate of growth of a protective oxide film on a metal follows usually the so-called parabolic law: The parabolic law is valid when formation of non-porous oxide layer is assumed and diffusion along grain boundaries can be neglected. The rate constant Kinetics of oxidation of liquid zinc was studied mainly with oxidants such as oxygen, air or CO Gebhardt Gebhardt It is important to distinguish between oxidation of a static specimen and dynamic experiments where the metal surface is constantly renewed In the present work, the kinetics of oxidation of liquid zinc was studied by bubbling of water vapor through the molten metal. The thermodynamic data on oxidation of zinc with water vapor is given in Results of computation on the oxidation of zinc in CO An experimental setup was constructed for the study of the kinetics of the molten zinc oxidation in water vapor. The kinetics of oxidation was investigated by bubbling of inert gas saturated with water vapor.  The material used for the experiments was granular zinc, 30 mesh, produced by Fisher Scientific, of 99.99% purity grade, with a maximum content of 0.005% iron and 0.005% lead. The argon purity was 99.99% and the helium purity was 99.999%. The oxidation of zinc was investigated by bubbling argon saturated with water vapor through the molten metal. The largest uncertainty in these measurements is the estimation of the surface area of liquid metal exposed to the oxidizing gas. It is known that any oxide formed is likely to remain at the gas–liquid interface time of formation of the bubble time of rise of individual bubble through the liquid zinc shape of the bubbles. The volume of each bubble ( The time of formation of the bubble is determined by: Assuming that the bubbles attain their terminal velocity without collisions, the time of rise of the bubble through the liquid metal can be calculated, according to Davenport et al. The total time needed for formation of the bubble and rise through the liquid zinc, Assuming that a spherical bubble is formed at the tip of the tube, its average surface area, When the bubbles leave the tube they are presumed to have a spherical cap shape, with half angle of 50° subtended at the center of the curvature The following equation is derived from the number of bubbles/s and the time of rise, for the average surface area, The total surface area of the bubbles, This surface area is an approximation with an estimated accuracy of more than 20%. The radius of the bubbles was calculated by the following equation: The kinetics of oxidation of liquid zinc was investigated by bubbling argon saturated with water vapor.  Results of kinetics experiments with a dip tube of The experiments were conducted also at constant water pressure and different temperatures. The results are given in On the basis of the results the thickness of zinc oxide layer, The experimental data can be described by the following kinetic equation:  The results obtained in this work can be compared with those from previous studies about oxidation of molten zinc. Guppy et al. Results of other works are generally given in the form of parabolic law. The parabolic law can be written also in form: Gebhardt Based on the results obtained in the present work and assuming that the parabolic law is applicable, a comparison with the results reported in the literature has been performed. At a temperature of 450°C and water partial pressure higher than 200 mm Hg (conditions where the reaction rate is independent of water concentration) the rate constant was found to be about 1×10 The experimental data obtained in the present investigation show that at low concentrations of water the rate of oxidation depends on the water vapor partial pressure. It can be suggested that the processes at the gas–solid boundary influence the rate of reaction. The first stage of the oxidation is apparently dissociative adsorption of water molecule on zinc oxide with formation of surface hydroxylic groups. In the second stage the hydroxylic groups react with zinc resulting in formation of zinc oxide and hydrogen. One of these two stages could be the rate determiner at low partial pressure of water. The oxide film is very thin and can have some defects or pores. The reacting gas can diffuse rapidly to the reaction front. At high water partial pressure the surface concentration of hydroxylic groups is close to saturation, thickness of the oxide film increases, and the diffusion of zinc through the protection zinc oxide film is the rate determining process. The thermochemical cycle of carboreduction of zinc oxide using concentrated solar energy can be used for the production of hydrogen and chemical storage of solar energy. Hydrogen can be produced from both CO (via regular shift reaction) and reoxidation of the zinc metal using water. Kinetic studies show that the cycle is feasible. The rate at the carboreduction stage is high. In temperature range of 1200–1300°C the reduction can be completed within 5–10 min The results of the present study show that the second stage of the cycle, oxidation of liquid zinc in water vapor, is feasible. One of the possible concepts of oxidation of liquid zinc is bubbling of steam through the liquid. The rate of oxidation at high concentration of water vapor is independent of water concentration. The rate determining step is diffusion through the zinc oxide layer. The steam can be introduced in to the liquid zinc through injection nozzles (4–10 mm diameter). The rate of the oxidation for one nozzle can be estimated on the basis of the present kinetic data as 25–60 nml/min at 500–550°C. To illustrate the reoxidation stage based on thermodynamic calculations and the results of the kinetics of this process, production of 100 nm