Fouling in heat exchangers not only reduces heat transfer performance significantly, but also causes considerable pressure drop, resulting in higher pumping requirements. It would be much more desirable if surfaces which are inherently less prone towards fouling could be developed. In this paper, autocatalytic Nickel–Phosphorus–Polytetrafluoroethylene (Ni–P–PTFE) composite coatings and modified diamond-like carbon (DLC) coatings were applied to the coupons of the 316L stainless steel plates. The effects of surface energies of the coatings on the adhesion of aluminium silicate fouling were investigated and the best surface energy for which the fouling adhesion is lowest was obtained. The experimental results show that the coating with the most favourable surface energy reduced the adhesion of aluminium silicate deposit by 97%, compared with uncoated stainless steel plate coupons. The anti-fouling mechanism of the coatings was explained with the extended Deryagin, Landau, Verwey and Overbeek (DLVO) theory.Heat exchangers are broadly applied in chemical industries to transfer thermal energy between different fluids. However, due to the properties of the different fluids, heat exchangers are usually prone to fouling on the metal surfaces. Fouling not only reduces heat transfer performance significantly, but also causes considerable pressure drop, calling for higher pumping requirements It would be much more desirable if surfaces with an inherently lower affinity towards fouling could be developed. Many attempts have been made to reduce fouling by coating surfaces with Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) due to its non-stick properties. However, the poor thermal conductivity, poor abrasion resistance, poor adhesion to metal substrate and industrial process conditions currently inhibit their commercial use Ni–P–PTFE coating was prepared on 2B 316 stainless steel heat exchanger plate coupons (200 The doped DLC coatings with N, Si and F were prepared on 316 stainless steel plate coupons by plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition technique. The stainless steel plate coupons were cleaned in an ultrasonic bath containing acetone for 10 Prior to contact angle measurement, the coatings were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone, ethanol and deionised water in sequence. Contact angles were obtained using the sessile drop method with a Data physics OCA-20 contact angle analyser with an accuracy of ±0.1°. Three test liquids were used as a probe for surface free energy calculations: distilled water, di-iodomethane and ethylene glycol. The data for surface tension components of the test liquids are given in The theory of the contact angle of pure liquids on a solid substrate was developed 200 316 stainless steel coupons (200   It was visually observed that the uncoated coupons of the heat exchanger plate were fully covered by the aluminium silicate deposit after testing these coupons in the process pipe for 5 The fouling deposit was dried and removed from each coupon surface. Then it was weighed using a Sartorius electronic scale with 10  Particulate fouling adhesion may be described with the extended DLVO (Deryagin, Landau, Verwey and Overbeek) theory Zhao and Müller-Steinhagen Eq. In addition to surface energy, other factors, including zeta potentials, surface roughness, temperature and fluid flow velocity also have a significant influence on aluminium silicate adhesion In this paper, autocatalytic Ni–P–PTFE composite coatings and modified diamond-like carbon (DLC) coatings were applied to coupons of the stainless steel heat exchanger plates. The experimental results demonstrate that the surface energies of the coatings have a significant influence on the adhesion of aluminium silicate fouling. When the surface energy of the coatings was about 35 This paper was developed from a collaborative research program between Sasol Synfuels; Sasol Technology Research & Development (R&D); Energy Systems, School of Chemical and Minerals Engineering at North-West University and the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the University of Dundee. The support provided by the