The equilibrium separation of trivalent rare earth elements (Nd(III), Dy(III), and Y(III)) from hydrochloric acid solution by di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) and 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (EHEHPA) separately and in mixtures has been studied. The effect of extractant concentration, extractant mixture composition and solution acidity has been investigated. The results show that a mixture of D2EHPA and EHEHPA provide a better separation of Y(III) from Dy(III) when the total extractant concentration is 0.06 and 0.09mol/L, while the separation is better using pure EHEHPA at higher extractant concentration (0.15mol/L). The separation of Nd(III) from Y(III) and Dy(III) is higher using pure D2EHPA (0.06 and 0.15mol/L). The results show that for the complexation of the Nd(III) ions approx. 1–2 hydrogen ions/rare earth element (REE) ion are released to the aqueous phase upon binding approximately 1 extractant dimer on average. For the complexation of Y(III) and Dy(III) ions 2–3 hydrogen ions are released upon binding approximately two extractant dimers on average. Accordingly, under the conditions of this work the complexation involves not only extractant molecule dimers but also monomers or aggregated REE species to some extent, and a fraction of the REE is extracted as chloride complexes.There has been an increasing demand for rare earth elements (REE) in the last few decades due to their unique spectroscopic and magnetic properties and wide range of utilization, particularly, in advanced materials ( One of the greatest challenges in the recovery of REE from different sources is their separation from each other, which is very difficult due to their chemical similarity ( The extraction of trivalent REE with cationic extractants D2EHPA and EHEHPA has been proposed to follow Eq. Complexes of the form YCl(HB The structural formulas of the two extractants D2EHPA and EHEHPA are shown in The cations coordinate 8 (Y(III)) or 9 (Nd(III), Dy(III)) water molecules in the aqueous phase and the ionic radii of the hydrated Nd(III), Dy(III) and Y(III) ions are 1.175 Though there are numerous investigations on the extraction of REE with mixtures of extractants, to our knowledge, available data on the extraction of rare earths by mixtures of D2EHPA and EHEHPA are scarce, and the separation of Y(III), Dy(III) and Nd(III) by such mixtures has not been reported. The aim of this study was to investigate the extraction and separation of Nd(III), Dy(III) and Y(III) from hydrochloric acid solution using D2EHPA, EHEHPA and their mixtures. EHEHPA was added to the D2EHPA extraction system in order to enhance the selectivity of Y(III) over Dy(III). The extractants di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA, CAS No. 298-07-7, 97 Stock solutions of Nd(III), Dy(III) and Y(III) were prepared by dissolving the respective REE oxide (99%), provided by Treibacher, in concentrated hydrochloric acid, and diluting with distilled water. Solvent extraction experiments were carried out in a glass beaker placed on a magnetic stir plate. The pH of the aqueous solution was adjusted to the desired value by adding dilute ammonium hydroxide or hydrochloric acid solution. For each experiment, 10 The different experimental conditions studied are presented in The extraction efficiency (  The effect of the equilibrium acidity of the aqueous solution on the extraction efficiency of Nd(III), Dy(III) and Y(III) is presented in The effect of the aqueous equilibrium acidity on the extraction efficiency of Nd(III), Dy(III) and Y(III) using mixtures of D2EHPA and EHEHPA is shown in The distribution ratios for Y(III), Dy(III) and Nd(III) under different conditions, calculated by Eq. The extraction efficiency in pure D2EHPA is greater than in pure EHEHPA, see A possible explanation for the slopes being less than 3 and for the differences in the slopes of the three elements Nd(III), Y(III) and Dy(III), is that REE ions are extracted as mixed complexes including chloride together with D2EHPA. The chloride complexes of the light REE (LREE) are more stable than those of the heavy REE (HREE) due to the interaction of the borderline to soft chloride ion with the softer (more polarizable) LREE. The speciation in the aqueous phase has been calculated by the software Medusa at an ionic strength ( The different theoretically possible equilibrium reactions forming complexes involving REE(III) or REE(III) chloride complexes and D2EHPA (H A linearization of Eq. The plot of log D versus the log of the free D2EHPA dimer concentration at pH According to Eq. The results allow us to calculate the extractant loading for different equilibrium pH ( The separation factors for the separation of Y(III)/Dy(III), Y(III)/Nd(III) and Dy(III)/Nd(III) for different concentrations of D2EHPA and EHEHPA respectively at an equilibrium pH of 1 is presented in The results show that for high concentration of extractant (0.15–0.3 The extraction behavior of Nd(III), Dy(III) and Y(III) using different mixtures of D2EHPA and EHEHPA was studied in solutions of different equilibrium pH.  The enhancement factors R have been calculated for a total extractant concentration of 0.09 The separation factors for the separation of Y(III)/Dy(III), Y(III)/Nd(III) and Dy(III)/Nd(III) in different mixtures of D2EHPA and EHEHPA are listed in For a total extractant concentration of 0.06 For a total extractant concentration of 0.06 and 0.09 In solvent extraction of trivalent rare earth elements (Nd(III), Dy(III), and Y(III)) from hydrochloric acid solution by using di-(2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethyl hexyl ester (EHEHPA) and their mixtures, the extraction order in general is found to be Y(III) Separation factors calculated for an equilibrium pH of 1 show that pure D2EHPA (0.06 The authors acknowledge financial support from the