The two dimensional heat transfer of a free convective–radiative MHD (magnetohydrodynamics) flows with variable viscosity and heat source of a viscous incompressible fluid in a porous medium between two vertical wavy walls was investigated. The fluid viscosity is assumed to vary as an exponential function of temperature. The flow is assumed to consist of a mean part and a perturbed part. The perturbed quantities were expressed in terms of complex exponential series of plane wave equation. The resultant differential equations governing the flow were non-dimensionalised and solved using Differential Transform Method (DTM). The numerical computations were presented in tabular and graphical forms for various fluid parameters. It shows that an increase in radiation, variable viscosity and permeability parameters cause a rise in velocity profile. Nusselt number increases with increase in heat source and decreases with increase in radiation parameter at both walls.The study of viscous fluid flow over wavy wall(s) has received considerable attention of researchers due to its applications in nature and engineering such as in designing ventilated heating building, electronic components cooling and as well as in designing blood oxygenator and drying of several types of agricultural products (grain and food). In recent years, the interest of some researchers has been drawn to the study of fluid flow in the area of physiological processes through wavy channels. In particular, the peristaltic flow in the vasomotion of small blood vessels such as arterioles, venules, and capillaries, urine transport from kidney to bladder, spermatozoa transport in the ducts efferent of the male reproductive tract and in the cervical canal, transport of lymph in the lymphatic vessels, movement of ovum in the female fallopian tube and swallowing food through the oesophagus The theoretical and practical significance of the viscous fluid over wavy wall(s) were discussed by Lekoudis et al. The fluid flow through wavy channel is often used in certain engineering processes like glass manufacturing, crude oil refinement, paper production and in some geophysical studies under the influence of magnetic field The study of MHD free convection flow between two vertical wavy walls was studied by Tak and Kumar The study of fluid flow in a porous medium is significant because of its applications in soil mechanics, water purification, underground water hydrology, chemical engineering, petroleum engineering, ceramic engineering, metallurgical engineering, agricultural engineering and water irrigation process. Hence, Adesanya and Makinde However, the study of the fluid flow in a porous between two wavy walls has received relatively less attention. Among the studies, Teneja and Jain In all the above-mentioned studies, viscosity of the fluid was assumed to be constant. However, It is a known fact that viscosity property varies significantly with temperature As a result, the present study investigates the Reynold's model (temperature dependent) viscosity on a radiative MHD free convection flow in a porous medium between two vertical wavy walls. To achieve the aim of this study, perturbation technique coupled with Differential Transform Method was used to obtain the set of solutions of non-linear differential equations. Consider a steady laminar natural convective hydromagnetic flow in a porous medium between a long vertical wavy channel. The Following Rosseland approximation (Brewster The following dimensionless parameters are used for Eqs. Eqs. Taking the Maclaurin's expansion of the exponential terms in Eqs. (10) and (11), which can be expressed as Substituting Eqs. (15) and (16) into Eqs. For zeroth order equations, we are: Eqs. Substituting Eqs. (29) and (30) into Eqs. (26) and (27) with boundary conditions We transformed differential Eqs. The shear stress on the wavy boundaries, The rate of heat transfer at the wavy boundaries, A series of computations has been carried out on the effects of the following parameters: variable viscosity parameter ( The analysis of the fluid flow for zeroth-order distribution profiles uses the default values for the parameters:    The effects of Grashof number are presented in    The analysis of the fluid flow for first-order distribution profiles uses the default values for the parameters:      The skin friction coefficient and Nusselt number are expressed in Eqs. As for the Nusselt number shown in The effects of variable viscosity on radiative MHD free convection flow in a porous medium between two vertical wavy walls are presented. The resulting governing equations from the mathematical model of the problem are non-dimensionalised, simplified using perturbation technique and complex exponential series for plane equation, and solved using Differential Transform Method (DTM). A series of computations was carried out to study the effects of the fluid parameters such as variable parameter viscosity ( The followings were observed: An increase in any of variable viscosity parameter, radiation, Grashoff number and the permeability parameter produces a rise in the velocity profile while an increase in heat source or Hartmann number causes a reduction in the velocity profile on the zeroth distribution profile. An increase in radiation increases zeroth-temperature. Whereas an increase in heat source has a retard effect on the zeroth-order temperature profile. An increase in temperature dependent parameter, radiation parameter, Grashoff number and the permeability parameter, increases the first-order velocity while an increase in heat source and magnetic field cause a reduction on the first-order velocity. As radiation increases the first order temperature increase. Whereas the first temperature increases as the heat source increases. there is a rise in the skin friction due to an increase in any of An increase in any of Finally, there is an increase in the Nusselt number as The authors appreciate and acknowledge the contributions of the reviewers to make the article robust.