Activation of peroxymonosulfate (PMS) to degrade recalcitrant organic pollutants has attracted much attention, however, this process usually needs expensive or toxic catalysts. Herein, we prepared a Fe functionalized biochar composite that contain Fe0, porous carbon with abundant functional groups and nanofibers (Fe-BC-700) to activate PMS and efficiently remove bisphenol A (BPA). The contribution of different participants in the complicated system involving Fe species, carbon composites, and radicals and nonradicals were quantitatively investigated. Under optimal conditions (0.2 g/L PMS and 0.15 g/L catalyst), 20 mg/L of BPA can be completely removed in 5 min by Fe-BC-700. The effects including the activation of PMS by Fe species to produce sulfate radicals (SO4
                     
                        −), the electron transfer by the nanofiber-mesoporous carbon structure, and the inherent persistent free radicals (PFR) in biochar, were demonstrated to contribute to the high performance. A series of contrast experiments showed that PMS activated by Fe contributed to about 36% of BPA degradation, while the carbon composites, especially carbon nanofibers contributed to 17%, and the other 47% was ascribed to the adsorption of carbon composites (may further undergoing degradation). Meanwhile, the degradation by SO4
                     
                        − accounted for about 23% (by quenching experiments), while the nonradical pathway contributed to 30%. This work suggests that the non-activation factors in PMS/porous catalyst/pollutant system cannot be neglected.Reactive radicals, such as hydroxyl radical (HO In general, SO Among these metals, zero valent iron (ZVI) -based catalysts have been widely used for PMS activation due to its eco-friendliness, nontoxicity, and low-cost (Text S1). However, the ZVI suffers from poor stability due to its high surface energy Biochar is a byproduct of pyrolysis of waste lignocellulosic biomass to produce renewable fuels, which can be used as a low-cost carbonaceous support for metal-based catalysts The main objectives of this study are to prepare an Fe functionalized biochar composite that contain Fe All the chemical reagents used in the experiments were analytical grade and purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd., China. The biomass used in this study was sawdust, which was obtained from a local timber treatment plant in Hefei, China. The sawdust was crushed and screened through a sieve to collect the particles of size smaller than 0.12 mm. The Fe-BC was prepared by fast pyrolysis of Fe-preloaded sawdust. In detail, 10 g of sawdust was added into a flask containing 200 mL of different concentrations (5, 10, and 20 mmol) of a FeCl The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of Fe-BCs was performed on an 18 kW rotating anode X-ray diffractometer (XRD, MXPAHF; Rigaku Corp., Tokyo, Japan), using Cu Kα radiation (30 kV/160 mA, λ = 1.54056 Å). The textural feature of the Fe-BCs was measured by nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm at 77 K using a Micromeritics Gemini apparatus (ASAP 2020 M + C, Micromeritics, Co., Norcross, GA, USA), and the Brunauer, Emmett, and Teller (BET) method was used to determine the specific surface areas of the samples. The morphology of Fe-BCs was examined by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) on a Sirion 200, scanning electron microscope (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) on a JEOL-2100F transmission electron microscope (JEOL Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Raman spectrum was obtained using a Laser Raman spectrometer (LabRamHR, HORIBA Jobin Yvon, Paris, France). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed on an ESCALAB250 instrument (Thermo-VG Scientific, East Grinstead, UK). The electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectra were obtained using a JES-FA200 spectrometer (JEOL Ltd.) with a single cavity, a modulation of 100 kHz and microwave frequency of 9080 MHz. The VSM magnetization curve of Fe-BCs was measured by using a precision SQUID magnetic measurement system (Quantum Design Co., Ltd, USA) with the magnetic field intensity in the range of ±10 kOe at 300 K. Batch experiments were conducted to evaluate the BPA removal performance by Fe-BCs. In a typical reaction, 15 mg of catalyst was added into 100 mL of BPA solution (20 mg/L), and 20 mg of PMS was then added to the solution to initiate the reaction. The reaction system was kept at room temperature (25 ± 2 °C) under vigorous stirring. At each time interval, 1.0 mL of the reaction solution was withdrawn, immediately quenched with 0.5 mL methanol and then centrifuged and used for the following analysis. The initial pH value of the reaction was 8.2 without buffering, which was measured by a pH meter (model PHS-25; Nanjing T-Bota Scietech Instruments & Equipment Co., Nanjing, China). To test the effect of pH values of initial solution on the BPA removal performance, the pH of the BPA solution was adjusted with a 0.1 M NaOH or HNO The BPA concentration was determined using a high-performance liquid chromatography system (HPLC, LC-20A, Shimadzu Corp., Kyoto, Japan) equipped with a C18 column. The mobile phase consisted of methanol and water (70:30, v/v) at a flow rate of 0.6 mL min Different Fe-BCs were prepared by fast pyrolysis of FeCl The XRD analysis was conducted to determine the crystal structure of Fe-BCs prepared at different pyrolytic temperature with the retention time of 1 h and the XRD patterns are shown in The retention time is another important parameter related to the properties of the Fe-BCs. To examine the influence of the retention time (0, 0.5, and 1 h) on the Fe-BCs, the pyrolytic temperature was set to 700 °C considering both the energy consumption and the formation of low valent Fe species. The XRD patterns of the Fe-BC-700–0 h, Fe-BC-700–0.5 h, and Fe-BC-700–1 h are shown in According to the XRD pattern of the Fe-BCs, the transformation of Fe species during the pyrolysis process can be explained as follow: Fe The surface morphology of the Fe-BCs was observed by SEM ( The Raman spectra of the Fe-BCs under different pyrolytic temperatures show clear D (1355 cm The surface area and pore structure of the Fe-BCs were determined by the N To correlate the effects of pyrolytic parameters with the degradation of BPA in the presence of PMS, a series of experiments were conducted. As shown in To further optimize the BPA removal efficiency by Fe-BC-700–1 h, the reaction parameters were investigated. The Fe content in the Fe-BC-700–1 h was controlled by adjusting the concentration of FeCl The BPA can be removed in 15 min with a catalyst dosage of 0.15 g/L and in 10 min with 0.20 g/L of catalyts. The high Fe content corresponds with the high yield of the oxidizing radicals, resulting in the high removal rate of BPA ( The influence of the initial solution pH on the BPA removal efficiency was investigated and shown in The pH variation during the reaction was shown in Considering the practical applications of Fe-BC-700/PMS system, the influence of various water matrix species (HCO  The abovementioned experimental results on BPA removal in the presence of PMS clearly indicate that the Fe-BC-700–1 h can completely remove the BPA in 10 min under optimal conditions. The catalytic performance of the Fe-BCs was found to correlate with the pyrolytic parameters. The BPA degradation by homogeneous process (ferrous ions) was studied. The amount of ferrous ions used in the homogeneous process was same as that in Fe-BC-700. As shown in It is widely accepted that PMS can be activated to produce the SO To verify the PMS activation by Fe-BC-700, quenching experiments were carried out. Generally, PMS can generate SO The quenching experiments cannot quantitatively determine the contribution of SO To discriminate the role of Fe and carbon composites in the PMS activation, the metallic Fe in Fe-BC-700 was removed by treatment with 6 M HCl at 80 °C and BC-700 was obtained. Similar BPA removal experiments by BC-700 with and without PMS were conducted under the same conditions. As show in Combining with the above analysis, a plausible mechanism of PMS activation by the Fe-BC-700 is proposed and shown in In the nonradical mechanism, the surface sp2-hybridized carbon network and the free-flowing π electrons of the Fe-BC-700 could affect the electron configuration of PMS, activate and break O-O bond in PMS through electron transfer. When BPA with abundant electrons meets the activated PMS molecule, the activated PMS molecule (electron acceptor) can directly oxidize BPA (electron donor) via two-electron conduction with the assistance of the Fe-BC-700 (electron shuttle) In addition, in the inherent radical mechanism, the oxidant (PMS) accepts an electron from the Fe-BC-700 to decompose into SO The GC-MS results of the intermediates from Fe-BC-700/PMS/BPA system were shown in The stability of the Fe-BC-700 was examined by testing the degradation of BPA in consecutive runs and the results were shown in The XPS spectra clearly show three elements (C, O, and Fe) present in both sample ( After thermal treatment (450 °C for 2 h in air), the catalytic performance could be partially recovered. Traditionally, the Fe-based catalysts in PMS activation cannot be recycled. The relatively high stability of the Fe-BC-700 may be attributed to the special way in which the Fe NPs were embedded in the carbon nanofibers. The TEM images ( The Fe-BC-700 was facilely prepared by fast pyrolysis of FeCl The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: