Reports of ballistic injures to the extremities typically include those involving gunshot wounds. However, high-pressure washer injuries frequently lead to equally damaging injuries. These injuries should not be overlooked, because they can result in high morbidity and complication rates. Similar to the open fracture protocol, these injuries require prompt debridement and irrigation with administration of antibiotics to avoid limb loss. The present case report identified a delay in the treatment protocol that left limited options for the patient. However, the patient agreed to undergo staged reconstruction consisting of serial debridement, implantation of a polymethylmethacrylate antibiotic spacer, and eventual interpositional iliac crest arthrodesis of the midfoot. At a follow-up point >5 years from the initial injury, the patient was walking with minimal pain and no limitations in his daily activities.High-pressure washer injuries are an often overlooked and unique pathologic entity. It has been estimated that 1 of 600 hand trauma cases include an injection injury under high pressure. One to four high-pressure washer injuries have been reported to be treated at large surgical hand centers annually One month before presenting to our institution, a 52-year-old white male presented to an outside emergency department 90 minutes after sustaining a laceration to his right foot from 40,000-psi water pressure washer while working at an industrial cleaning company. The patient denied any medical history, surgical history, medications, or allergies, and he was a nonsmoker. At the outside emergency department, radiographs were obtained, which were negative for the presence of any fractures, soft tissue emphysema, or foreign bodies ( He initially presented to us in September 2012, with his final follow-up examination in January 2017. At the initial appointment in September 2012 with the orthopedic surgeon after the original emergency department visit, the patient presented with a painful, red, hot, swollen foot with a draining sinus tract ( Additional computed tomography studies revealed involvement of the second metatarsal and intermediate cuneiform ( He was taken to the operating room for excisional debridement and bone biopsy that day. All procedures were performed with the patient under general anesthesia and in the supine position. No tourniquet was used for the initial procedure to allow us to determine the bone and soft tissue viability. Intraoperatively, an immediate gram stain of the medial cuneiform was obtained and revealed numerous white blood cells consistent with the diagnosis of osteomyelitis. Because of these clinical and radiographic findings and the positive intraoperative gram stain findings, wide resection of the bone was deemed necessary. The second metatarsal–intermediate cuneiform articulation was addressed by placing calcium sulfate beads impregnated with 1 g of vancomycin. The first metatarsal–medial cuneiform articulation was addressed with wide debridement of bone and implantation of a polymethylmethacrylate spacer impregnated with 1 g of tobramycin owing to the previous pseudomonas-positive cultures. This entire complex was spanned and stabilized with a monorail-type external fixation device ( Cultures of intraoperative bone again grew After the 6-week antibiotic regimen, the patient underwent additional debridement with bone biopsy. The repeat bone biopsy specimen grew no bacteria; however, histopathologic analysis identified the continued presence of osteomyelitis. Therefore, the patient was transitioned to oral ciprofloxacin for 4 more weeks. After 2 debridements and 10 weeks of antibiotic therapy, the final reconstructive procedure was performed because the chronic infection had been adequately treated. A tricortical iliac autograft was harvested by the original consulting orthopedic surgeon and implanted into a healthy, granular soft tissue envelope previously occupied by the polymethylmethacrylate antibiotic spacer, which had been explanted at the start of the procedure ( At 6 weeks after the final reconstructive procedure, we transitioned the patient into a walking boot. At 8 weeks postoperatively, the monorail external fixator was removed, and the fusion site stressed under fluoroscopic imaging yielding complete stability. The patient remained in a walking boot and was kept partial weightbearing. He was slowly transitioned into custom foot orthotics after a 2-week period. Final radiographs were taken at 6 months after the initial injury and 3 months after the final reconstructive procedure. These films demonstrated trabeculation across the proximal and distal arthrodesis sites and incorporation of the autograft ( High-pressure power washers are a common industrial and commercial tool used on a daily basis and are becoming increasingly popular for residential use. Injuries caused by this device are often overlooked and/or treated as simple lacerations. Such undertreatment can result in devastating consequences, especially when osseous involvement is present. In a recent review of 435 cases involving high-pressure washer injuries to the upper extremity, the amputation rate was 30% The pathophysiology of these injuries is quite complex and consists of 3 separate phases: early, intermediate, and late. In the early phase, significant edema, numbness, and possible vascular compromise will be present. The volume of the infused substance and the local inflammatory response causes an increase in the interstitial pressure, resulting in vascular occlusion and compartment syndrome. Death from cecal perforation and air embolism resulting from high-pressure air injuries has been reported. In the intermediate phase, formation of foreign body granulomas occurs, with widespread vessel thrombosis and coagulative necrosis of the skin and subcutaneous tissue. Subsequent damage to tendon sheaths and perineural fibrosis leads to contractures, loss of function, and immobility. In the rarely seen late stages, ulceration and sinus tract development occur over the initial injury site, with purulent discharge, with the risk of malignant development of squamous cell carcinoma and amputation Although much data on the topic have revolved around injuries to the upper extremities and hands, several case reports involved the foot. Shea and Manoli In the present case, a 40,000-psi pressure washer caused the injury. This amount of force is identical to that of a small caliber rifle or even a high-velocity missile. These devices can generate velocities of ≥900 miles/hr Because the patient had been working in a varnish tank cleaning industrial waste, we predicted that highly virulent or rare bacteria would be the primary pathogen. Intraoperative bone cultures were positive for When the present patient first presented to our institution, we had limited options. Significant time had elapsed, leaving him at a greater risk of amputation. Many of these injuries have unfavorable results or even amputation after 72 hours Several options were available to stabilize the affected joint and perform arthrodesis. An approximately 3-cm defect was present that required replacement, whether by an orthobiologic, allograft, or autograft. The choice to use a tricortical iliac autograft was multifactorial. Placing any form of orthobiologic or allograft in an area of previous infection could have quickly served as a nidus for infection. An autograft contains patient host leukocytes and marrow cells that will initiate direct bone healing and offers the advantage of a decreased immune response and the ability to combat infection. Allograft and orthobiologic material heal by creeping substitution, in which the body resorbs the product through osteoclastic breakdown, which is then subsequently replaced by host osteoblasts to initiate healing. This process often requires >7 months in metaphyseal bone and ≥16 months in diaphyseal bone. Vascular invasion and ingrowth typically only occur for 2 to 3 mm into the margin of the graft, leaving the central core open to necrosis, collapse, and infection In conclusion, heightened awareness of the dangers of a high-pressure washer injury is of paramount importance when attempting to preserve a patient's limb. Many times, these injuries occur highly productive and hardworking members of society who depend on their hands and feet to earn a living. It would be a disservice to ignore such an injury or to consider it a simple laceration or deep bone bruise. Prompt recognition and treatment should entail same-day wide excisional debridement with or without fasciotomy, neurovascular monitoring, systemic and possibly local antibiotic therapy, and future plans for wound closure or additional debridement, if necessary. The main goal of therapy for these injuries is to preserve the functionality of the limb and avoid amputation. The most important factors for limb preservation remain the type of material injected, timing of treatment, injection pressure, and injury site