Distal humeral nonunions occur frequently secondary to suboptimal fracture fixation in a comminuted fracture setting. Host factors such as smoking, osteoporosis, compromised soft tissue envelope, and noncompliance can also increase the chances of developing nonunion. Nonunion usually occurs at the supracondylar level secondary to limited cancellous bone and comminution at this level. The elbow joint is usually stiff; therefore most of the motion occurs from the nonunion site. This leads to progressive resorption of bone at the nonunion site. Additionally, the failed implants continue to damage the bone because of pathologic motion within the bone, compromising the bone stock further Internal fixation is the treatment of choice whenever possible. Modern series have reported a high union rate when internal fixation is used, but the reoperation rate has remained high, and function is not always reestablished. Elbow arthroplasty is an excellent surgical alternative for the salvage of distal humeral nonunions when fixation is considered to be impractical or expected to be associated with a high rate of failure. Although some theoretical interest has been expressed in the use of distal humeral hemiarthroplasty for nonunions, the associated stiffness and bone loss make it less attractive compared with the acute setting. Most patients requiring arthroplasty for a distal humeral nonunion will benefit from the use of a total elbow arthroplasty. A linked implant is preferred in this situation as the humeral attachments of the collateral ligaments are removed as part of the procedure. This chapter reviews the presentation, surgical technique, and outcomes of total elbow arthroplasty for distal humeral nonunion. Joint replacement is a well-accepted treatment modality for fractures in other locations, such as the femoral neck or the proximal part of the humerus. The good track record of some elbow implants for patients with rheumatoid arthritis and other conditions prompted the use of elbow replacement for distal humeral nonunion. When total elbow arthroplasty is used for the treatment of distal humeral nonunion, the procedure offers several advantages: the extensor mechanism may be left undisturbed, no postoperative protection is required, functional range of motion is relatively predictable, and pain and limited motion secondary to nonunion, malunion, or posttraumatic osteoarthritis are avoided. The main disadvantages are the risk of other implant-related complications and the need to limit upper extremity use to minimize polyethylene wear. A detailed history should delineate the timeline of the initial injury and various treatment attempts. Patients should be questioned for signs and symptoms of infection such as prolonged drainage or antibiotic use after surgery. Patients should be counseled on modifiable host factors such as smoking, and management of medical comorbidities should be optimized. During physical examination it is important to document the location and status of the previous skin incisions. The location of the ulnar nerve should be known before an incision is made. This can be accomplished by palpation or with the use of ultrasound. Also, stiffness of the elbow and the gross deformity if there is any is evaluated at this stage. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein levels with aspiration and cultures of the elbow joint and/or nonunion site (under fluoroscopy or ultrasonography if needed) should be obtained routinely in patients who had previous surgery to rule out infection. Radiographs are used for preoperative planning (see Routine use of CT scan has not been found to be necessary. However, in cases where the decision to fix the fracture or replace the joint will be made in the operating room, it provides extra insight. Additionally, three-dimensional reconstructions might help the surgeon understand the deformity of the canals in severely deformed patients. The patient is positioned supine with the involved extremity bolstered across the chest. Even if the previous fixation was placed through separate lateral and medial incisions, the elbow is exposed through a posterior midline skin incision, and full-thickness medial and lateral skin flaps are elevated. The ulnar nerve is identified and subcutaneously transposed if it was left in situ during previous surgical procedures. A previously transposed but asymptomatic ulnar nerve should be identified and protected but does not require a full dissection. Neurolysis should be considered in patients with a previously transposed but symptomatic ulnar nerve. The extensor mechanism is left undisturbed, and the procedure is performed with the surgeon working on both sides of the triceps unless an associated olecranon nonunion or triceps detachment provides the opportunity for exposure ( The working space created by resection of the distal part of the humerus is enough to prepare the canals and implant the components. The surgical technique for implantation of a linked elbow arthroplasty is detailed in Access to the ulna is harder because of the “triceps-on” approach. Exposure of the ulnar canal may be improved by partial (20% to 25%) detachment of the triceps from the olecranon on the medial side. Besides, the tip of the olecranon is removed to provide unobstructed access to the ulnar canal. Proper rotational orientation of each ulnar rasp is achieved by the surgeon keeping the handle perpendicular to the dorsal flat aspect of the olecranon (see The implants may be fully seated before they are interlocked, because the articular windows at the medial and lateral sides of the elbow after removal of the nonunited fragments allow interlocking. At the end of the procedure, the common extensor and common flexor muscle groups are sutured to the lateral and medial triceps fascias to seal the joint space and maintain the strength of the forearm muscles. After surgery the elbow is placed in full extension in a bulky dressing with an anterior plaster splint and kept elevated to minimize swelling. Active-assisted range of motion exercises may be initiated on postoperative day 1 or 2. Once the surgical wound has healed, no additional protection is needed because the implants are fixed with cement and the extensor mechanism is left completely undisturbed. Patients usually regain functional elbow motion within the first 3 months after surgery. Total elbow arthroplasty has been shown in several studies to provide satisfactory results in a large proportion of well-selected patients. Figgie et al. To date, the largest series on treatment of distal humeral nonunions with total elbow arthroplasty is from the Mayo Clinic Before surgery, 86% of the patients reported moderate or severe pain. At the most recent follow-up, 79% of the patients had no pain or mild pain. Mean extension was improved from 37 to 22 degrees, and average flexion was improved from 106 to 135 degrees. Joint stability was restored in all patients, including nine with a grossly flail elbow (see Some concerns have been raised about the effect of humeral condyle resection on elbow and forearm strength. However, McKee et al. Total elbow arthroplasty provides satisfactory pain relief and large improvements in elbow stability and function when performed for the salvage of distal humeral nonunion. Our preference is to resect the ununited fragments so as to preserve the extensor mechanism intact and replace the elbow joint with a linked implant. Condylar resection does not seem to affect pain, strength, or function with the design used. However, when arthroplasty is indicated in this condition, the potential for complications and implant failure in the long term should be recognized.