Determination of Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) is a challenging issue for mine designers. Underestimating the capital cost in mining projects may postpone the construction and accordingly the production phases. In addition, overestimating the capital cost may decrease value of the project. Currently available capital cost estimation models cannot predict mining CAPEX in a reliable range of error. Since, current models are not considering all effective parameters other than capacity, annual ore production and waste stripping, they cannot turn out to a reliable result, although they can be used for a rough estimation of CAPEX. In this paper, to estimate the capital cost of mining projects, a model based on Support Vector Regression (SVR) is developed. To establish this model the technical and economic data of 52 open pit porphyry copper mines were collected. Robust design of this model led to negligible error of estimation of CAPEX anticipation procedure. According to the results, the capability of presented model to estimate the mining CAPEX in a wide range of mining capacity is proved. So, as a whole, with a view of evaluation results, this model can be used as a reliable model for estimating of mining CAPEX.The main goal of mine planning, designing, and scheduling is the fact of determination of optimal ultimate pit limit with regard to production scheduling horizon to achieve the maximum net present value (NPV). Fixation of the factor of production per year and specification of suitable mine fleet and equipment are both key factors of design and production scheduling horizon to achieve maximum profit. These are the determinant factors for mining capital cost estimation ( Usually in preliminary stages of project study, shortage of data is tangible. So the estimation of capital cost in this period is a challenging issue. To overcome on this obstacle, implementation of mathematical models are recommended, but currently available capital cost estimation models or methods cannot predict mining CAPEX in a reliable range of error. Performing of CAPEX estimation practice is an intertwined task and depends on many mechanisms. Because of complexity of this subject, previous studies did not express any comment on other effective parameters such as annual ore production and annual waste stripping. Hence, current studies cannot fetch up to an acceptable result. Meanwhile, most of them were developed only for special aspects of mining activities; therefore, they cannot be used for the other mining cost estimation problems. Nevertheless, some of them can be used for a rough estimation of CAPEX in the stage of a mining feasibility study. It is clear that considering the influence of other effective parameters is necessary during the estimation process to develop a reliable model for capital cost estimation. In general, the process of CAPEX estimation is so complicated. With regard to complexity of mining CAPEX estimation process and high amount of initial investment in such projects, a flexible robust method must be applied on it which has the capability of forecasting under any sophisticated conditions. Recently to overcome on foresaid issues, soft computing methods have been employed by researchers. In recent decades, along with the development of artificial intelligence-based methods, many useful mathematical tools are developed based on this theory. One of these methods is Support Vector Regression (SVR) training algorithm ( Many researchers have tried to propose the cost models for mining capital cost estimation, but there is still a significant error in the estimation process. However, to determine the estimation quality of the other approaches, Review of literature survey on mining capital cost estimation subject shows that the “Production Capacity” is the most important factor used in mining capital cost estimation models. Although some researchers also insist on other factors such as “stripping ratio” and “distance from railroad” for developing a better model with a reliable range of error, but the “capacity” factor is still widely used for capital cost estimation model construction ( Further, the descriptive statistics of collected data can be seen in Several factors can take part in mining CAPEX estimation trajectory. In order to achieve a CAPEX estimator model, before implementation of detailed engineering study or without using of it, the inherent properties of a mine should be utilized for the CAPEX estimation modeling process. The properties such as the reserve tonnage, overall stripping ratio, mine annual production, or life of mine are considered as the inherent properties of a mine. Having in hand such properties, provide the capability for determining the amount of mining facilities. Because, the value of each of them, determines the amount of required machinery, equipment, buildings and generally mining scale. In fact, using the inherent properties to develop a CAPEX estimator model, largely consider all cost drivers of mining capital cost. For instance, with a given mine annual production, it can be determined what number of dump trucks, shovel, or surface drill rigs are. Therefore, the CAPEX estimation modeling process, can provide a reliable output, when the inherent properties of a mine are used, of course, under the existence of a wide range of data and using a suitable method for model construction. Therefore, in this study five inherent factors were selected as the most effective ones on the estimation of mining CAPEX, as follows: Mine Annual Production (Million Tonnes) Stripping Ratio Mill Annual Production (Thousand Tonnes) Reserve Mean Grade (% Cu EQU.) Life of Mine (Year) One of the greatest challenges in the model construction process is the suitable variable selection, in which the predictors may have a high correlation with each other. The central premise when using a feature selection techniques is that the data contains many features that are either redundant or irrelevant, and can thus be removed without incurring much loss of information ( As mentioned before, mining capital cost estimation is a complex problem. Because the relationships among dependent and independent variables are very complex. Due to the complexity of this issue, in this paper, a search procedure based on genetic algorithm is presented for the feature selection. Generally speaking, Genetic Algorithm (GA) is a combinatorial search technique based on both random and probabilistic measures. In this procedure, Subsets of features are evaluated using a fitness function and then combined via crossover and mutation operators to produce the next generation of subsets ( Given the random nature of ANN output, to achieve a robust result, the average of MSE of five iteration of an ANN trained with randomly chosen data is used (70% of data for training, 15% for validation, and 15% for test). In the GA-based feature selection, the MSE of an ANN trained is used to evaluate the performance of the selected subsets in each iteration. The second objective is minimizing the number of features. Generally, for selecting the best subset of the features, a two objective optimization problem must be solved. Eqs. To solve this problem, the summation of two above objectives is considered as final objective function (Eq. Suppose that, In fact One of the diagnostic methods for multicollinearity is to perform auxiliary regressions and to regress one covariate on the remaining covariates ( In general, standard errors of regression coefficients are inflated when the There are various methods to develop predictive models. The regression-based models are among of those popular and efficient ones. The earliest form of regression was the method of the least squares. Many researchers have benefited of this method to structure a cost estimation model, but such kind of models can become deficient in complicated conditions such as the existence of different variables which cause to generate the ineligible estimation error answer. In this regard, artificial intelligence methods are greatly developed. They are creatively capable of looking ahead. An intelligent based method can be trained in various ways. There are many statistical and machine learning approaches. The most widely used methods are the neural network, kernel methods such as the support vector machine ( Support Vector Regression (SVR) was first introduced by Vapnik at 1995 ( More in the following, this research is aiming to fit out a reasonable and well-founded model on collected data, based on SVR theory. Although it must stay in a reliable tolerance of error ( The error can be considered negligible as long as the input data lies in If Therefore the loss function can be considered as: By keeping these assumptions, the regression process can change to minimization of an empirical risk like: In this way a simple model is expected. Thus, the norm of To define the constraints of the model, as mentioned above, If the violation exceeds the range of Therefore: With substitution the above terms in Eq. Finally, by adding the two objective functions, the optimization problem formula will be: To show a new improved form of constraints, the formula of problem can be rewritten like following: To achieve the primal problem, Lagrange multipliers are enroll in the following. More in the next, by implementing partial derivative on each variable, in primal problem, the dual problem will be in hand. Finally the completed form of the dual problem can be shown as follows: Note that, by converting the formula to negative form, the maximization problem can be converted to the minimization one: Now, the Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions ( Analyzing of boundary modality, preparing the study field of KKT conditions. Thus, from the above relations, it can be understood: As a result, the following five modes, are possible: The For each member of the Thus the bias component can be computed as below: Eq.  After solving Eq. Eq. We have a linear form of the SVR model in Eq. In fact, in the non-linear SVR model, a weighted sum of kernel is used. In this paper, the Gaussian kernel is utilized to construct the non-linear SVR model. To construct the non-linear SVR model, we used MATLAB 2014b software. Since, the available software, does not have any toolbox for developing the SVR model, therefore, to construct the non-linear SVR model, the objective function and constraints must be converted to matrix form. The first term of objective function can be seen in the Eq. So, the matrix form is: Then the first term of objective function transforms as follows: The second and third terms of objective function show in the Eq. Eq. Thus, Transform function can be considered as: Also the matrix form of constraint is as follows: At the end, we did use Eq. Determination of parameters of the SVR model such as By considering this concept, a SVR model was constructed for mining CAPEX estimation. Furthermore, 70% and 30% of the source data were considered as the train and test data set, respectively. The result of training of the SVR model is shown in Specifically, it can be seen; the fitness errors percentage of the proposed model is very near to zero with an excellent approximation in the training process. Therefore, to illustrate the model estimation capability, it was tested with the test data after the training process. According to the results, obtained from the cross validation, the capability of the presented model to estimate the mining CAPEX in a wide range of mining capacity is proved. The fitness performance in the training stage, and the cross validation of the test data is demonstrated in  Both kernel ridge regression (KRR) and SVR, learn a non-linear function by employing the kernel trick, i.e., they learn a linear function in the space induced by the respective kernel which corresponds to a non-linear function in the original space. They differ in the loss functions (ridge versus epsilon-insensitive loss). Detailed information on the theoretical background of KRR can be found in To demonstrate the estimation capability of the KRR model, similar to SVR model, the same 70% and 30% of data were considered as the train and test data respectively. The fitness performance in the training stage, and the cross validation of the test data are shown in The results show, the KRR model is fitted on the training data set as well as the previous SVR model, but the cross validation illustrates that it cannot predict the test data in the same way. Estimation error in different stage of a mining study is variable. Most common classifications in terms of accuracy is illustrated in Based on the amount of details, each level of study has a specific accuracy. According to literature the precision scale of each level is indicated in Generally, with regard to precision of each study level, overall range of accuracy can be considered as is reported in  It can be seen that the training fitness errors percentage of the SVR model is better than the KRR model, and very near to zero with an excellent approximation, but in the testing stage, the KRR model is associated with a large error, while the SVR model has been able to estimate all the same test data in the reliable range of errors. Eventually, for evaluation of the two models, RMSE (root-mean-square error), and MAE (mean absolute error) were calculated using Eqs. The test and predicted data, obtained from the two models, is reported in Finally, according to the results, the capability of the SVR model to estimate the mining capital cost in a wide range of mining capacity is proved. So, as a whole, with a view of evaluation results, the SVR model can be used as a reliable model for estimating of the mining CAPEX. Possession of an authentic estimator model that can consider effective parameters on estimating capital cost with an acceptable error range is essential. Therefore, to overcome this problem, four major rules that should be considered in devising a reliable estimator model are as follows: Collected data should be related to a specific mineral and specific extraction and processing method. Interval variations of mining capacity and generally scale of mining following a suitable dispersion. Effective factors in determining capital cost should be included in the model. Due to the complexity of the problem, the appropriate methodology to construct the model is selected. For this purpose, the data of 52 open pit porphyry copper mines were collected. If the amount of collected data is increased, following a suitable dispersion of size of mining (annual mine and mill production, tonnage of reserve, Stripping Ratio), then the model will be more comprehensive. Thus, it has the ability of predicting capital cost under various circumstances. So, in this study, five factors are selected as effective items on the amount of capital cost needed for an open pit mine. The prime factor is Mine Annual Production (MAP). There is a direct relationship between MAP and the amount of capital cost. The second factor is stripping ratio. Scale of stripping ratio has a proportional direct effect on the amount of rock production. An increase in stripping ratio, demands more capital cost in order to support the movement of ore and waste. Similarly, the third factor is Mill Annual Production. It is clear that to set up a factory with a higher annual production capacity, more capital cost is requested. Reserve Mean Grade can be a candidate as fourth factor. Higher average reserve grade leads to decrease of plant feed capacity to achieve certain production capacity. It consequently reduces the fund for initiation of the plant. As mentioned above, the collected data for this study are all related to open pit copper ore mines. Since the presence of valuable by-product like silver and aurous is possible, it was preferred to use mean equivalent grade instead of mean grade. Finally the last factor is life of mine. For large-scale mines covering high production per year, with regards to mine scale, more capital cost must be considered. A complicated relationship among predictors can blazon the estimation process to a complex task. Therefore, selecting a robust method to develop a cost model which can covers all inherent complexity of the problem, is very important. In the most cases, both kernel-based approaches SVR and KRR show superior average errors and class-wise mapping performances when compared to the other advanced regression algorithms ( Highly accurate estimation of capital cost becomes crucial and has an undeniable impact on project cash flow, since the mining capital cost is usually huge and expended in the primary stage of mine life. As well, it must satisfy the financier and guarantee the payback of investment for durable time. High initial investment in the mining industry requires careful management of the risk sources. Underestimating the capital cost in mining projects may postpone the construction and accordingly the production phases. In addition, overestimating the capital cost may decrease value of the project. An accurate estimate of the amount of CAPEX required to set up a mine project can lead to the success of that one and achieve the highest possible efficiency. This requires careful consideration at different levels of study in each phase of a mining project. According to the conducted research in review of differences between actual and estimated capital cost, it seems that, there is always an underestimating tendency in capital cost estimation during the feasibility study. Currently available capital cost estimation models cannot predict mining CAPEX in a reliable range of error. Therefore, in this study with regards to the importance of this topic, the most important factors which playing a significant role in the capital cost were selected. Recently, the metaheuristics methods have been widely used for feature selection. Thus, to determine the effective factors for model construction process, a search procedure based on genetic algorithm is presented for the feature selection. In the GA-based feature selection, the MSE of an ANN trained is used to evaluate the performance of the selected subsets in each iteration. Investigation of a fixed length binary string, and the value of each position in the string, obtained by GA-based feature selection, showed that all the 5 considered features have been selected as the important features for model construction. At the next step, an estimator model with an acceptable confidence level was developed The author declares no conflict of interest.