The pollution risk of dilute acidic sulfate effluent (DASE),which is discharged from titanium dioxide factories heavily every year, has sparked the recycling of sulfuric acid, iron and water. In this study, a new green recovery process for the DASE is proposed based on coupling solventextraction–oxidation–hydrolysis. Compared to the conventional ways, this innovative method allows the effective extraction of sulfuric acid and the precipitation of Fe
                        x
                     O
                        y
                     ·nH2O in onestep without adding inorganic neutralizer or precipitant. Trioctylamine (TOA) in kerosene (20–50%) was used as an organic phase for solvent extraction. The hydrolytic productions and the raffinate purified by a cation exchange were evaluated using XRD and ICP-OES, respectively. The initial pH of 0.63 and Fe(II) concentration of 0.1mol/L in the DASE, the volume ratio of organic toaqueous phase (O/A) of 3/1, and reaction temperature of 25°C were determined as the optimal conditions. Under this conditions, Fe(II) was transformed as yellow precipitation which was characterized as α-FeOOH, and pH of raffinate was in the range of 3.6–3.8.Titanium dioxide has been widely used as an additive to paints, plastics and paper As for the DASE, neutralization with limestone is most widely used because the concentration of each solute is low. This method causes serious disposal problems of large amount of gypsum The main components of the DASE are water, sulfuric acid, and sulfate salts. By removing the sulfuric acid and the sulfate salts, the purified water can be reused to wash the metatitanic acid. In addition to the neutralization method, the conventional way of removing sulfuric acid is solvent extraction The majority metallic ions in the DASE are ferrous and ferric ions. Fe(III) presents as species of Fe(OH) The DASE was reused as the resources for recovering sulfuric acid, water and Fe The DASE used in this study was kindly supplied by Shandong Doguide Group Limited Company. In a commercial process, the concentrations of metals are generally stable in the DASE, the initial pH and the ferrous concentration of the DASE used in this study was of 0.63 and 0.1020 The removal of sulfuric acid and the simultaneous precipitation of Fe Following the procedure described above, the reagent concentrations, the temperature and the volume ratio of the ferrous solution and the extraction solution were changed to determine their effect upon the pH and the Fe(II) concentration of the raffinate. The crystalline phase of the obtained particles was identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD; Philips PW1710) equipped with Cu Kα radiation ( The metal contents of the aqueous solution before and after the extraction of the experiments were determined using ICP-OES (Leeman Prodigy). For the analysis of the aqueous phase by ICP-OES, the samples were diluted in 10 The experiments were performed at 25 It was observed that the concentration of Fe(II) in the raffinate decreased rapidly with the increase of the concentration of TOA from 20% to 33%. The Fe(II) concentration remains steady at about 0.026 The reactants involved in this multi-phase system were oxygen, ferrous, ferric, sulfuric acid, TOA and water, et al. The complexes of ferrous and ferric and their equilibrium constants were listed in The chemical species of Fe(II) and Fe(III) listed in Eq. The formation of yellow precipitate involves five steps, including the diffusion of oxygen from air into the reaction system, the oxidation of Fe(II), the hydrolysis of Fe The experimental results of Ref. The pH of the aqueous phase increased when the DASE contacted with the organic phase containing TOA, since TOA has a stronger ability of extracting acids. The removal of acid as Eqs. The quantity of oxygen input from air was one of the key factors determining how much Fe(II) was to be oxidized in the operating period. The concentration of Fe(II) should keep close to a constant value if the equivalent of oxygen was greater than that of Fe(II). On the contrary, Fe(II) should increase linearly with a slope of 1 if the equivalent of oxygen was less than that of Fe(II). The intercept of the straight line which represented the equivalent of oxygen was equal to that of Fe(II) oxidized in the operating period. To verify the deduction, a set of experiments were performed at 25 Compared to the curve for Fe(II) concentration in the raffinate, the curve of pH consists of three parts. The first part is when the initial Fe(II) concentration ranges from 0.05 to 0.10 The initial pH of the DASE is a very important parameter for the recovery of sulfuric acid and the precipitation of iron. By optimizing the initial pH, it is convenient to maximize the removal of sulfuric acid and iron from the DASE. For this purpose, the pH of the DASE was adjusted by sulfuric acid as 1.13, 1.65, 2.13, 2.63 and 3.13. This pH range is in accordance with the pH of the DASE derived from commercial processes. Sulfuric acid extraction from the DASE with Fe(II) concentration of 0.10 According to Eqs. Eq. The reduction potential of oxygen is expressed as Eq. When the equilibrium is reached: It is predictable from Eq. From another perspective, the total sulfuric acid extracted with TOA can be calculated as Eq. According to reactions of 6, 7 and 8 displayed in Eqs. The experiments were performed with O/A ratio of 3:1, the relation between the concentrations of the complex in the organic phase and sulfuric acid extracted from the aqueous phase is shown in Eq. Sulfuric acid is completely ionizable because the raffinate is dilute, therefore, Associating Eqs. Based on Eq. The parameters such as the concentrations of TOA and Fe(II), the phase ratio and the reaction time were kept as the same values as mentioned in the Section Based on the experimental data, two straight lines are obtained by fitting −log To remove maximum amount of acid and iron from the DASE, the aqueous feed was contacted with the organic phase for different times. The experiments were performed at temperature of 25 The oxidation kinetics of Fe(II) has been studied by many investigators, and many mechanisms for the oxidation in liquid phase have been proposed. Oxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III) involves the transfer of totally four electrons from Fe(II)-ions to one molecule of oxygen. Thus one molecule of oxygen (O The reproducible and scale-up experiments (10 times) were carried out for five times at optimal conditions to identify the crystallinity of the yellow precipitations obtained by coupling oxidation, hydrolysis and solvent extraction. The optimal conditions is that the initial pH of 0.63, the initial Fe(II) concentration of 0.1 The other experimental results of the reproducible and scale-up experiments were summarized in There are some important steps to obtain titanium dioxide in the sulfate process. The first step is to digest ground slag or ilmenite with concentrated sulfuric acid to form titanyl sulfate solution. The second step is to form hydrolysis slurry by forced hydrolysis of soluble titanium at high temperature for an appropriate time. The third is to filter and wash the slurry with dilute sulfuric acid and distilled water to obtain hydrated titania (metatitanic acid) This study developed an efficient and environmentally friendly strategy for the extraction of sulfuric acid from aqueous phase to organic phase and the simultaneous precipitation of α-FeOOH based on coupling solvent extraction–oxidation–hydrolysis. The results suggest that the recovery of sulfuric acid, iron(II) and water from the DASE can be done in one step. The diffraction patterns show mainly characteristic α-FeOOH peaks for the yellow precipitations obtained from the reproducible and scale-up experiments. The formation of α-FeOOH is a result of the coupling processes of oxygen diffusion, oxidation of Fe(II) hydrolysis of Fe