In this investigation, in-situ precipitation of vanadium carbides was employed to reinforce Fe–13Mn and Fe–13Mn–3W alloys by means of conventional melting and casting route. Microstructures were characterized by optical and scanning electron microscopy techniques.
                  Mechanical properties of the materials were determined by hardness, impact toughness and tension tests. It was observed that tungsten improved the strength of the matrix and the reinforcements as well as tensile properties and work hardening rate of the VC-reinforced composite. Ball mill abrasion test was utilized to simulate impact–abrasion wear condition using two types of abrasive minerals. The results showed that the degree of benefit to be gained by the use of in-situ VC-reinforced composite materials depends strongly on crush strength of the abrasives. It was found that the studied particle-reinforced composite materials were only advantageous when the abrasives were relatively soft, providing low-stress abrasion condition.Wear is one of the three most commonly encountered industrial problems leading to the replacement of components and assemblies in engineering; the others being fatigue and corrosion. It can be broken down to five categories as: abrasive, adhesive, erosive, fretting and chemical wear. Among them, abrasive wear comprises roughly about 50% of industrial wear situations Austenitic manganese steels (AMS) having a wide range of applications in cement and mineral processing industries are well known. Their most characteristic type contains 12–14 However, austenitic manganese steel has certain properties that tend to restrict its use. It usually has a yield strength of only 345–415 As mentioned above, austenitic manganese steel parts are expected to perform best in impact load working conditions. On the other hand, the well-known pin-on-disk abrasion test cannot produce loading conditions of repeated impacts, although such conditions of loading are a very common feature of service applications Ball mill abrasion test (BMAT) has not been standardized yet, but it has been recently used to reproduce the abrasive particle and counterbody kinematics as well as quantitative alloy performance comparisons closely matching those in impact–abrasion service conditions Chemical composition of the unreinforced alloy and the composite materials are presented in Metallographic samples were prepared according to conventional laboratory techniques. Five percent Nital solution was used to reveal the microstructures. The yellowish brown film was removed by immersion in a 15% solution of HCl in ethanol. The density of the materials was determined by Archimedes' method in distilled water, using an analytical balance equipped with a density measurement kit. The accuracy of the balance was 0.1     Cumulative volume loss of the specimens as a function of milling time is shown in The coefficients of Compared to the conventional austenitic manganese steel, higher wear performance of the composite materials was due to the increase in mechanical properties of the austenite matrix such as initial hardness and yield strength which are prerequisite for satisfactory wear resistance in BMAT. Moreover, vanadium carbide particulates reduced the contact area of the matrix with abrasive particles and made the surface hard to plastic flow. Therefore, deformation and removal of the austenite by micro-cutting of the abradants was alleviated. It was observed that introducing tungsten to in-situ VC-reinforced composite was beneficial to the wear resistance. Specially, in case of hematite, nearly 45% improvement of wear life compared to V-AMS was distinguished. To explain these results, the wear micromechanism of the composites was studied. Altogether, microstructural studies demonstrated that predominant wear mechanism of the studied in-situ reinforced austenitic steel matrix composites was a combination of plastic deformation and micro-cutting of the matrix by abrasion along with microfracture of the reinforcements due to impact fatigue. Therefore, the remarkable increase in wear resistance of VW-AMS composite compared to the tungsten-free composite can be explained as follows: first, tungsten increased initial hardness and yield strength of the matrix. So, a better resistance to abrasion and plastic deformation was achieved. In addition, the worn surface of VW-AMS composite could be hardened more than W-free composite because of its higher work-hardening capacity ( The present paper reports the result of an investigation into the impact–abrasion wear characteristics of Fe–13Mn conventional austenitic steel, high-vanadium and tungsten-alloyed-high-vanadium Fe–13Mn austenitic steel matrix composites. Production of the in-situ VC-reinforced composite materials was quite feasible through conventional melting and casting route. The wear micromechanism of the matrix of the employed materials was plastic deformation of the austenite accompanied by subsurface impact–fatigue cracking of the reinforcements in case of in-situ reinforced composites. A noticeable increase in wear resistance of the composite materials was observed owing to the incorporation of VC particles in Fe-γ matrix. It was found that the W/V ratio increased from core to periphery of the particulates in VW-AMS alloy due to diffusion of the dissolved tungsten from austenite into the growing vanadium carbides during solidification. This diffusion provided the VW-AMS composite with stronger particulates and improved interface bond of the matrix with the reinforcements leading to higher mechanical properties and wear performance compared to the tungsten-free composite material. It was observed that the relative performance of the synthesized in-situ composites in BMAT was strongly dependent on intrinsic characteristics of the abrasive minerals; the crushing strength (hardness) in particular. Consequently, when the grinding media contains strong minerals such as quartz, there may be no economical advantage from the use of sophisticated alloys such as particle-reinforced composite materials as they have unsatisfactory performance under high-stress impact abrasion. However, the presence of even modest proportions of softer mineral abrasives in working condition (i.e. low-stress abrasion condition), can alter the cost-benefit balance in favor of the regarding VC-reinforced composites with respect to conventional Hadfield steel. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of