Breakage probabilities and fracture energy distributions have now found application in several mathematical models that simulate both degradation during handling and comminution devices. Unfortunately, measurement of these at the range of sizes of interest, in particular in the case of fine sizes, is not a straight-forward task. The paper proposes a procedure to estimate breakage probability distributions over a wide range of particle sizes by combining direct measurements of fracture energies at a selected size to back-calculated values estimated on the basis of progeny size distributions from breaking single particles over a wider range. Whereas direct measurements of fracture energies were carried out in a short impact load cell device, energy-dependent progeny size distributions were conducted by propelling particles against a target in rotary breakage testing devices. The work demonstrates how the parameters that characterize the variation of particle fracture energies with size can be fitted in a stage-by-stage process, with successful application to characterizing breakage of a copper ore contained in the range from 37.5 to 0.25 mm.Single particle impact breakage tests have been used consistently for nearly 40 years ( In recent years, breakage probabilities and distribution of particle fracture energies have found application in several mathematical models that simulate material degradation during handling ( A device, called impact load cell (ILC) or short impact load cell (SILC), has been successfully used to determine the distribution of particle fracture energies ( One alternative to circumvent this limitation is the impact of particles contained in monolayer beds and analyzing the progeny size distribution. Through this and by making several assumptions about the material breakage behavior, the median fracture energies may be estimated indirectly ( Rotary impact breakage devices provide a convenient method for testing single particles by impact, since they allow strict control of the specific impact energy applied to each individual particle. Their ability to deal with a stream of particles also makes testing far quicker and more convenient than other single particle impact breakage devices such as drop weight testers and pneumatic guns ( The present work proposes a combination of fracture energy data from a selected size range, estimated using a short impact load cell device, to data from impact-breakage of particles in rotary breakage testing devices to back-calculate median fracture energies over a wide range of sizes and impact energies. It has been widely demonstrated ( These distributions often vary significantly with particle size. Distributions of fracture energies are normally determined by testing particles in an impact load cell device ( When the stressing or collision energy is higher than the fracture energy of the particle, the particle will break, generating progeny fragments. The higher the stressing energy, the finer the distribution of progeny fragments. This reduction in size of the progeny with increasing applied energy in single particle breakage has been described very successfully using the Given that the influences of particle size and stressing energy are reasonably accounted for in Eq. From the In analogy to the distribution of particle fracture energies, energy-specific breakage functions are also measured using data contained in narrow size ranges. Besides Application of the model to predict the outcome of a single stressing event is illustrated in the flowsheet presented in This model has been successfully used as part of mechanistic models of degradation during handling ( A sample of a copper ore has been used as the basis of the work. It has a Bond ball mill work index of 19.5 kWh/t. The sample has been classified by sieving in narrow size ranges from 37.5–26.5 mm to 0.36–0.25 mm. Particles contained in the size range 3.35–2.36 mm were tested in the short impact load cell device (SILC) ( Afterwards, lots containing at least 200 particles in each narrow size range were subjected to impact tests in rotary breakage devices. Particles were subjected to testing at specific energies that varied from 180 J/kg (0.05 kWh/t) to 10,800 J/kg (3 kWh/t). For particles coarser than 4.75 mm, the JK Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT) ( The approach that is proposed in the present work to characterise breakage probability distributions assumes that the fragmentation pattern remains the same for both the coarser and the finer ranges of particles that are tested. The validity of this has been demonstrated for several materials in earlier studies ( Assuming that all particles are subjected to the same specific impact energy and considering that all particles impacted are contained in size fraction 1, then the size distribution of the progeny may be estimated by The approach then assumes that single particle breakage functions are normalisable both in respect to size and impact energy and remain valid to describe breakage of finer particles. From this, the parameter that should be estimated from experimental data is Median particle fracture energies ( The approach used in the present work to estimate the parameters of Eq. estimate parameters in Eq. using data from the JKRBT device for two size classes that are close to this one (4.00–2.83 mm and 2.83–2.0 mm), estimate parameters estimate parameters of the incomplete beta function (Eq. using Eqs. fit parameters of Eq. The distribution of fracture energies measured using the short impact load cell of particles contained in the 3.35–2.36 mm size range is presented in As discussed in 3.2, using the median fracture energy of this size interval, along with size distributions measured for nearly the same sizes (4.00–2.83 mm and 2.83–2.00 mm), obtained from testing in JKRBT, parameters from Eq. Particle size distributions from all breakage experiments were then transformed in From the fitted values of both Eqs. The good agreement between measured and predicted size distributions shown in Data from selected sizes are then shown in The back-calculated  Parity plots of measured and fitted size distributions are shown in Fitting of the single-particle breakage model to measured size distributions in the present work may be compared, for instance, to the approach used by Overall, the model required fitting of a total of 20 parameters to describe body breakage in a single impact. From these, however, 14 parameters corresponded to those of Eq. Recent work by Finally, the validity of adopting the back-calculation approach proposed in the present work to estimate median particle fracture energies can become more limited if some of the assumptions are not valid. For instance, the standard deviation of the distribution for selected materials has been observed to vary with particle size ( A procedure has been proposed that relies only on limited data from direct measurements of distributions of fracture energies to comprehensive data from impact-breakage of particles over a wide range of sizes in rotary breakage testers to estimate parameters of a detailed model that describes body breakage. In particular, the procedure has been found to be useful to estimate values of median particle fracture energies for particles contained in fine size ranges, in which direct measurements are very challenging.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the research group at the Institute of Particle Technology at Erlangen University for permission to use the Schönert breakage device as well as the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre for providing this and the data from testing using the JKRBT. Researchers from