The coverage intervals stipulated by ISO 11929 (2010) for estimating the uncertainty from ionising radiation measurements of replicate samples are compared with those of MARLAP (=Multi-Agency Radiological Laboratory Analytical Protocols Manual) and of Bayesian statistics. The latter two intervals agree well despite their different concepts. Whereas for either of them the ratio of the length of the coverage interval and MARLAP's standard uncertainty grows when the number of samples decreases, no such growth arises for the interval mandated by ISO 11929 (2010). It may therefore be too short (e.g. for three samples by a factor of approximately 2).A new edition of the international standard ISO 11929 for measurements of ionising radiation has come into force in March 2010, which replaces all eight parts of the preceding ISO 11929 standards series. Despite being mainly concerned with decision thresholds and detection limits, the new standard also includes the calculation of coverage intervals. Only the latter aspect of this standard will be investigated in the present paper. The study will consider the case of extra-Poisson variation determined by replicate measurements, thus contrasting a statistical analysis of low-level radioactivity measurement recently published in this journal by The new While the GUM ( As stated in the introduction of the GUM “it is often necessary to provide an interval about the measurement result that may be expected to encompass a large fraction of the distribution of values that could reasonably be attributed to the quantity subject to measurement”. The GUM requires the best estimate of the measurand to serve as the centre of this interval and the “expanded uncertainty” obtained with a chosen coverage factor to be its half-width. As mentioned in clause 6.2.2 of the GUM, the interval so defined has a certain “coverage probability” or “level of confidence”. For this interval neither of the terms “coverage interval” or “confidence interval” nor any other short designation formed by placing a modifier in front of “interval” is introduced in the GUM, whereas the “International Vocabulary of Metrology” ( The objective of this study is to compare for a particular example of activity measurement, presented in The following example derives from a scenario considered by In order to study the effect of the number of samples on the width of the coverage interval of the resulting specific activity, either all 10 counting results are accounted for or just part of them from the beginning of the series, i.e. Following the scenario of The third quantity required is the calibration factor The original data for the example are such that the uncertainties arising from the blank measurement and the calibration factor are almost negligible in comparison with the uncertainty caused by the variation of the activities of the samples. To contrast this scenario we also deal with a synthetic situation that yields virtually the same estimates of the samples' activities, but whose specification apart from that is markedly different. In the modified scenario the rectangular probability distribution for The specific activity A coverage interval according to The standard uncertainty Estimating the standard uncertainties The degrees of freedom ν When the product of the true blank count rate and the blank counting time is 10 or larger, which can evidently be taken for granted in the current circumstances, the variance of the square root of the Poisson variable is very close to 1/4 ( If the lower and upper limits for the calibration factor The expanded uncertainty required for constructing a coverage interval of the specific activity that has an approximate level of confidence of 0.95 can now be computed by multiplying the 0.975—quantile of Student's Radioactivity measurements have been analysed with the help of Bayesian statistics in the current notation for many years ( To permit applying the measurement model already available, the joint state-of-knowledge distribution of its input quantities has to be established. We start with the distribution of the gross count rate. It represents the unknown location parameter Due to the absence of prior knowledge about The true value of the blank count rate Since the only information With the individual distributions of the input quantities now available in the form of Eqs. Next, a change of variable is performed to introduce the value The constant The coverage interval [ Note that considering the sampling distributions of the gross counts and the blank counts independently and assigning the respective reference priors for these basic statistical models is not the only existing Bayesian approach. Another option would be a genuine Bayesian reference analysis. In the situation at hand this requires establishing a joint sampling distribution for the gross and blank counts in terms of the specific activity and of nuisance parameters ( The procedure of the new The limits of the coverage interval ensuing from this truncated Gaussian distribution can be calculated analytically. In contrast to the preceding section, The calculation of Bayesian coverage intervals in The lengths of all types of coverage intervals considered depend markedly on the empirical standard deviation For the original data However, this is only true if the Bayesian posterior distribution involved is unbounded or if the restriction of its support has no significant effect. The latter applies when In the case of MARLAP's coverage interval the ratio Contrary to that the coverage interval stipulated by the new The new As annex F of Finally, it seems worth mentioning some particular aspects related to the modified data. Their distinguishing features in comparison with the original data are the larger uncertainties associated with the blank count rate and the calibration factor. Therefore, larger uncertainty of the specific activity and longer coverage intervals are to be expected. Comparison of The procedure of the new Special thanks are extended to Günter Kanisch of the German “Johann Heinrich von Thünen Institut” for a private communication in which he raised the issue of the questionable procedure stipulated in the new ISO 11929 for processing results of repeated radiation measurements affected by extra-Poisson variations. The second author gratefully acknowledges the support of The calculation of the lower limit Although by definition the areas under the distribution curve to the left and to the right of such a probabilistically symmetrical coverage interval are both equal to (1−