Respirometry was used to study the growth and activity of six pure cultures of acidophilic bioleaching strains grown on a concentration series of low-grade chalcopyrite ores under various pH conditions. Sulfolobus metallicus, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, Acidianus brierleyi and Leptospirillum ferriphilum were able to grow on a very low-grade ore (equivalent to 0.1% Cu content). However, the two sulphur-oxidising bacteria Acidithiobacillus caldus and Acidithiobacillus thiooxidans grew poorly on the low-grade ore. Growth rates of all strains, except for perhaps S. metallicus at highest ore grades, displayed growth that was limited by substrate availability on this low-grade ore (0.5% Cu content in the ore). The decrease in solution pH from 3.0 to 1.0 enhanced both the cell growth and Cu dissolution.The ore grades for various commodities show long-term declining trends over time (  The objectives of this research were to quantify the growth kinetics and activity of pure cultures of six bioleaching strains when grown on low-grade chalcopyrite ore at a range of different ore grades by using respirometry, and to evaluate the effects of pH on microbial growth and activity when the ore grade was low. The six microbial strains used in this study were Low-grade chalcopyrite ore used in these experiments was obtained from Rio Tinto. Based on QEMSCAN analysis the ore contained (wt.%): chalcopyrite (CuFeS Reactor vessels (300 Respirometry was used in this study to evaluate both the microbial growth (based on CO Prior to inoculation, cells of all the six strains were collected by centrifugation at 10,109 The Fe The chemical leaching of chalcopyrite by either oxygen or ferric iron can be represented by following reactions ( The oxidation of Fe The CO Using calcite as an example, carbon dioxide may be released from carbonate rocks in the ore as shown in following reactions. Therefore, although the carbon dioxide consumption is mainly caused by microbial CO The correlation between oxygen consumption and the amount of leached Cu during abiotic leaching of chalcopyrite is presented in The growth kinetics of autotrophic bioleaching microorganisms were analysed by measuring the consumption of CO In contrast to the earlier studies which used mineral concentrate, low-grade chalcopyrite ore was used in this study. Therefore the effects of carbonate released from the gangue minerals (Reaction A dilution series of low-grade chalcopyrite ore was used to test the effect of ore grade on microbial growth kinetics. The effect of ore grade was smallest on the maximum CO The relatively high chemical leaching rate of chalcopyrite at 65 The growth of The maximum CO In this study, the ore was the sole accessible energy source for these bioleaching strains at the beginning of the experiment since nearly all of the carry-over Fe Although the CO All test strains grew poorly at the target pH 3.0 with cell numbers decreasing during the first 50 Lower pH (pH 1.0) favoured the growth of all test strains on the low-grade chalcopyrite ore. Given the fact that the optimum pH values of growth for the six test strains on iron or sulphur are generally at a higher pH (pH 1.5–2.0 for  Abiotic leaching of chalcopyrite ore was performed at pH 1.8 as a control experiment. The enhancement of chalcopyrite leaching by The results of this study suggested that the observed CO This study was funded by CSIRO and the National Basic Research Program of China (2010CB630902), and was conducted through the Minerals Down Under Flagship. Jian Song thanks the China Scholarship Council for supporting his study. We thank Rio Tinto Ltd., for the provision of the original chalcopyrite ore. We thank Patrick Merrigan, Suzy Rea, Helen Watling and the rest of the Biohydrometallurgy group at CSIRO Process Science and Engineering for crushing and sieving, and the mineralogical and chemical characterisation of the ore, which was undertaken as part of the collaborative AMIRA P768A project funded by Anglo American, BHP-Billiton, Phelps Dodge, Rio Tinto, and WMC. We gratefully acknowledge Kayley Usher, Bec Hawkes and Helen Watling for their comments on an earlier version of the manuscript.