Compressive, tortional and abrasive deforming forces are translated to the limbs during high energy trauma. The long bones may be fractured in many patterns with a varying extent of fragmentation and comminution but the soft-tissues appear to absorb the forces in a predictable way. We retrospectively reviewed a series of 79 complex limb injuries treated in a dedicated centre where the clinical notes and photo-documentation were meticulously kept and where the outcomes were known. The soft-tissue injuries were then described and revealed four patterns of injury: abrasion/avulsion, non-circumferential degloving, circumferential single plane and circumferential multi-plane degloving. These patterns occurred either in isolation or occasionally in combination. Resuturing of degloved skin was only successful in non-circumferential (pattern 2) cases. Radical excision of devitalised tissue followed by soft-tissue reconstruction in a single procedure was successful in all patterns apart from pattern 4 (circumferential multi-plane degloving). In pattern 4 we recommend serial wound excision prior to reconstruction.Severe, complex limb trauma remains a challenge. To describe the patterns of soft-tissue injury we retrospectively reviewed a total of 68 patients with a total of 79 injured limbs. The mean age was 29.5 (range 3–84) with 53 males and 15 females. Fifty one (65%) were of the lower limb. Injuries with the following criteria were included: all patients with a skin lesion greater than 5 adequate photo-documentation of the initial injury to allow accurate classification prior to reconstruction. injuries proximal to the metacarpals and metatarsals The causes of the injury were: road traffic accidents in 45%; pedestrian hit by vehicle 24% and machinery/farm accidents 31%. Two limbs went onto amputation. There were 40 long bone fractures (24 tibial; 6 femoral and 10 in the upper limb). The notes, X-rays and a total of 2043 slides (an average of 26 slides per injury) were reviewed. The management of all cases was radical wound excision and immediate wound cover as described elsewhere. During the study it became clear that the softtissue injury fell into distinct patterns as follows: There is loss of tissue as a result of the abrasive force. There is little undermining of the remaining skin edges. Since the majority of these cases occurred over bony prominences (such as the malleoli) there is exposed bone/joints ( In this pattern the majority of skin is still present either as a flap or as an area of extensive undermining. The plane of avulsions is, in the main, confined to a single layer (usually between the deep fascia and the subcutaneous fat and skin ( Either open or closed circumferential degloving of the integument confined to a single plane (usually between the deep fascia and the subcutaneous fat and skin – In addition to pattern 3 there is also a breach of muscle groups and even between muscle and periosteum (   Degloved limb skin post-trauma has been managed by many different surgical strategies. MacCollum recommended conservative management in his series of 26 ‘wringer’ injuries. A second option when there is significant degloving is to commit the patient to serial excisions prior to reconstruction. A theoretical disadvantage of this technique is the potential for bone desiccation and nosocomial infection. Limited degloving with abrasion/avulsion injuries. Free tissue transfer is needed as underlying tendon/bone/joints are exposed. Tissue excision is minimal (wound circumcision). All of these cases required free-tissue transfer. Flap reconstruction lead to prompt primary healing. Non circumferential degloving injuries. These injuries need careful assessment of the vascularity if a conservative approach is to be employed. Tissue excision is almost always needed but when either skin grafts or flap reconstruction is used the wound heals by primary intention. Circumferential single plane degloving. The presence of circumferential degloving is associated with delayed (secondary) healing. Circumferential degloving is a contra-indication to re-suturing. The majority of these flaps are excised in their entirety. Underlying muscle is assessed for viability and only when this can be assured is the wound reconstructed. When it cannot be assured a return to theatre is planned for a further assessment. Circumferential multiplane degloving. Patients sustaining these injuries had suffered the greatest degree of tissue disruption. These cases had the lowest rate of primary healing when using our original, single stage protocol. Thus we would recommend a staged reconstruction in these cases as a matter of course. There are no conflicts of interests from any of the authors with respect to the publication of this study. Ethical approval and funding was provided by the relevant committees of the Medical Centre, Zaloska Cesta, Ljubljana, Slovenia. None.