Phosphorus losses by surface runoff from agricultural lands have been of public concern due to increasing P contamination to surface waters. Five representative commercial citrus groves (C1–C5) located in South Florida were studied to evaluate the relationships between P fractions in soils, surface runoff P, and soil phosphatase activity. A modified Hedley P sequential fractionation procedure was employed to fractionate soil P. Soil P consisted of mainly organically- and Ca/Mg-bound P fractions. The organically-bound P (biological P, sum of organic P in the water, NaHCO3 and NaOH extracts) was dominant in the acidic sandy soils from the C2 and C3 sites (18% and 24% of total soil P), whereas the Ca/Mg-bound P (HCl-extractable P) accounted for 45–60% of soil total P in the neutral and alkaline soils (C1, C4 and C5 soils). Plant-available P (sum of water and NaHCO3 extractable P fractions) ranged from 27 to 61mgPkg−1 and decreased in the order of C3>C4>C1>C2>C5. The mean total P concentrations (TP) in surface runoff water samples ranged from 0.51 to 2.64mgL−1. Total P, total dissolved P (TDP), and PO4
                     3−-P in surface runoff were significantly correlated with soil biological P and plant-available P forms (p<0.01), suggesting that surface runoff P was directly derived from soil available P pools, including H2O– and NaHCO3– extractable inorganic P, water-soluble organic P, and NaHCO3- and NaOH-extractable organic P fractions, which are readily mineralized by soil microorganisms and/or enzyme mediated processes. Soil neutral (55–190mg phenol kg−1
                     3h−1) and natural (measured at soil pH) phosphatase activities (77–295mg phenol kg−1 3h−1) were related to TP, TDP, and PO4
                     3−-P in surface runoff, and plant-available P and biological P forms in soils. These results indicate that there is a potential relationship between soil P availability and phosphatase activities, relating to P loss by surface runoff. Therefore, the neutral and natural phosphatase activities, especially the natural phosphatase activity, may serve as an index of surface runoff P loss potential and soil P availability.Bioavailable P, including dissolved- and particulate- P in surface runoff from agricultural lands accelerates surface water eutrophication ( The P load in surface runoff is mainly derived from desorption in surface soils and suspended solids or sediment ( Phosphorus cycling in soils and P bioavailability are regulated by biological (short term) and geochemical (long term) processes ( Phosphatases play a key role in soil P cycling by catalyzing mineralization of organic P and potentially relate to soil P bioavailability. Acid and alkaline phosphatases (orthophosphoric monoester phosphohydrolase), so classified because they show optimal activities in acid and alkaline ranges ( Citrus is an important Florida agricultural crop with a 200-year planting history. Florida has the largest citrus production area (about 294,455 The objectives of this study were to evaluate the relationships among P loadings in surface runoff, soil P fractions, and soil phosphatase activities, and to understand the linkage of P losses by surface runoff with soil phosphatase activity. Findings from this study are expected to finetune BMPs, by incorporating phosphatase activity as an indicator of soil P availability, with an adequate balance of agro-economical and environmental concerns. Topsoil samples (0–15 Soil pH was measured in a 1:1 soil-deionized water mixture using a pH/ion/conductivity meter (Fisher Scientific, Accumet model 50, Pittsburgh, PA, USA) after 30 The activities of natural, acid, neutral and alkaline phosphatases were measured with the substrate, phenylphosphate, incubated in deionized water (natural soil pH), acetate buffer (pH 5.0), citrate buffer (pH 7.0) or borate buffer (pH 10.0), respectively, at 37 Soil phosphorus was sequentially fractionated mainly following the Hedley fractionation procedure ( Surface runoff water samples were collected from a catchment of two citrus beds at each rain event with an autosampler (SIGMA 900MAX portable sampler) at each site, from February 21 to June 30, 2003 after soil sampling. All the citrus groves have beds of similar width (15 Means and Standard Error (SE) for each measured variable were calculated by site. A one-way ANOVA with the pairwise Soils selected for this study were generally sandy in texture (880-970 Phosphorus fractionation in the five soils determined by the Hedley's procedure showed that for soils C2 and C3, the size of different P fractions decreased in the order of residual P>NaHCO Organically bound P (the sum of organic P concentrations in the H The geochemical P, consisting of inorganic P fractions extracted by H The amount of plant available P (PAP) significantly decreased in the order C3>C4>C1>C2>C5, but the percentage of plant available P with respect to total soil P decreased in the sequence C2>C3>C4>C1>C5. Consequently, the percentage of refractory P fractions changed in the reverse order ( From February to June 2003, there were 11, 18, 8, 7, and 13 rain events for the C1, C2, C3, C4, and C5 sites, respectively. Mean concentrations of P fractions in the first 2-hour flush samples, including total P (TP, 0.51–2.64 Basic soil properties influence P concentrations in surface runoff from these citrus groves. Soil pH and total Ca and Fe contents were negatively correlated with the concentration of TP and TDP in surface runoff ( The acid phosphatase activity in the five sandy soils ranged from 94.6 to 156.7 The activity of acid phosphatase was significantly correlated to total organic C ( Pearson correlation analyses between phosphatase activities and soil P fractions confirmed the above results ( In brief, this study revealed the relationships among the P loss by surface runoff, the soil P fractions, and the phosphatase mediated P mineralization. Phosphorus loaded in surface runoff is mainly derived from plant-available P fractions, which are transformed from relatively stable inorganic and organic P fractions in the soils. Because of their positive significant relationships with soil P fractions and P loss by surface runoff, the natural and neutral phosphatase activity may serve as an index of potential P loss in surface runoff and soil P availability to plants. The P release from organic P fractions by enzymes or microorganisms mediated mineralization processes is primarily related to soil pH ( This study is, in part, supported by grants of the Nonpoint Source Management/Water Quality (DEP Contract No. G0018 and S0132) from the Florida Department of Environmental Protection (DEP). Florida Agricultural Experiment Station Journal Series No. R-09851.