The interactions between manganese dioxide and pyrite or chalcopyrite were investigated in both the ammoniacal and ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching systems. Pyrite and chalcopyrite dissolved at enhanced rates in the presence of manganese dioxide in both ammoniacal and ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions. The interactions between manganese dioxide and sulphides were also applied in the thiosulphate leaching of gold from a pyrite concentrate and a sulphide ore. The addition of a small amount of manganese dioxide in the thiosulphate leaching of the sulphide bearing gold ores improved both the kinetics and the overall gold extractions without much impact on thiosulphate consumption.
                  A pre-treatment process with copper ammoniacal solutions enhanced gold extractions from the sulphide bearing ores and reduced thiosulphate consumption to a large extent. The sulphides partially degraded in the pre-treatment process likely exposing gold to leach solutions. SEM images of the surface corrosion of pyrite and chalcopyrite in contact with manganese dioxide showed that the pre-treatment with manganese dioxide enhanced the degradation of the sulphide matrices, thus achieved a better gold leaching from the sulphide bearing ores.Thiosulphate gold leaching has received much attention as an alternative technology to the cyanidation of gold ores in recent years due to the growing environmental and public concerns over the use of cyanide. Most work has been carried out on complex ores containing high copper, carbonaceous ores or ores containing high concentrations of lead, zinc or manganese ( Galvanic interactions are known to occur between different conducting minerals and play a significant role in hydrometallurgical applications. Many base-metal sulphides such as galena, sphalerite, chalcopyrite, and pyrite, are semiconductors, and when any of such minerals in contact with one another are placed in an electrolyte, a galvanic couple is formed in which the mineral of lower rest potential corrodes at an enhanced rate as the anode of the couple, and the one with higher rest potential corrodes at a slower rate as the cathode. Manganese dioxide is also a semiconductor having rest potential much higher than the aforementioned sulphide minerals so that, in contact with any of them, it can form a galvanic corrosion couple in which both the minerals would dissolve at enhanced rates simultaneously. Pyrite and chalcopyrite samples were obtained from Geological Specimen Supplies, Australia. The sulphides were crushed, milled to 45–75 Laboratory grade ammonium thiosulphate and ammonia water (25%) were provided by Westlab Chem Supply Pty Ltd., Australia. Analytically pure cupric sulphate, hydrogen peroxide (30% W/V), hydrochloric acid and nitric acid were obtained from Merck. Distilled water was used in the experiments. Elemental concentrations in solutions were determined by ICP-OES, involving the oxidation of sulphur species as very stable sulphates prior to the analysis ( Experiments for the mineral leaching system were performed in a 300 The gold leaching of the pyrite concentrate and the sulphide ore was performed in a 1  The cathodic reactions were the reduction of the oxidising species such as the cupric tetra-ammine complex and manganese dioxide:   In the presence of manganese dioxide, both the pyrite and chalcopyrite systems had much higher mixed potentials. The mixed potential for the 10 In the manganese dioxide and thiosulphate system, thiosulphate can be oxidised by MnO In the binary systems of the sulphides and manganese dioxide, the oxidative dissolution of the sulphides was accelerated. The oxidation of sulphides could alter the surface properties owing to the precipitation of reaction products such as iron hydroxides, which could reduce the catalytic effect of the sulphides on thiosulphate decomposition. Manganese dioxide was reduced to manganese oxide while the sulphides degraded. On the other hand, some manganese dioxide could also be simultaneously reduced by thiosulphate as well. The combined effect of manganese dioxide would determine the overall thiosulphate degradation. Therefore, manganese dioxide within 10% (weight percentage relative to the sulphide content) can be introduced in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of gold from sulphide ores to enhance the dissolution of sulphides for a better liberation of gold from sulphide matrices, without extra consumption of thiosulphate. An excessive addition of manganese dioxide over this range could result in excessive consumption of thiosulphate. The effect of manganese dioxide on gold leaching of the pyrite concentrate is shown in  The beneficial effect of manganese dioxide on gold leaching of the sulphide containing ores was expected to originate from the likely galvanic interactions between manganese dioxide and sulphides. Sulphides could dissolve at higher rates. The dissolution of sulphides probably expose the inter-locked gold within the sulphides amenable to the leaching solutions, and hence improve gold leaching. Clearly, the dissolution of sulphides increased to a large extent with the addition of manganese dioxide in terms of the increase in the concentrations of the metal species in the leachates.   For sulphide ores, sulphides will likely degrade to partially or completely expose gold during the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching, which is beneficial for gold leaching. In the mean time, the dissolution of sulphides will cause a decrease in the oxidant levels such as dissolved oxygen and the cupric tetra-amine complex in solutions and the sulphides will catalyse the decomposition of thiosulphate, which contributes to reduced leaching kinetics and excessive thiosulphate consumption in the leaching of sulphide gold ores. A small amount of manganese dioxide could improve gold leaching from sulphide ores, as demonstrated above. However, the introduction of manganese dioxide could increase the consumption of thiosulphate especially at a relatively higher dosage. The solution to this problem is to implement an oxidative pre-treatment, which will partially break down the sulphide matrices and release gold. It is expected that pre-oxidised sulphide ores would be more amenable to the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching with higher gold recoveries and less thiosulphate consumption. In cyanide leaching processes, the pre-treatments that were evaluated included fine grinding, oxidative roast treatment, bio-oxidation, in situ slurry oxidation, and oxidative pressure acid leach ( The pyrite concentrate and the sulphide ore samples of 400 The pre-oxidation partially dissolved sulphides and likely exposed gold to the leach solutions. This could be one of the reasons for the enhanced gold leaching. The addition of manganese dioxide could accelerate the oxidative dissolution of sulphides by forming galvanic couples. This was supported by the SEM studies of the pre-oxidised sulphides, as shown in  The reduced consumption of thiosulphate could be one of the reasons contributing to the improved gold leaching after pre-oxidation. The pre-oxidation of sulphides could partially decompose sulphides and alter the surface properties of sulphide particles, which were considered to catalyse thiosulphate decomposition. The mixed potentials remained almost in the range of 165–175 Pyrite and chalcopyrite dissolved at enhanced rates in the presence of manganese dioxide in both ammoniacal and ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions. The introduction of manganese dioxide at less than 10% (with respect to the sulphide content) in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching of gold from sulphide ores could enhance the dissolution of sulphides and possibly liberate the inter-grown gold with sulphides, without extra consumption of thiosulphate. An addition of manganese dioxide at 2.5% and 10% respectively in the leaching systems of the sulphide ore and the pyrite concentrate increased both the kinetics and the overall gold extractions without much impact on the mixed potentials and thiosulphate consumption. An excessive addition of manganese dioxide resulted in excessive thiosulphate consumption despite the increase in gold leaching. The pre-treatment process with copper ammoniacal solutions improved the gold leaching from the sulphide ores in terms of gold extractions, while the thiosulphate consumption was reduced to a large extent as well. The sulphides partially decomposed in the pre-treatment process, which likely exposed gold to the leaching solution and released copper and other heavy metals. The reduced thiosulphate consumption and the readily accessible gold due to the partial breakdown of the sulphide matrices in the pre-treatment could be the main factors contributing to the enhanced gold leaching from the sulphide ores. The pre-treatment with manganese dioxide achieved a higher gold leaching from the sulphide ores. The financial support from Newcrest Mining Limited, Placer Dome Technical Services Limited, and the Australian Research Council is gratefully acknowledged. Appreciation is also expressed to Hui Tan for assistance with the experimental work.