H2 recovery from large quantities of toxic H2S, the by-product of various minerals, coal and petroleum processing operations is an attractive proposition for efficient resource and energy utilization. This study has examined the analysis of a double-pipe membrane reactor internally packed with a Ru-Mo catalyst for the catalytic desulfurization of H2S and H2 generation. Due to the endothermic nature of the reaction, a non-isothermal model was employed. The effect of tube and shell-side residence times, sweep gas (argon) flow direction within the annular space between shell and inner membrane tube (relative to the H2S feed) and the shell-to-tube side pressure ratio on H2S conversion were investigated. The counter-current mode of reactor operation generally gave better H2S conversions than the co-current mode (40–60%). Irrespective of shell-to-tube side pressure ratio, conversion in both modes of operation exceeded the thermodynamically-imposed ceiling by between two- and five-fold increase. The niobium membrane proposed was internally-coated with platinum to improve resistance to H2S attack. The analysis showed that an optimum Pt thickness of about 1μm is attainable although the possible formation of hairline cracks may necessitate the use of a higher coating. The model also accounted for the temperature-dependency of the membrane H2 permeability in order to have a more realistic assessment of the reactor performance.area of the membrane (m internal tube area (m external tube area (m concentration of H dimensionless heat capacity of H H heat capacity of the mixture at the inlet ( Damkohler number initial Damkohler number (at the tube inlet) shell diameter (m) diffusivity of H tube diameter (m) activation energy (kJ total molar flow rate of H initial total molar flux rate to the shell side (mol initial total molar flow rate to the tube side (mol Dimensionless total flux on dimensionless flux of the component w on heat transfer coefficient from the furnace to the shell (J internal tube heat transfer coefficient (J  external tube heat transfer coefficient (J dimensionless H heat of reaction (J reaction rate constants (mol equilibrium constant (kPa Sievert's constant (mol longitudinal position on the reactor (m) total length of the reactor (m) flux of hydrogen atoms through the membrane (mol flux of H dimensionless heat of reaction partial pressure of hydrogen (kPa) partial pressure of H partial pressure of S shell total pressure (kPa) tube total pressure (kPa) heat transfer rate from the shell to the tube (J tube radius (m) average radius (m) residence time on the shell (s) residence time on the tube (s) ideal gas universal constant ratio of the feed total molar flow rate through the tube  ratio between the total pressure of the shell Stanton numbers furnace temperature (K) shell temperature (K) initial shell temperature (inlet) (K) tube temperature (K) initial tube temperature (inlet) (K) dimensionless number that represents the ratio of the hydrogen permeation rate to the tube feed rate. wall temperature (K) permeation coefficient (mol overall heat transfer coefficient between the tube and shell volume of the tube reactor (m volume of the annular shell (m molar composition of the component w on dimensionless longitude of the tube. kinetic rate of reaction (mol thermal decomposition kinetic rate (mol membrane thickness (m) catalyst bed void fraction catalyst bed density (g-catalyst membrane permeability (mol molar density of the fluid on the shell (mol molar density of the fluid on the tube (mol dimensionless temperature of the furnace dimensionless temperature of the shell dimensionless temperature of the tube niobium initial (at the inlet) platinum total total at the inlet shell tube H Ceramic and composite metal membranes are commonly used for product separation in H Fukuda et al. Analysis of shell and tube membrane reactors in the literature has been mostly focused on co-current flow (between the feed and sweep gas) operation A schematic diagram of the shell and tube membrane reactor is shown in Hydrogen transport through metals has been studied extensively  The flux of hydrogen molecules (H Integrating over the tube thickness yields: Hence, the H In the case of multiple metal layers, the total transport resistance may be obtained from: If the membrane thickness is very small compared with the radius of the reactor ( Niobium was chosen as the membrane material due to its high permeability to hydrogen The catalytic decomposition of H   In order to simplify the analysis of the membrane reactor, it is assumed that: Plug flow conditions exist in both the shell and tube side. Negligible axial pressure drop prevails in both packed bed and annular space. H Neither H The Pt-coated Nb membrane is catalytically inactive. Reactant and sweep gas can flow co- or counter-current. The reactor is operated non-isothermally (Δ Based on these assumptions the steady-state mass and energy balance equations for the membrane reactor are:  H H Tu is the ratio of the H S From the reaction stoichiometry, the tube-side S  H    The component balance Eqs. The tube Damkohler, Thus, The dimensionless number, Tu, which was first introduced by Itoh et al. Hence, Tu can be expressed as function of Tu The pressure ratio, Eq. The Stanton number for the tube- and shell-sides are further given by: For simplicity, the heat transfer coefficients are assumed to be constant over the reactor length. Hence, the ratio The system of ordinary differential equations (Eqs. The Runge-Kutta integration is a straightforward exercise for the co-current case where the inlet to the tube and shell sides are at the same end of the double-pipe reactor assembly since it can be treated as an initial-value problem. However, the counter-current case is a nonlinear boundary-value problem since the tube inlet (whose initial conditions are known) is at the same end as the shell-side exiting stream (with unknown final conditions). A shooting method rather than finite difference approach was employed due to the nonlinear character of the governing ODEs. Thus, in the counter-current situation, the gas composition profiles within the shell-side (annulus) were initially assumed to be constant in order to solve for the tube-side composition profiles. Subsequently, the shell-side ODEs were then solved using the most recently obtained tube-side composition data. This procedure was repeatedly looped until the percentage variation in the shell-side outlet conditions for successive iterations was less than 1 The results of the modeling are shown in The temperatures of the furnace, tube and shell inlets were assumed to be equal. Thus, only the inlet temperature is specified. The reactor was operated at 101.3    Interestingly, in the counter-current operation, although hydrogen production exhibits a similar overshoot (cf. Nevertheless, since the permeation coefficient is the same for both co-current and counter-current flows, it is apparent that the counter-current operation is a more effective gas separation mode. In the counter-current arrangement, the transmembrane driving force is smaller than in the co-current one at the beginning of the reactor. In fact, near the reactor inlet (shell exit) a negative H  The effect of reducing the tube-side residence time (rtt) on the conversion is shown in Additional improvements in the conversion may be obtained by increasing the hydrogen membrane permeability  A detailed analysis of hydrogen production from H The authors are grateful to the Australian Research Council for financial support.