Accumulative press bonding (APB) is a developed reuse of the oldest severe plastic deformation (SPD) process to produce nano/ultrafine grained (UFG) materials. In the present work, microstructural evolution and mechanical properties of AA1050 pure aluminum alloy have been investigated under APB technique up to 14cycles. From scanning transmission electron microscopy characterization, it was found that continuous dynamic recovery was a dominant mechanism in grain refinement, and resulted in formation of nano/ultrafine grains with average diameter of 450nm in pressing direction and 320nm in transverse direction. After 14 APB cycles, almost 10% of all grains were less than 100nm. Electron backscattered diffraction revealed that the fraction of high angle boundaries and the mean misorientation angle increased by increasing strain during APB process and reached a saturation value of ~78% and ~35°, respectively. By increasing the number of APB cycles, the tensile strength of the APB processed aluminum improved and reached 180MPa after 14cycles, which was two times higher than obtained values for initial materials, i.e. 88MPa. On the other hand, the elongation dropped abruptly at the first cycle and then increased slightly. Strengthening in APB processed aluminum was attributed to strain hardening by dislocation accumulation dominant in primary cycles, and grain refinement which was dominant in final cycles. Scanning electron microscopy observations demonstrated that failure mode in APB processed aluminum was shear ductile rupture with small elongated dimples.The most popular non-ferrous materials are pure aluminum and aluminum alloys, which have a key role in modern industry As-received commercial AA1050 aluminum strips with the dimensions of 100 The tensile tests were done in accordance with the ASTM E8/E8M standard, using a Houndsfield H50KS machine at a nominal strain rate of 1.6 In examining the effects of APB process on the microstructural evolution of pure aluminum, STEM observations were carried out in both LD–TD and LD–PD planes. For further analyses, STEM observations were focused on the specimens processed by 2, 5, 10 and 14   To investigate the bonding quality between aluminum layers, STEM micrograph of LD–PD plane of the specimen after 14 The mechanical properties of the aluminum produced by the APB process are shown in In order to clarify the failure mechanisms in the tensile tested specimens after APB process, SEM studies were undertaken and are shown in The APB process, as new severe plastic deformation method, has been carried out successfully up to 14 (1) The APB process led to decreasing the grain size of AA1050 strip from 40 (2) The STEM micrographs taken from the LD–PD planes of the specimens also showed that a good bonding between aluminum layers was achieved at each cycle. (3) EBSD analysis shows that the fraction of high angle boundaries ( (4) The APB refining mechanism was continuous dynamic recovery characterized by subdivision to ultrafine grains by severe deformation and progressive recovery to form clear and highly misoriented ultrafine grains. (5) It was found that tensile strength of pure aluminum increased with the increasing number of APB cycles due to strain hardening and grain refinement mechanisms. The UTS improved from 88 (6) SEM observations of fracture surfaces displayed that failure mode in APB processed specimens was shear ductile rupture. The authors acknowledge Alfonso García Delgado and Antonio Tomás López for their assistance with the SEM, STEM, TEM and EBSD at CENIM-CSIC, and the financial support from