The effect of thermal treatment on the magnetic properties of pyrite was investigated. Untreated pyrite showed evidence of both paramagnetic and ferromagnetic components. After heat treatment, the saturation magnetisation increased considerably until 800°C when the magnetisation decreased, and then increased again after 900°C. These changes are due to phase changes induced by oxidation. The wet magnetic recovery of the untreated sample was 25%, which increased to over 90% after treatment at 500°C. The recovery of the magnetic fraction plateaus after treatment at higher temperatures, implying that a sample magnetisation greater than 5kAm−1 leads to a recovery greater than 90% for this size fraction.Pyrite is an iron disulphide (FeS Roasting of hematite and siderite has been shown to produce magnetite and hence give an enhanced magnetic recovery ( Thermal treatment can increase the recovery of minerals through magnetic separation. This work aims to categorise the mineralogical changes that occur when pyrite is heated in a muffle furnace, and relate these changes to alterations in the magnetic properties of the sample, and the recovery after magnetic separation. Mineral samples of Peruvian pyrite were obtained from Gregory, Bottley & Lloyd (London, UK). The mineral sample was crushed and milled to obtain a suitable size fraction. Then, the sample in the less than 125 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out on the pyrite samples using a Philips X-Pert MRD (with Cu tubes). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was carried out using a JSM-6060 LV (JEOL Ltd., UK) fitted with an Inca 300 EDS (energy dispersive spectrum) analysis system (Oxford Instruments, UK). Magnetic properties were measured using a Lakeshore 7300 Series vibrating sample magnetometer, using 0.2 Fifty grams representative samples were used for wet magnetic separation processing, using a Boxmag Rapid high intensity wet magnetic separator. Suspensions were made up using 100 The initial and final mass of all the pyrite samples were measured. The change in mineral phase also brings about a change in the mass of the sample, as the sulphur is evolved as sulphur dioxide, and then oxygen bonds with the iron atoms to form magnetite, hematite and maghemite. The theoretical mass change from FeS EDS analysis of the untreated pyrite shows a ratio of sulphur to iron on the surface as being 2:1 (66% sulphur, 33% iron), with no other elements observed apart from gold, which was used to coat the samples prior to analysis. This is to be expected as the formula is FeS The untreated pyrite showed a saturation magnetisation of approximately 900  Similar results have been reported by The results of the magnetic separation of the pyrite samples are shown in Thermal treatment has a considerable effect on the magnetic properties of pyrite increasing the saturation magnetisation, due to the formation of the more magnetic phases of pyrrhotite and magnetite. At a temperature of 800