Effects of remote hydrogen plasma cleaning process parameters on the removal of Fe impurities on Si surfaces were investigated. Fe removal efficiency is enhanced with decreasing the plasma exposure time and increasing the rf-power. The optimum plasma exposure time, rf-power and substrate temperature are 1min, 100W, and 300°C respectively, in the range below 10min and 100W. According to the AFM analysis results Si surface roughness was improved by 30% or higher, which seems to be due to the removal of particles by plasma cleaning. The Fe impurities on the Si surface are considered to be contaminated as physisorption or incorporation of Fe-compounds on/in the chemical oxides, which can be explained from the thermodynamic point of view. The removal mechanisms of the Fe impurities are thought to be formation and evaporation of volatile compounds and lift-off of the Fe impurities during the removal of the underlying chemical oxide layer during the remote hydrogen plasma treatment.As device dimensions continue to scale down, the number of processing steps of Si-based devices are increased. Each processing step is likely to leave residues or contaminants from the previous step. These residues or contaminants are classified generally as organics, particles and metallic impurities Furthermore, these metallic impurities can affect the excess leakage current in p–n junctions and degrade the reliabilities and yields of the devices. Therefore, it is essential for these metallic impurities to be removed down to the level of 10 The most commonly adopted cleaning method for the Si-based devices is a wet chemical cleaning method based on the RCA cleaning The current trends of Si-based device manufacturing procedures are to use low temperature processes In this study, we have attempted to apply this remote hydrogen plasma cleaning to the removal of Fe impurities. Here, we varied the plasma power, exposure time and substrate temperature, which are important process parameters of the plasma cleaning. After the remote hydrogen plasma treatments, Fe impurity concentration and the surface roughness were measured by using Total Reflection X-ray Fluorescence (TXRF) and Atomic Force Microscope (AFM), respectively. Finally we proposed the contamination and removal mechanisms of Fe impurities by the remote hydrogen plasma treatment. The Si substrates used in this study were p-type, B-doped and 4 The Si substrates treated with the remote hydrogen plasma were characterized by Total Reflection X-ray Fluorescence (TXRF) and Atomic Force Microscope (AFM) to verify the residual amounts of Fe impurities and the Si surface roughness. Prior to investigating the removal efficiency of Fe impurities by the remote hydrogen plasma treatment, impurities intentionally contaminated by the FeCl Effects of the remote hydrogen plasma treatments on the removal of Fe impurities and Fe removal mechanisms were studied. It is well known that the most common impurity existing in vacuum chambers is water vapor. It is adsorbed by chamber walls when the chamber door is open and then closed or adsorbed by wafer surfaces. The water vapors on the chamber wall or wafers are desorbed by the downstream of hydrogen plasma and ion bombardment. The desorbed water vapors are thermally dissociated into O, OH, and H radicals. The metal molecules removed from Si wafer surfaces react with the O and OH radicals to form metal oxides. Thus, the Si wafers are recontaminated from the removed Fe contaminants. Another source for Fe contamination during the cleaning process in the remote plasma chamber is the stainless steel chamber wall. Some of the ions with high energy may bombard the chamber wall. Fe atoms will be sputtered off from the wall during the ion bombardment and fall on the wafer surface. Therefore, the Fe contamination of the wafer surface from the chamber wall may be proportional to the plasma exposure time. Also it can be seen from the AFM analysis results in the This improvement of surface roughness is closely related to the removal of Fe particles shown in the two-dimensional AFM images (  According to the AFM results 30% or higher improvement of the surface roughness has been achieved after the remote hydrogen plasma treatments at 20  Finally, the contamination mechanisms of Fe impurities on the Si substrate were investigated. The chemical species in the 10 Also we can think of the formation of other compounds such as Fe The ions (H Here, the reason why Fe impurities increase after 5 In this study, the remote hydrogen plasma treatment was applied to the elimination of Fe impurities intentionally contaminated on the Si surfaces. The concentration of the Fe impurities intentionally contaminated on the Si surface was about 10 The contamination mechanism of the Fe impurities on the Si surface seems to be a physisorption or incorporation of Fe-compounds on/in the chemical oxides, which can be explained from the thermodynamic point of view. The removal mechanism of the Fe impurities are thought to be formation and evaporation of volatile compounds and lift-off of the Fe impurities during the removal of the underlying chemical oxide layer during the remote hydrogen plasma treatment. This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation, Research grant 981-0907-025-2.