The fuel properties of small-sized whole-tree fuel stocks were studied in roadside and in-stand storages. The significance of pile cover, season and storage site on moisture content and heating value of Scots pine (Pinus sylvestris) and pubescent birch (Betula pubescence) fuel stocks were observed.
                  When the fuel stocks are placed in a well-ventilated location moisture content may be lowered below the 40% mark during one summer period. Covering the piles will give up to 6% units lower moisture content in comparison with non-covered piles. The most benefit is gained from covering during snow melting in spring and the least in midwinter when the snow is dry.
                  Multi-tree harvested stemwood with no limbs seasoned equally well as the whole trees both in roadside and in-stand trials. This is because the processing of multi-tree bunches caused some debarking to take place. As a result, the transpiration drying capability of whole trees was equalized by the evaporation of moisture via the open wood surface. Both assortments reached moisture contents below 30% in in-stand conditions during one summer's seasoning.
                  The effective heating values of neither birch nor pine showed significant changes. However, heating value deviated with the composition of the fuel stock. The presence or absence of crown material was a factor.
                  The microbial counts of mesophilic fungi in whole-tree fuel stocks were only 1% of that found in logging residues. The counts of thermo-tolerant fungi were still much smaller. Leaving the Scots pine piles uncovered will increase the number of mesophilic fungal spores and bacteria.The quality of biomass fuel stock can be measured in a number of ways. Most often it is the moisture content that is the determining factor. Other qualifications include bulk density, ash content, presence of microbes and heating value. More recently chemical composition of the fuel stock has been identified as a character of quality. This is because forest-based fuels have been identified to contain alkali metals and chlorine in sufficient quantities to cause agglomeration of bed sand as well as corrosion in modern fluidized and circulating fluidized bed boilers and heat exchangers. However, in spite of the development in the modern combustion technologies which are making way for the conversion of very moist fuel stocks, most of the modern day heating and power plants, including medium and small industrial and commercial plants, have limitations as to how wet a fuel they can handle. Also the forest industry is looking for a dry ingredient to their pallet of very wet mill residues. By introducing dry forest fuel to the fuel stream of wet residues they are able to improve plant efficiency and lower emissions. The dryer the added fuel, the better, as the mill residues can have moisture contents up to 70%. On the other end of the scale, in small local district plants (<1 When conditions are favorable whole trees and stemwood stored fresh on a roadside landing or a terminal is likely to loose moisture over time even at northern latitudes A whole tree includes all the components of a tree above the stump cross-section. Its effective heating value of oven-dry matter ( Vast number of microbes, i.e. fungi, molds and bacteria use woody tissue as a substrate to grow and reproduce on. The amount of microbes available is dependent on the substrate moisture content, relative humidity of the ambient air and the temperature. Most of the microbes are very temperature sensitive and are hence also categorized. The reproducing molds and fungi form great numbers of reproductive spores in a very short period. The spores are subsequently released into the ambient air. When the spores make contact with the human respiratory system they cause an allergic reaction the severity of which depends on the amount of particles present in the ambient air and the person's sensitivity to them Taking ecological and technical limitations into consideration the calculations show that the availability of small sized trees, 5–10 The study had four objectives. The first aim was to discover (a) whether it is possible to lower the moisture content of biomass in roadside storage below the 40% mark and to maintain that level until utilization, (b) if the drying rate is different in the roadside storage than the in-stand drying, (c) and how the timing of the harvest and the length of storage affect feedstock quality. The second objective was to find out how delimbing by multi-tree harvesting (mth) affects the rate of drying as well as fuel properties. The third goal was to see if covering storage piles enhances feedstock quality. The fourth objective was to discover the count of fungal spores and bacteria in the ambient and cabin air at the chipping site. In-stand drying was studied on two locations, one in Töysä (62°42′N, 23°47′E) in western Finland and the other in Ruokolahti (61°20′N, 28° 22′E) in southeastern Finland. The first thinning was carried out with a single-grip harvester with mth capacity. Bunches were laid out in a normal fashion along the strip road, in shade under the remaining trees. In Töysä there were six whole-tree and six delimbed, i.e. mth-handled, bunches. In Ruokolahti, there was 10 of each. Large synthetic cloths were placed under the bunches to collect all the needles falling off the bunched trees. All 36 bunches were positioned on them. Breathable material was chosen to let rain water pass through and ground moisture to permeate into the bunches. The delimbed trees did not contain needles but the tarpaulins were used to collect the needles that had fallen off the overstory trees. As the area of each base cloth was known, it could be calculated how much needle matter had fallen off the trees per square meter. This quantity was then subtracted from that collected from the base cloths under the whole trees to determine the mass shed of the bunched trees themselves. The moisture changes in the bunched trees were followed by weighing them approximately every third week. This was done by tying webbing around the bunches and weighing them with a Dynalink scale. Lifting power was provided by a forwarder-mounted grapple loader. Measurements were taken to a full kilogram and converted into moisture changes. Roadside storages were initiated throughout the year ( The study material included 14 whole-tree and 2 mth-handled stemwood storage piles. The piles were located on five sites in the provinces of Central Ostrobothnia (Toholampi at 63°49′N, 24°11′E; Kannus 63°58′N, 23°33′E; Kaustinen 63°36′N, 23°27′E; Alaveteli 63°40′N, 23°21′E) and South Carelia (Ruokolahti 61°20′N, 28°22′E). Half of the whole-tree piles were covered with a fiberglass reinforced, 230 All but two piles were forwarded green to the roadside landing immediately after felling. The material of the two remaining piles was left to season on the site for 2 months. One of these piles was whole trees and the other mth-handled stemwood ( Samples were taken at the beginning and at the end of the storage period. Intermediate samples were collected from those piles kept in storage for two summers. Analyses carried out included moisture content, heating value and microbial count from comminuted wood and air samples. At the initiation of each trial 10–15 samples were taken. This was done by chipping 2–5 stems per sample, mixing chips and extracting a 1-l sample for each analysis. When terminating storage of a pile, five samples were attained by the same method from the top, centre and the lower portion of each pile. All the heating values in this study are given as effective heating values of oven dry biomass ( Leco AC-300, a microprocessor-based isothermal-jacket bomb calorimeter, was used to determine the calorimetric heating values ( Moisture contents were determined by drying the samples at 102 Microbial counts were made from both the chipped material and the ambient air at the time of chipping. The ambient air samples were taken while comminuting the piles in the operator's cabin and the air around the person sampling the chipped wood at a distance of approximately 10 Both whole trees and mth-handled stems dried very quickly ( During the first summer, moisture content reached its low point in August (<30%), climbing to 35% by the end of September. Although leaving wood in the forest over the winter period is not a recommendable practice from the logistics point of view, it did not increase moisture content. The results show that if the feed-stock is left on the site for an extended period it can maintain low moisture content. However, it should always be forwarded to roadside storage before the end of August to guarantee the lowest possible moisture content. At this time the average moisture contents of the bunches were again at 30%. A further observation was that mechanical delimbing of the multi-tree bunches helped stems dry at such a rate that there was no difference between them and the whole trees ( When examining Heating values were very comparable between whole trees and mth-handled wood. Although the initial values were not statistically different ( It can be concluded that both assortments dry well in in-stand conditions. Neither one was significantly better than the other. This is because the site and the positioning of the bunch in relation to the sun and shade have an effect on the drying rate of each individual pile. It is also noteworthy that there was no difference in the variability of the moisture contents. When considering in-stand seasoning one should also take into consideration the fact that utilizing mth-handling will lower the yield by about 15%. On the other hand, it makes it possible to leave the nutrient rich needle and branch mass on the site to enhance the growth of remaining trees. If whole tree harvesting is utilized the needles will not fall off, but be removed from the site and the nutrient cycle Although in-stand drying proved to be an effective means of lowering moisture content there is a negative aspect to it, namely this requires a two-pass harvesting operation. You have to bring in the machinery to pick up the wood later on instead carrying out felling and forwarding consecutively. This will bring an additional cost to the procurement chain.  Both piles benefited from the summertime drying. The cover helped maintain the pile moisture content lower until the time of comminution (31.6%). The advantage gained in spring did last all the way into fall. This observation shows support for the thought that covers can be very important factors in keeping water from the melting snow away from the feed-stock. It is also worth noting that the total reduction in moisture content was greater under cover. More importantly both covered and uncovered piles did reach the targeted below 40% moisture content. Four piles, two birch and two Scots pine, were stored at the same site in Kannus for species comparison. Birch did have lower initial moisture content because of its higher density. When the stock piles were reviewed the following January 2003 both treatments had reached the 40% goal. The cover was a significant factor here resulting in a very dry fuel of 31.8% moisture content. Extension of storage to the beginning of the following heating season in September 2003 further reduced moisture contents to 26.7% and 32.1% for covered and non-covered piles, respectively ( In contrast with birch, covering pine piles was not a statistically significant factor at any stage of the storage period. Wood in both storage types had reached comparable moisture contents by the following January as well as September. The lack of significance could not be identified on the basis of the data collected at the site ( When this information from the piles in Kannus is compared with that from pine piles at Kaustinen, piles made 2 months later, it seems that earlier harvesting can benefit from the favorable drying months of April and May ( Similar conclusions can be made when comparing birch storages in Kannus and Alaveteli. The 2 months’ head start of piles in Kannus is maintained until January 2003 when Alaveteli piles were comminuted. Covering the piles provided a drier fuel in both locations but it was a significant factor only in Alaveteli ( The experiment at Ruokolahti aimed to study the effect of delimbing in contrast with whole trees. There were no statistical differences in the drying rate of whole trees and the mth-handled ones. Both lost moisture at a rapid rate. At the time of pile review in late April the moisture content was approaching the 30% mark. At the time of the second review and comminution of the piles moisture content was close to the 20% mark in September 2003 ( The second experiment carried out in Ruokolahti was designed to see if initial in-stand drying as described in The significance of the cover in the statistical sense is somewhat case specific. When the benefits are looked at from the user point of view, where statistics do not play a role, one can state that the benefit from the use of cover ranges from 3% to 6% units in moisture content. This is much less than the benefits of covering logging residues where the benefit was in the range of 10–15% units lower in covered piles The effect of preliminary in-stand drying before roadside storage was tested at the review dates in April and September, 2003. This was done separately for whole-tree material and the mth-handled wood ( The total range of pooled heating values measured after the storage period in covered and non-covered piles for birch were 18.7–20.3 ( The above figures indicated an all around uniformity in the Similar results surface when the heating values at the end of storage period are compared with the initial level. Neither the pine feed stocks in Kannus and Kaustinen nor did the birch feed stocks in Toholampi showed change after the initiations of the storages. The birch feed stocks in Kannus and Alaveteli were contradictory and demonstrated opposite results, storage time being a factor in both locations but having the opposite effect ( It is most likely that the cover and storage time did not have an impact on the lower heating value. This is because the chemical composition, mainly carbon–hydrogen balance, should have been altered through bio-chemical processes. However, it is suggested that the allowable time in these storages was possibly not long enough to cause the changes. The variability in results was most likely caused by sampling. In spite of the good mixing of the samples there is always bound to be a good deal of variability between and within the samples. This is because branches, foliage and bark are very different in heating value from stemwood In Ruokolahti the experiment was targeted to find out the possible effects of timber assortment on the characteristics. The fresh material made entirely of pine whole trees had a heating value (19.53 As with moisture content, the advantage of in-stand drying was one of debate. Whole trees did benefit from the in-stand seasoning period in comparison to the feed-stock placed green on the landing. This was not the case with the mth-handled wood. The variation in heating value brought about by storage length, site and the type of assortment is very small, it is the moisture content that remains a much more significant factor. The counts of mesophilic fungi in chips in comminuted material ranged from 1.6×10 The count of mesophilic bacteria was comparable to those found in residues (16×10 Those samples taken from ambient air during chipping showed a cubic meter of air to contain 0.07×10 Although the counts were not overly high in the chip samples or the ambient air it is recommended that possible health risks should be taken into consideration when assigning people to work in a close vicinity to the chipping site. The appropriate masks should be worn to avoid exposure. The fuel characteristics of small diameter Scots pine and pubescent birch from thinnings and cleanings were studied. It is possible to reach moisture contents below the 40% mark when piles are positioned on open, well-ventilated sites. Early harvest in the year is beneficial to the procurement system because it can utilize the high vapor pressure deficit of April and May. If this opportunity is lost it cannot be regained within the first summer drying period. During winter harvest it is also possible to utilize the ground frost as an agent to increase ground bearing capacity and hence make it possible to carry out harvesting on sites with poor bearing capacities. The benefits from pile cover are highest during melting of the snow in spring and lowest in midwinter. Winter itself does not present a problem as the dry snow tends to fall off when wood is being comminuted. However, spring meltdown will increase moisture content as wood will absorb some of the moisture. This is the time when cover becomes a quality improvement agent. On average, covering did lower moisture content by 3–6% units over the whole study material. Whole trees and mth-handled wood dried and stored equally well thanks to debarking that took place during the harvesting. It is not known if the same amount of debarking would have occurred had harvest been carried out in all seasons. Furthermore, if the soil nutrient status is a critical issue the mth-handling can be a very viable energy wood harvesting method. Also, mth-handled material will produce a more uniform fuel stock void of needles and branches. This may be a factor at some power plants with a restricted capability to handle high levels of chlorine and alkali metals contained in branch material. A negative consequence of delimbing is that it lowers the harvesting yield. In-stand drying is an effective way of reducing moisture content in a short while. However, it requires a two pass harvesting operation and may not be suitable for all operators from the logistics point of view. Carrying out the harvest in two stages, felling as a separate task from forwarding, may suit small scale entrepreneurs but may be unsuitable for large-scale forest and energy industries. The effective heating values of neither birch nor pine dry material showed significant changes from the practical point of view. It may, however, deviate with the composition of the fuel stock. The presence or absence of crown material may play a role here. Whatever the cause of this variation might be it is secondary to that caused by moisture content. The microbial counts of mesophilic fungi in the fuel stock were only 1% of that found in logging residues. The counts of thermo-tolerant fungi were still much smaller. Leaving the Scots pine piles uncovered will increase the number of mesophilic fungal spores and bacteria. Although the concentrations were lower than those found in logging residues they were high enough to justify the use of a protective mask when working in the immediate vicinity of a chipping operation.