Weight percentages of different size incremental particles in a mineral slurry is integrated into the ultrasonic attenuation model to derive a relation between ultrasonic attenuation and particle sizes. However, in the inertial and scattering regimes of frequency–radius space, irregularity and aggregation of particles can results in values of ultrasonic attenuation that are significantly different from those predicted by the derived model, which is based on the assumption of separated smooth spherical particles in mineral slurries. Experimental attenuation data obtained previously from mineral slurries of iron ores particles are compared with predicted values. It is shown that there is a negligible difference between predictions and experimental data. A new modification of theoretical model for ultrasonic attenuation is derived. The theory uses ωτ
                     v or κR as a fractal scale. It requires an empirical determination of the difference between the fractal dimension of the measured mineral slurry and that of a hypothetical slurry of spheres with the same particle size distribution. The new fractal modification of ultrasonic attenuation model is found to enable better agreement with measured attenuation as a function concentration for irregular particles than the theoretical model. Moreover, the fractal approach is found to discriminate between the effects of particle irregularity and aggregation.A critical requirement for achieving improved grinding control is on-line particle size analysis ( Ultrasonic techniques provide a number of advantages for on-line particle size determination of slurries, particularly their ability to operate on slurries which are undiluted, optically opaque and electrically non-conducting. In addition, ultrasonic measurements are rapid, precise, non-destructive and safe. The equipment used is robust, compact and relatively inexpensive. Following early work on ultrasonic on-line particle size analyzers in the 1970s ( The present work investigates the influence of particles' shape irregularity and aggregation on ultrasonic attenuation in mineral slurries. Firstly, theoretical model of attenuation in mineral slurries is derived and a new fractal modification of derived theoretical model of attenuation is proposed to account for the effect of particle shape irregularity and aggregation. Then, new experiments designed to test these effects are described. Finally, the data in these experiments are compared with the predictions of the fractal modification. In homogeneous media sound waves, analogous to light, propagate straight from the source, thereby steadily losing part of their energy by sound absorption in the medium. In heterogeneous media, e.g., in suspensions or mineral slurry systems, a qualitative shift in the character of sound propagation can be observed. The sound waves are reflected, refracted and diffracted on the disperse phase in such a way that each particle acts as a sound source, radiating sound waves in all directions. This general wave phenomenon is called sound scattering. Unlike light scattering, the sound scattering may be strongly influenced by mechanical and thermal coupling effects between the continuous and disperse phase. This follows from the physical nature of sound waves, which are nothing less than propagating compression equilibrium disturbances, coinciding with temperature fluctuations. To model the attenuation behavior of particulate systems in an acoustic field, one needs to account for the physical interactions between the particles and the acoustic wave. Early in 1948, Urick proposed the model between the attenuation and the particle size ( Assuming In Eq. However the slurries commonly encountered in mineral processing plants tend to have several features that in combination make Eq. Assuming If the weight of all particles in per unit volume slurry is Ultrasound propagating in mineral slurries causes the ultrasonic energy losses (attenuation). The presence of suspended solid particles, smaller than the incident ultrasound wavelength, results in ultrasonic attenuation due to viscous and thermal effects. When the particles are significantly smaller than the incident ultrasound wavelength, scattering theories ( However, there are data ( According to  When The effects of particle irregularity become more visible as is increased. In the inertial regime, the presence of irregularity and aggregation should mean that particles may not be regarded as smooth and spherical, and it is expected that data will deviate significantly from predictions that assume smooth and spherical particles. The ranges 0.1 So, in the inertial propagation regime and the transition between the viscous and inertial regime, The value of The model Eqs. The experiments were conducted in a 0.25 m diameter and 0.5 m tall cylindrical cell. A mechanical stirrer was equipped at the bottom of the cell to maintain a homogeneous suspension of particles in water. The ultrasonic system consisted of a pair of All the system parameters, i.e., gain, pulse voltage, gate, energy were controlled via RS485 interface with a computer (Pentium 133 MHz). A digital oscilloscope was used to visualize and analyze the received signal. In a typical experiment, after visualizing the signal on oscilloscope a gate position and a gate width were selected according to the position of the signal. After ultrasonic pulses were emitted by the transmitters, the receivers were activated at a time fixed by the gate delay and for the duration of selected gate width. This process was repeated at a rate of 1 s Given the digitized ultrasound pulses, we now show how the experimental value of the ultrasonic attenuation coefficient To investigate ultrasonic attenuation in mineral slurries that consist of irregular and aggregated particles, the experiments were made with different mass concentrations in ultrasonic frequency of 1.0 MHz. Particle size distribution of different iron ores slurries are given in Theoretical model between ultrasonic attenuation and particle size distribution in mineral slurry system is derived. However, in the inertial and scattering regimes of frequency–radius space, irregularity and aggregation of particles can result in values of ultrasonic attenuation that are significantly different from those predicted by derived theoretical model, which is based on the assumption of separated smooth spherical particles in mineral slurries. Experimental attenuation data obtained previously from mineral slurries of iron ores particles are compared with predicted values calculated according to the derived theoretical model. It is shown that there is negligible difference between predictions and experimental data. A new fractal modification of theoretical model for ultrasonic attenuation is proposed. The theory uses