Contact explosion damage prediction of circular steel plates is of interest to the naval architects and warship designers. During contact explosion, a fraction of the explosive energy goes for plastic deformation and fracture of the plate. Experiments were conducted on air backed circular high strength low alloy (HSLA) steel plates to establish this fraction. There was a large amount of plastic deformation preceding fracture in the contact exploded plates. The deformation contour was found to be spherical showing maximum absorption of energy for the depth of bulge attained. The radius of penetration of the test plate was obtained by applying the terminal strain to fracture and the non-uniform strain distribution in the target plate. A case history is presented where the current predictions are compared with the existing empirical methodology and experimental data.principal strains in three directions fracture strain energy (J) energy of the TNT explosive (kcal/kg) TNT equivalent of the explosive energy conversion factor in work units (J/kcal) instantaneous radius of the circular plate (m) radius of the hole that is penetrated (m) thickness of the plate (m) charge weight (kg) critical charge weight apex bulge depth (m) coupling factor yield stress (MPa) input deformation Research on contact explosion damage studies started way back in 1924 on the discarded Japanese battle ship Tosa Shock loading of circular plates subjected to non-contact underwater explosion loading was extensively studied by various authors The empirical relations formulated by Keil The input shock energy, Since large deformation is dominated by membrane stretching From During contact explosion, preceding fracture, thinning of the target plate takes place which absorbs energy in the form of plastic deformation. It can be approximately assumed that the hole that is being made by the explosive is circular in nature and significant energy goes only for the hole radius. Therefore, for the given quantity of charge, the radius of penetration of the explosive in the plate has to be worked out in accordance with these assumptions. Since the depth of bulge is dependent on the size of the hole being penetrated which in turn depends on the charge weight of the explosive, a method needs to be evolved relating the strain pattern across the radial line of the plate, the rupture strain and the radius of the hole. von-Mises’ proposed that yielding would occur when the second invariant of the stress deviator exceeds some critical value The target material was high strength low alloy (HSLA) steel whose chemical composition and mechanical properties are given in A drum model target of The explosive used was PEK-1 (1.17 TNT equivalent) along with Mk-79 electrical detonator. The Mk-79 detonator (which is equivalent to one gram of TNT) is 41.2 The deformation contours of the plates subjected to contact underwater explosion are shown in The deformation to input energy ratio was 7.26% for 1 The underwater explosion instantly converts the explosive charge into a hot gas of high pressure of approximately 5000  Applying the material parameters for the HSLA steel plate under investigation, and the TNT equivalent for PEK-1 charge: Underwater contact explosion damage phenomenon was empirically modelled by Keil relating the charge quantity to the thickness of the plate. The model lacks explanation for the variation in the structural material properties. Also, the basis of the empirical model is not known. A new damage prediction model has been proposed in this investigation relating the input shock energy, the contour of deformation, the material properties and the thickness of the structural material. This model assumes rigid plastic membrane stretching and neglects the energy dissipated in localised dimpling and cracking during the dynamic deformation process. A case study has been illustrated correlating Keil's empirical model and the present approach. The results are in good agreement with each other and the experimental observation. The authors are grateful to Rear Admiral S. Mohapatra, Director, Naval Science and Technological Laboratory, for his kind permission to publish this article. Acknowledgements are due to Mr. K.H.B.S. Satyanarayana for the help in experiments, Mr. M. Suryanarayana for explosive handling and Mr. V. Ramakrishna for hardware support.