Isolated fracture of the capitellum is discussed in detail in These fractures can be challenging to repair by virtue of (1) small articular fragments, (2) limited subchondral bone, (3) multiple fragments, (4) impaction fracture of the posterior part of the lateral column and the posterior trochlea, and (5) fracture of the medial epicondyle. Involvement of the posterior humerus is associated with nonunion. The patient's functional demands and overall health influence treatment as much as the fracture pattern and complexity. Lower limb injuries and the need for weight bearing through the upper limb for ambulation are important factors to consider. Computed tomography with three-dimensional reconstructions is helpful in understanding fracture elements, and there is some evidence that it can improve the reliability of diagnosis of certain fracture characteristics ( Fracture characteristics to evaluate at the time of imaging are (1) posterior or medial trochlear involvement, (2) impaction of the lateral column, (3) impaction of the posterior trochlea, (4) fracture of the lateral epicondyle, and (5) fracture of the medial epicondyle. Impacted fracture fragments are important to recognize: these fragments are out of position but may not appear fractured in surgery because they are not easily moved and the fracture lines are not obvious. It may not be possible to fully reduce all the fracture fragments until these impacted elements are realigned. In general, displaced fractures of the capitellum/trochlea benefit from operative intervention. If the patient is medically unstable, closed reduction may be attempted by extending the elbow using the method described by Ochner et al. The timing of surgery is dictated by the quality of the skin envelope and the overall health of the patient. Acquiring advanced imaging and ordering implants may be necessary. On occasion, this process may take up to 1 week or more. It is appropriate to perform surgery after these preparations are complete. If the skin envelope is tenuous and blistered, it is reasonable to delay surgery even longer until the skin has improved, but this is not generally necessary. If a patient has an isolated coronal shear fracture without substantial columnar impaction, arthroscopic-assisted reduction and fixation may be considered and is discussed in the previous section. If there are more complex elements, open reduction and internal fixation is preferred. If the patient is infirm or there is coexisting arthrosis, hemiarthroplasty, total elbow arthroplasty, or nonoperative treatment is considered. This fracture has been treated in the past by closed reduction alone, but internal fixation allows the patient to begin elbow motion more rapidly. In general, patients can be positioned supine, lateral decubitus, or prone. The majority of capitellum/trochlea fractures can be treated through an extended lateral exposure with the patient supine ( For simple fractures, a lateral skin incision is sufficient. For more complex fractures, a posterior skin incision allows the surgeon to convert to an olecranon osteotomy. In addition, a posterior skin incision allows for the surgeon to perform an ulnar nerve release. The extended lateral exposure is initiated at the supracondylar ridge (see More complex fractures usually include fracture of the lateral epicondyle. The fracture line can be utilized in the approach so the lateral mass structures can stay attached to bone. This fracture can be mobilized distally along with the origin of the LCL and the common digital extensor by incising some posterior anconeus muscle and lateral triceps from the olecranon and elevating the triceps from the posterior humerus. When there is involvement of the posterior or medial part of the trochlea, an olecranon osteotomy provides better access and visualization. The ulnar nerve is released and may be transposed at the end of the case or left in situ ( Reduction is straightforward when there is no impaction or posterior fracture. With such fractures—even if the LCL is intact—the fracture can be reduced by extending the elbow and pushing the capitellar/trochlear fragments into place. When the elbow is flexed, the fracture is captured by the radial head. A decision should be made about impacted fracture fragments. It is possible that realigning these fragments could destabilize them and make the repair more tenuous and might increase the likelihood of osteonecrosis and nonunion. A balance must be made between these risks and the potential benefits of restoring the normal anatomic alignment. Sometimes the capitellar fracture does not reduce properly. This is usually because of impaction or fragmentation of the posterior or medial distal humerus. The most difficult fractures are those that have no intact posterior or medial articular surface upon which to support and fix the fragments. In this instance, the senior editor has employed resorbable suture fixation with gratifying results (see Open fractures of the capitellum and trochlea are rare, but when they occur, prompt operative intervention and definitive fixation may decrease bacterial contamination and the potential for infection. Capitellum and trochlear fragments are often completely devoid of soft tissue attachments. The decision about whether or not to clean them and fix them internally can be a difficult decision in the setting of an open fracture, and it may be helpful to include surgeons with extensive elbow trauma experience in the decision making. Occasionally the capitellar fragment is lost. In this setting, repair of the lateral epicondylar fragment and reduction of the trochlear articulation with external fixation may be reasonable salvage ( Some surgeons prefer screws inserted from posterior to anterior. For fractures with posterior and medial trochlea involvement, buried headless screws can be used to secure the fragments to the medial and lateral columns, small threaded Kirschner wires or bioabsorbable pins can be used to secure fragments together side-to-side with fixation in the adjacent subchondral bone, and a plate and screws can be used to support the entire construct off of the lateral column with a posterolateral plate, especially in cases where impaction has been reduced. Arthroplasty may be an option when older, less active, or infirm patients have a complex fracture. If the medial and lateral columns are intact, hemiarthroplasty (replacement of the distal humerus articular surface with one side of an anatomic unlinked prosthesis) has been utilized. Splint immobilization with the elbow in 90 degrees of flexion and the forearm in neutral rotation is applied with the postoperative dressing and provides comfort for a few days or until the skin envelope is healthy enough to allow motion. If fixation is secure, active self-assisted elbow motion can be initiated when the patient is comfortable. Shoulder abduction is avoided if there was lateral collateral ligament compromise. If the fixation is tenuous we will immobilize the elbow for about 4 weeks rather than initiate early motion. When the lateral column is injured, the blood supply may be injured, and obtaining secure fixation is more difficult. Nonunion is also associated with comminution of the posterior aspect of the lateral column. When there is avascular necrosis of the capitellum, late excision of the necrotic fragment is a reasonable option if the other injured structures have healed. Weiland et al. reported radiocapitellar arthroplasty for treatment of avascular necrosis of the capitellum. Postoperative stiffness may result from ulnar neuropathy, capsular contracture, hardware prominence, or heterotopic ossification. If the nerve is compressed, release of the nerve can help improve range of motion. Isolated capsular contracture can usually be improved with stretching, although this process may take up to a year. Arthroscopic or open capsular release is an option in patients with refractory contracture. In our experience we have found (1) isolated capitellar fractures are uncommon, (2) nonunion is associated with posterior column involvement, and (3) there is a high rate of reoperation. In one series of 21 fractures, the majority involved the posterior part of the lateral column or the posterior trochlea. Seven fractures had extension involving the medial epicondyle. Ten patients had a second operation: six for contracture release, two for treatment of ulnar neuropathy, one for symptomatic implants, and one for early loss of fixation. Two patients were felt to have some fracture settling. No nonunions or avascular necrosis were diagnosed. The average arc of flexion was 96 degrees. Sixteen patients had good or excellent results, and four had fair results according to the Mayo elbow performance score (MEPS). A second series from our group included many open fractures and fracture-dislocations that likely were not classified as capitellum and trochlea fractures in the past. Among 30 patients, 18 fractures involved both fragmentation of the capitellum and trochlea as well as fracture of the posterior distal humerus (type 3B according to Dubberley et al. Other reported results are similar to our own. Watts et al. reviewed 79 patients and noted that 36% involved the capitellum only and 38% were complex fractures involving the lateral epicondyle or more.