A thermodynamic model is developed and shown to reliably simulate the speciation of the quaternary H2SO4–Fe2(SO4)3–FeSO4–H2O system through a wide range of solution compositions and temperatures (25°C–150°C). The main species involved (including H+, Fe2+, Fe3+, SO4
                     2−, HSO4
                     −, FeHSO4
                     +, FeSO4°, FeHSO4
                     2+, Fe(SO4)2
                     −, FeSO4
                     +, Fe2O3 and H2O) were investigated, and their thermodynamic data were collected and critically assessed to evaluate their activity coefficients and equilibrium constants. Results show that the species distribution depends highly on the initial total amount of iron, acidity, nominal Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio and temperature. Modeling results also reveal that most of the Fe(III) is distributed as complexes or precipitates and the free Fe3+ accounts for only a minor percentage, whereas a large amount of Fe(II) exists in the form of free Fe2+, with the rest dissolved as complexes. Moreover, based on the model results, the temperature dependence of the real Fe3+/Fe2+ ratios and their activity coefficient ratios was subsequently obtained and employed to systematically study the redox potential of the Fe3+/Fe2+ couple. The redox potentials predicted by the model increase with the nominal Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio and temperature when the nominal Fe3+/Fe2+ ratios are 10:1, 100:1 and 1000:1, with its values in the range of 736–956mV (all potentials in the present study are quoted with respect to the Standard Hydrogen Electrode at 25°C) from 25°C to 150°C in the studied acidic iron sulfate solutions. At a nominal Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio of 1:1, the predicted potentials are relatively stable with respect to temperature, typically between 671mV and 679mV, because the real Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio in solution is much lower for such a condition. The speciation model explains the change of redox potential with temperature for all nominal Fe3+/Fe2+ ratios. An expression is also developed to calculate the redox potential and is supported by experimental results from the literature. It appears that the redox potential can be easily and accurately determined only based on the variables of temperature and nominal Fe3+/Fe2+ ratio, independent of the nominal concentrations of H2SO4 and Fe3+. Moreover, this expression is probably applicable to more general cases at or around room temperature. The proposed model was validated by reliable prediction of measured redox potential from 25°C to 150°C. Comparison of previously published results of ferric solubility, together with an analysis of the calculated pH and ionic strength, provides additional justification for the model developed herein. These findings contribute to the research on aqueous speciation of acid iron sulfate solutions, the reduction kinetics of the Fe3+/Fe2+ couple, as well as the mechanistic analysis in industrial leaching processes of chalcopyrite and other sulfide minerals.It is well known that the largest preponderance of Cu is in sulfide porphyry deposits which consist largely of chalcopyrite ( Essentially, these processes can be regarded as electrochemical processes with cathodic reduction of the oxidant (ferric regenerated by oxygen) and anodic oxidation of chalcopyrite. To date, much effort has been devoted to understanding the kinetics and mechanisms of the oxidative processes ( In order to study the reduction behavior of ferric ions and further obtain its influence on the leaching rate, the true ferric concentration/activity in the leaching solution is required. In addition, despite the fact that ferric plays a central role in the oxidation of chalcopyrite, it has been reported that the reversible/redox potential of the Fe Moreover, although it is generally accepted that ferric ion is an effective oxidant for chalcopyrite leaching and increased FeSO In addition, during the oxidation of chalcopyrite, there are a number of solution species that can interact by forming complexes that may exert influence on the overall process. Therefore, based on the above analyses, solution speciation is required to better understand and determine the factors affecting the leaching process, so as to establish the optimum conditions and improve the leaching rates for copper recovery. However, although several studies have examined the speciation of the quaternary acidic iron sulfate system ( The present work was initiated to explore the possibility of establishing an aqueous speciation diagram of the quaternary acidic iron sulfate system, thereby obtaining more detailed information about the electrolytes involved and further providing the data that can enable one to study the kinetics of the cathodic reduction reactions on chalcopyrite in industrially relevant leaching systems, at different temperatures from 25 When iron sulfates are present in sulfuric acid solution they are distributed as soluble species such as simple cations, neutral or charged complexes, as well as precipitates such as Fe However, modeling the speciation in the H The activity coefficients for ions can be estimated by using different models such as the Debye–Hückel equation and its extensions, the B-dot, Pitzer, electrolyte NRTL, Bromley–Zaemaitis and the mixed solvent electrolyte (MSE) models. These models have been employed in hydrometallurgical applications, and reviewed by several authors ( In the present work, the B-dot activity coefficient model was applied. This model has been used to evaluate the activity coefficients of dissolved species in similar aqueous sulfuric acid/metal sulfate systems and has given reasonable predictions through a limited range of temperature and solution composition ( The only two species-specific parameters are the In the case of polar neutral species, the activity coefficients were assigned a value of unity according to the literature ( In the systems considered in the present work, only moderate concentrations that are similar to those found in hydrometallurgical processing of chalcopyrite were used, and the real ionic strength of the solution was generally lower than 0.85 Standard molar Gibbs free energy of the reaction products and reactants are required to obtain the equilibrium constant of a reaction. Thermodynamic data for all of the species that may exist in the specific system were collected and critically assessed to calculate the equilibrium constants at different temperatures.  It is well-known that iron forms complexes in H The pH value of the acidic iron sulfate solution used in chalcopyrite leaching is usually below 2, because higher pH will lead to the formation of iron hydroxyl complexes and even iron precipitates. Speciation calculations indicate that iron hydroxide complexes always play a minor role in these solutions where pH is below 2. As a result, at the high acidities of interest (pH generally less than 2.0), hydroxide (OH The changes in the activity of water participating in the chemical reactions are negligible compared to its concentration, and were thus also ignored. It has been reported that at low pH the concentration of Fe(SO FeH(SO Fe After the selection of the possible species, the next step was to collect their thermodynamic data and calculate the equilibrium constants at different temperature. For many aqueous reactions, there is a lack of equilibrium constants for high temperatures. In most cases, even if available, a big variation often exists among different reports. The Criss–Cobble method ( The thermodynamic data at 298.15 Thermodynamic data for the five iron complexes have been reported, and were reviewed and summarized by several reports ( As to It should be noted that the calculated Δ Prior to calculating the speciation, to obtain the equilibrium constants for HSO It is clearly seen in Chemical equilibrium equations based on the above formation reactions (including the equations of activity coefficient and ionic strength), and additional component mass balance equations in terms of Fe Experimental work to study the quaternary acidic iron sulfate system was carried out at temperatures ranging from 25 According to several publications on the redox behavior of the ferric-ferrous couple in H The platinum wire used in this investigation for the redox potential measurement was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The diameter was 0.5 In the present study, the overall composition of the solutions was determined based on the operating conditions described for the above-mentioned industrial leaching chalcopyrite processes. The largest ferric concentration was limited to 0.18 Deionized water, sulfuric acid (H The choice of the particular sulfuric acid concentration is due to the fact that it is an appropriate concentration for chalcopyrite leaching and is widely used in industrial leaching processes. Furthermore, at low temperatures (≤ According to Electrochemical experiments were carried out using a standard three-electrode cell with a thermostated water jacket. The counter electrode (CE) was graphite and the prepared Pt electrode served as the working electrode (WE). A saturated Ag/AgCl electrode (saturated with KCl, Accumet* Glass Body, Fisher Scientific) was used as a reference electrode (RE). All potentials have been converted from Ag/AgCl to the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE). All further potentials in this study are quoted with respect to the SHE at 25 The test solution was deaerated by sparging high-purity N Electrochemical measurements were performed using a Potentiostat/Galvanostat VersaSTAT 3F Electrochemical System with an optional frequency response analyzer contained in a single unit, controlled by the VersaStudio electrochemistry software package (Princeton Applied Research). A 5100 low pressure reactor from the Parr Instrument Company, with a 600 Prior to use, the CE was immersed in ethanol for degreasing, rinsed with deionized water, and finally dried with cool air. The test solution was deaerated by sparging high-purity N In the present study, it is assumed that the SHE potential is a function of temperature and is zero only at 25 The A similar method was employed to convert the potentials measured using the Ag/AgCl electrode (saturated with KCl) at 70 The diffusion potential between the test solution and the internal KCl solution in the reference electrode (also known as the isothermal liquid junction potential), can be evaluated by Henderson's equation for dilute solutions ( The results of the aqueous speciation (expressed as a percentage of the total ferric or ferrous) in Fe(II)–Fe(III)–H Free ferrous ions account for the largest percentage of the total ferrous (61.5%–67.0% at 25 With the exception of FeSO Under the same nominal Fe  On the other hand, a considerable proportion of Fe(II) exists as free ferrous in the range of 60.1–73.0%. This trend was similar to that at 25 Moreover, at both 90 Furthermore, under the same nominal Fe As reported in the literature ( A drop in free hydrogen ion concentration in the system studied could reduce the amount of soluble ferric and based on several published results hematite is a likely precipitate in this system. Thus hematite was included in the speciation calculations at 150  A similar trend to that observed from 25 At 150 It is interesting to note that for the same nominal Fe As mentioned in the The temperature dependence of the calculated real Fe Apart from the real Fe The standard electrode potential of the Fe Mathematical regression shows that the standard electrode potential of the Fe The correlation coefficient was 0.9967. As to the single ion activity coefficients for species involved in the present study, they were estimated by the above-noted B-dot equation. A detailed discussion on the applicability of this model will be given later. Calculated results show that the ratios of the activity coefficient for free ferric and free ferrous are typically only affected by temperature, and remain practically constant at each temperature under different nominal Fe The corresponding correlation coefficient was 0.9997. All data calculated using the model results for the standard and reversible potentials of the Fe In addition, the very low real Fe At present, there are no theoretical methods available for predicting the redox potential of the H This equation can be applied to the cases under the given nominal concentrations of H Obviously, there is some concern regarding this expression: whether it can be supported by experimental evidence, and be used to calculate the redox potentials under different conditions such as nominal concentrations of H The applicable scope of the developed expression was investigated based on the experimental results in the literature in terms of nominal amounts of Fe Furthermore, in From the above analysis, it seems that the redox potential depends significantly on the nominal Fe The above analyses of the experimental results from the literature strongly support the expression developed by speciation in this work. It appears that the redox potential could be easily and accurately determined based on the variables of temperature and nominal Fe The model can only be validated in a restricted range of conditions due to the limited availability of experimental data for this system. Nevertheless, experimental results for redox potential and ferric solubility, together with the calculated pH and ionic strength, were used to validate the model predictions presented previously. A comparison of the reversible potentials between experimental measurements performed for this work and model prediction was used to validate the thermodynamic speciation model. Single ion activity coefficients are also part of the speciation model parameters. The ability of the model to predict the experimental data also indicates that the method for estimating activity coefficients of simple ions and complexes is valid in the present study. The B-dot model was found to be surprisingly applicable for accurate prediction of redox potential at temperatures up to 150 The following analysis (three parts) also serves as a justification for the developed model in the present work. As mentioned previously, in the present acid iron sulfate solutions, the formation of hematite may occur at 150 At present, no experimental data are available for ferric solubility (introduced in the form of Fe The calculated pH for various solution compositions are shown in Under the same nominal Fe At 150 The above results justify the exclusion of hydroxide (OH  Under the same nominal Fe The nominal ionic strengths for the four different nominal Fe Validation of the present model could not be extended to a wider range of composition concentrations and temperatures due to the generation of iron precipitates and the presence of additional species. Further work is required in order to expand our understanding of this quaternary system. The speciation of the quaternary H Results from the calculated distribution of the main ferric and ferrous species as a function of temperature, iron and acid concentration, and the nominal Fe Based on the model results, the temperature dependence of the real Fe An expression, regressed from our speciation model data, and determined only by the variables of temperature and nominal Fe The validity of the proposed model was confirmed by reliable prediction of measured redox potential from 25 In summary, this work confirms that the model developed in this study is a feasible and promising method for the studies on the speciation of the quaternary H The authors acknowledge the financial support of