Objective
                  To prospectively study the outcome of surgically treated split depression lateral tibial plateau fractures extending into the posterior column using the extended posterolateral approach.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-one patients with split depression lateral tibial plateau fractures (AO: 41-B3) with extension into the posterior column were treated with open reduction and internal fixation through an extended posterolateral approach with osteotomy of the fibular neck±Gerdy tubercle. Follow up radiographs was assessed for quality of articular reduction and limb axis. Functional assessment was performed at last follow up using the Tegner–Lysholm score. Complications pertaining to the surgical approach were recorded.
               
                  Results
                  The approach was performed in 15 patients with a fibular neck osteotomy alone and 6 patients required a Gerdy's tubercle osteotomy also. All fractures and osteotomies had united. Anatomical articular reduction was achieved in 16 patients. Radiological limb alignment was restored in all patients except for a reversed posterior slope in 1 patient. Arthritic changes were seen in 3 patients. The mean Tegner–Lysholm score was 87.3 (range: 76–95) at last follow up. No specific complications related to the surgical approach like common peroneal nerve injury and lateral instability of the knee was encountered.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The extended posterolateral approach offers excellent exposure posterior to the fibular head to perform articular reduction and fixation achieving satisfactory radiological and functional results in split depression lateral tibial plateau fractures extending into the posterior column.Split depression lateral tibial plateau fractures can be high velocity injuries characterised by varying degrees of comminution and articular depression. Conventionally the anterolateral approach is used to address these fractures by direct reduction and plate fixation. However, fractures extending into the posterolateral corner (lateral part of the posterior column of tibial plateau) behind the fibular head are difficult to access with the conventional anterolateral approach The study was a prospective analysis of select patients with lateral tibial plateau split depression fractures approved by the institutional review board. Closed, displaced AO: 41-B3 fractures with extension into the lateral part of the posterior column (based on the 3 column classification of proximal tibia fractures, Twenty-one patients satisfying the inclusion criteria underwent internal fixation using an extended posterolateral approach with a fibular neck osteotomy The surgery was performed with the patient supine under a sub-arachnoid block. A lazy S incision was made along the course of the biceps tendon crossing the knee joint between the fibular head and the Gerdy's tubercle. The common peroneal nerve (CPN) was identified and released beyond the level of the planned osteotomy. The extensor muscles were elevated from the tibia leaving a cuff of tissue for later repair. The fibular neck was osteotomised with an oscillating saw without violating the proximal tibio-fibular joint. In cases with pre-existing fibular head or neck fracture, the fracture plane was developed to get access to the posterolateral corner. The fibular neck osteotomy provides posterolateral exposure from the PCL insertion to the posterior margin of the IT band allowing plating of the broken posterolateral rim, posterolateral articular reconstruction and lateral plating. The tubercle of Gerdy was osteotomised in complex cases where an unrestricted anterior access to the plateau was required to achieve articular reduction. The osteotomy was performed with an oscillating saw without violating the articular cartilage and the IT band was reflected anteriorly and proximally ( The posterolateral wall was reduced first and stabilised provisionally with K wires and pointed clamps. Antiglide fixation of the posterolateral wall was performed using a 3.5 Patients were allowed active knee range of movements from day 1. Weight bearing was restricted initially. Patients progressed to full weight bearing by 12 weeks. Outpatient follow up visits were done at 3, 6 and 12 weeks followed by 6 and 12 months. Range of motion analysis and plain radiographs were performed at each visit after 6 weeks to assess fracture union, alignment, articular reduction and loss of fixation or reduction during follow up. Articular reduction was classified as anatomical, good (<2 The results were analysed statistically using SPSS (version 16, Chicago, IL). The loss of fracture reduction over the follow up period on basis of studied radiological parameters were analysed using the paired The mean follow up was 32 months (range: 24–41 months). The mean age was 39 years (range: 26–54 years). There were 14 males and 7 females. Radiological fracture union was evident in all patients at 12 weeks ( The articular surface reduction was classified as anatomical in 16 patients and good in 5 patients. The femoro-tibial axis, MPTA and condylar width were anatomically restored in all patients. Except for 1 patient who had a LPSA of 1°, all patients had their posterior slope restored within normal limits. The mean LPSA at the last follow up showed a statistically significant change ( The surgical treatment of tibial plateau fractures has evolved significantly in the last two decades. New surgical approaches, development of a column specific approach The posterolateral column between the PCL and the back of the fibular head is difficult to access surgically and fractures involving this portion can pose significant challenges. Approaches specific to access fractures in the posterolateral corner were described by Solomon et al. Luo et al. We recommend the extended posterolateral approach for complex fractures of the lateral condyle, which requires fixation of the posterolateral plateau in addition to lateral buttress plate fixation. The approach provides excellent exposure made possible by osteotomies of the fibular neck and the Gerdy's tubercle. The approach is biological and safe to perform as evident by high union rates, and lack of complications in our study. The limitations of the study include small number of patients and lack of control group. The sample was small due to the relative rarity of the relevant fracture pattern but this is still the largest sample size reported so far. We were convinced that an anterolateral approach could not help achieve anatomical articular reduction in these fractures, so having a control group was not justifiable. Comparison with historic controls is subject to bias and is limited by availability of complete relevant records. All data were collected prospectively and blinded surgeons and trainees performed all analysis. To summarise, the extended posterolateral approach provides excellent exposure of the lateral tibial plateau to address select split depression fractures extending into the retrofibular area. The approach helps achieve anatomical reduction and stable fixation of these fractures without increased complications. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No external funds were received for conducting the study.