Anionic collectors (phosphonic acid and hydroxamic acid) and flotation depressants were tested in a modified small-scale flotation tube on high purity single minerals in order to find a suitable reagent combination for niobium oxide mineral flotation from its ores. High purity calcite and quartz were used to represent carbonate and silicate gangue minerals and pyrochlore was used to represent the niobium oxide mineral. Only hydroxamic acid could float pyrochlore at natural pH, with recoveries over 90%. However, it floated calcite as well. To separate the pyrochlore from the carbonate gangue, sodium metaphosphate was used. Single mineral and mineral mixture tests indicated that the calcite could be selectively depressed by the sodium metaphosphate. Bench-scale flotation tests were carried out on a carbonatite niobium ore sample, and they showed that the reagent combination, at less than 2kg/t Aero 6493 (hydroxamic acid) and 1.0kg/t sodium metaphosphate, could recover over 90% of niobium oxide from the ore feed at about 30% mass pull. The results indicated that the combination of hydroxamic acid and sodium metaphosphate is a possible reagent scheme for pyrochlore recovery from niobium oxide ores.The demand for niobium (Nb) in the world market has been increasing for the past decades due to increasing need for high performance steel and alloy ( Current pyrochlore concentrating processes are very complicated. It usually includes two desliming stages, reverse carbonate flotation, reverse magnetic separation, pyrochlore flotation by a cationic collector (with rougher and five cleaning stages with progressively lower pH down to 2.5), reverse sulfide flotation and acid leaching ( The major drawbacks of the flowsheet include: Too many processing stages with each gangue mineral being rejected one at a time. Small losses of the niobium minerals in each stage are unavoidable and the cumulative effect leads to significant niobium mineral losses. About 15% of the niobium minerals are lost to the slimes during the two desliming stages. Since carbonates are the most abundant minerals in the ore, the reverse carbonate flotation inevitably entrains the niobium minerals into the carbonate concentrate causing value mineral losses. The cationic pyrochlore flotation is carried out at very acidic conditions requiring corrosion-resistant equipment and high maintenance costs. Plus, any remaining carbonate minerals will be dissolved consuming large amount of acid. The complexity of the flowsheet and the associated drawbacks are due to the use of an unselective cationic collector, amine, as the collector for the niobium minerals. To improve the recovery of niobium oxide, a more selective collector and a simplified flowsheet needs to be designed. Anionic collectors that are capable of forming chemical complexes with niobium are expected to be more selective. Hydroxamic acid and phosphonic acid are two widely used or tested reagents. Hydroxamic acid was widely reported as effective collectors in small-scale flotation tests for a wide varieties of oxide minerals and ores including copper ( Phosphonic acid is another potential anionic reagent. It can float similar types of oxide ores as hydroxamic acid does. However, it is only effective at low pH conditions. In this project, we have used hydroxamic acid and phosphonic acid as potential replacement collectors for the cationic collector that is currently used to recover pyrochlore from the carbonatite ore, with the objective to simplify process flowsheet and increase Nb recovery. High purity sample of pyrochlore in a powder form (−75 Three ore samples were taken from three different points of a pyrochlore flotation plant operating in Eastern Canada (see Aero 6493 was acquired from Cytec Canada and used as the collector as its major component is hydroxamic acid. Dowfroth 250 (DF250), obtained from Charles & Tennant, was used as a frother in some batch flotation tests. Sodium metaphosphate (NaMP, molecular formula: (NaPO 1-Hydroxyalkylidene-1,1-diphosphonic acid was synthesized in our lab from phosphorus trichloride and octanoic acid, both of which were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich Canada and used directly without purification. A custom-made glass flotation tube, shown in High purity single mineral samples including pyrochlore, calcite and quartz were tested in the small-scale flotation tests. In single mineral flotation, 1.5 Batch flotation tests were carried out in a bottom-driven open-top flotation machine purchased from JKTech, University of Queensland, Australia. A 1.5 In the initial exploratory rougher flotation tests, tests were done on three mill samples with different collector or depressant dosages. Froth was scraped for a total of 5 Following the exploratory tests, a more aggressive rougher flotation procedure was used to increase niobium mineral recovery. The procedure is shown in   The addition of sodium metaphosphate (NaMP) following Aero 6493 significantly depressed the flotation of calcite. On the contrary, it slightly promoted the pyrochlore flotation, as can be seen from    Exploratory batch flotation test results with different feed samples, collector and depressant dosage are shown in All the rougher flotation tests were done at about 30% solids and natural pH of about 8.5. The final pH was slightly increased to around 9. This pH range matches the optimum pH range for hydroxamic acid function. As can be seen from The rougher flotation results showed that Aero 6493 was able to float carbonate minerals as well. This observation was consistent with the results in small-scale flotation. However, the carbonate recovery was much lower than that of niobium oxide indicating some degree of natural selectivity of hydroxamic acid between pyrochlore and carbonate minerals. In order to further depress the carbonate gangue, sodium metaphosphate (NaMP) was tested as a selective depressant. The effect of sodium metaphosphate dosage on the flotation of Carbonate Float Feed can be seen in The initial test on the Mill Feed (test N 05 in The Mill Feed had a relatively coarse size at 80% passing 200 At this point, only two stages of cleaner flotation were carried out because the final cleaner concentrate’s weight was not sufficient for additional cleaning flotation. However, the two cleaner stages showed obvious progressive increase in niobium oxide grade ( Hydroxamic acid (Aero 6493) and diphosphonic acid both showed good collecting power towards niobium oxide mineral pyrochlore in small-scale flotation. However, only hydroxamic acid was further tested in the batch flotation because diphosphonic acid only floated the pyrochlore at acidic pH, which is unsuitable for carbonatite Nb ores. Hydroxamic acid (Aero 6493) was found to be a selective collector for the pyrochlore ore samples in the batch rougher and cleaner flotation tests. At dosages less than 2 Financial support to this project is provided by NSERC, COREM and IAMGOLD through a collaborative research and development (CRD) project. Cytec Canada provided the Aero 6493 collector.