A series of bacterial and chemical leaching experiments were conducted to clarify contradictory reports in the literature regarding the role of bacteria in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite. Tests containing a high bacterial concentration showed inhibited leaching, even lower than non-inoculated controls. However, when bacterial cells were washed before inoculation, it was apparent that it was not the bacterial cells but rather the chemical species introduced with them that influenced the leaching rate. In addition, the results of comparative tests with 0.1 M ferrous sulphate or ferric sulphate showed that copper was leached from the ore 2.7 times faster in leach solutions containing ferrous ion, suggesting that ferric ions inhibit chalcopyrite dissolution. The results indicated that the chalcopyrite dissolution rate is strongly dependent on the reduction potential (E
                     h) in solution, and that this parameter is far more influential than the number or activity of bacterial cells. These results imply that the role of bacteria may only be stimulatory when the prevailing electrochemical conditions are also favourable.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The parabolic kinetics of chalcopyrite dissolution are thought to result from the formation of a tenacious “passivating layer” that causes a dramatic decrease in the rates of copper release by preventing the diffusion of ions to and from the mineral surface It has been reported consistently, and observed in the present study, that increasing concentrations of the conventional oxidising agent, ferric ion, do not result in a corresponding increase in the leaching rates of chalcopyrite In continuing efforts to accelerate the dissolution of chalcopyrite, attention has been focused on the use of bacteria to catalyse the process For other mineral sulphide systems, such as pyrite, bacteria are thought to contribute to bioleaching processes by both direct and indirect mechanisms. In the indirect mechanism, bacteria produce highly oxidising conditions through their ability to oxidise ferrous ion to ferric ion The research presented here is intended to provide a better understanding of the biological and chemical mechanisms of chalcopyrite bioleaching. The effects of increasing the bacterial cell concentration and the individual chemical effects of ferrous and ferric ion in chalcopyrite leaching solutions were investigated. A mixed culture of mesophilic acidophilic bacteria, enriched from a sulphidic ore stock-pile at Murdoch University, was maintained at pH 1.3 and 37°C through numerous serial cultures with pyrite (6% w/v) as the sole substrate. It was adapted to chalcopyrite as the sole energy source by repeated transfer with replacement of the pyrite by chalcopyrite. The aqueous growth medium contained 3.2-g MgSO All leaching experiments were performed in 500 mL Erlenmeyer shake flasks, containing 100 mL of leach solution. Flasks were placed on an orbital shaker (200 rpm) and incubated at 37°C. The growth medium used contained 3.2-g MgSO Required volumes of slurry were removed from the stock culture and centrifuged at 400 rpm for 10 min in a Heraeus Megafuge™ 1.0 (Sepatech). The supernatant containing the bacteria and dissolved metal species was removed and used as inoculum. For experiments where the harvesting and washing of the cells was required, a centrifuge speed of 5000 rpm for 10 min gave adequate separation of the cells from the clear supernatant without cell damage. The supernatant was discarded and the cell pellet resuspended in a sulphuric acid solution (pH 2) to wash the cells free of iron precipitates. After a second centrifuging step, the cells were resuspended in nutrient solution. The method of Karan et al. Soluble copper and iron were determined by Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometry (AAS), using a SpectrAA.40™ model. Ferrous ion was determined by titration with potassium dichromate (K The copper release rate from chalcopyrite was compared between sterile tests and bacterial cultures inoculated with 1%, 10% and 50% (v/v) of the total solution volume, respectively. The bacterial concentration in the inoculum corresponded to 0.25 g/L of protein equivalent to 1.6×10 Despite there being five times as many bacteria in the starting solution of the 50% (v/v) test, the copper release rate in this test was lower than in the non-inoculated control At 50% (v/v) of bacterial suspension, the initial In a second experiment, the bacterial cells were separated from the medium. The purpose of this was to determine whether the inhibition of leaching in the presence of high bacterial numbers was related to the bacteria and their activity or to the chemical species introduced with the inoculum. A suspension of active, washed bacterial cells was prepared and the required volumes inoculated into the tests. This inoculum contained 0.61 g/L of protein equivalent to 3.1×10 Although there were very different concentrations of bacteria in the initial leaching solutions, the rate of copper release in the three tests was almost identical, and similar to the non-inoculated control A significant level of sulphide oxidation was also presumed to have occurred, concomitant with ferrous ion bio-oxidation, as evidenced by a gradual drop in pH in the inoculated tests. It is interesting to note that the controls in the two tests investigating the effects of inoculum dose leached in distinctly different ways It might be suggested that a high concentration of bacteria is detrimental to the dissolution of chalcopyrite. Yet, when the transfer of dissolved metal ions with the bacteria in the inocula was avoided The results described above suggest that parameters other than bacterial numbers are important in the bioleaching of chalcopyrite. Hence, a series of experiments was conducted without bacteria in order to understand the effect of chemical species introduced with the large inocula. Copper release in the presence of 0.1 M ferrous or ferric sulphate solutions was compared over 400 h The experiment was repeated and the dissolution followed closely during the first 150 h The parameters suspected of contributing to the suppression of leaching at this point were a high ferric ion content and a high reduction potential, since several tests have been conducted in which one or both of these appears to slow dissolution. When different concentrations of washed cells were used as inocula The suppression of leaching by high concentrations of ferric ions together with the apparent enhancing effect of ferrous ions, suggest that the oxidation rate of chalcopyrite is strongly dependent upon the suspension reduction potential ( Thus, the role of bacteria in chalcopyrite leaching might be optimised if leaching conditions were designed to limit ferrous ion oxidation and, hence, ferric ion accumulation in solution, while maintaining some sulphur oxidation (acid generation). It has been shown that the bioleaching of chalcopyrite is not a typical bioprocess because neither an increase in the principal oxidant (ferric ion) nor an increased concentration of catalyst (bacteria) improved the reaction rate (copper extraction). It appears that it is not the bacterial cells that are inhibitory, but rather the ferric ion and high The authors wish to thank Dr. D. Ralph for providing the bacterial culture, Prof. M. Nicol for useful discussions and the Australian Federal Government, through the A.J. Parker Cooperative Research Center for Hydrometallurgy, for financial assistance and technical support.