Soil in a brownfield contaminated by pyrite ashes showed remarkably high concentrations of several toxic elements (Hg, Pb, Zn, Cu, Cd, and As). Initially, we assessed various physical, chemical and mineralogical properties of this soil. The data obtained, and particularly multivariate statistics of geochemical results, were useful to establish the predominant role of the soil organic matter fraction (6%) and iron oxyhydroxides in the binding of heavy metals and arsenic. In addition, we studied the viability of soil washing techniques to reduce the volume of contaminated soil. Therefore, to concentrate most of the contaminants in a smaller volume of soil, the grain-size fraction below 125μm was treated by hydrocycloning techniques. The operational parameters were optimized by means of a factorial design, and the results were evaluated by attributive analysis. This novel approach is practical for the global simultaneous evaluation of washing effectiveness for several contaminants. A concentration factor higher than 2.2 was achieved in a separated fraction that contained less than 20% of the initial weight. These good yields were obtained for all the contaminants and with only one cycle of hydrocycloning. Hence full-scale soil washing is a plausible remediation technique for the study site.During recent decades, the closure of heavy industry across Europe has left large extensions of contaminated land In this context, a suitable remediation technique to reduce the initial volume of contaminated soil is the soil washing approach Most effective soil washing technologies apply physical processes to concentrate contaminants by exploiting differences in characteristics between the metal-bearing particles and soil particles (size, density, magnetism, and hydrophobic surface properties) The first step in the design of a full-scale washing treatment is a viability analysis, which involves several laboratory and analytical determinations to examine the main characteristics of the soil To integrate grain-size distribution data with edaphological, geochemical and mineralogical information of the site in order to identify the soil fractions in which the contaminants were bound. To apply the information reported in the previous step to design and implement a physical separation study by means of hydrocycloning, thereby obtaining functional conclusions for the implementation of full-scale soil washing treatments. To develop and apply a theoretical formulation (attributive analysis) for the evaluation and selection of optimal parameters in the physical separation tests for our study site. The study site is situated in the central zone of Asturias (Northern Spain), where a number of industrial and mining facilities have been closed in recent decades, thus generating several ‘brownfields’. In this area, the climate is Atlantic (European) with an annual average precipitation and evapotranspiration of 1,130 and 667 The soil samples analyzed were collected from the area surrounding a derelict fertilizer factory. Since its closure in 1997, this factory has been partially demolished and it is currently in an advanced state of abandonment. The total surface of the affected site is 70,000 After initial “in situ” determinations and observations (data not shown), we identified several areas of natural soil distributed in the study site. We then carried out a double sampling campaign on these soils to perform a multi-element characterization to determine contamination. In the first case, samples were collected at 21 points randomly located in the natural soil areas, from a depth between 0 and 30 The soil samples taken in the first campaign were dried at room temperature. The soil was then disaggregated by a roller and subsequently sieved through a 4-mm screen. Materials with a grain-size greater than 4 Descriptive statistics and cluster analysis were used to study the geochemical association of elements in the samples. Concretely, clustering was undertaken following the Ward-algorithmic method, which maximizes the variance between groups and minimizes it between members of the same group The 50-kg sample was wet-sieved in 100-g batches by means of a standardized series of Restch screens, in agreement with the norm ASTM D-422-63. Two main fractions (0–125 Texture was determined by the pipette method after a disaggregating treatment with two dispersants: sodium hexametaphosphate and sodium carbonate There are several approaches available to study the soil washing of the separated fine fraction (<125 The solid concentration of the feeding slurry used in our experiments was constant (20% per weight) whereas the underflow diameters and different working pressures were combined in a factorial test (see Section Having completed the multi-element analyses, for each test and for each element we defined recovery as the percentage of the total element contained in the overflow or in the underflow with respect to the total concentration in the feed slurry (a recovery of 90% of a given element in the overflow implies that 90% of the initial concentration was recovered in the overflow and 10% is ‘lost’ in the underflow). In addition, the ratio of concentration for each test was defined as the ratio of the weight of the feed to the weight of the concentrates in the overflow or in the underflow. Ideally, in a soil washing procedure the aim is to concentrate a given contaminant in a smaller volume of soil than the initial one, i.e., to maximize its recovery and to reduce the ratio of concentration of that fraction. However, here we simultaneously addressed several contaminants and therefore required a method to adjust the selection of recoveries and ratios of concentration in order to achieve good results for a group of contaminants rather than a single one. Therefore, we chose a methodology based on attributive analysis First, we defined For a given element, e.g. Hg, conditions for concentration (i.e., recovery greater than ratio of concentration) were identified in each test. These conditions can occur in the overflow or in the underflow. For both cases, we labelled each recovery as Taking into account the set of values and parameters defined, the index of merit The expression (1) can be generalized for multi-element contamination as the sum of Raw data of the multi-element analyses of the samples taken in the initial sampling campaign were processed with SPSS v15.0. Regarding the multi-variant statistical analysis, a dendrogram was introduced to show results of “clustering” ( Group ‘a’: formed mainly by chalcophillic elements (Cu, Zn, Sb, Ag, etc.), probably associated with the sulphides toasted in the factory. The result of the furnace emissions, including waste dumping and inappropriate storage practices for sulphides and oxidized residues (pyrite ashes, etc.), affected natural soils. In addition, this group of pollutants was concerned by rapid weathering in the superior horizons of the soil, which also explains the absence of S in this group of elements. Remarkably, Fe was the only major element included in this group which results redundant in the probable origin of all of these elements (Fe-rich minerals as pyrites and maybe other sulphides). It also appears a weak correlation with Ca suggesting also a certain association of the contaminants with carbonates (the content of Ca is high, as shown in Group ‘b’: could be considered a sub-group of the group ‘a’, formed by other pollutant elements, such as Pb and Hg, mixed with other minority ones in pyrite ashes. S is included in this group and presented a good correlation with Hg. This observation may be attributed to the lower susceptibility of cinnabar (HgS) to weathering than other metallic sulphides Group ‘c’: regarding with the statistical treatment is distant from the preceding ones. Most of the elements included in this group are probably related to the geochemical background of the natural soil before its contamination. It comprises mainly clay aggregates, including major elements such as Al and K. A subsequent study was carried out with a 50-kg sample of soil from one of the zones most affected by contaminants. The representative subsamples of this area showed neutral pH (6.6), high organic matter content in the upper horizon (6%), low electrical conductivity (EC We classified the soil as a silt loam on the basis that the particle-size distribution revealed a high percentage of silt fractions (77%). In contrast, the clay fractions (13%) were dominated by illites (2:1 clay mineralogy) and kaolinites (1:1 clay mineralogy). The specific surface area of illites and kaolinites range from 65 to 100 The presence of two types of low specific surface clays, together with the large amount of organic matter in the soil (6%), and the abundance of Ferrihydrite indicates that the contaminants in the study site are, to a great extent, bound to the organic matter, Fe oxyhydroxides, and secondarily carbonates  We applied laser dispersion to focus on particle distribution in the fine fraction. Almost 40% of the material was below 10 We completed a factorial test combining two apex diameters of the hydrocyclone (9.5 and 6.4 It can be concluded that higher pressures are favourable only with the smaller apex diameter, i.e., there is no related general tendency with an increase in pressure. Overall, the best In our case the cut point was 9.5 Successive cycles of soil washing, commonly applied in full-scale processes The pyrite ash, a by-product of the sulphuric acid production process during the roasting of pyrite ores, has contributed to introducing toxic elements, such as As, Pb, Cd, Ni, Cu and Hg, into the natural soils in the study site. The soil presented marked multi-component contamination. Most of the contaminants were bound to the soil organic matter and secondarily to Fe oxyhydroxides, while processes such as clay adsorption made a minor contribution. Here we applied hydrocycloning, a physical washing procedure, to clean the fine fractions of a soil contaminated with heavy metals. Instead of the extended premise of hydrocyclones achieving separation by sizes, the separation of the contaminants by specific-gravity effects was favoured. Therefore, under these conditions, it is more appropriate to refer to cut densities rather than cut-off sizes for hydrocycloning. Furthermore, we have demonstrated attributive analysis to be an effective tool for the quantitative determination of the quality of separations, and also to establish weighting factors based on the diverse elements to be removed. Finally, optimum conditions allowed us to obtain concentration factors higher than 2.2 for all the contaminants in less than 20% of the weight of the original soil. This achievement implies that full-scale treatment with successive rewashing cycles is viable. This treatment should be considered in soil remediation programmes. This research was funded by the