The rational evaluation of strength of rock material is the key subject for the safe and economical design and construction of tunnels, caverns, dam foundations, slopes and mining engineering. So, a series of strength criteria have been presented to describe the strength features and failure laws of different rock types. The most generally used failure criterion is the Mohr–Coulomb (abbreviated to M–C) criterion. This criterion implicitly assumes that the intermediate principal stress has no influence on rock strength In previous work, a number of polyaxial strength criteria have been proposed to describe the strength characters of rock. Most of them can be reduced to the M–C criterion under the triaxial stress condition. Furthermore, the cohesion Mogi In the present paper, we first define a coefficient Generally, the range of Now the polyaxial strength curves of rock can be plotted to the The three rock types investigated were Dumhan dolomite, KTB amphibolite and Solenhofen limestone. Colmenares and Zoback As we cannot know the peak strength Numerous triaxial test data have validated the M–C criterion under triaxial compression ( Firstly, we analyzed the test data of the three rock types based on the intermediate principal stress coefficient The true triaxial test data of KTB amphibolite and Solenhofen limestone are also analyzed by the above method. The test data and the best-fitting linear curves are plotted in The above results of three rock types show that the linear relation between So by Eqs. The curves of Of course, Eq. The results of the above section indicate that polyaxial strength criteria should describe the relation between So far, a number of polyaxial strength criteria, such as Modified Wiebols–Cook, Modified Lade, Drucker–Prager, Mogi 1967 and Mogi 1971, have been proposed to describe the strength characteristics of brittle rock. Among them, the Mogi 1971 criterion can commonly be expressed in the power-law or linear form; the linear form is also called the Mogi–Coulomb criterion In the stress analysis theory, the Lode parameter Hence, it indicates that the relation between In this sense, the Modified Wiebols–Cook, Modified Lade, Circumscribed Drucker–Prager and Mogi–Coulomb criterion can all satisfy this demand. But the functions of The curves of In The Mogi 1967 criterion cannot reduce to the M–C criterion when In totality, the Modified Wiebols–Cook criterion achieved best fits to all the test data. Of course, the other polyaxial criteria can also achieve very good fits to the test data by the best-fitting method, but not adopting the triaxial mechanical parameters It is very interesting that the Modified Wiebols–Cook, Modified Lade, Drucker–Prager and Mogi–Coulomb criterion all obey the linear rule of The Mohr–Coulomb criterion works well under the condition of triaxial stress state. We should focus attention on the range of the minimum principle stress because the linear form will not be suitable at high confining stresses. But we can expand the conclusion in this paper and assume that the nonlinear relation between All of the polyaxial criteria except the Mogi 1967 criterion discussing in this paper can degenerate to the M–C criterion at a stress condition. So the cohesion So far we could not collect the intact polyaxial test data by controlling Analysis of the experiment data of three rock types reveals that polyaxial strength has the same characteristic as conventional triaxial strength at different Furthermore, the cohesion and friction effects for the conventional M–C criterion change under the true triaxial stress states. And the new linear form reflects the effect of intermediate principle stress on strength. The parameters in it embody the cohesion and friction action under the polyaxial stress condition. And they are functions of It is a new angle to study the polyaxial strength laws and understand the macro-mechanism of the polyaxial strength effect of rock. And it can also present a new method to establishing or evaluating the strength criteria. This paper was financially supported by the