In this paper, a strategy is described to develop high toughness yttria-stabilised tetragonal zirconia polycrystalline (Y-TZP) composites reinforced with hard TiB2 particles. The experimental results revealed that fully dense Y-TZP composites with 30vol.% TiB2 can be obtained with a moderate hardness of 13GPa, a high strength up to 1280MPa and an excellent indentation toughness up to 10MPam1/2 by hot pressing in vacuum at 1450°C. The toughness of the composites can be tailored between 4 and 10MPam1/2 by varying the yttria stabiliser content of the ZrO2 matrix between 3 and 2mol%. An optimum composite toughness was achieved for a ZrO2 matrix with an overall yttria content of 2.5mol%, obtained by mixing pure monoclinic and 3mol% Y2O3 co-precipitated ZrO2 starting powders. An important observation is that the thermal residual tensile stress in the ZrO2 matrix due to the TiB2 addition, needs to be taken into account when optimising the transformability of the ZrO2 matrix in order to develop high toughness Y-TZP composites.Yttria-stabilised tetragonal zirconia polycrystalline (Y-TZP) monoliths exhibit excellent mechanical properties such as bending strength and fracture toughness. The high toughness of the zirconia monoliths originates from the stress-induced transformation of the stabilised tetragonal phase in the stress field of propagating cracks, a phenomenon known as transformation toughening. Vleugels and Van Der Biest investigated hot pressed ZrO The toughness optimisation of yttria-stabilised tetragonal zirconia by tuning the yttria dopant content by means of mixing monoclinic and co-precipitated Y Details on the commercial starting powders and experimental zirconia powder mixture grades used in the present investigation are given in Two different TiB Fifty to one hundred grams of powder, with a ZrO The density of the specimens was measured in ethanol, according to the Archimedes method (BP210S balance, Sartorius AG, Germany). The Vickers hardness (HV The elastic modulus ( Microstructural investigation of the phase assembly was performed by means of X-ray diffraction (XRD, Philips, The Netherlands), scanning electron microscopy (SEM, XL30-FEG, FEI, The Netherlands) and a 200 The transformability, i.e. the ability of t-ZrO The The density of the ZrO The lower density of the TM2-based composites is due to the presence of m-ZrO Representative scanning electron micrographs of fully dense ZrO In order to investigate the influence of the addition of TiB Representative bright field TEM micrographs showing the morphology and size of the zirconia grains and TiB XRD spectra obtained from the polished composite grades T3E, TM2.5E and TM2E are presented in The mechanical properties of the composites are compared with those of the Y-TZP monoliths, all hot pressed in vacuum for 1 A modest hardness of 13 The bending strength of the TM2.5F composite is higher than that of the TM2.5 matrix material and comparable to that of the 2Y-TZP (TM2), whereas the strength of the TM2E composite is significantly lower than that of the TM2 ceramic. The latter is due to the formation of microcracks as a result of the spontaneous transformation of part of the t-ZrO In the present investigation, the indentation toughness method was chosen, as it is an easy and effective way to make a ranking of the materials based on their toughness. The observed indentation crack profiles closely follow the well-established radial or Palmqvist crack pattern. Therefore, the indentation toughness data are thought to be reliable as far as ranking of the investigated materials is concerned. The toughness measured by the conventional indentation technique is reported to be lower than that of the long crack toughness of transformation toughened materials. The indentation toughness of the pure Y-TZP material can be increased by reducing the overall Y SEM observations of the radial crack patterns generated at the corners of Vickers indentations clearly reveal the presence of a crack deflection toughening mechanism in all composites, as illustrated in Looking at the relative toughness enhancement in the composite with respect to the matrix toughness, Δ Following the classical zirconia literature, XRD analysis revealed that the t-ZrO Because of the very high transformability of the t-ZrO The contribution of the different toughening mechanisms in the composites and their corresponding ZrO Comparing The residual thermal stress is considered to be one of the important design parameters in the fabrication of ceramic matrix composites. While the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) mismatch decides the tensile or compressive nature of the residual stress in the constituent phases, the magnitude of the residual stress is determined by the mismatch in CTE and elastic modulus. In general, if the residual stress is compressive, the far field applied stress necessary for the t-ZrO Due to the lower CTE of TiB The influence of the residual stress on the transformation toughness can be explained from the existing transformation toughening literature. The increased transformation zone size enhances the transformation toughening contribution according to the established formula of Evans and Cannon: Furthermore, the experimental data also indicate that the transformability of the ZrO The influence of the residual stress on the increased t-ZrO Comparing the toughness increment (Δ The indentation toughness of the TM2E and T3E composites is comparable to that reported for a ZrO The experimental work revealed that the overall yttria content and residual stress play a predominant role in optimising the toughness of TZP–TiB A high indentation toughness of 10 The fracture toughness of Y-TZP–TiB The addition of TiB This work was supported by the Brite-Euram programme of the Commission of the European Communities under project contract No. BRPR-CT96-0304. The authors wish to thank Dr. C. Sarbu for the TEM investigation of the samples.