The paper discusses alternative methods to assess thermal shock in refractories. Thermal shock performance of two conventional silica bricks and two novice fused silica materials has been studied. Methods involving fracture mechanical tests of monotonic loading, repetitive thermal shock tests and cyclic strain controlled fatigue tests have been utilised. The amorphous fused silica is rather brittle. However low thermal expansion guarantees its superior thermal shock resistance. In-service crystallisation is to happen rather quickly. For crystallised fused silica of the studied morphology the tests coherently predict superior thermal shock resistance due to less brittle failure. Strain controlled fatigue test allows assessment of strain limits in the conditions of cyclic loading and thus combines the benefits of the thermal shock and monotonic fracture mechanics tests. Strain tolerance seems to be the property to correlate the results of the alternative test methods and those with the service loads.During the service in insulating linings of high temperature industrial units refractories are often exposed to periodic thermal-shock. It is the state of the art to evaluate the resistance of refractories to temperature fluctuations by fracture mechanics based indexes of merit [ Conventional silica bricks are known for their dimensional stability at high temperature and resistance to acidic slag [ The paper discusses alternative methods to study thermal shock using the example of silica refractories. Thermal shock resistance of two novice fused silica materials and two conventional silica bricks was measured. Fused silica materials were tested in as delivered amorphous form and after crystallisation achieved by additional heat treatment. Measurements according to the alternative methods were conducted at three cooperating labs according to the established procedures. Fracture mechanics parameters were obtained from the wedge splitting test according to Tschegg [ Four commercially available silica refractories are investigated. All the materials are used in coke ovens of steel industry. Similar refractories are also used in hot blast stoves serving blast furnaces and glass producing units [ Samples of fused silica materials were studied in as delivered predominantly amorphous form and after the heat treatment at 1400 °C for 100 h. The heat treatment was to achieve crystallisation expected to occur during the service. To prevent cracking of the heat treated fused silica samples the average cooling rate after the heat treatment was approximately 10 °C/h. Further in the paper the “crystallised” fused silica means the material heat treated in the regime 1400 °C/100 h. The abbreviations for crystallised fused silica materials are CFS1 and CFS2. The chemical and mineralogical composition was determined by XRF and XRD (Rietveld) methods using powders. The progress of crystallisation was measured on fused silica samples after the conditioning at 1400 °C for 24, 48 and 100 h. The XRD patterns were recorded in the range of 10 to 130° (2 Θ) in reflection mode using a fully automated Bruker D4 diffractometer (CoK The wedge splitting tests according to Tschegg [ Thermal shock experiments were done on the samples of SB1 and CFS1. The prismatic samples of 25 × 25 × 145 mm Monotonic and cyclic three point bending tests were performed in a mechanical test frame by Zwick-Roel equipped with a furnace. Tests were performed at RT and 1000 °C. The loading rate was 0,3 mm/min. The sample geometry was 25 × 25 × 145 mm An overview of physical properties and microstructure is given in In as delivered form FS1 has higher amount of crystalline phases than FS2 (  Monotonic wedge splitting and bending tests were performed. The former tests delivered fracture energy necessary to quantify the brittleness ( The cohesion between the grains and the condition of micro-cracks can explain the differences between the materials and the changes of the material properties with temperature. In refractories the presence of large strong grains and micro-cracks on their periphery and in the matrix of smaller grains resist the instant brittle failure [ As it was discussed above the crystallised fused silica has more micro-cracks than the amorphous fused silica. Due to this it has higher fracture energy, lower strength and brittleness ( Loads in the refractory lining structures are of the strain controlled nature [ According to standards [ Throughout the cycles the samples of CFS1 showed lower loss of Young’s modulus than SB1 ( The observation of the samples after thermal shock indicate qualitative differences in the crack trajectories ( The fatigue data presents the number of cycles to failure ( In cyclic tests the failure occurs at amplitudes as low as 60–70% of the strain at failure in the monotonic loading regime. Lower amplitudes are characterised by higher amount of cycles to failure and steeper correlation trend ( Formation of damage and its growth under sub-critical loads controls the fatigue degradation [ Thermal properties (thermal conductivity and heat capacity) and thermal expansion determine the strain loads developing in a material during the temperature fluctuations. Mechanical properties such as brittleness are indicative for the ability to sustain such loads without major crack formation. The fused silica material is to start its service in amorphous condition. Its thermal properties are roughly comparable with those of silica bricks ( To select the most suitable material and to quantify its performance in given application simple properties based ranking is not always efficient. E.g. even the worst in the list material can be sufficient for some specific application. Refractory linings of short campaign lives provide sufficient in-service performance data to establish a correlation with the material properties. Subsequently this correlation can be used to judge new materials. Silica refractories serve in linings with the expected life of several decennia. For such applications the most efficient approach is to quantify the in-service loads and to compare those with the capacity of the material to bare such loads. To quantify the service loads the strain at critical temperature is seen as a more suitable parameter than temperature or stress. Temperature either outside or inside of the refractory lining is not suitable as thermal shock strains developing in the material depend not only on the temperature and material properties but also on the geometry and intensity of heat exchange [ There is a number of method specific issues relevant for correlating the service strain loads and the material properties. Monotonic loading measurements do not quantify the cycles to failure. For quasi-brittle materials (e.g. civil engineering masonry and concrete) to which refractory are microstructurally related it is known that the zone of fracture interaction is larger for cyclic (fatigue) than for monotonic loading [ The thermal shock test has an advantage that it accounts for all the material properties critical for thermal shock resistance. The test is quite similar to the in-service wear conditions. However, the predictions regarding the number of shocks to failure cannot be translated to the lining wear. Potential differences between the test and the practice in the dimensions, thermal and mechanical boundary conditions define the abstract nature of the test results. To enable the link to in-service loads one can try measuring strains developing during the test or to quantify them using computer model. Another interesting question is whether the saturation of the damage frequently reported for the thermal shock tests is permanent, or in certain cases it is the secondary phase of the degradation as it is seen in the mechanical fatigue tests. Thermal conductivity and expansion in SB1 and CFS1 are quite similar. During the thermal shock tests roughly similar strains are expected to develop in the samples of two materials. Regarding the outcome of the thermal shock tests for SB1 the strain realised in the test should be close to the strain at failure. The same strain for CFS1 was rather low in comparison with respective strain at failure. The few cracks observed on the surface of CFS1 samples did not show major effect either on strength or Young’s modulus. The thermal shock tests on SB1 and CFS1 should be compared with the mechanical cyclic tests when samples failed after low and high number of cycles, respectively ( The mechanical fatigue test has a potential to combine the benefits of the both above approaches. It allows direct correlation of loads and material response in the stress—strain coordinates. It can quantify the degradation due to repetitive cycles. However in strain controlled fatigue tests the potential for the damage saturation depends on the loading protocols [ In amorphous (as received) form the fused silica materials are rather brittle. Their high thermal shock resistance is guaranteed by the low coefficient of thermal expansion. Crystallised fused silica materials of the morphology realised in the used heat treatment regime have high strain tolerance and low brittleness that promotes resistance to the crack growth and thermal shock. These properties result from the tendency to form more tortuous crack path that avoids larger grains and are formed by the micro-cracks. Differences in performance between the materials within one type are seen to be lower than those between the types. Utilised alternative methods produce same ranking for the studied materials. The mechanical strain controlled fatigue tests allow direct correlation of the loads and material response in the stress—strain coordinates. At the same time it allows monitoring the material degradation during the repetitive loading cycles. As a result it combines the benefits of the thermal shock tests and stress-strain tests of monotonic loading. The critical strain is the laboratory test parameter that can correlate the material behaviour observed in tests of different methods and the loads specific for the service. Further work is to concentrate on the correlation of thermal shock and mechanical cyclic (fatigue) tests for the wide range of the refractories and on the specifying potential cyclic degradation limits using established fracture mechanics tests. The authors declare no conflict of interest. Financial support from the open fund (