The atom distribution and electronic properties of (010), (001) and (100) planes of MnWO4 and FeWO4 were studied based on a DFT calculation. The surface stabilities of the three planes were compared according to their surface energies. The most stable one is (010) plane, followed by (001) and (100). (010) and (001) are the main planes for absorption of anion collector ions, which is supported by their bonding relationship and charge density distribution of surface atoms and finally proved by the results of flotation test and stereomicroscope analysis. In addition, the tungsten atoms can be viewed as the absorption site for collectors in (001) plane but not in (010) plane, which can explain the phenomenon in flotation test that the recovery of wolframite can hardly be further boosted even with a high dosage of BHA.Tungsten is an important sort of strategic resource and it usually occurs as the wolframite in the nature. At present, gravity and magnetic separation are still the main methods for recovering wolframite Chelating reagent and fatty acid are widely used in flotation of oxide ores [mineral processing] and they are commonly used as collectors of wolframite In terms of previous researches, it can be concluded that the iron and manganese atoms in the surface of wolframite should be the absorption sites when anionic collectors are used. However, they have not referred to the precondition for absorption of collectors, namely, whether the wolframite has a proper surface crystal structure for absorption of collectors is not involved. As we know, besides of iron, manganese and oxygen, tungsten is also a component of wolframite. Whether tungsten in the surface can be absorbed by collector ions should also be taken into account. For this reason, the research of crystal surface properties of wolframite is indispensable for explaining the phenomenon of collector absorption. (010), (100) and (001) are the most common cleavage planes which can be seen from wolframite crystals. According to the mineralogical characters of wolframite, these planes are easy to be formed when cracked by force. Therefore, their surface properties should be related to the absorption of collector ions, and then, to the flotation behavior of wolframite. Actually, wolframite is an isomorphous series with doped iron or manganese atoms between huebnerite (MnWO In this work, the atom and electron properties and the stability of (010), (001) and (100) surfaces of MnWO The total energy plane-wave pseudopotential based on DFT was used for performing all calculations with the CASTEP computer code. The BFGS algorithm was recommended to reach the minimum total energy of the system for its stability and efficiency The crystals of MnWO For symmetrical slabs, such as (010)-A, the surface energy after relaxation will be simply calculated by Eq. For non-symmetrical slabs, such as (010)-B1 and (010)-B2, we calculate the surface energies of both slabs with Eq. In terms of the calculation method above, we obtain the surface energies of different slab models and list them in In the light of Bond's breakage theory The bonding and charge density of surface atoms of (010)-A, (010)-C and (001)-A of MnWO The charge density distribution is quite intuitive to reflect the bonding relationship. In It can also be seen from For further study of the bonding relationship of surface atoms of (010)-A, (010)-C and (001)-A, we marked out the bond length and angle changes in relaxed slabs and mapped the charge density difference distribution of relaxed slabs (see To verify our speculation of the relationship between particle size and cleavage plane features of wolframite, we classified a batch of pure minerals of wolframite into three size fractions of −74 The fraction of −50 From The pH of pulp was 7. The terpenic oil was used as frothing agent (16 The result from To further understanding the absorption of BHA on different mineral surfaces, a series of simulations based on the models above were performed. Considering the similarities between MnWO The red, dark blue, gray, purple and light blue balls respectively denote O, N, C, Mn and W atoms. A, B and C respectively depict absorption of BHA on (010)-A, (010)-C and (001)-A planes of MnWO  In this study a DFT calculation was carried out to obtain the surface energies, bonding nature, Mulliken population and charge density distribution of the (010), (001) and (100) planes of MnWO According to the calculation result of surface energy, the (010) plane is the easiest one to be seen in wolframite, followed by (001) plane and (100) plane. The bonding nature and spatial distribution of surface atoms demonstrate that (010) and (001) are the primary planes for the absorption of anion collector ions, in (010) plane of which only Mn and Fe can be the absorption sites while in (001) plane W can also be the absorption site. The stereo microscope observations of screening and flotation productions show that the cleavage plane features of wolframite particles are in accordance with the prediction based on calculation results, namely, the proportion of platy particles along with their perfect cleavage planes increase with the decrease of particle size. When using BHA alone as the collector of wolframite, the recovery of wolframite around 50% can hardly be further boosted even using a high dosage of BHA, that is mainly because a part of cleavage planes of wolframite is occupied by W atoms and hard to be absorbed by collector ions. This research is supported by