Trioctylphosphine oxide based extractant impregnated membranes (EIM) were used for extraction of phenol and its methyl, hydroxyl and chloride substituted derivatives. The distribution coefficients of the phenols varied from 2 to 234, in the order of 1-napthol > p-chlorophenol > m-cresol > p-cresol > o-cresol > phenol > catechol > pyrogallol > hydroquinone, when initial phenols loadings was varied in 100–2000 mg/L. An extraction model, based on the law of mass action, was formulated to predict the equilibrium distribution of the phenols. The model was in excellent agreement (R2 > 0.97) with the experimental results at low phenols concentrations (<800 mg/L). At higher phenols loadings though, Langmuir isotherm was better suited for equilibrium prediction (R2 > 0.95), which signified high mass transfer resistance in the EIMs. Examination of the effects of ring substitution on equilibrium, and bivariate statistical analysis between the amounts of phenols extracted into the EIMs and factors affecting phenols interaction with TOPO, indicated the dominant role of hydrophobicity in equilibrium determination. These results improve understanding of the solid/liquid equilibrium process between phenols and the EIMs, and these will be useful in designing phenol recovery process from wastewater.Phenol and its derivatives are common pollutants in wastewater from many industrial processes, which include refineries, coking operations, coal gasification and manufacturing of disinfectants, biocides, dyes, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics ( Phenols can be removed from wastewater through solvent extraction using organophosphorus extractants ( One of the most commonly used organophosphorus extractant in phenol removal is trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) ( The kinetics of extractive separation of phenol using EIMs has been studied in detail in previous studies ( In this research, a detailed and systematic study was performed to understand the solid/liquid extraction equilibria of phenol and its substituted derivatives by the EIMs. An equilibrium model based on the law of mass action was used in conjugation with the Langmuir isotherm to predict the distribution coefficients over a wide concentration range. The novelty of this research lies in elucidating the mechanism of EIM-based solid/liquid extraction and in identifying the factors affecting the equilibrium. All the chemicals used in this research were of analytical grade and were used as received from the supplier. TOPO was dissolved in dichloromethane (DCM) to prepare a 400 g/L stock solution. The aqueous concentrations of phenol and its derivatives were determined by measuring absorbance using an ultraviolet-visible spectrophotometer (UV-1240, Shimazdu, Japan). The wavelengths used to analyze phenol, Phenol concentration in the solid phase (EIMs) was calculated by mass balance. The adsorption capacity calculations were made based on the total weight of TOPO in the EIMs used in the experiments, which was 0.688 g. The total volume of TOPO in the EIMs was 0.782 cm Commercial polypropylene hollow fiber membranes (Accurel PP 50/280, Membrana GmbH, Germany) were used for the immobilization. Membrane specification is described elsewhere ( 20 pieces were prepared using epoxy resins (Araldite, England). For immobilization, TOPO/DCM stock solution was diluted with DCM to the desired concentration and the bundles were added to it. The contents were stirred on a shaking water bath for 1 h at 150 rpm to allow the TOPO solution to penetrate the fibers. The solution wetted fibers were then removed and rinsed twice with ultrapure water to remove DCM present on the outer surfaces of the fibers. Finally, the fibers were air dried for 24 h to evaporate the DCM, leaving solid TOPO inside the fibers. The resulting EIMs were washed thoroughly to remove loosely held extractant on the outer surfaces of the fibers. Although the tube side of the hollow fibers was not used during extraction, the empty space in the tube side was used to maximize TOPO packing in the membranes. The extraction experiments were carried out in batch mode in a 50 mL Falcon tube with 40 mL of phenolic solution on a thermomixer (HLC Biotech, Germany) operating at 25 °C and 200 rpm. A total of 15 bundles of EIMs were used during the solid/liquid extraction. Samples were collected periodically to measure phenols concentrations in the aqueous and the solid phases. Phenol stripping from the EIMs was carried out in 40 mL of 0.2 M sodium hydroxide solution. Each experiment was repeated three times for reproducibility. In all the experiments, the standard deviations between triplicates were less than 5%. Being a solid/liquid mass transfer process, extraction of phenols by the EIMs could be considered a sorption process. Therefore, both extraction and adsorption based approaches were used to examine the distribution equilibrium. In a solid/liquid mass transfer process involving adsorption, the equilibrium can be modeled using Langmuir isotherm which is given by In the extraction of weak organic acid, phenol, by the strong solvating extractant, TOPO, the solvation number of phenol can be assumed to be one ( Eqn.  Since phenol is a weak acid, it can dissociate in aqueous solution to form a phenolate ion and hydrogen ion: The distribution coefficient ( Using Eqns. The concentration of undissociated phenol in the aqueous phase can be calculated using Bivariate statistical analysis was performed to identify the effects of solubility, hydrophobicity (log  In the extraction of weak acidic compounds by strong basic extractants, the pH of the aqueous phase can play a very important role. It has been suggested that the pH of the aqueous solution should be lower than the Although the The changes in equilibrium partitioning at alkaline conditions could be explained based on the reaction between phenols and sodium hydroxide, which resulted in the formation of phenolate salts, and reduced the availability of the phenols for binding with TOPO in the EIMs. At increasingly alkaline pH, the extent of phenol converting to phenolate would have been much higher, which would have rendered an increased amount of the phenols unavailable for reaction with TOPO, and hence led to a gradual lowering in the partitioning of the phenols on the EIMs (  The extraction equilibrium constants, The Since the solid/liquid extraction of the phenols by the EIMs resembled sorption, the equilibrium was also investigated using Langmuir model. Contrary to the extraction model, there was a poor fit between the experimental data and the Langmuir isotherm at low phenols loadings. However, an excellent agreement between the Langmuir isotherm and the experimental results were obtained at high concentrations of the phenols ( In solvent extraction using TOPO as the extractant, the changes in equilibrium can be predicted well using the law of mass action ( At higher loadings of the phenols, TOPO available on the membrane surfaces could not possibly have provided enough binding sites and the phenols molecules would have to diffuse deeper into the membranes for the required impregnated TOPO sites. However, the movement of phenols within the membrane walls was slow due to the high mass transfer resistance of the EIMs ( In order to gain further insights into the extraction equilibrium of phenols by the EIMs, the factors affecting the equilibrium was elucidated through a detailed analysis of the effects of ring substitution/aromaticity.  Similar trends were seen while comparing the effects of methyl group substitutions at different positions. The   Based on these results, it was concluded that the hydrophobicity of the phenols was the most important factor influencing their extraction by the EIMs. Although changes in the functional group and aromaticity of the phenols also resulted in changes in solubility and acid strength, hydrophobicity was the most dominant and decisive factor in determining the equilibrium. Since log The results obtained in Section  Based on the experimental results, model predictions and statistical analysis, it can be concluded that the significance of this study lies in elucidating the extraction mechanism for extraction of phenols by the EIMs, and in predicting the extraction equilibrium. Although phenols were used as the model compounds in this research, the efficacy of extraction was analyzed based on the general properties of acid strength, hydrophobicity and water solubility. Therefore, these findings will be applicable in the EIM-based extraction of other weakly acidic compounds, such as carboxylic acids. Nevertheless, it is possible that real wastewater may have other compounds, which could interfere with the extraction of the phenols by the EIMs. Therefore, further investigation will be required to assess competition from other contaminants in wastewater, before the EIMs can be applied in real wastewater treatment. The extraction equilibrium of phenol and its chloride, hydroxyl and methyl substituted derivative has been investigated using TOPO-based EIMs as the partitioning phase. The experimental results were compared with a model based on the law of mass action. The distribution equilibrium has been simulated using the extraction model and Langmuir isotherm and a mass transfer mechanism has been proposed. The effects of pH on distribution equilibrium have been examined, which showed a marginal role of acid strength in extraction. Bivariate statistical analysis has been carried out and it yielded high Pearson correlation coefficients between extraction capacity and hydrophobicity. The effects of ring substitution/aromaticity indicated a strong influence of hydrophobicity in the extraction equilibrium. It can be concluded that hydrophobicity of phenols was the dominant factor affecting their extraction by the EIMs.