Radio frequency (RF) cooking is a form of dielectric heating similar to microwave heating. In this study an optimised cooking protocol was developed for pasteurising 1 kg cased meat emulsion samples, which were immersed in 80 °C circulating water during cooking. Subsequently, selected quality attributes of RF pasteurised samples were compared to steam pasteurised samples, by instrumental and sensory methods. Instrumental assessments show that RF heated meat batters had a greater ability to hold water, were significantly harder, chewier and gummier (P<0.001), while having less cook colour development than their steam cooked counterparts. Differences were also detected by sensory methods. In conclusion, while differences were detected, it is possible that these could be eliminated by adjusting the cooking protocol to produce similar cook values in RF samples to those in products cooked by steam.Traditional methods for cooking of comminuted meat products involve heating the product using hot water or steam. While cooking meats in this way, the outer surfaces of the product heat first with heat subsequently transferring to the colder interior predominantly by conduction. This in turn can lead to overheating of the outer surfaces while waiting for the interior to reach an appropriate temperature. In contrast using dielectric forms of heating, polarizing electromagnetic radiation (EMR) allows volumetric heating of the product such that all parts of the product in principle heat at the same rate. In practice, however, the frequency of the incident EMR limits the depth to which it can penetrate with lower frequency EMR being required for greater penetration depths. Thus for products such as large diameter comminuted meats, low frequency EMR such as that encountered in RF heating (i.e., 1–300 MHz ( Some information is available regarding RF dielectric properties of meat batters which govern their interaction with RF energy ( In view of the lack of information with regard to RF cooking of cased meat products, a principal objective of the present study was the development of a method, which permits the application of RF heating to a comminuted cased meat products and which could be easily integrated with current methods for meat pasteurisation. In addition, a number of quality attributes of the RF heated products were assessed and compared to products pasteurised by conventional methods (steam cooking). The quality attributes assessed were texture and colour measured using an Instron and a chromameter, respectively. In addition, a sensory comparison of a RF pasteurised and conventionally produced comminuted meat product was carried out. Lean pork shoulder and pork back fat were obtained from a local producer (Galtee meats, Cork, Ireland). Lean tissue was ground through a plate with 3.5 mm diameter holes, while fat was ground through a 10 mm plate using a mechanical mincer (Model No. TS8E, Tritacarne, Omas, Italy). About 2 kg lots of ground tissue were then placed in polyethylene bags, vacuum-packaged using a Webomatic packaging system (Model No. 021ODC681, Webomatic, Bochum, Germany) and stored at −18 °C until required for product manufacture. Suitable amounts of the frozen muscle and fat were air-tempered at 5 °C for 24 h prior to batter preparation. The recipe used in preparation of the luncheon roll (LR) meat batter is given in An orthogonal experiment described in All RF heated products were processed in a customised RF oven (Capenhurst Technologies Ltd., Capenhurst Technology Park, Capenhurst, Chester CH1 6ES, England). The maximum power output of the unit was 0.6 kW. A photograph of the cell positioned within the RF oven is shown in For steam processing, samples were prepared as described in From the time–temperature data recorded during RF and steam cooking, pasteurisation units (PU Texture profile analysis (TPA) was conducted using the methods of Expressible fluid (EF) were measured using the method of Samples for colour measurement was prepared as described above. A chromameter (Model CR-300 Minolta, Minolta (UK) Limited, Milton Keynes, England) was used to determine Hunter The chromameter was calibrated for internal light (D65) before carrying out colour measurements. Sensory evaluation of LRs cooked by RF or steam oven was carried out by Triangle Test according to the method of All instrumental texture and colour data were subjected to one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with cooking protocol as a factor using An L Results of an orthogonally designed experiment on the effect of selected processing parameters on the MxT, MnT, Δ The objective in developing a cooking protocol in the current study was to heat all measured points of the product to a temperature in excess of 72 °C and to hold all measured areas of the product above that temperature for a minimum of 2 min. Cooking times in excess of 30 min produced higher end point temperatures (EPT) than those required for effective pasteurisation with temperatures up to a maximum of 90 °C being attained ( A typical time–temperature profile for an RF heated LR cooked using the optimised conditions described above is compared to the time–temperature profile for a steam cooked sample heated at 80 °C in Typical EPT distributions for LRs cooked by RF and steam methods are illustrated in The magnitude of the temperature differentials in the current study was substantially less than those reported by  Peak load values (N) measured during expressible fluid analysis and fluid loss for RF cooked samples were significantly higher than for steam cooked samples ( TPA and Kramer shear values for RF and steam cooked LR are presented in Results of instrumental colour analysis are presented in It has also been shown that rising A similarity triangle test using 48 panellists indicated that panellists could distinguish at the 1% level between RF and steam cooked LR samples. Results for the sensory sequential test are shown in Using the optimised cooking protocol developed in this work, a 79% reduction in pasteurisation time of encased luncheon roll meat was obtained compared to equivalent steam cooked samples. Temperature differentials were twofold higher within the RF cooked sample relative to its steam cooked counterparts. TEF, EM and ESS values were significantly lower for RF vs. steam cooked samples indicating that RF samples had higher capacity to hold water following cooking. Instrumental texture analysis indicated that RF cooked samples were harder, gummier and chewier than their steam cooked counterparts. RF cooked samples appeared to have less colour development than their steam cooked equivalents as indicated by their lower