The main purpose of this study is to compare the many different rock properties in the rock sawability. The comparison was realized with the combination of the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and Fuzzy Delphi method and also TOPSIS method. The analysis is one of the multi-criteria techniques providing useful support in selecting among several alternatives with different objectives and criteria. FDAHP method was used in determining the weights of the criteria by decision makers and then ranking the sawability of the rocks was determined by TOPSIS method. The study was supported by the results obtained from a questionnaire carried out to know the opinions of the experts in this subject. During the research process, the rock sawability was evaluated in terms of production rate of sawn rock. Prediction of production rate is important in the cost estimation and the planning of the stone plants. The new developed ranking method may be used for evaluating production rate of ornamental stone at any stone factory with different stone. Some factors such as uniaxial compressive strength, Schmiazek F-abrasivity, mohs hardness and Young’s modulus must be obtained for the best production rate ranking.Prediction of rock sawability is important in the cost estimation and the planning of the stone plants. A correct estimation of rock sawability helps to make the planning of the rock sawing projects more efficiently. Rock sawability depends on non-controlled parameters related to rock characteristics and controlled parameters related to properties of cutting tools and equipment. In the same working conditions, the sawing process and its results are strongly affected by mineralogical and mechanical properties of rock. Up to now, many studies have been done on the relationship between sawability and rock characteristics in stone processing. Burgess proposed a regression model for sawability, which was based on mineralogical composition, hardness, grain size and abrasion resistance Especially, among the previous studies some researchers have developed a number of classification systems for ranking the sawability of rocks. Wei et al. evaluated and classified the sawability of granites by means of the fuzzy ranking system. In their study, wear performance of the blade and the cutting force were used as the sawability criteria. They concluded that with the fuzzy ranking system, by using only the tested petrographic and mechanical properties, a convenient selection of a suitable saw blade could be made for a new granite type The performance of any stone factory is affected by the complex interaction of numerous factors. These factors that affect the production cost can be classified as production rate, energy, labor, water, diamond saw blade, polishing pads, filling material and packing. Among the above factors, production rate is one of the most important factors. In this study, it is aimed to develop a new hierarchy model for ranking the production rate of ornamental stone in sawing process with circular saw. By this model, ornamental stone were ranked with respect to its production rate. This model can be used for cost analysis and project planning as a decision making index. To make a right decision on production rate of ornamental stone, all known criteria related to the problem should be analyzed. Although an increasing in the number of related criteria makes the problem more complicated and more difficult to reach a solution, this may also increase the correctness of the decision made because of those criteria. Due to the arising complexity in the decision process, many conventional methods are able to consider limited criteria and may be generally deficient. Therefore, it is clearly seen that assessing all of the known criteria connected to the production rate by combining the decision making process is extremely significant. The main purpose of this study is to compare the many different factors in the production rate of the ornamental stone. The comparison is performed with the combination of the analytic hierarchy process (AHP) and Fuzzy Delphi method and also the use of TOPSIS method. The analysis is one of the multi-criteria techniques that provide useful support in the choice among several alternatives with different objectives and criteria. FDAHP method is used in determining the weights of the criteria by decision makers and then ranking the production rate of the rocks is determined by TOPSIS method. The study is supported by results obtained from a questionnaire carried out to know the opinions of the experts in this subject. To deal with the vagueness of human thought, Zadeh The parameters A fuzzy number can always be given by its corresponding left and right representation of each degree of membership: The analytic hierarchy process (AHP) is an approach that is suitable for dealing with complex systems related to making a choice from among several alternatives and which provides a comparison of the considered options, firstly proposed by Saaty The AHP is a tool that can be used for analyzing different kinds of social, political, economic and technological problems, and it uses both qualitative and quantitative variables. The fundamental principle of the analysis is the possibility of connecting information, based on knowledge, to make decisions or previsions; the knowledge can be taken from experience or derived from the application of other tools. Among the different contexts in which the AHP can be applied, mention can be made of the creation of a list of priorities, the choice of the best policy, the optimal allocation of resources, the prevision of results and temporal dependencies, the assessment of risks and planning The relative fuzzy weights of the decision elements are calculated using the following three steps based on the FDM and aggregate the relative fuzzy weights to obtain scores for the decision alternation. First, compute the triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs) Lastly, calculate the relative fuzzy weights of the evaluation factors: TOPSIS (technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution) is one of the useful multi-criteria decision making (MCDM) techniques to manage real-world problems Step 1. Decision matrix is normalized via Step 2. Weighted normalized decision matrix is formed: Step 3. Positive ideal solution (PIS) and negative ideal solution (NIS) are determined: Step 4. The distance of each alternative from PIS and NIS are calculated: Step 5. The closeness coefficient of each alternative is calculated: Step 6. By comparing Carbonate rock sawability depends on non-controlled parameters related to rock characteristics (such as textural characteristics, mechanical characteristics and environmental and structural characteristics) and controlled parameters related to properties of cutting tools and equipment (such as machine power, feed rate, depth of cut, peripheral speed, cutting mode, blade type, diameter of blade saw and Amount of water used). In the same working conditions, the sawing process and its results are strongly affected by physical and mechanical properties of rock. The important characteristics influencing the rock sawability are shown in Because different groups have varying objectives and expectations, they judge on rock sawability from different perspectives. So, affecting criteria have different level of significance for different users. For this reason, five decision makers are selected from different areas and these decision makers evaluate the criteria. FDAHP is proposed to take the decision makers subjective judgments into consideration and to reduce the uncertainty and vagueness in the decision process. Decision makers from different backgrounds may define different weight vectors. They usually cause not only the imprecise evaluation but also serious persecution during decision process. For this reason, we proposed a group decision based on FDAHP to improve pair-wise comparison. First each decision maker ( The weighting factors for each criterion were presented in the following steps: Compute the triangular fuzzy numbers (TFNs): According Eqs. Create fuzzy pair-wise comparison matrix Calculate the relative fuzzy weights of the evaluation factors. The final weights of each parameter are calculated as follows: In attempting to present a ranking system for assessing rock sawability, using all mentioned parameters is difficult from a practical point of view. In this ranking system three following rules have been considered: (a) the number of parameters used should be small, (b) equivalent parameters should be avoided, and (c) parameters should be considered within certain groups. Considering these rules, the parameters chosen for assessing the rock sawability are listed as follows: (a) uniaxial compressive strength (UCS); (b) Schmiazek F-abrasivity factor (SF-a); (c) mohs hardness (MH); (d) Young’s modulus (YM). The reasons of the selections of these parameters are given below. Uniaxial compressive strength is one of the most important engineering properties of rocks. Rock material strength is used as an important parameter in many rock mass classification systems. Using this parameter in classification is necessary because strength of rock material constitutes the strength limit of rock mass Abrasiveness influences the tool wear and sawing rate substantially. Abrasiveness is mainly affected by various factors such as mineral composition, the hardness of mineral constituents and grain characteristics such as size, shape and angularity Hardness can be interpreted as the rock’s resistance to penetration. The factors that affect rock hardness are the hardness of the constitutive minerals, cohesion forces, homogeneity, and the water content of rock According to rock behavior during the fracture process, especially in sawing, the way that rocks reach the failure point has a great influence on sawability. The best scale for rock elasticity is Young’s modulus. Based on ISRM suggested methods Some stone factories in Shamsabad of Iran were selected and performances of diamond circular saw in term of the hourly production rates ( After determining the weights of the criteria with FDAHP method and laboratory studies, ranking the sawability of carbonate rocks is performed by TOPSIS method. First, the amount of each criterion is filled in decision matrix for each criterion. Decision matrix is obtained with respect to important rock properties ( In the present study, a new hierarchical model is developed to evaluate and ranking the sawability of ornamental stone with the use of effective criteria and considering of decision makers' judgments. The proposed approach is based on the combination of Fuzzy Delphi and analytic hierarchy process (FDAHP) methods. Technique for order preference by similarity to ideal solution (TOPSIS) is also used in this study. FDAHP was used for determining the weights of the criteria according to decision makers then rankings of carbonate rocks were determined by TOPSIS. The proposed method was applied for Iranian ornamental stone to evaluation the production rate in rock sawing process. For validation of applied ranking system, experimental procedure was carried out. The sawability ranking results of studied rocks are shown in In this paper, a decision support system was developed for ranking the sawability of ornamental stone. This system designed to eliminate the difficulties in taking into consideration many decision criteria simultaneously in the rock sawing process and to guide the decision makers for ranking the sawability of ornamental stone. In this study, FDAHP and TOPSIS methods was used to evaluate the sawability of ornamental stone. FDAHP is utilized for determining the weights of the criteria and TOPSIS method is used for ranking the sawability of ornamental stone. During this research, twelve types of ornamental stone belonging to granite and carbonate rock were tested in some factories located in Iran. The production rate of each sawn rock was determined to verify the result of applied approach for ranking them by sawability criteria. The experimental results confirmed the new ranking results precisely. This new ranking method can be used for evaluating the production rate of ornamental stone at any stone factory with different rock. Some parameters such as uniaxial compressive strength, Schmiazek F-abrasivity, mohs hardness and young's modulus must be obtained for the best sawability ranking.