Microbial oxidation of ferrous to ferric iron allows efficient oxidative processing of sulfide minerals under ambient conditions. This study determined the effect of cell concentration of a mixed mesophilic microbial culture on iron oxidation rate, and evaluated if there was a cell concentration threshold that dictates a maximal volumetric iron oxidation rate. A bioreactor with feedback-loading of ferrous media was operated at 30 °C to maintain a redox potential of +480 mV vs. Ag/AgCl at pH of 1.3. A positive and linear correlation (R2
                      = 0.955) between the cell concentration (6.8 × 107–7.1 × 109 cells mL−1) and volumetric biological iron oxidation (up to 6.9 g L−1 h−1) was observed. The specific iron oxidation was not affected by cell concentration, and no biocatalytic threshold was observed. This indicated that a high cell concentration can be used to achieve a high volumetric iron oxidation rate, enabling the use of a compact reactor size.Ferric iron (Fe Biological iron oxidation kinetics has been investigated with reference to process conditions such as dissolved oxygen ( There are currently no industrial sulfide mineral bioprocesses where cell concentration is deliberately increased to increase biological iron oxidation rates. Most bioprocesses are managed simply by optimising the process conditions to enhance cell growth. In a conventional agitated tank leaching cascade, the cell numbers in each reactor increase by cell division and culture growth ( The culture medium used in the iron oxidation experiments was 0 K medium (modified 9 K medium ( The mixed culture used for the experiments was obtained from ALS Metallurgy (Perth, Western Australia) and included Redox potential was controlled to +480 mV (vs. Ag/AgCl) by feedback dosing fresh 0 K medium (supplemented with 8.0 g L Redox potential was measured using a TPS meter, model MC-80 and IONODE ORP combination electrode, model PRFO (Ag/AgCl reference). Reactor pH was measured using a TPS miniCHEM controller and pH electrode (Ionode pH electrode, IJ44CT), calibrated using pH 1.68 and 4.01 standard buffers. The solution pH, redox potential and the consumption of 0 K medium by the reactor were recorded using the LabVIEW software (National Instruments). Dissolved oxygen (DO) concentrations were measured using a HACH luminescent dissolved oxygen (LDO) HQ10 meter with HACH LDO probe. Solution samples (1 mL) were taken from the reactor (initially twice in an hour for the first 2.5 h, then hourly until 6.5 h and thereafter at decreasing frequency as the volumetric iron oxidation slowed down) and kept on ice prior to cell counting and ferrous iron and total iron analyses. Ferrous iron concentrations in filtered (0.2 μm) samples were measured spectrophotometrically using the phenanthroline method ( The Nernst equation was used to calculate ferric iron concentrations based on redox potentials, ferrous iron and total soluble Fe concentrations measured at selected time points during the experiment ( Here, Ferric iron concentrations calculated from Eq. Here, Initial cell concentration in the reactor was 5.8 × 10 The solution pH decreased slightly during the experiment, with average, maximum and minimum values of 1.31 ± 0.05, 1.48 and 1.17, respectively (data not shown). The pH of the system was suitable for most of the microorganisms present in the mixed culture ( The initial aeration rate of 8 L min The volumetric iron oxidation rate decreased from 6.9 g L The volumetric iron oxidation rate decreased as the influent was dosed to the reactor ( Interestingly, the specific iron oxidation rate, ranging from 6.2 × 10 There was a strong positive linear correlation between cell density and volumetric iron oxidation rate ( This study showed that higher cell concentrations allow higher iron oxidation rates. The final cell number at the end of the experiment was 6.8 × 10 An increase of cell concentrations, beyond which is currently achievable in conventional agitated tank leaching, may be achievable using methods to recover and recycle suspended cells from the process discharge solution ( This study showed that the biological iron oxidation rate had a positive linear correlation with cell concentration in the studied range of 6.8 × 10 The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of