Hesperidin found in citrus fruits has been reported to be a promising bioactive compound for maintaining an optimal bone status in ovariectomized rodent models. In this study, we examined the capacity of hesperetin (Hp) to affect the proliferation, differentiation and mineralization of rodent primary osteoblasts. Then, the impact of Hp on signalling pathways known to be implicated in bone formation was explored. We exposed osteoblasts to physiological concentrations of 1 μM Hp (Hp1) and 10 μM Hp (Hp10). Neither proliferation nor mineralization was affected by Hp at either dose during 19 days of exposure. Hp at both doses enhanced differentiation by significantly increasing alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity from Day 14 of exposure (Day 19: Hp1: +9%, Hp10: +14.8% vs. control; P<.05). However, Hp did not induce an obvious formation of calcium nodules. The effect of Hp10 on ALP was inhibited by addition of noggin protein, suggesting a possible action of this flavanone through the bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) pathway. Indeed, Hp10 significantly induced (1.2- to 1.4-fold) mRNA expression of genes involved in this signalling pathway (i.e., BMP2, BMP4, Runx2 and Osterix) after 48 h of exposure. This was strengthened by enhanced phosphorylation of the complex Smad1/5/8. Osteocalcin mRNA level was up-regulated by Hp only at 10 μM (2.2 fold vs. control). The same dose of Hp significantly decreased osteopontin (OPN) protein level (50% vs. control) after 14 days of culture. Our findings suggest that Hp may regulate osteoblast differentiation through BMP signalling and may influence the mineralization process by modulating OPN expression.The maintenance of bone mineral density (BMD) is largely dependent on the coordinated activities of osteoclasts and osteoblasts It is well known that osteoblast differentiation is regulated by various pathways such as bone morphogenetic protein (BMP), transforming growth factor β (TGFβ), insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF1), fibroblast growth factor (FGF), Hedgehog, Wnt (wingless-type MMTV integration site family) and mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) Little is known about the interaction of polyphenols with these pathways. It has been described that flavonoids may affect the expression of NF-κB and AP-1. Furthermore, many bone-specific genes such as The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of Hp on osteoblast functions and to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms involved. Therefore, we assessed the influence of 1 μM (Hp1) and 10 μM Hp (Hp10) on ALP activity, which is the main marker of osteoblast differentiation. We also tested the effect of Hp on mineralization. When considering the molecular impact of Hp, we mainly focused on BMP target genes related to osteoblast functions. Primary osteoblasts were isolated from the calvaria of newborn Wistar rats (INRA, Theix, France) by enzymatic digestion, as described previously All cell experiments were performed in triplicate. The cells were treated with a medium supplemented or not with 25 μM Hp for 24 h. Polyphenol was extracted from cells using a solution of 70% methanol and 30% water acidified with 200 mM HCl. Cellular uptake of Hp was determined by high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) coul-array detection (Esa, Chelmsford, MA, USA), as previously described Cell proliferation was measured by determining DNA content on Days 0, 5, 9, 14 and 19. Cells were rinsed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (Sigma), then incubated with 2 μg/ml bisbenzimide H33342 (Hoechst) in PBS at 37°C in the dark. The total amount of DNA was measured with an FLX800 Microplate Fluorescence Reader (Bio-Tek Instruments, Winooski, VT, USA) at wavelengths of 360 nm (excitation) and 460 nm (emission). Fold increase in cell number was calculated relative to the initial cell number on Day 0. Enzymatic activity of ALP was measured kinetically on Treatment Days 0, 5, 9, 14 and 19 in accordance with the method described by Sabokbar et al. Osteoblasts seeded in 24-well plates were cultured for 14 days in C Upon confluence, cells were exposed to different media (C The concentration of proteins isolated using the NucleoSpin RNA/Protein Kit (Macherey-Nagel) was measured by a BC assay kit (Uptima Interchim, Montluçon, France). Twenty-five micrograms of total protein was subjected to a 10% sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel and transferred to Immobilon-P-PVDF membranes at 100 V for 1 h 45 min. The membranes were blocked in 5% nonfat dry milk in TBS-T (0.5% Tween 20) buffer for 2 h. Blots were incubated with anti-phospho-Smad1/5/8 (Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA, USA) at a 1:1000 dilution for 1 h 30 min at room temperature, washed with TBS-T and then probed with 1:2000 diluted anti-rabbit horseradish-peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) for 1 h 30 min at room temperature. The membranes were washed in TBS-T and Tris-buffered saline. Blot signals were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL Plus; Amersham GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK). After stripping in a buffer containing 0.7% β-mercaptoethanol, membranes were labelled with 1:500 diluted anti-Smad1/5/8 and anti-actin antibodies (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and probed with 1:10000 and 1:5000 diluted secondary antibodies, respectively. Osteoblasts seeded in 24-well plates (30,000 cells/well) coated with collagen were grown to confluence and treated. The culture medium was collected after 2, 5 or 14 days of treatment. The concentration of BMP2 protein in the medium was determined using a Quantikine BMP2 enzyme immunoassay (ELISA) (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN). OPN and OCN concentrations were measured using a Rat Osteopontin Assay Kit (Immuno-Biological-Laboratories, Gunma, Japan) and a Rat Osteocalcin IRMA Kit (Immunotopics, San Clemente, CA, USA). Results are expressed as mean±S.E.M. ALP activity and cell proliferation on each day were analyzed using parametric one-way analysis of variance, followed by multiple-comparisons Fisher's Exact Test/least significant difference performed in XLSTAT version 7.5.2 (AddinSoft, Paris, France). Nonparametric test–Wilcoxon signed-rank test (compared to control C In our experimental model, an optimized medium (C The cellular uptake of Hp was tested by incubating cells with 25 μM Hp for 24 h, preparation of cells lysates and analysis by coul array, as described in Examination of the coul-array profile ( The impact of Hp on cell proliferation on Days 0, 5, 9, 14 and 19 was assessed by measuring Hoechst incorporation in DNA. As expected, increased proliferation was observed until Day 5 (3.6-fold increase Osteoblast differentiation was assessed kinetically by measuring ALP activity in cells treated with Hp for 19 days. As expected, in osteoblasts treated with optimized medium (C The addition of 100 ng/ml noggin protein into C Calcium nodule formation was assessed by measuring the release of alizarin red S after 14 days of cell culture. As expected, calcium nodules were observed in C To study gene expression, mRNA levels were assessed by real-time PCR after 24 and/or 48 h of treatment. Changes were considered significant when 20% up-regulation (1.2-fold) or down-regulation (1.2-fold) was obtained compared to C  Expression of both genes was significantly down-regulated in C While  Expression of c- Under our experimental conditions, BMP2 protein concentration in the medium was not detectable by ELISA after Treatment Days 2 and 5. In optimized medium (C Phosphorylation of Smad proteins was assessed by Western blot analysis of cell lysates from cells incubated for 24 h ( At both time points, Smad1/5/8 phosphorylation appeared to be decreased in osteoblasts cultured in C It has previously been reported that hesperidin was able to increase BMD in rodents Cell signalling can be activated by the interaction of a compound with a receptor on the cell surface and/or by an interaction with extracellular proteins We chose the primary rat osteoblast model to study the effect of Hp on bone formation and related pathways since this is one of the most commonly used models and allows us to compare our results with previously reported results for flavonoids and statins. In our experimental model, an optimized medium (containing ascorbic acid and β-glycerophosphate) was used as positive control for osteoblast functions. Indeed, ascorbic acid is an important inducer of osteoblast differentiation, and its requirement for both differentiation and mineralization is well known In the present study, Hp, similar to other polyphenols For all the genes evaluated, the level of mRNA responds to different doses of Hp ( The BMP pathway can be regulated by a negative feedback loop. Noggin is one of the osteoblast-secreted proteins that can limit the level of BMP signals through complexation with BMPs and prevention of their receptor binding We observed that both Hp and ascorbic acid can stimulate BMP2 and BMP4 expression, as well as down-regulate noggin expression, with ascorbic acid being more efficient ( Hp also enhanced Smad1 mRNA level ( These results support our hypothesis that one of the pathways that Hp may activate during osteoblast differentiation could be BMP signalling. On the other hand, our results concerning OPN and also c- These results indicate that Hp may act on osteoblasts not only through BMP signalling but also through MAPK, as previously described by Kim et al. Taken together, our findings suggest that Hp stimulates differentiation in primary rat osteoblast cells involving Smad-dependent BMP signalling pathways (