The optimal management of anterior shoulder instability continues to be a challenge. The presence of an anterior glenoid rim fracture in the context of a glenohumeral dislocation, also called “bony Bankart lesion,” can alter therapeutic behavior. Reduction and fixation of the bone fragment has been shown to greatly reduce the risk of recurrence once bone consolidation is achieved. However, there is no gold standard surgical technique. Stability of fixation and the healing of the bony fragment are still a concern, and there are no clinical studies comparing the different techniques to date. The aim of this report is to describe an arthroscopic double-point fragment fixation technique in lateral decubitus for the treatment of an acute traumatic shoulder dislocation with a bony Bankart lesion.Place the patient’s head in a suitable position to avoid traction of the brachial plexus. Insert an elevator through the anterosuperior portal to mobilize the bony Bankart fragment until it is easily reducible to the intact glenoid. Use a shaver to create bleeding surfaces to enhance bone-to-bone healing. Switch the arthroscope to the anterosuperior portal to place the medial anchors. For the suture passage, change back the vision portal to the posterior one. Use an angled suture-passing device loaded with a loop to pass the sutures around the bone fragment through the capsulolabral complex. Handle sutures carefully to avoid tangles. Place the 2 lateral anchors on the glenoid face at the cartilage–fracture margin to obtain an anatomical reduction. Pull on the sutures, while keeping a firm grasp of the driver, to create tension on them before the final lateral anchor insertion. When performing the sliding knots, use a knot pusher to compress the fragment base. The 2-point fixation creates a larger contact area and provides better compression and rotational control. Sutures do not cross between the 2 bone surfaces, improving bone-to-bone contact. Lateral decubitus may allow better joint visualization and decreases risk of intraoperative cerebral desaturation events. Suture limbs over the glenoid surface may cause complications affecting the humeral head. At least 4 anchors are needed, thus increasing surgical costs. Anchor placement could be technically more challenging using this technique. The presence of an anterior glenoid bone defect, also called “bony Bankart lesion,” is a critical prognostic factor for therapeutic decision-making in the context of glenohumeral instability. The treatment of these lesions has evolved since the first reports of reduction and fixation with screws through open surgery. While different techniques have been described within the scope of open and arthroscopic approach, the stability of fixation and the healing of the bony fragment are still a concern and there is currently no gold standard. The aim of this report is to describe a double-point fragment fixation technique with an arthroscopic approach, in lateral decubitus, for the treatment of an acute traumatic shoulder dislocation with a bony Bankart lesion. We believe that positioning the patient in lateral decubitus can improve joint visualization and facilitate the procedure. On the other hand, making 2 pulleys with 2 fixing points could allow a more stable construction and greater interfragmentary compression. The preoperative clinical assessment begins with a standard history surrounding the mechanism of injury, previous episodes of instability, and documentation of any previous surgical interventions. Patient sport level and work intensity are registered. This is followed by a physical examination, including tests of instability (e.g., apprehension, relocation, load-and-shift, and sulcus tests). Active and passive shoulder motion, including forward flexion, external rotation at the side, and internal rotation to the back, are measured. All patients are studied with standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the shoulder ( The presented technique is suggested for active patients suffering from an acute displaced anterior glenoid rim fracture-avulsion with a reducible bone fragment. It is not recommended in cases of a comminuted fracture or in those cases in which the bone fragment is partially or totally reabsorbed. A detailed technique of the procedure is shown in The surgery is performed with an ultrasound-guided interscalene block and general anesthesia. The patient is secured in lateral decubitus with the arm under traction of 5 kg and the head in proper position to avoid traction at the level of the brachial plexus. Careful attention is paid to pad all bony prominences, including the peroneal nerve at the knee. The shoulder is prepared and draped in the usual sterile fashion. A posterior portal is created 2 cm distal and medial to the posterolateral corner of the acromion. The glenohumeral joint is examined, looking for secondary lesions, and the presence of bony Bankart injury is confirmed ( Technical pearls of our technique are summarized in Regarding the positioning, the most commonly reported complication in the lateral decubitus position is neurologic injury, which can be due to excessive strain on the brachial plexus, as a result of intraoperative traction, or due to external nerve compression. Regarding the surgical procedure, iatrogenic comminution of the bone fragment is one possible complication. It can be cracked during manipulation or if too much tension is applied during the impaction of the medial anchors. Lastly, if an appropriate reduction is not obtained or there is not sufficient bone to bone contact, the potential risk of pseudoarthrosis and bone fragment absorption could increase. The patient's shoulder is immobilized with a sling for 4 weeks. After the fourth week, rehabilitation begins, consisting of passive and progressive active mobility exercises. From the eighth week on, strengthening exercises are initiated. Rehabilitation continues for 3 months. On the third month, a computed axial tomography with 3-dimensional reconstruction is performed to confirm proper alignment and bone healing ( Glenoid bone loss generated in a traumatic glenohumeral dislocation has become a key factor when defining therapeutic behavior. Despite these good results, a number of concerns and shortcomings have been identified. First, the use of single points of fixation along the fracture predisposes the fragment to tilting in the direction of the anchor, reducing the contact area between the fragment and the glenoid, thus potentially affecting healing. Second, the sutures loop around the fragment and return to a single anchor, thereby making it not possible to effectively compress the fragment into the glenoid fracture surface. Third, the sutures around the fragment sit between the 2 bone surfaces and may further inhibit bone-to-bone contact and healing. To correct these issues, Millet and Braun To date, there are no clinical studies comparing these techniques. However, some authors report high rates of unsatisfactory reduction when using a single-point fixation technique. We believe that positioning the patient in lateral decubitus can improve joint visualization and facilitate the procedure. Some authors consider that the traction on the arm allows increased intra-articular space, thus providing better access to the anterior and posterior labrum, subacromial space and inferior capsule, and thereby increasing the working space for instrumentation. We consider that treating acute bony Bankart lesions with an arthroscopic approach, in lateral decubitus and using a double-row technique, is a viable option to achieve anatomical reduction and a stable fixation. 