The amino group of 5-aminopropargyl-2′-deoxyuridine-5′-triphosphate was labelled with dibenzocyclooctyne (DIBO) and two derivatives of bicyclo [6.1.0] non-4-yne (BCN) with short and long linkers to produce three different cycloalkyne-modified deoxyuridine triphosphates. BCN was successfully incorporated into DNA at multiple sites by enzyme-mediated primer extension and the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Efficient fluorescent labelling of the BCN-DNA and DIBO-DNA with Cy3-azide was demonstrated.Chemically modified DNA is used extensively in biology, diagnostics, and nanotechnology. Recently the field of nucleic acid chemistry underwent a revolution when click chemistry However, despite the spectacular success of the CuAAC reaction in the nucleic acid field, Cu Enzymatic incorporation of terminal alkyne and azide modifications into DNA by polymerase enzymes is an efficient and widely employed method of DNA labelling. Deoxyuridine triphosphate is the simplest of the natural dNTPs to modify chemically. The C5-position of uracil is remote from the H-bonding residues that are involved in Watson–Crick base-pairing, and functional groups attached at this site protrude into space in the major groove of the DNA duplex, without disruption of the normal B-conformation. Hence 5-modified dUTPs (dMTPs) are likely to be compatible with enzymatic incorporation by DNA polymerases, provided that the modification does not inhibit polymerase binding. Primer extension is a biochemical approach to the synthesis of chemically modified DNA of defined sequence and substitution pattern. Primer extension reactions utilizing amino, DIBO, BCN-I and BCN-II dMTPs were carried out with family A (Klenow large fragment) and family B polymerases (Therminator II, Gotaq and KOD). The sequences of primers and templates are shown in Polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) and mass spectrometry confirmed that KOD, Therminator II, Gotaq and Klenow large fragment polymerases successfully incorporated all four dMTPs into the template T1 ( Next template T2 with four consecutive adenines was used to evaluate the incorporation of the various dMTPs in a highly demanding case. Encouragingly dMTP containing short chain BCN-I was successfully incorporated by KOD, Therminator II and Klenow polymerases ( Cy3 is commonly used in the synthesis of fluorescent DNA probes. Efficient incorporation of cyclooctynes into DNA during PCR amplification and subsequent fluorescence labelling by the SPAAC reaction would enable the synthesis of long fluorescent probes in practical quantities. To this end PCR was carried out with BCN-I dMTP using KOD polymerase and 81-mer DNA template T7. The modified triphosphate was successfully incorporated when it was mixed with the four natural triphosphates, using a 1:3 ratio of dMTP to dTTP. Labelling of the PCR product created from this mixture with Cy3 hexylazide gave a fluorescent band ( Reverse transcriptase (RT) enzymes can be used to copy DNA and RNA templates in order to prepare chemically modified complementary DNA (cDNA). This methodology can efficiently produce functionalized complementary DNA (cDNA) from RNA that has been isolated from natural sources. In the current work we chose to evaluate the cyclooctyne-modified dMTPs with Moloney Murine Leukemia Virus reverse transcriptase (M-MuLV RT, RNase H The strain-promoted alkyne-azide cycloaddition reaction is a valuable tool for DNA labelling, and in this context the efficient incorporation of reactive cyclooctyne derivatives into DNA by enzymatic methods is an important objective. To this end we have synthesized one DIBO and two BCN dUTP analogues from a common aminopropargyl dUTP intermediate and incorporated them into DNA by linear extension using two different templates and a variety of DNA polymerases. All three cyclooctynes (DIBO, BCN-I and BCN-II) were incorporated successfully against template with dispersed adenine bases, whereas BCN was the most successful dMTP when using a template with four consecutive adenines. Labelling of the modified extension products with Cy3 hexylazide via the copper-free SPAAC click reaction demonstrated the efficient incorporation and stability of these modified triphosphates to the enzymatic reaction conditions. The acceptance of cyclooctyne-modified triphosphates as substrates for various DNA polymerases in linear extension and PCR is encouraging in the context of future in vitro and in vivo applications. Standard DNA phosphoramidites, solid supports, and additional reagents were purchased from Link Technologies and Applied Biosystems Ltd. All oligonucleotides were synthesized on an Applied Biosystems 394 automated DNA/RNA synthesizer using a standard 1.0 The building blocks for the RNA analogues were prepared using 2′-TBS protected RNA phosphoramidite monomers with The fully deprotected oligonucleotides (DNA or RNA) were purified by reversed-phase HPLC on a Gilson system using a Luna 10 All oligonucleotides were characterized by negative-mode electrospray HPLC-mass spectrometry, using a Brueker Daltronics micro-TOF mass spectrometer and an Acquity UPLC system with a BEH C18 1.7 In a 20 Samples containing 10 Samples containing 66 Primer extension reactions or PCR (2 T.B. and A.H.E.-S. are grateful to the UK BBSRC for funding via the sLOLA Grant BB/J001694/1: ‘Extending the Boundaries of Nucleic Acid Chemistry’. Supplementary data (chemical synthesis, primer extension experiments and fluorescent labelling reactions) associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 