This paper describes a new synthesis route to magnetic ferrite nanoparticles, in which the dissolved ferrous iron(II) in spent pickling solutions is used as a starting material for the ferrite preparation. Firstly, the iron(II) in the spent pickling solution was microbially oxidized to iron(III) by using the acidophilic thermophilic microbe Acidianus brierleyi. Secondly, the iron(III) in the oxidized pickling solution was separated into the organic monocarboxylic acid solution by solvent extraction. Finally, the carboxylate solutions of iron(III) and other metal (nickel) were hydrolyzed with water at 190 °C for 20 min and gave crystalline nickel ferrite nanoparticles with an average diameter of 31 nm. In addition to the synthesis of nickel ferrite, a heat treatment of the iron(III) carboxylate at 245 °C for 60 min resulted in the preparation of crystalline magnetite nanoparticles with an average diameter of 48 nm.Pickling is a surface cleaning treatment for chemically removing a scale layer of iron oxides on steel surface. Normal steels are usually pickled in 15–20% hydrochloric acid at 60–70 °C or in 20–25% sulfuric acid at 95–100 °C. When the steel is pickled with sulfuric acid, the scale oxides dissolve to give iron(II) sulfates. It is generally accepted that spent pickling solutions are hazardous wastes because they are corrosive solutions and contain a large amount of dissolved iron(II) and sulfuric acid, e.g., about 40 kg/m There are only a few studies on the recovery and reuse of dissolved iron(II) in spent pickling solutions. In previous work This paper describes a new synthesis route from spent pickling solution to ferrite nanoparticles. Microbial oxidation of ferrous iron(II) in sulfuric acid pickling solution: Solvent extraction of ferric iron(III) in microbially oxidized solution with the monocarboxylic acid extractant RCOOH: Solvothermal synthesis of nickel ferrite from the organic carboxylate solution of iron(III) and other metal(Ni(II)): In this synthesis route to ferrite nanoparticles, the iron (III) is first supplied by the microbial oxidation of iron(II) in spent pickling solutions. A common iron(II)-oxidizing microbe is the acidophilic mesophile The purpose of this work is to examine experimentally the synthesis route from sulfuric acid pickling solution to ferrite nanoparticles. To prepare the starting solution of ferrite, the dissolved ferrous iron(II) in spent pickling solution was microbially oxidized, and the resultant iron(III) in the aqueous solution was separated into organic carboxylic acid solution by solvent extraction. Ferrite nanoparticles were synthesized by direct hydrolysis of iron(III) carboxylate dissolved in an organic solvent with water under mild solvothermal conditions. The pickling solution used in this study was obtained from a steel company, Japan. The concentration of iron(II) in the pickling solution was 40 kg/m The mesophile The batch reactor used to perform the iron(II) oxidation tests was an air-sparged stirred vessel of 1000 cm The solvent extractant used in this work was commercially available Versatic 10, a synthetic tertiary aliphatic monocarboxylic acid (Shell Chemical, Tokyo, Japan). The synthetic monocarboxylic acid was diluted to desired concentration levels using commercial Exxsol D80, an aliphatic hydrocarbon diluent (Exxon Chemical, Tokyo, Japan). Iron(III)-loaded carboxylate solution was prepared by solvent extraction from the microbially oxidized pickling solution. Organic solution of nickel carboxylate was prepared by solvent extraction from an aqueous NiSO A stainless steel autoclave of 400 cm In the synthesis of magnetite, the iron(III) carboxylate solution was heated in the absence of water at 245 °C and 0.45 MPa for 60 min, in order to suppress the precipitation of unwanted hematite The resultant precipitates were filtered, washed with distilled water and acetone, and dried for 5 h at 50 °C. The precipitates were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis. The chemical composition of the precipitates was determined by energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectrometry. Organic contamination of the precipitates with the starting materials was checked by thermogravimetry and differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA) and carbon analysis using a high frequency combustion method. The particle size and morphology were observed with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The magnetic properties of the resultant precipitates were measured with a vibrating sample magnetometer (VSM) at room temperature. In some precipitation runs, a solution sample of 5 cm Microbial oxidation of iron(II) in the spent pickling solution was experimentally examined before treating the synthesis of ferrite nanoparticles. The pickling solution (40 kg/m  The present work uses somewhat idealized conditions, namely about 10-fold dilution of the pickling solution. For the dilute pickling solution with pH 0.9, the complete oxidation of 3.8 kg/m The microbially oxidized pickling solution with 3.8 kg/m For the solvothermal synthesis of nickel ferrite, starting solution was prepared by mixing the iron(III) carboxylate solution with nickel(II) carboxylate solution to give an iron(III)/nickel(II) molar ratio of 2:1. When contacted with distilled water at 190 °C and 1.3 MPa for 20 min, the iron(III)/nickel(II) carboxylate solution was hydrolyzed and gave a precipitate. The quantitative analysis demonstrated that both iron and nickel in the organic phase were completely precipitated within 20 min at 190 °C and 1.3 MPa. The content of nickel and iron in the resultant precipitate was determined by dissolving the solid products in concentrated HCl solutions. The chemical analysis revealed that the precipitate had a nickel/iron atomic ratio of 0.50±0.02, which was close to the stoichiometric ratio of 0.50 for nickel ferrite, NiFe  Because the nickel ferrite nanoparticles were prepared in the presence of organic phase, there was a fear of unfavorable contamination of the oxide product with the organic starting materials. Thermal analysis (TG-DTA) in air was performed to examine the organic contamination of the oxide particles. The nickel ferrite particles did not exhibit an exothermic peak and a weight loss at 300 °C on the TG-DTA curve, which would result from combustion of the organic material. The nickel ferrite particles were analyzed for carbon using the direct combustion method, and the carbon analysis revealed that the carbon content in the ferrite particles was only 0.11 wt.%. These analytical results indicate that the nickel ferrite particles are virtually uncontaminated by the organic starting materials.  For solvothermal synthesis of magnetite, the iron(III)-loaded carboxylate solution was prepared by solvent extraction from the microbially oxidized pickling solution of 3.8 kg/m  A new synthesis route from sulfuric acid pickling solutions was proposed to synthesize magnetic ferrite nanoparticles. When the pickling solution (40 kg/m We wish to thank Mr. Hiroshi Doi, Japan New Metals, Osaka, Japan, and Messrs. Shinsuke Takumi and Tomohiro Katoh, Ishihara Sangyo, Kusatsu, Japan, for their assistance in characterizing the precipitated powders.