We report 2 cases of conversion of fused knee to total knee arthroplasty (TKA) by way of soft-tissue expansion. Case 1 had had multiple operations on the infected total knee, which was arthrodesed 7 months before conversion. Case 2 had had knee arthrodesis for an intra-articular comminuted fracture 5 years and 10 months before conversion. In both patients, a tissue expander was placed subcutaneously upon the patella and the patellar tendon to gradually expand the anterior knee skin for later coverage and knee flexion. After takedown of the arthrodesis, a fully constrained rotating-hinge prosthesis was implanted as the second-stage procedure. The final range of flexion was 95° in both knees with patients' subjective satisfaction.Conversion of fused knee to total knee arthroplasty (TKA) is a challenging procedure with many complications, and there have been only a few reports in the literature. A high incidence of diverse complications (53%-57%) has been reported such as skin necrosis, rupture of the quadriceps, residual extensor lag, and postoperative stiffness We report 2 cases of conversion of fused knee to TKA of a fully constrained type using a soft-tissue expander to overcome these difficulties. A 64-year-old male patient had undergone TKA that was infected. The removal of the prosthesis and the knee arthrodesis were performed 3 months later at a local hospital. When the patient was transferred to our service, he had cavitary osteomyelitis of the proximal tibia with draining sinus and radiologically incomplete fusion. Knee arthrodesis was secured by us, and the cavity was filled with antibiotics-impregnated cement beads. Methicillin-resistant A 63-year-old woman sustained an open comminuted fracture of the left femur involving the knee joint from a traffic accident. The fracture was treated by Ilizarov fixation, multiple debridement, plate fixation, and finally arthrodesis of the knee and patellectomy because of severe intra-articular comminution ( The preoperative workup to exclude infection before TKA includes clinical disappearance of local infective signs and normalization of erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C-reactive protein level. The soft tissues and extensor mechanism are probably the most crucial factor of achieving a favorable result in the reversal of a knee arthrodesis. Quadriceps function can only be evaluated by palpable and visible contraction in the state of arthrodesis. Quadriceps contractures could be treated by V-Y lengthening The severe bone loss and ligament instability encountered in revision and complex primary TKA cannot easily be compensated by using a total condylar– or posterior-stabilized–designed prosthesis Both patients are satisfied with the regained motion of the knee compared with that of their previous fusion. We experienced that the soft-tissue expander proved invaluable in handling these challenging reconstructions. No subsequent wound problems developed. Taking a fused knee down, however, can be difficult with major complications as reported by others; and it should not be done without the patient knowing that an amputation could result if the infection recurs because enough bone has to be removed so that a repeat fusion would be unlikely. Skin thinning and contracture at anterior knee after fusion, especially after multiple interventions, make it difficult to convert knee fusion to arthroplasty. The application of the tissue expander resolved the common soft-tissue difficulty by providing expanded skin for coverage, even in flexion. A fully constrained rotating-hinge prosthesis provides sufficient stability after conversion. A well-planned and well-executed TKA after tissue expander application in 2 stages can provide satisfactory results in such complex reconstructions as in the 2 cases we report.