Background
                  Crossed k-wire osteosynthesis is a widely used procedure for displaced supracondylar humerus fractures in children, but the rate of secondary displacements is up to 31%. Alternative techniques including casts, elastic stable intramedullary nailing, and the fixateur extern, have been used, but there are no biomechanical data comparing these methods. We developed a biomechanical model to compare four osteosynthesis techniques for stabilizing supracondylar humerus fractures in children.
               
                  Methods
                  An osteotomy to simulate a fracture was made in a total of 32 adult cadaver humeri. The pseudofractures were then stabilized by crossed k-wires, elastic nailing, a fixateur extern with either k-wires, or Schanz screws. We measured the stiffness values in flexion and extension and torsion with static loading. The movements in cyclic loading were chosen to resemble the mechanism described in the development of a clinical cubitus varus.
               
                  Findings
                  No significant differences were found with static loading. With cyclic loading all methods showed an irreversible torsional deformation less than 20°. Crossed k-wires and elastic nailing showed significantly lower reversible torsional deformation than the external fixateurs.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Our biomechanical data reveal that the crossed k-wires have the highest stiffness and lowest loss of reduction under cyclic loading. The external fixators proved to be good alternatives.Supracondylar humerus fractures with displacement in more than one plane are managed surgically ( A total of 32 adult cadaver distal humeri (Institute of Pathology, Medical University Basel, Basel, Switzerland) were explanted and frozen. The use of the cadaver material was approved by the institutional Ethics Committee. Bone mineral density (BMD) of the distal humerus was evaluated from 15 scans starting 5 The trochlear diameter of each bone was measured to determine the location of the humero-ulnar axis according to Osteosynthesis was performed with crossed k-wire osteosynthesis (crossed pinning, CKO), Elastic Stable Intramedullary Nailing (elastic nailing, ESIN), a fixateur extern with Schanz screws (FES), or an external fixator as proposed by von Laer (FEL). For crossed k-wire osteosynthesis (crossed pinning, CKO) a k-wire (diameter 2 For elastic stabile intramedullary nailing (elastic nailing, ESIN) the cortical bone of the humerus was transfixed twice below the tuberculum deltoideum. Two 30   A materials testing machine (Bionix 858®, MTS System Corp., Minneapolis, MN, USA) with two degrees of freedom was used for biomechanical testing. To ensure physiological load transmission, the potted ends of the humeri were fixed in the chucks of the testing machine and aligned by the humeral shaft and humero-ulnar axis similar to the potting procedure. During the tests axial and torsional displacements, the force and the torque were continuously recorded at 20 Static flexional and extensional loading was performed to measure stiffness. To produce a nearly physiological movement of the distal fragment around the humero-ulnar axis it was fixed in a custom made swing ( The stiffness of the bone-implant-construct in Nm per degree was computed using maximum torque and the corresponding flexion/extension of the distal fragment. Static torsional loading was performed as external rotation of the proximal fragment without axial preload. The torsional moment was introduced through the humeral shaft axis ( For cyclic loading the bones were subjected to a swelling axial and torsional load to compare their potential to prevent a varus deformity in a loading condition similar to the movements reported during clinical functional treatment. The set-up was similar to torsional loading, with the difference that the swing was released ( As each group contained eight specimens, non-parametric tests were used for statistical analyses with SPSS Version 11.0 The mean (±SD) age of the donors was 71.9 There were no significant differences among the implant groups in static flexional and extensional loading ( The drop-out rate indicates the number of specimens per group that failed before reaching the run-out limit of 5000 cycles. The drop-out rate was highest for elastic nailing (five bones, all reached an external rotation greater than 30°), followed by the fixateur with k-wires (one bone, reached external rotation of 30°) and crossed pinning (one bone, failure of the sensors of the test machine resulting in shut down with destruction of the specimen). The reversible deformation was obtained as a measure for the elasticity of the construct. To assess the rotation and compression of the fragments we measured the angular and axial reversible deformation, respectively. There were no significant global differences for reversible angular deformation at 5000 cycles ( Medians and percentiles of the irreversible angular deformation were lower for crossed pinning compared to the other groups, albeit not significantly ( Irreversible deformation was used to assess the plastic deformation caused by deformation of bone or implant. Again values were obtained for compression (axial) and rotation (angular). Regarding the axial irreversible deformation we found no global differences ( Power analyses showed that the following differences between groups would have been necessary for significant results at a This study was performed to evaluate initial fixation of distal humerus fractures. We tested four different commonly used constructs – crossed k-wire osteosynthesis, elastic stabile intramedullary nailing, fixateur extern with Schanz screws and fixateur extern with k-wires – in quasistatic and cyclic bending and torsion. We found almost no differences in static flexional and extensional loading among the four osteosynthesis techniques for humerus fractures. Although there was no significant difference, crossed pinning showed slightly better results than the other methods in static torsional loading. This is likely due to firm stabilization of the pillars with one wire each. At cyclic loading, five bones in the elastic nailing group and one in the von Laer fixateur group failed before completing 5000 cycles. Irreversible torsional displacement, an important factor in the development of cubitus varus, was lowest for crossed pinning. Interestingly, the bones treated with elastic nailing that passed the test had a displacement similar to the external fixateurs, although the torsional stiffness was low. The reason for this may be contact between the fragments, which was verified in video recording of the bones during the tests. Comminuted elbow fractures in children resulting in a fracture gap are uncommon. Thus, from a clinical perspective, torsional displacement is more important than irreversible axial displacement. Also, axial displacement is not considered a factor in the development of cubitus varus. Nevertheless, the lower torsional and axial irreversible deformation we found with crossed pinning may be due to the positioning of one wire in each pillar with the two wires crossing each other. The good biomechanical results of crossed pinning are somewhat at odds with the problems of secondary displacement and cubiti vari reported in some clinical studies. In the clinical setting soft tissue swelling and two-dimensional radiology may contribute to misplacement of the wires. In our study, both external fixateurs were good biomechanical alternatives to crossed pinning. However, there are still few published clinical data on these procedures. The poor biomechanical results of elastic nailing in our study may be due to the difficult operating conditions in an adult cadaver model and to an inadequate relation between bone and implant diameter. In contrast to our biomechanical study various clinical studies have shown good clinical results with elastic nailing ( The choice of specimens in biomechanical studies like ours is difficult. We used adult (rather than pediatric or synthetic) humeri because the mineralization and amount of cartilage in the growth zones of pediatric humeri both depend strongly on age and sex and would thus influence the biomechanical properties of the construct. Also, pediatric bones are difficult to obtain. We felt that synthetic bones differ more from pediatric humeri than adult humeri do ( Because the diameter of the wires for ESIN should be 35–40% of the smallest diameter of the medullar cavity ( Another issue with our fracture model was the use of a 3 The elbow permits three axes of moment but as the elbow joint is a ginglymus only flexion and extension are performed physiologically around the humero-ulnar axis. A major problem with biomechanical tests of the elbow is that both the physiological movement of the joint as well as the force distribution are complex and have to be simplified to be simulated. To be close to a physiological introduction of the moments in biomechanical loading, we had to align the humerus by the humeral shaft and the humero-ulnar axis. The location of the axis was based on the work of The quasi static loading conditions were designed to obtain basic biomechanical data about the different methods. Clinically, flexion of the distal fragment would cause a recurvation of the humerus and thus a loss of movement in the elbow; an extension would cause an antecurvation. Torsion between the fragments would lead to a loss of contact area and thus predispose to coronal tilting. We designed a cyclic loading condition to compensate for the uncertainty of the results of quasi static loading. Since cubitus varus is the most severe complication of supracondylar humerus fractures in children, we chose a loading condition simulating the mechanism thought responsible for its development ( The results of our model suggest that crossed pinning of pediatric supracondylar humerus fractures is comparable or superior to other techniques from a biomechanical perspective. Load levels of the cyclic test were chosen to simulate early functional after treatment. Given the correctness of this choice functional treatment may be possible after crossed pinning. External fixateurs can be used if crossed pinning appears problematic because reduction is difficult or there is considerable soft tissue swelling. Both approaches showed good biomechanical results in our model, although tested with a gap. Good clinical results of elastic nailing confirm that it is difficult to simulate elastic nailing with cadaver humeri. This study was financed by the AO Research Fund (Grant number 02-W57). Material for osteosynthesis was kindly provided by the Robert Mathys Foundation Switzerland.