Contact angle measurements, ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy and microflotation studies were carried out in order to investigate the effect of externally applied potential on the wettability of both synthetic and natural chalcopyrites in potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) solutions. The contact angle on the mineral electrode surface was measured after the mineral electrodes were conditioned at a fixed potential for 10 min. The effects of pH, concentration of PAX and depressants such as sodium cyanide, sodium sulfide and MAA (a mixture of magnesium chloride, ammonium chloride and ammonium hydroxide) on the contact angle of synthetic and natural chalcopyrites were also investigated. The hydrophobic film on the chalcopyrite surface was extracted using hexane and examined by UV spectroscopy. Collector and collectorless microflotation of natural chalcopyrite under controlled potential at pH 10 was performed in order to determine the floatable potential range of chalcopyrite. The contact angle results indicated that synthetic and natural chalcopyrites have similar wettability. Their floatable potential range in 7×10−4 M PAX solution was −0.2 to 0.2 V vs. standard calomel electrode at pH 10 and was −0.25 to 0.3 V at pH 7. Sodium sulfide showed the strongest inhibiting effect among the three depressants investigated. The flotation results indicated that natural chalcopyrite floated in the pulp potential range of −0.087 to +0.2 V (vs. SCE and monitored by a platinum electrode) without collector and in the potential range of −0.2 to +0.205 V in the 7×10−4 M PAX solution.Chalcopyrite is the most common type of copper sulfide. Chalcopyrite concentrates are often contaminated with arsenic bearing sulfides such as arsenopyrite, enargite and tennantite. Arsenic, in the chalcopyrite concentrate, causes environmental problems and also problems in the subsequent pyrometallurgical process. Therefore removal of arsenic from the copper concentrate is necessary. Industrially it has been shown that arsenic bearing minerals such as enargite, tennantite are difficult to remove from copper concentrate by conventional flotation techniques. Research on flotation separation of enargite and chalcopyrite by Synthetic chalcopyrite (CuFeS Natural chalcopyrite samples were supplied by Ward’s. X-ray diffraction of the sample showed no impurity peaks. The chemical assay of the natural chalcopyrite sample is given in Natural chalcopyrite contained trace amount of lead, zinc and nickel. The purity of the sample was assumed over 98%. Chalcopyrite is a mineral with good conductivity, which usually has a tetragonal crystalline structure. In the tetragonal structure of chalcopyrite, each sulfur ion is surrounded by four metallic ions (two copper ions and two iron ions) and each metallic ion is surrounded by four sulfur ions. The good conductivity of chalcopyrite crystal makes it a suitable sample for electrochemical investigation of its surface properties. The sample was prepared as a mineral electrode by connecting it with copper wires and encapsulating it in epoxy resin. The electrode working area varied from 1.1 to 2.8 cm The contact angle test was conducted by placing the mineral surface in a glass cell filled with collector solution. An air bubble was produced on the mineral surface by a capillary tube. The images of the air bubble and mineral surface were projected on a flat screen by a slide projector and the contact angle was measured on the screen. The potential applied on the mineral electrode was produced by a CMS 105 DC Corrosion Test System potentiostat. A standard calomel electrode was used as reference electrode, and all the potential values in this article are referred to standard calomel electrode. A large surface area platinum electrode was used as the counter electrode. All the collector solutions were prepared by dissolving purified collector into a buffer solution in order to keep the pH of the solution stable after the dissolved oxygen in the buffer solution was removed completely by bubbling nitrogen gas through the solution. The potassium amyl xanthate (PAX) used in this study was supplied by Prospec Chemicals. pH 10 buffer solution contained boric acid, potassium chloride and sodium hydroxide and pH 7 buffer solution contained sodium and potassium phosphate. Depressant MAA was prepared by mixing 5 mole MgCl To obtain the contact angle of chalcopyrite under different potentials, the chalcopyrite mineral electrode was first conditioned under a fixed potential for a period of 10 min and then the contact angle of the electrode surface was measured. In order to accurately determine by contact angle measurement the potential at which the xanthate began to electrodeposit on chalcopyrite as dixanthogen, a PAX concentration of 7×10 The depressant concentrations used in this study were chosen initially based on the work of open circuit potential measurement and polarization study conducted on chalcopyrite in solutions of different depressants ( For ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopic examining of the extract of the electrode surface, the electrode, which had been subjected to conditioning under a certain potential for 10 min, was taken out from the test cell and the solution attached to the surface of epoxy resin which encapsulated the mineral electrode was wiped carefully with a paper towel (Kimberly–Clark) before the electrode was put into 6 ml hexane in a 50 ml beaker. At most times, no solution was attached on the mineral electrode surface because of its hydrophobicity. If the electrode surface was hydrophilic under the test condition, the visible solution on the mineral surface was adsorbed away carefully by paper towel to avoid disturbing the adsorption on the surface. The UV spectra of the hexane extracts were measured by a Lambda 3 spectrophotometer. The microflotation samples were prepared by dry grinding after the samples were crushed to −1 mm. The −150 +400 mesh fraction was used for flotation and was divided into 1 g samples and stored in 20 ml glass vials after the fraction was mixed thoroughly. In order to wash away the oxidation products especially the element sulfur on the particle surface of the flotation samples, the sample was washed with a 5% Na First 10 ml of 5% Na To carry out a chemical-controlled-pulp-potential microflotation, about 40 ml of buffer solution was transferred to the flotation chamber of the modified Hallimond tube and about 10 ml to each of the other chambers. Then, the buffer solution in each chamber was purged with nitrogen through a gas disperser for 2 min in order to remove the oxygen from the solution. Then the counter and reference electrodes were inserted into the smaller chambers and the cleaned mineral sample was transferred into the flotation chamber. The microflotation potential was monitored by a platinum electrode, which was immersed into the slurry, and referred to SCE. The pulp potential was adjusted by the appropriate chemical (either NaOCl or Na In order to determine the potential range in which the chalcopyrite surface is hydrophobic, contact angles on the mineral electrode surface were measured after the mineral electrodes were conditioned at the predetermined potential for 10 min in 7×10 The results of The results in The hydrophobic film on chalcopyrite surface was identified as dixanthogen by many authors ( The restoration of contact angle from its minimum to the second maximum was due to the passivation of chalcopyrite surface and the increased formation rate of dixanthogen. As the formation rate of dixanthogen on chalcopyrite surface increased, sufficient dixanthogen was available at the mineral surface to sustain a good contact angle. The test results clearly illustrated that the wettability of the chalcopyrite surface depended on the balance between the hydrophobicity due to the formation of dixanthogen and the hydrophilicity due to the formation of hydrophilic oxidation film. The effect of PAX concentration on the contact angle and the hydrophobic potential range of chalcopyrite was investigated at pH 10 on both the synthetic and the natural chalcopyrite surface. The results are shown in The results in The results in The effects of sodium cyanide, sodium sulfide and MAA on the contact angle of synthetic chalcopyrite were studied in the pH 10, 7×10 The results in At a 10 A 10 The results in In order to verify the adsorption of dixanthogen on the chalcopyrite surface at a certain potential, the mineral electrode was conditioned at a preset potential in 7×10 The UV spectra of the hexane electrode surface extract indicate that dixanthogen was responsible for chalcopyrite hydrophobicity when the potential applied on the electrode surface was equal or greater than −0.2 V vs. SCE. The adsorption peaks at 241 and 286 nm are characteristic of dixanthogen. The adsorption peak at 200 nm is due to CS The results of collector microflotation of natural chalcopyrite under controlled pulp potential are shown in The results indicate that chalcopyrite had a slightly wider floatable potential range in the 7×10 Comparing the contact angle results in The reason for this phenomenon is simple. The actual pulp potential controlled flotation system could not maintain the xanthate concentration at a high enough pulp potential. The oxidizing reagent used to increase the pulp potential will oxidize most of the xanthate in the flotation slurry since xanthate can be easily oxidized by a oxidant such as iodine I The results of collectorless microflotation of natural chalcopyrite at pH 10 under controlled pulp potential are shown in The results in One possible explanation for the discrepancy between the hydrophobicity of the chalcopyrite electrode surface and the floatability of the chalcopyrite particles in collectorless buffer solution is that the elemental sulfur produced on the mineral electrode surface was somewhat uniformly distributed over the surface together with other oxidation products while the elemental sulfur produced on the chalcopyrite particle surfaces in the flotation was concentrated on some spots on the particle surface. Concentration of elemental sulfur on the surfaces of chalcopyrite particles gave them the ability to attach to the air bubbles and therefore to float. Uniformly distributed elemental sulfur on the chalcopyrite electrode surface was not sufficient to render the mineral surface hydrophobic, especially when other hydrophilic oxidation products such as Fe(OH) The flotation results demonstrate that in the pulp potential range of −0.2 to −0.087 V vs. SCE, chalcopyrite only floated well in the PAX solution. In the pulp potential range of −0.087 to +0.2 V vs. SCE, chalcopyrite could float with or without PAX. If the pulp potential was higher than +0.2 V vs. SCE, chalcopyrite did not float either in the PAX or the buffer solution. The flotation behavior of chalcopyrite under controlled pulp potential could be explained as follows. In the potential range of −0.2 to −0.087 V vs. SCE, very little elemental sulfur was produced on the surface of chalcopyrite particles and electrodeposited collector film (mainly dixanthogen) was responsible for chalcopyrite flotation in the PAX solution. As the pulp potential was increased, more element of sulfur was produced on the chalcopyrite particle surfaces which alone could result in chalcopyrite having a very good floatability in the potential range of −0.087 to +0.2 V vs. SCE. Chalcopyrite became hydrophilic when the pulp potential was higher than +0.2 V vs. SCE mainly because of the growth of the oxidation product film on chalcopyrite surface ( In contrast to chalcopyrite, the contact angle and microflotattion tests conducted by the authors ( The flotation results in this investigation are remarkably different from the results of similar studies published by other authors. One important conclusion of this study is that the microflotation tests indicated that chalcopyrite would not float at a potential higher than +0.2 V vs. SCE. The results published by Two main factors could contribute to the discrepancy among the results obtained by different authors. Firstly different methods were used to adjust the pulp potential. In Gardner and Woods’ study, the particle surface potential was adjusted by externally applied potential. In the study of Heyes and Trahar, the pulp potential was controlled by chemicals as in the present work. Comparison of the flotation results obtained in this study with the results of Heyes and Trahar, Gardner and Woods leads to the conclusion that the flotation response of chalcopyrite to the externally applied potential is slower than the flotation response of chalcopyrite to the potential which is adjusted by chemicals. The second main factor is the manner in which the pulp potential was adjusted. This includes the chemicals used, the conditioning time of the slurry subjected to a certain potential and the fluctuation of the pulp potential during conditioning and flotation. The conditioning time of the mineral particles at different potentials was not clearly stated in Heyes and Trahar’s study. The use of dithionite (Na Synthetic and natural chalcopyrites have similar wettability. The contact angle measurement results indicate that the hydrophobic potential range of chalcopyrite in 7×10 The amount of dixanthogen formed on the chalcopyrite surface initially increased with the increase in the applied potential on the mineral electrode and then decreased with the increasing potential. The optimum potential range for dixanthogen formation on the chalcopyrite surface in the 7×10 The microflotation results indicate that at pH 10, chalcopyrite floated in the potential range of −0.2 to +0.205 V vs. SCE in the 7×10 The authors wish to thank the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada for financial support. Mr. Christopher Pickles for editorial advice.