Segmental fractures of the radius and ulna are associated with high energy trauma in adults. In children this condition is rather rare. A segmental fracture involving the distal physaes has only been reported once previously in the orthopaedic literature. An otherwise healthy 10-year-old boy was admitted to our institution following a fall from a swing in the local park. On clinical examination the left forearm and the right wrist were deformed. The soft tissue envelope was intact in both forearms. There was paraesthesia in the territory of the median nerve in the left hand, with no sign of a vascular injury in either limb. Plain radiographs showed his injuries as displaced midshaft fractures of the left radius and ulna as well as a Salter-Harris type II injury to the distal physaes of the ipsilateral forearm ( In the accident and emergency department the patient was given analgaesia, the left arm was placed in an above elbow and the right forearm in a below elbow backslab. The patient was then prepared for an operation and taken to theatres. Following a general anaesthetic and administration of prophylactic intravenous antibiotics (Cefuroxime 750 At 4 weeks both casts and the Kirschner wires were removed from both wrists. The intramedullary nails in the bones of the left forearm were subsequently removed 6 months following the injury. Forearm fractures are one of the most common skeletal injuries in children comprising 40% of all paediatric fractures. The use of elastic nails in the treatment of paediatric long bone fractures has gained much support over the past few years. The insertion technique is minimally invasive involving little soft tissue dissection, operative time is much shorter with better cosmesis Due to the rarity of this injury there is little in the way of consensus regarding its management. The authors of the previously reported case treated their patient by open reduction and internal fixation with plates and screws. Soft tissue interposition had necessitated an open reduction. In our institution we advocate the use of elastic nails in paediatric long bone fractures.