Extensive destruction of the forearm bones may cause significant morbidity to the patients and require timely active surgical treatment. When the distal ulna is also lost, reconstruction of the distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) is important to reduce the functional sequel. The ulnar head is a central biomechanical structure for stability of the wrist, forearm and elbow. Apart from its well-known role in forearm rotation, the ulnar head is essential in maintaining transverse forearm stability upon elbow flexion, preventing radioulnar convergence A case of reconstruction of a segmental bone defect of the radius and distal ulna with a double-barrel fibula flap and a metatarsal head free flap is presented. To the best of the authors’ knowledge no similar case has been reported before. A 52-year-old male patient presented with a subacute (five weeks) crushing injury of the left forearm, partially treated with an external fixator elsewhere. There was a highly comminuted distal metaphyseal radial fracture and destruction of the distal ulna ( The comminuted segments of the radial metaphysis and distal ulna were resected, leaving a 4-cm defect in the radius and a 7-cm defect in the ulna including the head. The ulnar styloid process with the insertion of the TFCC was preserved. The bone defect was reconstructed with a double-barrel free fibular osteocutaneous flap with two independent skin monitoring islands. Bone fixation was performed with standard locking plate technique. The peroneal vessels were anastomosed end-to-end to the radial vessels. The ulnar head was reconstructed using a simultaneous ipsilateral osteocutaneous free flap including the distal 2nd metatarsal (M2) and a monitoring skin island based on the first dorsal metatarsal artery ( The postoperative course was uneventful, with primary healing of bone and soft tissues. At 30-month follow-up, the skeleton was healed ( High-energy trauma to the forearm may result in a spectrum of injuries. Comminuted fractures are usually treated with formal osteosynthesis and small bone defects are most commonly bone grafted. When the comminution is severe, the bone segment is either “bridged” with a plate fixed proximally and distally to avoid further devascularisation of the fragments, the so-called biological osteosynthesis Reconstruction of sizable defects of the long bones of the extremities with microvascular fibular flaps has been extensively reported, mostly in the lower limb. In the upper limb, the forearm bones have similar cross-section compared to the fibula, and lend themselves for accurate reconstruction using the microvascular fibular flap The loss of the distal ulna in the setting of both-bone segmental defect, as in the case shown here, significantly compounds the reconstructive problem. A single-bone forearm is the most technically straightforward option, at the expense of forearm rotation loss In the case reported here, the extent of bone loss called for a double free flap, one for the segmental radius and ulna defect, and another for the distal ulna. The insetting and fixation of the three skeletal segments were technically demanding. Locking plates and screws are less aggressive to the periosteal circulation and are commonly used in vascularised bone reconstructions. DRUJ stability was a concern in this case. The suturing of the TFCC and styloid process to the collateral ligaments and capsule of the M2 resulted in a stable joint. A second-stage formal ligamentoplasty had been initially planned for this patient but proved to be unnecessary. Pronation–supination was acceptable with good transverse stability of the forearm upon resisted elbow flexion ( This reconstructive combination, although technically demanding, allowed for autologous reconstruction of a complex segmental bone and DRUJ defect, with acceptable mid-term result. This pattern of injury is infrequent but an autologous reconstruction as described may reduce the negative impact to the patient. No conflicting interests.