The paper deals with the entropy difference between frozen-in phases and their equilibrium counterparts. First, the nature of data compiled in thermochemical data collections are briefly reviewed, comprising data for non-equilibrium phases. Then, experimental evidence from earlier literature is compiled showing that the conventional entropy of a frozen-in phase at zero Kelvin assumes a non-zero residual value S(0). Based on calorimetric data from multiple sources, the same evidence is elaborated for diopside glass, yielding S
                     glass(0)=24.8±3J/(molK), a value reproducing a result publishes earlier. The zero Kelvin enthalpy of this glass is H
                     glass(0)=81±8kJ/mol. For S
                     glass(0), a structural interpretation in terms of silicate chain mixing is proposed, yielding a lower threshold for S
                     glass(0). From the point of view of statistical mechanics, non-zero residual entropies of frozen-in phases can be derived from ensemble averages, however, not from time averages.The progress of materials science and technology depends on the availability of reliable data for individual substances. Among the available data collections, tables of the thermodynamic properties of substances most certainly constitute a corner stone. Based on such data, the sharp tools of thermodynamics may be applied to materials. It is true, the relatively abstract nature of thermodynamic data does not appeal to our sense of imagination. But this is more than compensated by the fact that the thermodynamic approach to materials always yields quantitative results. An especially abstract nevertheless extraordinarily interesting property of a substance is its entropy. Two of the three laws of thermodynamics deal with entropy. Its application reaches from the treatment of industrial-scale processes, heat engines and energy conversion systems to the concepts of chemical equilibrium, phase stability, and mixing, and it reflects the structure and dynamics of substances on the atomic scale. Entropy as a material property is well established for pure homogeneous substances in their stable or metastable equilibrium states. In fact, the internal equilibrium of a substance may be defined by the condition that any entropy variation The tabulation of enthalpy data for pure homogeneous substances in their stable or metastable equilibrium states at constant pressure ( By virtue of the third law of thermodynamics, the elements (as defined above) as well as any pure homogeneous equilibrium substances do have a natural reference value, i.e., For practical reasons, it has become common practice to also tabulate entropy data of substances which are definitely not in their equilibrium state. The way in which the JANAF tables Although this is not relevant for the practical examples given above, the concept of using The 1949 Nobel prize laureate for chemistry, William Francis Giauque, devoted much of his work to experimentally investigate the entropy of substances at very low temperatures. He aimed at validating the third law of thermodynamics for different substances. In fact, the third law of thermodynamics, first formulated by Nernst, and thoroughly investigated by Simon, has been fully proved by Giauque’s experimental work. The proof was based on a comparison of low- Let us return to oxide glasses again. For such systems, the assessment of the relevant degrees of freedom and the possible molecular configurations is much less compelling than for the simple molecules discussed before. If heat capacity data are available for a glass from temperatures close to 0 where, throughout this paper, c denotes a heat capacity at constant pressure, and the index GL denotes the path ‘glass – undercooled melt – stable melt’ as defined before. It is a surprising circumstance that the greatest experimental difficulties and, hence, the largest deviations among literature data do not occur with the glass but with the crystal. In fact, the improvement of data accuracy from Refs. A further cross-check of the accuracy of the heat capacity data employed in the present analysis is performed by the evaluation of the integral, Its numerical value represents the difference between the heat of melting With heat capacities known form very low temperatures to beyond Thus, the vitrification entropy The occurrence of a non-zero entropy at 0 As to the variability of configurations in the frozen-in state, let us consider two extreme cases. These are: a very large number of possible configurations versus a quite limited one. Rose and Berry Let us finally apply the concept of just a limited number of configurations to the diopside glass. Let the stoichiometry of the diopside be presented by wollastonite CaO·SiO wollastonite diopside enstatite Let us now assume the presence of a random distribution of the stoichiometric entities This value is in fair agreement with the zero Kelvin entropy of diopside glass derived from calorimetric data. Note that chain orientation is in no way taken into account in the simple model. Thus Eq. The conventional entropy of a frozen-in phase at zero Kelvin temperature assumes a residual non-zero value. This statement rests on a broad basis of experimental evidence, especially found in earlier literature, and on an adequate formulation of the third law of thermodynamics given 1956 by Simon in retrospect of his own work. Based on a careful selection of calorimetric data from multiple sources, the residual entropy of diopside glass at zero Kelvin was reconfirmed as