Many granulation plants operate well below design capacity, suffering from high recycle rates and even periodic instabilities. This behaviour cannot be fully predicted using the present models. The main objective of the paper is to provide an overview of the current status of model development for granulation processes and suggest future directions for research and development. The end-use of the models is focused on the optimal design and control of granulation plants using the improved predictions of process dynamics. The development of novel models involving mechanistically based structural switching methods is proposed in the paper. A number of guidelines are proposed for the selection of control relevant model structures.Drum granulation is a particle size enlargement process often obtained by spraying a liquid binder or slurry onto fine particles as they are agitated in a rotary drum. A typical continuous granulation circuit consisting of a drum granulator, rotary dryer, screen classifier, crusher and a number of conveyors is schematically depicted in In this article, issues on modelling and model-based control of continuous drum granulation are reviewed followed by a proposal on future research directions. Although the emphasis of the review is placed on the macroscopic processes, relevant topics in granulation fundamentals are also briefly described. This is because a comprehensive understanding of granulation mechanisms is essential to the optimal design and control of complete granulation plants. Similar to most process engineering areas, physically based granulation models deserve much more research effort than their empirical counterparts. It should be pointed out that in spite of significant progress in the fundamental studies on granulation mechanisms witnessed in the last decade, macroscopic models to-date do not give a good fit to plant data (denoted as the plant–model mismatch), and physically based models are scarcely applied at all to industrial granulation plant. Physically based models are highly desirable because a probabilistic model is normally only applicable to a narrow range of operational conditions without providing any physical insights into the underlying processes. These insights are very important to the improved design, control and operations. It can be identified that in addition to the disturbance amplification effects caused by recycle streams, the following three reasons are responsible for the significant plant–model mismatch. (1) In a typical wet-granulation device, a large number of soft granules are formed through spraying a liquid binder onto the moving surface of fine powders. The mechanism of this granule formation process, denoted as nucleation, is the key factor influencing the granule size distribution and thus the recycle rate. However, this important mechanism has not been incorporated into working models of granulation processes. (2) The granulation process is physically divided into several stages, namely wetting and nuclei formation, compaction and consolidation, and growth by coalescence. As a result, different sections in a drum granulator are dominated by different granulation mechanisms. Consequently, the model structure should switch from section to section, even though there are no physical divisions in the drum. However, a unified population balance model with fixed structure is conventionally used for drum granulation processes. (3) The fact that characteristics of solid and liquid transport, mixing and segregation (de-mixing) also change within the drum, requires zonal models to predict these characteristic changes. Again, oversimplified, unified models have been traditionally used to describe transport phenomena and mixing behaviour. The current status of granulation research clearly shows that there exists a notable gap in knowledge between microscopic-level studies and plant-scale modelling. Consequently, future research work should focus on the construction of a bridge to link these two individual areas via the development of mesoscopic-level models. One step towards the bridge construction proposed in this article is the development of structure switching models for the improved design and control of industrial granulation plants. In contrast to the conventional granulation models with fixed-structure, this relatively new modelling methodology suggests the generation of models with different structure for different parts of the granule formation and enlargement processes based on recently developed mechanisms of granulation. The major ongoing and future research projects in the drum granulation field can be summarised as follows. (1) Understanding and representing granulation processes in drums with appropriate modelling techniques. (2) Developing multiple models for zonal applications in drums, including model structure optimisation and model order reduction techniques. (3) The study of solid and liquid transport in rotary drums in order to accurately estimate localised properties required by the multiple models. This includes the determination of velocity and moisture distributions, and investigation of mixing and segregation (de-mixing) phenomena within drums. (4) Application of zonal models to system optimisation and nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC). In this article, an attempt is made to identify well-understood and poorly defined issues in model development and model-based control techniques. Some other important topics, such as model solution and particle characterisation techniques, are not addressed here due to the ongoing feature of the research. A more complete review paper constituting a broader vision of the field should appear in the near future. A comprehensive review of nucleation, growth and breakage fundamentals in agitated wet granulation processes has been carried out by Iveson et al. It has been identified by Ennis and Litster Most recently, a powerful numerical simulation method, namely the discrete element method (DEM), has been successfully applied to the studies on impact strength and breakage As correctly assessed by Iveson et al. A variety of methods can be used in model classifications. In this article, the models are classified based on modelling methodology, and briefly reviewed within their respective classes. A generalised phenomenological population balance model with both size enlargement and reduction mechanisms is given by Nicmanis and Hounslow It may be noted that both growth and breakage terms in The empirical coalescence kernels have played an important historical role in the study of the population balance. For many practical granulation processes, a properly selected empirical kernel may provide an acceptable level of model prediction. Some kernels can even be used for intuitive explanation of granulation mechanisms. For example, in the commonly used kernel given by: In spite of their simplicity, popularity, and historical significance, it is impossible to develop a generalised kernel representation using probabilistic methods to unify the empirical kernels due to a lack of physical insight. The reported kernels, even the most popular ones, could be highly successful for some particular processes, but provide misleading results for other processes as observed by Adetayo et al. The population balance models are normally solved by using one of the discretization methods. Most commonly used discretization methods include that developed by Hounslow et al. In the last decade, significant attempts have been made to develop physically based granulation models. A multi-stage coalescence kernel model based on the microlevel theory proposed by Ennis et al. Recently, Adetayo and Ennis In dynamic simulation and process control areas, an attempt has been made by Zhang et al. In the reported simulation studies using these physically based models, processes are assumed to be operated under uniform operational conditions (perfect mixing). If the nonuniformity occurs in the drum while the averaged bulk properties are still used in the simulation, misleading results will be obtained. This assumption could be very restrictive for industrial granulation plants. Consequently, the physically based dynamic models have not been fully validated against plant data. There are also two control relevant limitations with the unifying approach. First, the discontinuous coalescence kernels are not continuously differentiable with respect to operational conditions. This discontinuity will eventually cause problems in optimisation and control studies if using conventional calculus of variations approaches. Second, the key parameter, namely the liquid film thickness, is very small (at the microscopic level) and can hardly be identified dynamically. At the current stage, the main significance of the physically based models is to achieve better understanding of granulation mechanisms, and to attract general rules via simulated studies as demonstrated by Zhang et al. It can be seen that in order to address industrial applications using physically based models, techniques for handling nonuniformity and for estimating key model parameters under operational conditions rather than under idealised conditions must be developed. The multiple models for zonal applications, and the conversion of the unidentifiable variables to measurable ones, are possible solutions to improving the applicability of the physically based models, which will be described in later sections. The black-box modelling strategy is based on experimental data only. The models connect process outputs (controlled variables) with inputs (control actions) through model parameters that have no definite physical significance. A simple representation of an input–output, black-box model is given by It should be pointed out that sometimes a model structure itself does not provide sufficient information for model classification. In these cases, the history of model development is needed to determine whether the model is physically based or empirical. For example, although in most cases, the well-known linear state-space model given by: A control relevant linear model has been developed by Adetayo and Ennis The population balance models can be represented not only in integral forms, but also in matrix forms such as used in crusher models and recommended by Lynch Although the matrix representation is mathematically equivalent to the discretised integral representation, it allows applications of matrix calculus which gives advantages in control and optimisation studies. The method of moments has been extensively applied to particulate processes due to its ability to generate low-dimensional models. Reported application areas include soot formation in combustion (1) When recycle streams are introduced, it is difficult to close the set of moment equations. That is, the moment equations may still contain particle numbers as model variables. (2) Because of the complexity of granulation kernels, it is difficult to develop a generalised moment representation. Furthermore, the numerical solutions of the moment models involve the determination of negative and fractional moments that could be difficult if the distribution function is not known in advance. In this paper, we will present preliminary research results to demonstrate the significance of the method of moments to granulation processes. Publications on modelling and simulation of complete granulation circuits have appeared in the literature since early 1970s. The early mathematical study on granulation circuits was reviewed by Kapur After a long period of inactivity, significant efforts on the development of a more generalised model for the complete granulation circuit can be observed in the literature Further work will focus on the incorporation of recent developments in various areas into the generalised model. This includes liquid distribution in the granulator, nucleation, breakage in the granulator and the dryer, porosity dependent kernels, and solid transport in the rotary drums. The generalised model is very useful in studying the dynamic behaviour of the whole circuit. In particular, the so-called “snow-ball effect” (disturbance amplification effect) can be observed through simulations instead of very expensive experiments. Model-based control of granulation processes has not yet been extensively published in the literature. Ogunnaike Black-box, input–output models can be used in linear model predictive control (LMPC) schemes. The most comprehensive and powerful LMPC techniques are those based on optimisation of a quadratic objective function involving the error between the set-point and the predicted outputs A control-related linear model has been developed by Adetayo and Ennis Computer simulated studies on control of granulation circuits were carried out by Zhang The well-known special characteristics of particulate processes that cause difficulties in the implementation of conventional control schemes include: nonlinearity, distributed nature of the population balance, and significant model uncertainty (plant–model mismatch). The existence of significant model uncertainty requires very robust control schemes with high failure tolerance. The nonlinear model predictive control, which incorporates on-line model identification into model-based control, is no doubt an ideal candidate for granulation plants. The fundamental concepts and basic algorithms are briefly described in an excellent review paper on model identification and control of crystallisation processes published by Rawlings et al. Although direct applications of NMPC schemes to complete granulation plants have not been reported in the literature, the schemes have been successfully applied to a number of chemical processes with very similar characteristics. The most relevant studies include: nonlinear model predictive control of a distributed parameter process We have carried out similar model identification studies for control of a variety of processes. These include drum granulation In spite of the reported successful applications of NMPC schemes, significant modifications of conventional methods and further development of novel control strategies are necessary for the application to granulation processes due to special characteristics. In particular, the fact that only parameter estimation is emphasised in the conventional NMPC schemes without taking changes in model structure into account has significantly restricted their applications to complex industrial processes. Generic Model Control (GMC) developed by Lee and Sullivan The main difference between NMPC and GMC is that the former uses two-level optimisation approaches for the determination of both model parameters and control values, whereas the latter employs an optimisation algorithm only for model identification with control variables determined by GMC laws. As a result, GMC could be less computationally intensive than NMPC. However, it should be pointed out again that NMPC can be applied to systems with any relative order, but GMC is mainly suitable for relative order 1 systems. The differential geometric approach (DGA) is a general control strategy for nonlinear systems with any relative order There are a number of subprocesses in a complete granulation circuit including granulation, crushing, size classification, binder-spraying, and solid transport. Obviously, the emphasis of the drum granulation research should be placed on the modelling, optimisation, and control of the granulator, which is the “bottle-neck” of the entire granulation circuit. However, since a granulation circuit is a highly interactive system, it is impossible to achieve optimal circuit operations without taking other subprocesses into account. The recommended future directions in modelling of granulation processes are summarised as follows. (1) Based on recently developed mechanisms of granulation, to generate models with different structure for the different parts of the granulation formation processes denoted as structure switching models. That is, a granulation drum is conceptually divided into several zones of variable length, each represented by a different model structure. (2) To add this new drum model to an overall model of a granulation circuit with rigorous treatment of solid and liquid transport in rotary drums. The main granulation circuit interactions should be predictable by using the overall model. (3) To develop a model hierarchy using model order reduction techniques with the emphasis placed on the determination of control relevant models. Research strategies and preliminary studies in modelling of granulation processes in order to achieve the aforementioned future objectives are described in this section. These include application of fundamental granulation theory, development of generalised phenomenological model structure, development of structure switching models for zonal applications, investigation of granulation circuit interactions, preliminary study on the method of moments for granulation processes, grey-box modelling, and model validation. Particle growth in a granulator may cover a number of growth regimes, such as powder wetting and granule formation, compaction and consolidation, and growth by coalescence Fundamentally, the coalescence of two particles is strongly affected by a number of variables: liquid film thickness and relative velocity for Type 1 coalescence In addition to variations of model parameters in the drum, another difficulty encountered in the application of fundamental coalescence theory proposed by Adetayo and Ennis A study on the interconversion between the liquid film thickness and particle porosity is also a possible strategy for the direct application of Adetayo and Ennis' It has been identified that the granule porosity is one of the most important properties affecting the granulation behaviour The population balance equation can be conceptually represented as follows: It is also advantageous to separate fine powders from larger particles in mathematical models. Consequently, the suggested super-model structure of porosity dependent population balance (Model 2) consists of two submodels. The submodel for particles with sizes greater than certain minimum value ( The submodel for particles with sizes less than or equal to the minimum value ( From the previous discussion, it can be seen that mathematical representations change with location and time in a drum granulator even though there is no physical division of the granulator. This implies that an attempt to represent the entire granulator by using a unique model is inadequate, and multiple models should be developed. In the development of multiple models, the drum granulator is divided into several sections along the axial direction. Not every term in the generalised population balance model is active in each section. A basic model will be developed for each section by using a structural optimisation technique that has been successfully applied to a complex mineral process by Schroder and Cameron It should be emphasised that the basic models will need to be continuously modified based on the on-line measurements. For example, if the solid feed rate is too high, or the liquid spray rate is too low in the first section, additional mechanisms and model complexity would be necessary in the second section. That is, the first section may need to be extended to the second section. Another incompleteness of conventional granulation models is that the granulation circuit interactions have not been incorporated in the overall model, and uniform operational conditions are normally assumed in the model development. Important interactions among various subprocesses are shown in Comprehensive studies on heat and mass transfer, and solid transport in flighted rotary drums based on rigorous mathematical analysis have been carried out by Wang et al. Significant progress has been achieved in recent years in the mathematical modelling and numerical simulations of mixing and segregation of granular materials in rotary drums evidenced by numerous publications. The current status and basic methods of mixing and segregation research are clearly explained in a recent review paper jointly authored by Ottino and Khakhar It is recognised that liquid maldistribution and particle size evolution have not been addressed in the current granular mixing and segregation research. Significant progress has been achieved in a study of liquid distribution in wet-granulation carried out by Litster et al. A batch granulation process with coalescence as the only size enlargement mechanism is treated first for simplicity. The coalescence kernel is formulated as: In order to determine the size distribution from moments, the Laguerre polynomial expansion was suggested by Hulbert and Katz At this stage, at least for some popular distribution functions, such as log-normal distribution, the moment models can be developed and solved for granulation processes. Consequently, the control studies can be based on low-dimensional moment models. It is not always possible to develop mechanistic models due to the complexity of real granulation processes. Grey-box modelling is an important modelling strategy in the future study of granulation dynamics for process design and control. In this modelling strategy, physically understandable phenomena (white parts) are described by the mechanistic representations, and poorly understood processes (black parts) are formulated by using probabilistic methods. That is, the grey-box modelling strategy combines mechanistic analysis with advanced system identification methods to generate models with an acceptable level of accuracy and physical insight. The white and black parts of the granulation models are roughly identified as follows. The white parts in the grey-box models are: The generalised phenomenological structure of the population balance, which is mostly known. General structures of some components in the super-structure, such as integral and matrix forms of the coalescence models, and the representation of the axial dispersion term. Part of the system parameters, which can be computed in advance or determined by batch experiments. The black parts in the grey-box models are: Structures of some components in the super-structure, such as nucleation model and moisture distribution (mixing) model. Optimal model structure, which should be determined through the identification of the significant and trivial components in the super-structure by using the grey-box modelling strategies. A number of model parameters, which cannot be determined in advance. Shifting times in multi-stage models. Bed depth dependent models, which have not yet been developed. In particular, previous work reported in the literature in dynamic modelling has focused on systems without structural changes under disturbances. This assumption could be very restrictive. For example, in the multi-staged models, how to determine the switching points in disturbed systems remains an unanswered question. It is expected that grey-box identification with an ability for optimisation of model structures should be able to solve this kind of switching problem. One of the most important issues in the future study on granulation circuits is the dynamical validation of the complete circuit model, which has not been reported previously. This requires experimental facilities. In the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of Queensland, a world-class, pilot-scale continuous granulation plant with all of the major unit operations is in the final stage of commissioning. Techniques for on-line measurement, data acquisition, fault diagnosis, and advanced control are being investigated. A large number of high-quality experimental data have already been collected. In addition to this continuous granulation plant, there are several laboratory-scale batch granulators. Both batch and continuous granulators have attracted a significant number of national and international academic visitors and exchange students. Experimental investigations are designed to be run in parallel with theoretical developments for model validation and methodology verification. In the continuous granulation plant, the particle size distribution and moisture can be measured on-line for process control. The particle size distribution can be measured by using an OptiSizer unit Measurements at selected locations can be used to estimate the behaviour of the complete plant. Techniques will be developed for the estimation of unmeasurable variables. In order to verify these techniques in continuous granulation experiments, the ongoing process will be temporarily stopped at specified time for sampling at various locations in the drum. The moisture and size distribution will then be measured off-line. The quality of dynamic models can be assessed through comparative studies between model predictions and experimental measurements. Batch granulation experiments have provided useful information on liquid and solid mixing, and granulation mechanisms. The pilot plant is equipped with a PLC system and uses the Gensym intelligent control software G2 for process control and fault diagnosis Numerical computations can be carried out by employing either DaeSim Studio The key future directions in optimal design, operation, and control of granulation circuits can be summarised as follows. To determine strategies for incorporating newly developed model structures as an appropriate basis for design of improved granulators. To develop improved nonlinear model predictive control (NMPC) to optimise granulation circuit operations. The novelty and research methodology are briefly described in this section. The objective of the system optimisation of granulation circuits is to minimise the recycle ratio and maximise the productivity at steady state. The possible decision variables are drum rotation rate, inclination angle (holdup of the drum), solid feed flowrate, and most importantly, solid moisture. The overall model must be able to predict the effects of these variables on the objective functions. Optimisation techniques have been successfully applied to complex chemical processes by Wang and Cameron A preliminary study on the innovative design of a granulator configuration using multiple models is being carried out with promising results. The basic concept behind the innovative design strategy is that the granulation drum is divided into several zones, each represented by a different model structure. These zones are either of different length or of adjustable configuration. Control variables are independently adjustable in each zone. In general, for a granulation circuit, the controlled variables are flowrates of on-sized, oversized and undersized particles, and the product moisture. The candidates for manipulative variables are liquid binder flowrates at various locations, flowrate of fresh solid feed, velocity of recycle conveyor, air flowrate, and temperature to the dryer. As pointed out previously, models for particulate processes are normally nonlinear, of a distributed nature, and possess significant model uncertainties (plant–model mismatch). These have caused problems for the implementation of conventional control schemes. The model structure evolution identified in this article has introduced additional complexity to the model-based control of granulation processes. Consequently, improved NMPC schemes should be investigated to fit the special characteristics of granulation processes. The major limitation of the conventional NMPC is that only parameter estimation is incorporated into the control schemes without taking model structure changes into account. This has significantly restricted applications of NMPC to complex granulation processes. Furthermore, the set-points specified in the conventional NMPC are mainly based on operational experience without carrying out optimal control simulations. These two issues should be addressed in the improved NMPC with the following new features. (1) The model structure optimisation and alternative model structure selection should be incorporated into the model-based control framework. If the model prediction cannot fulfil the accuracy requirement by using the simple parameter identification technique, either new terms should be added to the model, or the unsuccessful models should be replaced by the alternative models. An example of model structure optimisation for a complex mineral process has been published (2) Optimal control algorithms will be incorporated into NMPC schemes using structure switching models in order to determine the new optimal profiles as the set points in the feedback control systems. That is, the overall control algorithm consists of both an open-loop optimal control strategy and a closed-loop model-based control scheme. This integrated control strategy was developed by Miller and Rawlings (3) The output sensitivity with respect to disturbances in the recycle systems will be minimised by adding extra terms to the objective functions in the optimisation algorithms. This strategy will effectively reduce the disturbance amplification effects. The quantitative graph theory applied to the control systems analysis by Wang and Cameron The expected new advances through the development of the improved NMPC include: Model uncertainties will not be limited to parameter variations as significant effort will be spent on changes of model structures. Set-points in NMPC will be computed by using optimal control algorithms for distributed parameter. “Snow-ball” effects in recycle systems will be minimised in optimisation algorithms. Obviously, the significance of the development of improved NMPC will not be limited to granulation processes. It has far-reaching implications in applications to more general large-scale industrial processes. In this paper, a large number of reported models for drum granulation processes are critically reviewed. It has been identified in this paper that a single simple model cannot predict the complex granulation behaviour with switching mechanisms. The development of novel models involving mechanistically based structural switching methods is necessary. That is, the different parts of the granulation process should be described by different model structures. Furthermore, important interactions among various subprocesses in granulation circuits should be incorporated in the working models. A new design of drum granulator, and a new generation of nonlinear model predictive control framework should be developed by using these structural switching models, which will lead to improved quality and productivity in granulation plants. parameter in coalescence kernel matrix in state-space model parameter in coalescence kernel birth rate; matrix in state-space model granule formation (nucleation) rate seed formation rate matrix in state-space model death rate weighting function (or impulse response) growth rate  number density of particle with size number fraction of particles in the total number of particles number of particles in the porosity reduction rate fine powder disappearance rate due to layering fine powder disappearance rate due to nucleation selection function manipulative (control) variable particle volume as internal coordinate; summation of disturbances particle volume as internal coordinate process output coalescence kernel parameter in coalescence kernel breakage function particle porosity ratio of the