Improper ground conditions should be improved to gain higher strength suitable for construction and the grouting with cement injection is the best option. Understanding the mechanical behavior of grouted fractured rock mass is based on characterization of grouted rock fractures. A systematic comprehensive study on the effect of consolidated grouting on mechanical behavior of fractures has yet to be conducted. The present research work incorporated identical artificial fractures produced through silicon casting and dental plaster as analogs to the ones found in Chamshir dam area in Gachsaran of Iran. By using dental silicone, samples with three different surface roughnesses were molded and finally by using dental plaster that had more strength than gypseous and more faster built up than concrete, several replicates of each samples were casted. Grouts with the water-cement ratios of 1:1 and 2:1 were generated and placed into the fractures. The grouted fractures were subjected to direct shear test and cohesion of the joint and friction angle in both residual and maximum shear strength were determined for different characteristics of rock joints like roughnesses and apertures. The results show that grouting is of positive effect on shear strength. With decreasing the water-cement ratio, grout compressive strength is increased but not necessarily an increase in its shear strength. Maximum friction angle of fractures experienced a decrease by 36–48% by means of 2:1 ratio grout and fluctuated between 5% and 15% through 1:1 ratio grout which approximately equals that of a natural joint. While maximum cohesion rose by 145–282% with 2:1 ratio grout and by 59–96% with 1:1 ratio grout.Due to the increasing use of grouting as an important operation in stabilization and reinforcement of rock mass, investigation of the behavior of grouted joints to evaluate their effect on rock mass behavior is imperative. Grouting is a method where a grout is injected into the fractures, pores, or fissures of a rock or soil body and enhances its properties. As a result, the permeability will reduce, the strength of layers will increase, and the overall deformability will decrease. The objective of this research work is to investigate grouting effect on the mechanical behavior of a rock joint. As a result of varying joint mechanical properties at different points and impossibility of providing sufficient number of samples with similar characteristics, comparison of grouting results without involving other factors is unachievable. It was attempted to replicate natural jointed rocks to maintain their mechanical properties in every test and also to generate joints at desired quantities. Once joints bearing properly similar physical and mechanical properties were fabricated, the strength parameters of the rock were measured before and after the grouting. The resulted grout resembled those used in industry in terms of compound. The natural rock joints were sourced from Chamshir dam located at 25 Joint aperture is defined as the vertical distance between two joint surfaces which filled with water or air. In order to evaluate the effect of grouting fluid on the mechanical behavior of the joint, the grout with different cement mixtures (expressed as kilograms per cubic meter of grout), filling materials, various additives, and different water-to-cement ratios may be used. Using the 8 The type of the direct shear tests performed in this test was Constant Normal Loading (CNL). The effects of grout's strength, rock roughness, and joint aperture on the strength properties of the joint were inspected. The properties include cohesion, friction angle, maximum shear strength, and residual shear strength. The plots corresponding to each joint were established according to maximum shear stress and residual shear stress, indexed with (Max) and (Res) respectively, and each set of points was fitted with a line ( One of the most important joint parameters controlling its strength is roughness. In order to study this effect during grouting, the results of the effects of different grouting materials on mechanical properties of rock joints with different roughnesses, were summarized in Due to the impact of aperture (natural) on the strength of rock joint, all joint apertures were measured. The previous section highlighted that noted that shear strength-normal stress graph has a significant proportion with rock joints roughness. However, cohesion and friction angle may not be meaningfully attributed to roughness. This section discusses the correlations of strength parameters with joint aperture and different modes of natural Grouted with the water-to-cement ratios of 2:1 (GJ_W:C-2:1) and 1:1 GJ_W:C-1:1. Three apertures with the average normal distances of 1.91 The shear strength curves highlight a general increase in the residual and the maximum strength of the samples post grouting compared to those of natural joint. Conclusively, grouting had a positive impact on the shear strength of the rock joint and more prominently on the maximum shear strength. This remark may be well justified in the light of the pertinent reports in the literature The objective of the present research work was to investigate the mechanical characteristics of grouted rock joints. Accordingly, artificial joints were fabricated with a dental plaster and subjected to direct shear test after grouting with varying water-to-cement ratios. Dental plaster may well serve the modeling of rock joints owing to its proper strength, repetitiveness, and similar mechanical and geometrical characteristics. The results show that, as the joint roughness increases, the residual and maximum strength increases in natural and grouted joints. Roughness increase generally led to increases in maximum friction angle and residual friction angle respectively over 13–27% and 15–30%. However roughness variations did not transpire meaningful changes in maximum and residual cohesions mainly due to the dominated frictional behavior of grouted joints. Low values of maximum friction angle and residual friction angle of the joint with medium roughness may be attributed to the grain (teeth) size. Variations in aperture did not yield to any significant changes in joint shear strength. As joint aperture increased, maximum cohesion decreased. The aperture increase from minimum to medium resulted in 23–29% reduction in maximum joint cohesion. This increase did not produce any considerable variations in residual joint cohesion. The aperture increase from medium to maximum provided 40–100% increase in maximum friction angle and 18–162% in residual friction angle. Grouting operation boosted the shear strength of the rock joints. Reduction in the water-to-cement ratio (which increases the compressive strength of grout) did not necessarily increase joint shear strength in relation to higher ratios. Maximum friction angle experienced a decrease by 36–48% by means of 2:1 ratio grout and fluctuated between 5% and 15% through 1:1 ratio grout which approximately equals that of a natural joint. Maximum cohesion rose by 145–282% with 2:1 ratio grout and by 59–96% with 1:1 ratio grout. Our experimental study was conducted on different fractures with a wide range of surface roughnesses. Fracture with a small JRC shows a weak groutability behavior which was not considered in our research work. Therefore the provided results in our study make a general view of groutability of rough fractures. On the other hand, grout material covers all roughnesses of a fracture while roughness acts as pseudo cohesion in constitutive model of fractures. In this case, friction could dominate the behavior of a grouted joint, regardless of degree of its roughness before grouting. Our present work is the beginning of a series of pertinent works and also the findings were established upon experiments.