Distal tibial fractures represent a significant treatment challenge to most orthopedic surgeons. Pilon fractures represent 1% to 10% of all lower extremity fractures. These fractures can result from low-energy injuries that do not cause significant damage to the soft tissue envelope of the lower leg. Alternatively the advent of high-speed automotive travel has been accompanied by high-energy distal tibial injuries, which can result in severe soft tissue devitalization. Higher energy injuries also can induce significant joint surface cartilage damage, leading to posttraumatic arthritis despite optimal articular surface reduction and fixation.
                        7
                     
                  
                  Initial operative management techniques focused on obtaining anatomic radiographic appearances by reestablishing normal bone anatomy. With the increasing prevalence of high-energy injuries and the accompanying soft tissue damage, the orthopedic community has discovered that reestablishing bone anatomy while ignoring the soft tissues might not lead to optimal postoperative results. Standard open reduction and internal fixation techniques that used large fragment screws with large spoon plates resulted in significant wound complications in high-energy pilon fractures. More recent treatment protocols have focused on maintaining a healthy soft tissue envelope while reducing the articular surface by indirect means using minimally invasive techniques. Surgeons have combined internal and external fixation to minimize the need for the extensive soft tissue dissection necessitated by large fragment screws and plates. Hybrid external fixators have been used for pilon fractures to allow early ankle range of motion, while reestablishing normal bone anatomy and minimizing the need for extensive internal fixation. Treatment has evolved to a staged protocol that ases external fixation as portable traction for several weeks before performing definitive internal fixation. Many options currently exist for the definitive treatment of pilon fractures for orthopedic surgeons. This article reviews the evolution of treatment as well as the current state-of-the-art of pilon fracture management.