The mineral matter in typical feed coals used in South African gasification processes and the ash derived from gasifying such coals have been investigated using a variety of mineralogical, chemical and electron microscope techniques. The mineral matter in the feed coals consists mainly of kaolinite, with minor proportions of quartz, illite, dolomite, calcite and pyrite plus traces of rutile and phosphate minerals. The calcite and dolomite occur in veins within the vitrinite macerals, and are concentrated in the floats fraction after density separation. Some Ca and Ti also appear to be present as inorganic elements associated with the organic matter.
                  Electron microscope studies show that the gasification ash is typically made up of partly altered fragments of non-coal rock, bonded together by a slag-like material containing anorthite and mullite crystals and iron oxide particles, with interstitial vesicular glass of calcic to iron-rich composition. Ash formation and characteristics thus appear to be controlled by reactions at the particle scale, allowing the different types of particles within the feed coal to interact with each other in a manner controlled mainly by the modes of mineral occurrence. Integration of such techniques provides an improved basis for evaluating ash-forming processes, based on quantitative phase identification, bulk and particle chemistry, and the geometric forms in which the different phases occur.Mineral matter present in coal may occur as minerals, mineraloids and as organically-associated inorganic elements The mineral matter of the coal used in such commercial gasifiers is thus not a homogeneous material, but is made up of individual aggregates of minerals with or without organic matter. Each such aggregate or particle has its own composition and internal texture, and these provide different opportunities for interaction among the components during the gasification process. As well as the bulk chemistry of the feed coal ash as determined in traditional quality assessment, it is becoming increasingly important to understand the nature of the mineral matter in the coal, including both the percentages of the different mineral components and the occurrence of any inorganic elements in the macerals that make up the organic matter. Especially with the coarse particle size and the heterogeneity of the individual particles in gasification feedstock, it is also necessary to understand the geometric relations between the minerals and macerals in the coal and any associated non-coal contaminants, so that the interactions at a particle scale in the different parts of the gasifier can be better understood. Although coals of higher or lower rank may be used for gasification in other countries, the coals typically used as feedstocks for commercial gasifiers in South Africa are low grade, medium-rank C (bituminous) coals ( During gasification the mineral matter in the different coal and ash particles may fuse, melt and partially crystallise on cooling to form a number of new phases (e.g. mullite, anorthite, cristobalite, diopside and magnetite) in association with an amorphous or glassy component The main objective of the present study was to evaluate the modes of mineral matter occurrence in typical feed coal supplied to a gasifier unit, using a combination of chemical and mineralogical analyses, conventional SEM observation, and a recently-developed SEM-based image analysis technique (QEMSCAN). The QEMSCAN technique, initially developed as QEM*SEM A sample of the bulk feed coal supplied to a commercial gasifier was crushed to < Another sample of < Samples of crushed coal were mounted in epoxy resin and prepared as polished sections, as for conventional coal petrology studies. The coal in the polished sections was studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) with associated energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) elemental analyzer, to evaluate more fully the modes of occurrence for the different mineral components. Another sample of crushed feed coal was mounted in carnuba wax and prepared as a polished section for study using QEMSCAN, an integrated SEM and image analysis system described more fully for coal applications by French et al. XRD analysis of the LTA from the feed coal ( The chemical composition of the coal ash is given in Mineralogical analysis of the float sink fractions ( Chemical analysis ( Scanning electron microscope studies ( The third mode of mineral occurrence shown in The occurrence of calcite and dolomite in these cleat infills, and the intimate association of the infills with the vitrinite components, serve to explain the higher concentrations of dolomite in the mineral matter of the floats fraction of the < As well as the coal itself, this specific gasifier feed sample typically contains discrete fragments of different non-coal rock types, including sandstone and siltstone materials. Mineralogical and chemical studies of such materials associated with Highveld and Witbank coals show a wide range of variation, depending on lithology. For example, Pinetown et al. A scanning electron micrograph of a polished section prepared from one such particle, made up of very fine grained sandstone, is shown in A false-colour image showing the mineralogy and internal texture of the different particles in a crushed sample of the feed coal, prepared using the particle scan option in QEMSCAN, is shown in QEMSCAN was also used to calculate the relative abundance of the different phases in the coal, with the relative volume of each phase combined with a relative density value for each component to give a weight percentage. The overall weight percentage of minerals recognised by QEMSCAN in the feed coal sample, and also the weight percentage of each mineral as a fraction of that visible mineral matter, is given alongside the results of the XRD analyses in The total weight percentage of minerals estimated by QEMSCAN is slightly higher than that determined for the feed coal directly by low-temperature ashing. This may in part reflect incorporation of some organic matter in the mineral aggregates recognised by QEMSCAN, and in part inconsistencies in the two samples studied. The percentages of quartz, kaolinite and illite identified by the two techniques are similar; the minor differences may reflect sample inhomogeneities, and also possibly difficulties in separately identifying fine quartz particles intimately admixed with more abundant kaolinite. Although the total percentages of calcite plus dolomite are similar, QEMSCAN has identified a greater proportion of calcite and a lesser proportion of dolomite than the XRD analysis. This may reflect a difficulty in differentiating calcite from dolomite in cleat infillings such as those shown in The reason for the greater abundance of rutile (TiO The mineral and coal-mineral associations determined in the QEMSCAN analysis of the feed coal are shown graphically in QEMSCAN analysis of the mineral associations in the pulverised coal particles of the gasifier feed coal ( Pyrite has an association with high-sulphur coal (most likely vitrinite containing organically bound sulphur) and background, the latter indicating the presence of liberated pyrite grains. Less than 10% of the association is with low-sulphur coal particles. Dolomite shows an association with calcite, in agreement with the textural relationships shown in Calcite has a strong association with coal (above 50%), which is supported by the relationships shown in Kaolinite and quartz are mostly associated with coal. Quartz is also associated with kaolinite, suggesting that the quartz occurs as included grains in some kaolinite particles as shown in Feldspar is strongly associated with the carbonates and in particular dolomite; there is a weaker association with coal. Apatite is strongly associated with calcite and to a lesser extent with coal. As described more fully in other studies  Individual rock (or “stone”) fragments in the feed coal may show only minimal alteration ( Electron microprobe studies QEMSCAN analysis was undertaken of a polished thin section of a representative portion of a sample of the coarse gasification ash. Two field scans were acquired, one over an area 25 The results of the QEMSCAN analysis provide textural evidence of behaviour of the various rock types present in the gasifier coal feed that cannot be identified from more conventional analyses. The field scan analyses show that the quartzo-feldspathic rock fragments are largely unreactive, and that the glass formation is most likely due to the presence of impure calcareous sediments having a low fusion temperature. Fusion resulted in the formation of a glass from which anorthite crystallised on cooling. It is also possible that the glass may have been derived from the mineral matter associated with the coal, particularly the carbonates and pyrite in association with the silicates; melting of the mixtures could then have formed calcium-rich and iron-rich glasses, respectively. Integrated application of advanced mineralogical techniques such as quantitative XRD and automated electron beam image analysis is a powerful investigative tool for understanding the behaviour of coal mineral matter during gasification. This study has shown that the rock fragments are largely unreactive during gasification, apart from decomposition of the clay minerals. However, the minerals and inorganic elements in the coal have undergone significant transformations, the nature of which depends not only on the mineralogy but also the mineral association. Thus the calcic glass from which anorthite has crystallised is most likely the melt product of a calcite Mr. Al Cropp of Intellection in Australia is thanked for assistance with the different aspects of the analysis program.