Effects of non-isothermal aging (NIA) treatments on the mechanical properties, intergranular corrosion (IGC) and microstructures of Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy were investigated by tensile test, intergranular corrosion test, electrochemical analysis, optical microscopy and transmission electron microscopy. Compared with isothermal peak-aging (T6) treatment, the NIA treatments effectively improve the intergranular corrosion resistance by narrowing precipitation free zones (PFZ) and breaking the continuous distribution of precipitates on the grain boundaries. Under NIA treatments, with the increase of heating rate, the width of PFZ decreases induces the improvement of intergranular corrosion resistance. The mechanical properties of NIA treatment could be enhanced by adjusting the heating rate. The tensile strength and yield strength after NIA treatment with a heating rate of 20 °C/h are increased 1.5% and 5.8% than that after T6 treatment, respectively, which is ascribed to finer intra-grain precipitates. Reasonably, the mechanical properties and intergranular corrosion resistance could be improved simultaneously by adjusting the heating rate of NIA treatments.Aluminum alloys, the primary structural materials, have been widely used in the military aircraft, automobile and weapons, since they have excellent mechanical properties [ As age-hardenable aluminum alloys, the strengthening of Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloys with high Cu/Mg ratio usually relies on the precipitation of θ′-phase [ It is commonly believed that conventional T6 treated aluminum alloys are prone to localized corrosion, including intergranular corrosion, exfoliation corrosion and stress corrosion cracking [ Latterly, an innovative approach of non-isothermal aging (NIA) treatment including a heating process and a cooling process has been developed to further enhance the corrosion resistance and strength of Al-Zn-Mg-Cu alloys [ The application of two electrochemical techniques, potentiodynamic polarization and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), for the study of corrosion processes has become extensive. This is because in principle these techniques provide information relating to the different processes that simultaneously take place in any complex system [ The present work is thus to investigate the effect of NIA treatment on the microstructure, mechanical properties and corrosion behavior of Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloys. The aim is to find suitable non-isothermal aging parameters for a good combination of strength and corrosion resistance. The materials used in this study were the as-rolled Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy sheet with the thickness of 2.5 mm, and the chemical composition (wt.%) is Al-4.41Cu-0.691Mg-0.644Si-0.521Mn-0.116Fe. The specimens were solid solution treated at 515 °C for 1 h, subsequently water quenched and then subjected to NIA and T6 treatments immediately, followed by air cooling to obtain different aging tempers, as shown in The specimens for microstructure analysis, mechanical tests and corrosion tests were cut from the long transverse direction (LTD)-rolling direction (RD) plane of the sheet. Specimens of 15 mm × 15 mm × 2.5 mm were prepared for hardness and electrical conductivity tests. Electrical conductivity was directly tested by a D60K type digital metal eddy current conductivity measuring instrument with a operating frequency of 60 kHz at room temperature. Hardness measurements were examined on a 200 HVS-5 Vickers hardness teste with a load of 9.8 N. To ensure the reliability of the hardness data, at least seven indentations were conducted for each specimen. Tensile specimens of “dog bone” type with an 80 mm gauge length and a 12 × 2.5 mm  The tensile results of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy with different aging tempers are listed in  For purpose of highlighting the intergranular corrosion resistance of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy treated by different aging tempers, corresponding polarization curves and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) diagrams are further carried out in IGC solution.  It can be found that the For the sake of a better research on the corrosion resistance of the specimens, EIS diagrams are carried out in IGC solution [ In order to find out an equivalent circuit model to explain the EIS behavior of the Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy (  The TEM micrographs of the grain boundaries of Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy under different aging conditions are shown in It is well known that the precipitation sequence in the Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy with high Cu/Mg ratio is [ The precipitation behavior of non-isothermal treatment is more complex and difficult to control with respect to that of classical isothermal treatment [ It is known that the nucleation, growth and coarsening of the precipitates is a diffusion-controlled processes which is determined by aging temperature and time. According to the Arrhenius equation [ The strengthening mechanisms for Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy are mainly due to precipitates. The size, type, distribution and volume fraction of precipitates within grains dominate the mechanical properties by inhibiting the dislocation glide by two mechanisms, consisting of particle bypassing mechanism and particle shearing mechanism [ For NIA20 specimen, the mixture of coarse and small θ′-phases within grains are distributed with high density, which is similar to that of T6 specimen. While the θ′-phases’ size range of NIA20 specimen is smaller than that of T6 specimen. That is the reason why the NIA20 specimen shows a higher yield strength. For NIA10 specimen, the θ′-phases within grains reveals a wider size distribution and begin to coarsen, which seems to be in over-aging status. Thus, the yield strength of NIA10 specimen decreases. Conversely, for NIA40 specimen, the density of intra-grain θ′ particles is high but the size of intra-grain θ′ particles is relatively fine, which is similar to that of under-aging status. Therefore, the yield strength of NIA40 specimen is lower than that of NIA20 specimen. The results of intergranular corrosion testes exhibit that the corrosion resistance of Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy could be improved by NIA treatments. It is well known that the intergranular corrosion begins in the grain boundaries and proceeds along these areas [ As one of micro-galvanic corrosion, the intergranular corrosion of the alloy originates from the potential differences between GBPs, PFZ and the matrix [  Compared with T6 treatment, the NIA treatments can significantly improve the intergranular corrosion resistance of the studied Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy by efficiently decreasing the width of PFZ and breaking the continuous distribution of precipitates on the grain boundaries. For NIA specimens, with the increase of heating rate, the width of PFZ decreases induces the improvement of intergranular corrosion resistance. The maximum corrosion depths of NIA10, NIA20 and NIA40 specimens are 136.3 μm, 130.1 μm and 125.5 μm, respectively, obviously smaller than that of T6 specimen (188.6 μm). Higher heating rate during the heating stage of NIA treatments means longer equivalent aging period. For the NIA treatments, the specimen with a heating rate of 20 Based on the above discussions, the optimal heating rate of NIA treatments of the studied Al-Cu-Mg-Si alloy is 20 The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the