Dodecylamine (DDA)–alcohol mixtures have motivated great interest recently due to their superior performance in industrial processes compared with pure DDA. Self-assembly of surfactants at the air/water interface plays an important role in their surface properties. However, the self-assembly of mixed DDA–alcohol at an atomic level is still unknown. In this study, large-scale atomistic dynamic simulations of DDA–dodecanol (DOD) mixtures with different ratios were performed to clarify their molecular arrangement and explain the synergistic effect. The structural properties, such as molecular aggregation, orientation, angle distributions, and H bond distributions, of DDA–DOD mixtures were characterized in detail. Simulation results show considerable differences in the behavior of mixed DDA–DOD molecules with different ratios. The self-assembly of pure DDA molecules is not significant due to the strong electrostatic repulsion between head groups. The surface activity of pure DOD molecules is not strong due to their poor water solubility based on their fewer amounts of H-bonds with water. For mixed DDA–DOD, the addition of DOD does not directly affect the arrangement of DDA molecules; rather, DOD molecules insert between DDA molecules and form stable clusters at the air/water interface due to the van der Waals interactions between surfactant chains. Two main interaction patterns exist between DDA and DOD, including van der Waals interactions between the surfactant chains and H bonds between their head groups. DOD and DDA play an important role in forming the cluster and solvent action, respectively. The ratio of these two surfactants can affect the two above properties. This study provides a good strategy to investigate the self-assembly cluster of mixed surfactants and supports the experimental theory at the atomic level.Surfactant assembly at interfaces is of great importance due to its wide applications like industrial, technological, and daily life applications. In particular amine is the most commonly used collector for the flotation of non-sulfide minerals, such as muscovite, kaolinite, feldspar, quartz as well as sylvite. Nonionic alcohol surfactants are frequently mixed with amines as auxiliary collectors to improve flotation performance [ In recent years, the detailed mechanism has been extensively studied using various experimental methods, such as surface tension, conductivity, light scattering, surface pressure, surface rheology, and UV–vis spectroscopy. Relative to pure surfactants, amine solutions containing alcohols show significantly decreased surface tension and therefore enhanced interfacial properties [ As an important complement to experimental approach, molecular dynamics (MD) simulation has been widely used to directly obtain the adsorption layer at interfaces from the molecular level. Wang et al. investigated the adsorption behavior of dodecylamine (DDA) at the quartz/water interface by MD simulations under different pH conditions, and their simulation results match with vibrational spectroscopy results very well [ Previous studies conducted MD simulations of surfactant assemblies at different interfaces. However, these studies mainly focused on the structure and properties of surfactant mixtures that are formed at the mineral/water interface. The properties of solution and foam affect the experimental index in flotation. Therefore, the performance of neutral molecules and DDA at the air/water interface warrants investigation. MD simulation is a favorable tool for interpreting the self-assembly properties of surfactants at air/water interfaces. Tsibranska et al. performed MD simulations on the properties of escin molecules that assemble at the air/water interface [ We previously studied the effects of a series of alcohols with different alkyl chain lengths on the surface properties of DDA at the air/water interface. Our results indicated that the mixed surfactants with the same carbon chains show an increased degree of compatibility and packing density within the monolayers at the air/water interface [ All MD simulations were conducted using the GROMACS 5.0.2 software package. The original coordinate files of DDA and DOD were obtained from Material Studio 6.0. Topology files, including the bonded and non-bonded force field parameters, were established by PRODRG builder. United-atom Gromos 53a6 force field was utilized to describe the molecular potential parameters of DDA and DOD [ The simulation models, including the total numbers of DDA, DOD, counterions, and water molecules, are shown in After energy minimization of the system using the steepest descent method, a short (1 ns) simulation was executed to reach a reasonable density in the NPT ensemble (300 K and 1 bar). Finally, the systems were equilibrated under the NVT ensemble at 300 K using the Nose–Hoover thermostat with a time step of 2 fs. All bond lengths in the simulation system were constrained using the LINCS algorithm. The van der Waals (vdW) interactions were treated with a cut-off distance of 1.0 nm, and the long-range electrostatic interactions were handled with the particle-mesh Ewald method. Each system was performed for 20 ns and the last 2 ns were used to analyze the dynamics information. VMD was applied for 3D molecular visualization.  Interestingly, the DDA/DOD mixtures with different ratios display various aggregation behaviors. In specific, the mixtures aggregate with each other after DOD addition. This phenomenon is clearly evident in the top view in Clearly, compared with the use of individual surfactants, the addition of DOD allows strong synergism at the air/water interface. Strong electrostatic repulsion occurs between the DDA head group and the steric hindrance of head–head repulsion in the DDA system, causing the electrostatic repulsion to be distributed evenly at the air/water interface. The presence of the DOD molecules reduces the repulsion of the electrostatic DDA head group and maximizes the vdW interactions between the surfactants chains. The simulation results of the pure DOD system show that DOD molecules form a stripped distribution at the air/water interface. Cluster analysis was conducted to characterize the detailed aggregation properties of the DDA/DOD mixtures with a limiting distance of 0.032 nm. In our systems, we assumed that one cluster aggregation contains at least two surfactant molecules. The number of clusters in these five systems is shown in The formation of these aggregation structures can be explained in the following aspects: when the surfactants are randomly placed near the water surface, the water/surfactant systems are unstable thermodynamically. Many interaction forces act between surfactants and water molecules, including H bonds between the head groups of surfactants and water molecules and vdW interaction forces between the carbon chains of surfactants themselves and that with air. Driven by these interactions, the surfactant slab begins to move and approach the water/air interface. For DDA/DOD mixtures, long-range attractive forces are strong between these surfactants, which exhibit increased affinity to form spontaneous self-assembly and prevent them from breaking apart. The long-range attractive force can be composed of the vdW interactions between DDA and DOD, which are not immersed in water. The DOD head groups are uncharged and can thus weaken the electrostatic repulsive force between DDA head groups. The self-aggregation properties can be characterized by density distribution, the angle of surfactants with respect to waster surface, the number of H bonds between water and surfactants, and the radial distribution functions of surfactants and water, which will be discussed in detail in the following sections. The density profiles of DDA, DOD, counterions, and water along the Z axis for DDA and DDA/DOD mixtures were analyzed and are shown in  This section discusses the orientation of surfactant molecules at the air/water interface, which was quantitatively evaluated with an angle between the Z axis and a vector interconnecting the two terminal carbon atoms of the carbon chains in the DDA and DOD molecules ( The average angles between the head and tail moieties of DDA and DOD at 1:1 ratio are provided in The interaction among the head groups of surfactants was analyzed to investigate their arrangement structure at the air/water interface. In the surfactant system, strong H bond interactions exist between the hydrophilic group and water molecules, which are crucial to their properties. Therefore, we will discuss the effect of polar ammonium and hydroxyl groups in the system of 1:1 DDA/DOD mixture on their stability at the air/water interface. The intersurfactant H bonds within the cluster were also studied. The time variation of the number of H bonds between the surfactants themselves and between surfactants and water is shown in Basing on the above analysis, we can conclude that for DDA alone, a great number of water molecules exist among the DDA head groups to screen their electrostatic repulsion and reduce the overall strength of interaction between the surfactant molecules, resulting in a loose molecular packing. For DOD alone, the amount of water molecules protruding among the surfactants is much less than that for DDA. Therefore, DOD can form a rigid cluster. H bond analysis indicates that strong interaction occurs between head groups of surfactants and water molecules. To investigate this interaction in detail, we calculated the radial distribution function (RDF) of the water molecules surrounding the DDA/DOD mixtures. The behavior of the calculated RDFs for the all systems is qualitatively similar, such as systems a, c, and d in As shown in For DOD, three peaks are observed around 0.17, 0.27, and 0.32 nm, which indicate that the distance of the hydroxyl groups of DOD and water is much closer than that of DDA because the steric hindrance effect is weak for DOD. Water molecules located beyond 0.50 nm from the hydroxyl group of DOD are regarded as unbound water [ Based on the analysis of this study, we briefly summarize how the interactions between the DDA and DOD molecules can explain the high surface activity of DDA/DOD mixtures compared with pure DDA. As shown in The first type of interaction occurs between the strong hydrophobic carbon chains of surfactant molecules. The long-range hydrophobic attraction among DOD molecules plays an important role to orient DOD with respect to each other because of the zero charge of the head groups of DOD. H bonds between the head groups of DOD are also a main force for their interaction with one another. On the basis of the RDF analysis, the distance of the first water shell between the head group of DOD is small. Therefore, one DOD surfactant can form strong H bond interactions with the water shell of their adjacent DOD surfactant. The charge analysis of DDA indicates that almost all of the charge is located around their head groups. Therefore, for DDA, this long-range attraction is counteracted by the electrostatic repulsion between the charged head groups, which leads to their loose packing at the air/water interface. For DDA/DOD mixtures, DOD molecules can easily insert between DDA molecules because the steric hindrance effect of DOD head groups is weak. Thus, DDA molecules can interact with each other through the strong long-range hydrophobic attraction and H bonds. In summary, DOD and DDA play an important part in forming the cluster and solvent action, respectively. For pure DDA and DOD, DDA/DOD mixtures show improved surface activity at the air/water interface, and the ratio of these two surfactants can affect the two above properties. MD simulation was used to study the aggregation behavior of DDA and DOD mixtures with different mixing ratios at the air/water interface. The density profile and RDF results indicate a strong interaction between the ammonium group of DDA and water molecules, and the hydrocarbon chains of DDA are prone to stretching in the air phase, showing good hydrophobic properties. The angles between the tails of the two surfactants and the z axis illustrate that DDA hydrocarbon chains are close to the normal direction at the air/water interface and are stretched in the water phase. The self-assembly of pure DDA is not significant due to the strong electrostatic repulsion between head groups. The surface activity of pure DOD is not strong due to their poor capacity with water, but pure DOD can rapidly assemble in a compact and stable surface cluster. For mixed DDA/DOD, DOD can reduce the electrostatic repulsion of DDA head groups, making two surfactants intertwine with each other. Therefore, DDA/DOD molecules can form large clusters at the air/water interface, and their surface activity is strong, indicating that they are good surfactants. All the simulation results show that the mixed system between DDA and DOD exhibits good synergistic effects. We gratefully appreciate the financial support from