Detail descriptions of designs are given of large gyratory crushers that are used as primary crushers to reduce the size of large run-of-mine ore pieces to acceptable sizes. Descriptions of secondary and tertiary cone crushers that usually follow gyratory crushers are also given in detail. The practical method of operation of each type of gyratory crusher is indicated and the various methods of computing operating variables such as speed of gyration, capacities and power consumption given are prescribed by different authors. The methods of calculations are illustrated to obtain optimum operating conditions of different variables of each type using practical examples.Gyratory crushers were invented by Charles Brown in 1877 and developed by Gates around 1881 and were referred to as a Gates crusher Similar to jaw crushers, the mechanism of size reduction in gyratory crushers is primarily by the compressive action of two pieces of steel against the rock. As the distance between the two plates decreases continuous size reduction takes place. Gyratory crushers tolerate a variety of shapes of feed particles, including slabby rock, which are not readily accepted in jaw crushers because of the shape of the feed opening. Primary crushers are solidly built to receive large lumps of rock directly from the mines and designed for large tonnage throughputs. Basically, gyratory crushers consist of a fixed solid conical shell or bowl (also called concaves) and a solid cone within the bowl called a breaking head (  The rule of thumb for describing the dimensions of primary gyratory crushers may be summarised as for sizes < 66 cm, the circumference along the opening = 8–10 × gape (measured along the outer perimeter), for sizes > 66 cm, the circumference along the opening = 6.5–7.5 × gape (measured along the outer perimeter), the ratio of mantle diameter to grape = 1.3–1.7:10, the feed size = 0.9 × gape (up to 2 m in diameter), the reduction ratio ranges from 3:1 to 10:1. The angle of nip for large crushers varies between 21° and 24° (average about 22°) but for curved surfaces it is about 27–30° bowl diameter at the discharge end × gape, bowl diameter at the feed end × gape, bowl circumference at the feed end × gape, maximum diameter at the head × gape. The designs of the breaking faces differ with different manufacturers. In doing so, the crusher products have different size distributions. The movement of the mantle or conical head that performs the crushing action can be visualised in When the mantle moves away during its cycle of gyration, the crushed rock slips down to be caught again between the mantle and the concave on the next cycle, resulting in further size reduction. The process is repeated until the sizes of the broken rock are less than the open set at the bottom of the crusher. The sizes of commercially available gyratory crushers vary considerably. The sizes are usually designated as gape × diameter of mantle (breaking head) or referred to by gape only. For a particular requirement it is advisable to consult manufacturer’s literature. As a rough guide, According to Weiss Cone crushers were originally designed and developed by Symons around 1920 and therefore are often described as Symons cone crushers. As the mechanisms of crushing in these crushers are similar to gyratory crushers their designs are similar, but in this case the spindle is supported at the bottom of the gyrating cone instead of being suspended as in larger gyratory crushers. The breaking head gyrates inside an inverted truncated cone. These crushers are designed so that the head-to-depth ratio is larger than the standard gyratory crusher and the cone angles are much flatter and the slope of the mantle and the concaves are parallel to each other. The flatter cone angles help to retain the particles longer between the crushing surfaces and therefore produce much finer particles. To prevent damage to the crushing surfaces, the concave or shell of the crushers is held in place by strong springs or hydraulics which yield to permit uncrushable tramp material to pass through. The secondary crushers are designated as The Standard cone crushers are for normal use. The Short Head cone crushers are designed for tertiary or quaternary crushing where finer product is required. These crushers are invariably operated in closed circuit. The final product sizes are fine, medium or coarse depending on the closed set spacing, the configuration of the crushing chamber and classifier performance, which is always installed in parallel. For finer product sizes, i.e., less than 6 mm, special cone crushers known as Gyradisc crushers are available. The operation is similar to the standard cone crushers, except that the size reduction is caused more by attrition than by impact In practice, large primary gyratory crushers are seldom installed underground. They are invariably installed at the surface. The charge is preferably fed directly off trucks, tip-wagons, side dump rail cars and conveyor belts onto a receiving hopper, which feed the crusher through a chute. Usually, a grizzly is placed prior to the feed entering the crusher to remove extra large pieces, which tend to jam the operation. Gyratory Crushers are invariable operated in open circuit. When a choice has to be made to include a gyratory or a jaw crusher in a circuit, a general rule of thumb is to examine the desired production rate. Where the production rate required is in excess of 900 t/h, gyratory crushers are always the preferred option. The primary gyratory crushers operate in open circuit while the last stages, either the secondary or tertiary crushers are invariably configured to operate in closed circuits in series with the primary crusher. The need for the secondary crusher is dictated by the size of the product required. The product size from a primary crusher is limited by the possible reduction ratio, which normally is around 10:1. The feed size to a primary crusher from the mines could be 1–1.5 m; thus, the maximum product size possible is 10–15 cm which is normally too large for down stream processing for mineral liberation. Hence, secondary and possibly tertiary crusher stages form part of the crushing circuit design. The final product size from the circuit depends on the close set of the secondary crusher and on the screen apertures. The same logic is used where the final product size requires the installation of tertiary crushers. To develop a crushing circuit it is useful to remember that the ranges of reduction ratios of crushers are primary crusher 3:1 to 10:1, secondary crusher 6:1 to 8:1, tertiary crusher ≅ 10:1. Thus if a project requires a final product size of say 3 mm, then maximum feed size to tertiary crusher should be 30 mm. As this would be the discharge size from the secondary crusher, the maximum feed size of the secondary crusher should be about 240 mm. Similarly, the feed size Most crushing operations are performed under dry conditions. Water is only used occasionally as a lubricant to wash or flush the fines and sticking material on crusher surfaces. Gyratory crushers can accept 8–10% moisture in operation, but the fine content should be preferably less than 10%. The crushing action in gyratory crushers is regarded as rings or ‘helics’ (spirals) of feed down through the crusher of which a single section may be regarded as similar to the jaw crusher. Therefore, computations leading to the performance of gyratory crushers may be considered very similar to jaw crushers. Thus, as in jaw crushers, the performance of gyratory crushers will be affected by fines content (fine should preferably be less than 10%), inherent and total moisture content in the ore/rock, feed distribution in the crushing area and the bulk density of the feed, hardness of ore (work index), recirculating load in the case of closed circuit crushing. The operation of crushers depends on the gyrating speed and the open and closed set positions. For a uniform size of the product it is necessary to charge uniformly and distribute the feed evenly around the spindle keeping a constant level of feed in the crushing chamber. Idling should normally be avoided as the idling load power consumption is about 0.3 times the full load power consumption. The operation of gyratory crushers is subject to the gape size, diameter of the mantle, the open set, throw and speed of gyration. It also depends on the ore characteristics including the work index of the ore. Manufacturers generally supply the operational characteristics of individual types of gyratory crushers in the form of characteristic curves. Limestone is the usual mineral used for comparative purposes. The performance of selected sizes of gyratory crushers ( One of the important factors in the operation of a gyratory crusher is to determine the speed of gyration to attain a specific product size at a specific rate. In general, the speed of crushing is inversely proportional to the size of the feed. If the feed size is increased, the speed of gyration has to be decreased. There is some evidence μ = coefficient of friction of the material  For example, if θ = 75°, Equation The mechanism of crushing is considered similar to that of a jaw crusher. The difference is that instead of wedges, the elements of material in the process of being crushed can be Using this concept early workers  θ = inclination of cone to the horizontal   Gauldie’s expression is difficult to apply in practice as the angle of inclination is difficult to measure. An easier method to estimate capacity is to apply the method advocated by Rose and English for jaw crushers. Broman      α = angle of nip Broman suggested that the frequency should not exceed a critical value as it would result in a decrease in production and showed that capacities calculated using Equation The theoretical work of Rose and English    r = reduction ratio  For soft materials, such as coal and coke, For harder materials, such as quartz and granite, Capacities of gyratory crushers of different sizes and operation variables are published by various manufacturers. The suppliers have their own specifications which should be consulted. As a typical example, gyratory crusher capacities of some crushers are shown in The methods applicable for estimating the capacities of primary gyratory crushers are also applicable to cone crushers. To select a cone crusher of a definite size, the maximum product size from the primary crusher is first checked. The gape of the secondary crusher should be 1.1 times larger than the largest particle in the feed and the feed should have 80% less than 70% of the feed opening of the crusher. Reference to manufacturer’s data on performance of cone crusher sizes is useful. To compute the power consumption of gyratory crushers, knowledge of the ore work index and crusher capacity is necessary. In its simplest form, the power consumption is given by     This expression was used by Rose and English Motz Motz When a range of particle sizes are charged for crushing, as is usual from run-of-mine ores, the power required has to be considered for only those particles that are larger than the closed set. The particles smaller than the closed set will gravitate down the crusher chamber and be discharged without crushing for which no extra power is required. In actual practice, it has been found that for primary crushers, the following rule of thumb applies: For primary crushers, The calculated power described often differs from that observed by manufacturer’s ratings; hence, a material balance method advocated by Whiten  A primary gyratory crusher was required to crush iron ore at the rate of 3000 t/h. The largest size of the run-of-mine ore was 1000 mm. The required product size was less than 162 mm. Manufacturer’s data indicated that the nearest size of gyratory crusher would be 1370 mm × 1880 mm with a cone angle of 18°. The work index of the ore was 14 kWh/t, the S.G., 4.5 and the coefficient of friction, 0.43. Calculate: the closed set required to produce the desired product, the frequency of gyration. A conveyor belt fed a Run-of-Mine iron ore to a gyratory crusher, which had a gape of 356 cm. The maximum opening at the discharge end was 15.0 cm and the close set 4.5 cm. Eighty percent of the feed and product was less than 15.0 and 2.4 cm, respectively. The size distribution of feed and product was as follows: The gyration was 15° to the horizontal. Estimate the optimum throughput of the crusher, power required for material having a Bond work index of 13.4 kWh/t, minimum frequency of gyration. Limestone having a mean particle size of 50 mm is crushed in a cone crusher the product size analysed. The power consumed for the operation was 8.0 W/kg. The feed size was then altered to an average size of 20 mm. A product of 0.5 mm (mean size) was required. Estimate the power consumption after the change in feed size. A gyratory crusher was installed in a gold mine where it was expected to crush the ore at a rate of 660 t/h. The crusher was arranged to gyrate at 140 cycles/min at an angle of 30° to the horizon. Estimate radius of the cone, change in throughput when the crusher was switched to dolomite (S.G. = 2.8), the change required in the set to maintain the same throughput as the gold ore. A cone crusher of height 2.1 m, open side feed opening 30.4 cm and a closed set at 5.1 cm gyrated at 480 rpm to crush quarry limestone scalped at 20.3 cm opening screen. The crusher was expected to crush at the rate of 1000 t/h. Calculate the level at which the charge has to be maintained, angle of the crusher head. A gyratory crusher size 33–55 was designed to accept feed of size 68 cm × 178 cm. The open-side setting of the discharge opening was 10.2 cm. The rate of gyration was 175 per minute. Calculate the capacity of crusher for an eccentric throw of 1.6 cm, what would the eccentric throw be if the crusher capacity had to be increased to 600 t/h at the same setting, if the open side setting of the discharge opening was altered to a setting of 12.7 cm what will be the percent increase in production. A gyratory crusher, 122 cm × 304.6 cm, required 300 HP to operate at a gyration of 135 cycles/min. When the eccentric throw was 2.5 cm and open side setting was 12.7 cm, it produced 1023 t/h of crushed ore. The open side setting was gradually increased in steps of 1.3 cm to 20.3 cm and tested for productivity during comminution of magnetite ore (S.G. of 5.3). All other variables being the same, establish a relation between productivity and the set at the discharge opening. A secondary crusher (size 16–50) with approximate feed opening of 41 cm × 40 cm had an eccentric throw of 1.9 cm. Gyrating at 225 rpm it crushed limestone with an open setting of 3.8 cm. Calculate the percent change of power required when the open setting was altered to 9.0 cm. Dry limestone was crushed at a rate of 100 t/h. Eighty percent of the feed passed a square screen having an opening of 25.4 mm and 80% of the product passed a 3.2 mm square screen. The S.G. of limestone was 2.66 and the Bond work index 12.74 kWh/t. Estimate: The HP required to crush (1 kW = 1.34 HP). The feed size to a gyratory crusher is 2.54 cm and nearly uniform. The product analysis is given in column (2) in the table below. The power required to crush the feed was 500 kW. The clearance between the crusher head and cone was then reduced yielding a product whose size distribution was given in column (3) of the same table. Estimate the power required in the second operation, the change in reduction ratio if the power was reduced by 10%. A gyratory crusher received iron ore from the mines at 1.5 m top size. The work index of the ore was determined as 12.5 kWh/t. The height of the bowl was 9.75 m and it was required to produce 300 t/h of crushed material at 175 rpm. Calculate the required crusher set to satisfy the crusher throughput. A long shaft suspended spindle gyratory crusher 12.7 cm × 127 cm was commissioned to crush limestone with a work index of 13.2 kWh/t. The crusher was adjusted to a throw of 0.7 cm and the set at 2.54 cm. The average size distribution was It was operated initially at 500 rpm and then at 600 rpm. Assuming a shape factor equal to 1, estimate: the production at each speed of gyration, the difference in power required between the two speeds of gyration, the critical speed of gyration.