As a part of the Project on Integrated utilization of the Fe–Ti–V ore from Campo Alegre de Lourdes (Bahia), the present work have as its main objective to investigate the hydrochloric acid leaching of a pre-reduced ilmenitic concentrate, with the purpose of obtaining synthetic rutile.
                  Initially, the crude ore was submitted to the following steps: partial reduction, grinding, sizing and magnetic separation at low and high intensity (the last one shown to be of low effectiveness).
                  In order to guide the thermogravimetric analysis of the ilmenite during pyrometallurgical treatments, oxidation–reduction diagrams of the Fe–Ti–H–O system were constructed. Tests of those treatments were conducted in a STANTON thermobalance to determine the best operational conditions.
                  Of fundamental importance were the calculation and construction of Eh–pH diagrams for the system Fe–Ti–Cl–H2O at elevated temperatures, in the development of the hydrochloric acid leaching processes studied. It was verified, through these diagrams, that a reaction medium of high acidity and moderately reductive potential is necessary to get iron into solution, in the Fe2+ form, and titanium as a solid oxide (TiO2). Eh–pH diagrams for the system Fe–Cl–H2O, at elevated concentrations were also produced, through which it became possible to explain the results of the processes developed by previous researchers. Tests on hydrochloric acid leaching were carried out in a Parr autoclave, model 4562.
                  It was observed that in the hydrochloric acid leaching on the pretreated ilmenitic concentrate, the effect of the oxidation as a pre-treatment step before reduction is not significant. The best results for iron extraction (about 97.5%) and titanium content in the residue (about 47.5%) were obtained with hydrochloric acid leaching of the reduced ilmenitic concentrate at 100°C with 4 M HCl solution.This paper comprises part of the research work carried out at the Metallurgical and Materials Engineering Department of the Coordination of Graduate Programs of Engineering of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on integrated exploitation of the Fe–Ti–V complex ore from Campo Alegre de Lourdes (Bahia State, Brazil). A previous study The present paper have the objective of studying autoclave chloride leaching of the referred ilmenitic concentrate, in order to contribute to the science and technology of the production of the synthetic rutile (a TiO The ilmenite concentrate used in the present study contained 32.1 wt.% Fe (41.30 wt.% FeO), 28.2 wt.% Ti (47.04 wt.% TiO Prior to pre-reduction, the ilmenite concentrate was submitted to an oxidative calcination in air (0.l81 standard dm The hydrochloric acid leaching tests were performed in a programmable Parr 4562 model agitated titanium autoclave. A mass of 10 g of the ilmenite concentrate was placed in the teflon liner containing 200 mL of the hydrochloric acid solution, providing a solid:liquid ratio of 1:20. The autoclave was closed and put in the mantle furnace. The presence of the metallic iron in the pre-reduced material required the supply of an oxidizing agent, which consisted of air bubbling for 20 min prior to the start of the autoclave heating; then, with the valves of the autoclave closed, the heating program was put into operation. After the end of the leaching, the autoclave was cooled down out of the furnace and then the leaching mixture was filtered with the help of a vacuum pump. Electrochemical potential and pH of the resultant leach liquor were determined. The solid residue was washed in distilled water, dried in an oven and weighed. The filtrate and residue samples were subjected to chemical analysis. Measurement of the electrochemical potential of the leach liquors was performed using a platinum electrode and a saturated calomel reference electrode, which were connected to a digital multi-meter. The pH of solutions was measured using a pH meter/glass electrode. X-ray diffraction analysis was used to determine the phases present in both starting material and the final residue of the leaching tests. The same materials were examined by scanning electron microscopy with EDS analysis. Two level experimental planning for the leaching of the ilmenite concentrate was set up and executed in order to study the effects of the variables. The high and low level of the variables was adopted from data available in the literature and from a consideration of theoretical fundamentals. The potential-pH and At first it is convenient to point out that the variables considered in the study were: previous oxidation (of the ilmenitic concentrate) prior to reduction and HCl concentration, whose symbols are A and B, respectively. Leaching conditions were kept constant: temperature (100°C), solid/liquid ratio (1/20), agitation speed (400 rpm) and leaching time (180 min). The levels of the variables were the following. Previous oxidation prior to reduction: WITH and WITHOUT. HCl concentration: 2 and 4 M.  It seems evident that the higher HCl concentration irrespective of pre-oxidation of the ilmenitic concentrate prior to reduction leads to a better Fe extraction, at the same time resulting in an increase of the titanium content in the residue. The ilmenitic concentrate in its different states (initial, pre-oxidized and reduced) and the leaching residue were analyzed by X-ray diffraction.    In In (a) the increase in the HCl concentration (in the range from 2 to 4 M) will increase the Fe extraction with a mean difference of 3.035%, 97.5% of probability of success being associated with such a statement; (b) the effect of the oxidation prior to reduction is not significant with respect to the iron extraction; and (c) the effect of the interaction between the oxidation prior to reduction and the HCl concentration (in the ranges studied) is not significant with respect to the iron extraction.  It is seen in The values of “ (a) the increase of the concentration of HCl (in the range from 2 to 4 M) will increase the titanium content of the solid residue with a mean difference of 4.38%, with a 99.9% probability of success associated with such a statement; (b) the effect of the oxidation prior to reduction is not significant with respect to the titanium content of the solid residue; and (c) the interaction between the oxidation prior to reduction and the HCl concentration (in the studied range) will decrease the titanium content of the residue with a mean difference of 1.45%, with a 92% probability of success associated with such a statement. The literature contains various references to the use of hydrochloric acid leaching to produce a TiO Hussein et al.   In turn, For Eh values in the range between −0.2 and +0.2 V, The important reactions taking place in the course of hydrochloric acid leaching of a pre-reduced ilmenite would be as follows: Finally, the residue composition (by weight) was the following: 1.34% Fe, 79.2% TiO (a) Under the conditions tested, the best results were obtained by leaching the pre-reduced ilmenitic concentrate with a 4 M hydrochloric acid concentration at 100°C: 97.5% extraction of iron 47.5 wt.% Ti in the solid residue (equivalent to 79.2 wt.% TiO (b) Oxidation prior to reduction does not significantly alter the leaching results (percent of iron extraction and percent titanium content of the solid residue), during hydrochloric acid leaching of ilmenitic concentrate. (c) In the leaching of the pre-reduced ilmenitic concentrate, the increase of the hydrochloric acid concentration from 2 to 4 M increases iron extraction by 3.035% mean difference and titanium content of the solid residue by 4.38 wt.% mean difference. (d) Additional treatment of the TiO The authors would like to register their acknowledgements to CNPq, RHAE, CAPES, PADCT, FINEP, FAPERJ, and Fundação José Bonifácio for the support to the work done.