Attention has been focused in recent decades upon the precipitation of metal sulfides from acid mine drainage (AMD) and pregnant leach solutions, due to the advantages of the sulfide precipitation process over traditional methods employing hydroxides. The aim of this work was thus to explore technologies for the precipitation of valuable metals, such as nickel using such sulfides (as either Na2S or biogenic sulfide). The recovery of nickel sulfide was improved when the initial pH of the solution containing each metal was set to 7. In such a condition the removal efficiency of nickel was 99.9%, corresponding to a residual level of 0.13mgL−1 for nickel in solution. Kinetic parameters for precipitation were determined from the particle size distributions (produced in an MSMPR reactor) using the method of moments, where the growth and nucleation rates, as well the agglomeration kernel, were calculated. The precipitation of nickel at an initial pH of 7 showed a nucleation rate value of 8.16×1018#m−3
                     s−1, the highest volumetric growth rate (1.03×101
                     μm−3
                     s−1) and agglomeration kernel of 9.71×10−23m3
                     #−1
                     s−1. The biogenic sulfide was a suitable alternative to sodium sulfide for nickel removal. Both sodium sulfide and biogenic sulfide can be utilized to precipitate nickel as millerite (NiS), allowing the effluent compliant with environmental legislation.Several industrial processes, particularly those related to the metallurgical and mining industries, produce acid effluents containing large amounts of dissolved metals, which can cause serious environmental damage Many technologies are being developed for and applied to the treatment of metal-laden effluents, and a significant body of research has investigated the treatment of such wastewaters Due to the familiarity of the industry with it, precipitation is one of the first technologies to be tested, particularly for large volumes of effluent and high pollutant concentrations. Precipitation is a complex process that is influenced by several parameters, including nucleation, growth and, eventually, agglomeration and breakage of particles Lewis The determination of nucleation and growth rate, as well as agglomeration parameters, was carried out in a study addressing the precipitation of zinc sulfide in an MSMPR reactor The development of technologies for on-site sulfide generation (sulfate reduction) has renewed the interest in sulfide precipitation aiming at both metal recovery and effluent treatment. Copper and zinc precipitation has been studied extensively, but nickel has been addressed less frequently. Nickel sulfide is highly reactive, and therefore the particle size distributions PSD are not easily determined, meaning that nucleation and growth rates are seldom found in the literature. This work therefore investigated the application of biogenic sulfide for nickel precipitation, evaluating the kinetic factors involved in the process. Supersaturation (S), the driving force of The agglomeration kernel is more easily determined if the PSD is analyzed by the method of moments such that the population balance equation is reduced to a set of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The j moment, The nickel-containing solutions were prepared from analytical grade NiCl Preliminary experiments were carried out to investigate the effects of pH and time on nickel sulfide precipitation. These experiments were carried out in a 1000 Experiments were also carried out with biogenic sulfide, and the experimental conditions were the same as previously reported but with different nickel and sulfide content. Because the measured sulfide concentration in the effluent of the sulfate reduction bioreactor was 98 The batch experiment ran for 20 To investigate nickel precipitation in continuous systems, an unbaffled MSMPR reactor with a working volume of 300 Unless otherwise stated, a 25-mL sample was collected from the reactor outlet at every residence time for a total of 10 samples. These samples were filtered using a polyethylene filter unit (HV Durapore® membrane, 0.45 The kinetic modeling was performed from the PSD produced in the continuous experiments. After the system reached steady-state conditions, a volume of 300 Preliminary experiments were carried out by mixing nickel chloride and sodium sulfide solutions to define the values of both the initial pH and reaction time that ensured an efficient nickel precipitation. The initial pH values of the nickel chloride solution were defined following the studies of Bijmans et al.  Similar experiments were performed with the biogenic sulfide produced in the sulfate reduction bioreactor. As this solution presented a sulfide content of 98 After the batch precipitation studies, a series of continuous experiments was carried out in which the initial pH of the nickel solution and the effect of the [Ni  Continuous nickel precipitation with biogenic sulfide was assessed next, and the results are presented in XRD data for the nickel precipitated with biogenic sulfide in the continuous process are shown in The well-mixed reactor is not the most appropriate technique for studying fast precipitation reactions because of mass transfer control and high supersaturations. Despite such a disadvantage, the well-mixed reactor was applied to study the precipitation of a series of sparingly soluble compounds, such as hydroxyapatite Precipitation modeling was carried out only with the results of the continuous precipitation experiments with sodium sulfide because attempts to assess the PSD of the solid particles produced with biogenic sulfide were not successful, due to the high reactivity of the fine precipitates. From PSD magma density and particle density, the number of particles in each fraction was determined, assuming a volume shape factor equal to The PSDs were determined in a laser particle size analyzer, and the results are shown in As shown in Eqs. The agglomeration kernel ( Despite intense research, technologies for bioreduction of sulfate (active treatment) have encountered intense competition with other sulfate removal approaches, such as ultrafiltration and reverse osmosis Sodium sulfide can be applied successfully for the precipitation of nickel in the form of metal sulfide, as residual levels equal to 0.13 The application of biogenic sulfide in the stoichiometric amount allowed the precipitation of nickel (at initial pH values above 5), also to levels below the limit prescribed by environmental legislation. Nickel removal is influenced by the composition of the solution containing the biogenic sulfide and the pH of the medium, and precipitation may occur in the form of other compounds, such as phosphate. Financial support from the funding agencies FINEP, FAPEMIG, CNPq and CAPES is greatly appreciated. The “Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas” – CNPq scholarships to F.D. Reis and V.A. Leão are particularly acknowledged.