The article presents the seismic evaluation and retrofit of a 10-storey steel building located in Vancouver, British Columbia, designed following the provisions of the 1980 NBCC and the CSA-S16.1-M78 steel design standard. Lateral resistance is achieved by tension-only X-bracing with back-to-back double angle members. Seismic evaluation is first performed in accordance with the recommendations of the User's Guide to NBCC 2010 using response spectrum analysis. A Tier 3 systematic evaluation according to ASCE 41-13 is then carried out using both linear and nonlinear dynamic analysis procedures. The performance objectives are set same as those implied in NBCC 2010. The ASCE 41 approach results in much less corrections to the structure. Using the mean results from 10 ground motions is also less stringent than using the maximum of three records. For this structure, nonlinear dynamic analysis permitted to identify the concentration of inelastic deformations demands on the braces along the frame height. This behaviour induced considerable bending moment demands on the columns not captured by linear dynamic analysis. Finite element analysis of the structure columns showed that columns of braced steel frames can exhibit higher ductility compared to acceptance criteria specified in ASCE 41.New steel buildings designed according to the seismic provisions of the National Building Code of Canada (NBCC) In the 1980′s, concentrically braced frames with tension-only X-bracing and chevron bracing were commonly used to resist lateral loads in steel buildings in Canada. Seismic evaluation of these framing systems for 4- and 10-storey sample buildings using the NBCC 2010 and CSA S16-09 provisions revealed that braces, brace connections, beams, and columns would require extensive retrofit Commentary L of NBCC 2010 provides information on structural evaluation and upgrading of existing buildings. For earthquake resistance, it refers to the 1993 Guidelines for seismic evaluation of existing buildings In the U.S., the ASCE 41-13 standard Analysis procedures vary greatly in their complexity to represent structural behaviour and their easiness of use in day-to-day application. In practice, the choice of the analysis method depends on the objectives and costs of the assessment program as well as the time available for the evaluation. Linear analysis is usually carried out for preliminary assessment and nonlinear analysis methods are subsequently performed to evaluate the imposed demand more realistically. Nonlinear analysis also provides a better insight into structural deficiencies and efficient retrofit strategies. Because linear analyses methods are commonly used in practice, it is useful to establish whether seismic structural assessment based on such analyses is consistent with one performed using more sophisticated nonlinear analysis methods. Callister and Pekelnicky Seismic evaluation and retrofit of existing structures designed according to past Canadian norms using the component-based ASCE 41 methodology has not been reported yet. In this article, ASCE 41-13 is used to evaluate the 10-storey building with tension-only concentrically X-bracing studied by Jiang et al. The plan view and frame elevation of the building studied is illustrated in For the braced frames studied, the aspect ratio The beams and columns are W sections whereas back-to-back double angles were used for the braces, reflecting construction practices of the 1980s. CSA-G40.21-300W steel was used for all members, with nominal yield stress Preliminary seismic evaluation of the braces, brace connections, columns, and beams was carried out using the current Canadian seismic design provisions for new buildings considering 100% and 60% of NBCC 2010 seismic loads. The latter was considered to determine if seismic upgrade would be needed according to NBCC 2010 Commentary L. In the 2010 NBCC, the base shear In NBCC 2010, the equivalent static force procedure (ESFP) is permitted for regular structures having a period In both analysis methods, a three-dimensional model of the entire structure was employed in ETABS These amplifications have been included and the final factored storey shear profiles and column axial loads from both seismic analysis methods are shown in Seismic evaluation was performed based on the computed demand-to-capacity ratios (DCR) for the braces, columns, and beams presented in In In Seismic evaluation of the structure was also performed in accordance with ASCE 41-13 to examine if the approach could result in a more cost-effective retrofit. A brief overview of the approach is given in this section. Evaluation of the structure using linear and nonlinear analysis procedures are respectively presented in In ASCE 41, the evaluation process starts by selecting the performance objective which is defined by targeted performance levels for given earthquake hazard. For existing buildings, two basic performance objectives are proposed: life safety performance for 20% in 50 The ASCE 41 procedure is a multi-tiered approach and the engineer has to select which tier will be used. In Tier-3 systematic evaluation, structural analysis must be performed to assess the demand on every component and the components are then evaluated using prescribed acceptance criteria. The Tier 3 evaluation was adopted herein to obtain a detailed comparison between the ASCE 41 and NBCC 2010 approaches and examine the influence of the analysis procedure on the evaluation results. Four analysis procedures are proposed in ASCE 41-13: linear static, nonlinear static, linear dynamic and nonlinear dynamic procedures. Although static procedures would be permitted for the regular structure studied, linear dynamic procedure (LDP) and nonlinear dynamic procedure (NDP) were used to obtain more realistic estimates of the seismic demand including dynamic effects. Details of the numerical models and seismic input used for each analysis procedure are given in the next sections. Because ASCE 41 procedures were applied for a structure constructed in Canada, the load factors for gravity and seismic loads were taken from the NBCC 2010 load combinations presented in the previous section. In ASCE 41-13, structure evaluation is performed at the component level and the acceptance criteria depend on the component type, the structural action class, and the analysis procedure. For a braced frame structure, braces, brace connections, beams, and columns all classify as principal components. Actions in components must be classified as either deformation-controlled or force-controlled actions. Deformation-controlled actions are those associated with ductile response whereas force-controlled actions are those which cannot classify as deformation-controlled. Brace tension yielding on gross section is a deformation-controlled action whereas axial compression in beams and columns as well as tension in brace connections are force-controlled actions. For the beams subjected to combined axial compression and bending moment, axial compression is a force-controlled action whereas flexure is treated as either a deformation- or force-controlled action depending on the level of axial load. Specific acceptance criteria for the applicable action types are given in the following sections. Material properties used in the evaluation process also depend on action classification: lower-bound material properties are used for force-controlled actions whereas expected material properties ( In ASCE 41, either response spectrum analysis or response history analysis can be used for LDP. For simplicity, the former was adopted in this study. The analysis was performed with the three-dimensional structural model used for the NBCC evaluation. The frame model included the braces, beams, and columns and all components were represented using elastic frame elements. Rigid column base was assumed. This model is subsequently referred to as Model A. The analysis was performed using the NBCC 2010 design spectrum In ASCE 41, the acceptance criterion for deformation-controlled actions is given by: For tension in bracing members, the basic For force-controlled axial compression in columns and tension in brace connections, acceptability in ASCE 41 is verified using: In this equation, For the beams subjected to combined axial compression and flexure, the acceptance criterion depends on the ratio between the applied axial load and the beam lower-bound axial compressive strength, where For For For intermediate values of The bracing members were evaluated using Eq. This evaluation is less severe than the evaluation under 60% NBCC 2010 seismic loads (YGS-60%) in Force-controlled tension in brace connections was evaluated using Eq. In these expressions, For each connection, Beams were evaluated as described in Eq. In these equations, similar to brace connections, the beam compression load  Evaluation results are presented in Columns are considered as force-controlled and were verified using Eq. Alternatively, In Eq. Nonlinear response history analysis was performed using a two-dimensional numerical model of one of the two X-braced frames studied. The analyses were conducted using the OpenSees finite element platform The structure studied is symmetrical and has no inherent torsion. For this situation, ASCE 41-13 allows two-dimensional models if the structure has rigid diaphragms and the torsional amplification multiplier for displacements due to total in-plane torsional moments does not exceed 1.1 at any floor. The displacement multiplier is the ratio between the maximum displacement at any point on the floor diaphragm to the average floor displacement (δ In Model B, nonlinear force-based beam-column elements are used for the braces whereas elastic beam-column elements are used for the columns and beams. The model therefore allows explicit assessment of inelastic deformation demands on the braces (deformation-controlled actions) while monitoring peak force demands on brace connections, beams, and columns (force-controlled actions). The brace model by Jiang et al. Model C is identical to Model B except that columns at every storey are represented by 10 nonlinear force-based beam-column elements with 4 integration points and fiber discretization. Steel 02 material with kinematic and isotropic hardening properties was also selected for the columns. The nominal steel yield strength was specified and the residual stress pattern by Galambos and Ketter Model D is identical to Model C except that nonlinear force-based beam-column elements are also used for the beams to represent possible beam buckling failure mode. The beam model is same as for the columns except that out-of-plane buckling is prevented by the horizontal restraint provided by the floor. Hence, initial beam out-of-straightness was only considered in the plane of the frame. The response analysis was carried out for an ensemble of three site representative historical ground motion records scaled to match the 2010 NBCC design spectrum. The number of records is the minimum required in ASCE 41-13. They were selected from a broader ensemble of 20 far-field records matching the dominant magnitude-distance scenarios proposed by Atkinson When using NDP in ASCE 41, acceptance for the bracing members is based on their inelastic axial deformation capacity. For the collapse prevention performance level, the basic plastic deformation capacity of double angle braces in tension is equal to 12 Δ Flexure in beams and columns subjected to axial compression and flexure is also considered as deformation-controlled action if For force-controlled actions, the acceptance criteria described for LDP were used except for the following: In the analysis with Model B, the columns developed significant bending moments about strong axis due to non-uniform storey drift demands and were evaluated using the approach for components subjected to axial compression and bending moments described in In Models B and C, beams were evaluated using the acceptance criteria defined for LDP. Since beam moments are due to gravity loads only and do not vary, the evaluation was performed only at the time of maximum axial compression. In Models C and D, column failure was explicitly modelled in the analysis and the acceptance criteria for LDP were not verified. Similarly, when the analysis was performed using Model D, LDP acceptance criteria were not applied for the beams. In the frame studied, the brace length at level 2 and above is 9965 Acceptance for the bracing members was verified using Model B and the ratios between peak brace plastic deformations during the response history and the brace plastic deformation capacities are plotted in Because brace forces attain Evaluation of the beams and columns from Model B are presented in In Model B predicted column failure by instability and this behaviour is examined further using Model C. In In the analysis with Model C, buckling of the LHS column occurred at level 1 as a result of the large axial compression demand predicted by Model B at 13.3 When using Model C, column buckling was also observed under earthquake record no. 3. This other column failure occurred at the 3rd level. For this structure, seismic induced column buckling observed with Model C at the first and third levels due to excessive axial load demand could be predicted in the evaluations performed using Model B as Although the more comprehensive Model C could show column buckling and give a more realistic prediction of the anticipated frame behaviour, this example shows that the use of simpler analysis procedures, such as RSA and NDP with partial nonlinear response such as Model B, should not be undervalued in seismic evaluation. Here, for instance, NDP with partial nonlinear modelling limited to deformation-controlled actions (Model B) could provide a quick estimate of realistic forces for all force-controlled actions. Such a model is also sufficient to develop and validate a final retrofit solution as it can adequately simulate the intended structural response with inelastic deformations limited to deformation-controlled actions. This example also illustrates that NDP with nonlinear modelling of both deformation- and force-controlled actions may be used to refine the evaluation by predicting more accurately the strength of force-controlled members. In this case, however, the analysis may need to be repeated several times, updating the model each time to include the retrofit measures required by the previous analysis, until satisfactory nonlinear seismic performance is achieved. This progressive approach is essential as early failures of a deficient component may eclipse other deficiencies present in the structure or result in lower force demand on other components. When Model C was used for the frame under study, building failure was caused by column buckling at level 1. The large inelastic deformations in the braces at levels 8 and 9 and their possible consequences on the performance of the columns at these levels could not be predicted because the analysis stopped after buckling of the column at level 1, before these problems could be identified. Similarly, when using Model D, beam buckling response could not be fully evaluated because the analyses could not be pursued after column buckling. Seismic retrofit of the frame was performed using ASCE 41 NDP with partial nonlinear modelling (Model B), as recommended in the previous section. For the retrofit design, the evaluation procedure was however modified as follows to identify the structure deficiencies more realistically and propose cost-effective retrofit actions: Knowing that brace connections would have to be retrofitted to resist forces corresponding to the brace expected strengths The demand from the most critical of 3 ground motion records was found severe and the analyses were redone using 7 additional ground motions such that the average demand from 10 records could be used in the evaluation. The average spectrum of the 10 scaled ground motions is shown in From the study by Bech et al. With these modifications, braces and beams required no strengthening but column reinforcement was needed at levels 1 to 7 and at level 9. The retrofit scheme for the columns consisted in welding reinforcement steel plates to the flanges, as shown in In Beam evaluation with the LDP acceptance criteria is presented in As shown in Column rotation capacity is studied herein for the columns at level 8 which did not need reinforcement based on axial load demand only. The column is a W310 To evaluate if the column at level 8 can withstand the seismic induced axial compression without failure while undergoing flexural yielding due to brace yielding, the time histories of the axial load, end displacements and end rotations imposed on the LHS column under record no. 2, as obtained from the analyses with OpenSees Model C, were applied to the isolated ABAQUS finite element model of the column. The axial load vs. total rotation traces from Model C are plotted in Further numerical simulations and experimental investigations are needed to develop acceptance criteria for columns whose main function during an earthquake is to resist axial loading. For the braced frame studied herein, the limited study presented here does not suffice to conclude that the retrofit scheme studied is sufficient to achieve the intended level of performance. In particular, the possibility of soft-storey response at the 8th level is of concern and the braces and/or columns could be strengthened to mitigate this undesirable response. Nonetheless, when compared to the retrofit currently required under NBCC 2010 (18.4 The seismic performance of 10-storey tension-only steel X-braced frame with back-to-back double angle braces was evaluated using different methods. The structure was designed in accordance with the 1980 NBCC for a site class C in Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. The evaluation approaches proposed in the 2010 NBCC and the ASCE 41-13 Tier 3 procedures were used. The former was performed using results from the equivalent static force procedure (ESFP) and response spectrum analysis (RSA). ASCE 41 evaluation was done using both linear and nonlinear dynamic analysis procedures (LDP and NDP). For NDP, models reproducing nonlinear responses associated to deformation-controlled actions in the bracing members and models accounting for nonlinear response for both deformation- and force-controlled actions in primary components were used. The ASCE 41 methodology was adapted for Canadian application. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: Evaluation of the structure for 60% of the 2010 NBCC seismic loads using both static (ESFP) and dynamic (RSA) analysis procedures revealed that seismic retrofit was needed. When considering 100% of NBCC 2010 loads, both analysis methods indicated that most braces and columns would need strengthening. All brace connections were also found to have inadequate capacity and some of the beams had insufficient strength. The evaluation was generally less severe when using RSA. For the structure studied, the evaluation using ASCE 41 LDP was less severe than the one performed under 100% NBCC 2010 seismic loads. It could predict well the force demand on force-controlled actions obtained from NDP ASCE 41 with nonlinear modelling of deformation-controlled actions. When evaluating force-controlled actions using ASCE 41 LDP, limit analysis should be preferred to elastic analysis with the force delivery factor NDP with partial nonlinear modelling limited to deformation-controlled actions effectively provides realistic estimates of all force-controlled actions and thus allows a rapid insight into potential seismic deficiencies related to force-controlled actions. Because the model can adequately simulate the intended structural response with inelastic deformations limited to deformation-controlled actions, it is sufficient to develop and validate a final retrofit solution. NDP with nonlinear modelling of both deformation- and force-controlled actions permits more accurate representation of complex failure mechanisms and thus provides a more accurate prediction of the structure capacity. In this case, however, the analysis may need to be repeated several times, updating each time the model to include retrofit measures required from previous analysis, until satisfactory nonlinear seismic performance is achieved. This progressive approach is essential as early failure of a component may eclipse other deficiencies possibly present in the structure or result in lower force demands on other components. Selection of ground motions may have a significant impact on evaluation performed using the ASCE 41 nonlinear dynamic analysis procedure. For the structure examined in this study, the average demand from 10 records was significantly less than the maximum value from 3 records. Current ASCE 41 LDP acceptance criteria for components subjected to axial compression and flexure appears to be too conservative for columns of steel braced frames. Further study is needed to assess the axial load carrying capacity as a function of the expected cyclic plastic rotation demand of these columns. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by the