Solutions with 1.07mmoldm−3 aniline or with 1.38mmoldm−3 4-chlorophenol at pH ca. 3 have been treated with ozone and ozonation catalyzed with Fe2+ and/or UVA. The initial mineralization rate increases as more oxidizing hydroxyl radical is produced in the medium by the catalyzed ozonations. Direct ozone treatment leads to stable oxidation products, which are quickly destroyed under UVA illumination. In the presence of Fe2+ as catalyst, the degradation process is inhibited by the formation of Fe3+ complexes with short organic diacids, being photodecomposed by UVA light. Each initial pollutant is destroyed at similar rate in all processes. p-Benzoquinone and nitrobenzene are identified as intermediates of aniline oxidation. The former product is only detected when high amounts of hydroxyl radical are produced by the action of Fe2+. Ammonium ion released during p-benzoquinone formation is also generated in larger extension under the same conditions. Nitrate ion reaches maximum production under UVA irradiation, indicating that generation of nitrobenzene from selective attack of O3 on the amino group of aniline is photocatalyzed. Reaction of 4-chlorophenol with ozone leads to 4-chloro-1,3-dihydroxybenzene and 4-chloro-1,2-dihydroxybenzene. The last product is produced in larger extension when high amounts of hydroxyl radical can selectively attack the initial pollutant. Chloride ion is completely lost during the further degradation of both dihydroxylated derivatives. Oxidation of all aromatic intermediates detected during aniline and 4-chlorophenol degradation gives maleic acid, which is further mineralized via oxalic acid. A general reaction pathway for the degradation of each pollutant is proposed.In the last years, a wide variety of methods are being applied to the mineralization (i.e. conversion to CO It is well known Several authors In previous work To gain a better knowledge on the behavior of the O The present paper reports the results obtained for the mineralization of 1.07 Reagent grade aniline from Probus was doubly distilled at 178–180°C under atmospheric pressure before use. Reagent grade 4-chlorophenol supplied by Merck was recrystallized in ethanol-water. All degradation experiments were performed with a thermostated cylindrical vessel of 150 Test solutions were prepared with 1.07 The solution pH was measured with a Crison 2000 pH-meter. Mineralization of pollutants was monitored for total organic carbon (TOC) removal, which was determined on a Shimadzu 5050 TOC analyzer by the non purgeable organic carbon (NPOC) method. The decay in substrate concentration and the evolution of stable aromatic intermediates were followed by reverse-phase chromatography with a Waters 600 HPLC liquid chromatograph fitted with a Spherisorb ODS2 5 Solutions of 1.07 The relative oxidation ability of the above processes varies at longer degradation times, although the solution pH slightly decreases to a value ca. 3.0 at the end of all treatments. Thus, 78% of organics are removed after 1 The kinetics for aniline degradation and the evolution of aromatic intermediates for the different processes was followed by reverse-phase chromatography. A fast decay of aniline by direct attack with O Several aromatic intermediates, such as Ion-exclusion chromatography allowed to detect the presence of small contents of oxalic acid and to follow the evolution of maleic acid, which is shown in  On the basis of intermediates detected in this work and previous results reported in the literature Taking into account that at pH ca. 3 the solution contains a small proportion of the neutral form of aniline (p 4-Chlorophenol was mineralized under comparable conditions to those used for aniline degradation. The sample initially contained 1.38  At longer times than 30 It is noteworthy that aniline and 4-chlorophenol undergo similar TOC abatements (<90%) after 1 The 4-chlorophenol concentration decay for all processes was followed by reverse-phase chromatography and the results obtained are also presented in Two dihydroxylated derivatives, 4-chloro-1,3-dihydroxybenzene and 4-chloro-1,2-dihydroxybenzene, have been identified as primary products of 4-chlorophenol by reverse-phase chromatography. These compounds are generated by The evolution of 4-chloro-1,2-dihydroxybenzene is depicted in Ion-exclusion chromatography of treated solutions also allowed the detection of oxalic acid in small concentrations and the quantification of free maleic acid, i.e. without forming complexes with Fe The further degradation of the above dihydroxylated derivatives yields chloride ion, which remains stable in the medium. The proposed reaction pathway for 4-chlorophenol mineralization at pH ca. 3 in The mineralization of aniline and 4-chlorophenol at pH ca. 3 by O