A new tracking filtering algorithm for a class of multivariate dynamic stochastic systems is presented. The system is expressed by a set of time-varying discrete systems with non-Gaussian stochastic input and nonlinear output. A new concept, such as hybrid characteristic function, is introduced to describe the stochastic nature of the dynamic conditional estimation errors, where the key idea is to ensure the distribution of the conditional estimation error to follow a target distribution. For this purpose, the relationships between the hybrid characteristic functions of the multivariate stochastic input and the outputs, and the properties of the hybrid characteristic function, are established. A new performance index of the tracking filter is then constructed based on the form of the hybrid characteristic function of the conditional estimation error. An analytical solution, which guarantees the filter gain matrix to be an optimal one, is then obtained. A simulation case study is included to show the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm, and encouraging results have been obtained.Considerable progress has been made on the state estimation theory following the development of the well known Kalman filtering theory ( For stochastic systems, their nonlinear filtering has also received considerable attention. Since the time evolution of the conditional probability density function of the state vector under the measurements cannot be directly calculated in most cases, filters based on various probability measure approximated representations have been developed in the literature. Examples are moments of the probability density ( It is well known that the distribution function or PDF can capture all the statistical characteristics of a random variable. Indeed, direct control of the distribution function shape is an active research area in the stochastic control systems ( The application of the PDF shaping control concept ( In this regard, a new filtering algorithm has been developed recently, where the system considered has a linear state space structure with a nonlinear output equation ( In this paper, we aim to develop a new filtering algorithm by shaping the conditional PDF of the estimation error signals, where the filtering algorithm produces the estimate error whose PDFs can be made to follow closely a narrowly distributed Gaussian PDF function. A novel approach, which uses characteristic functions instead of the PDFs, is presented here to generalize the classical optimal filtering theory for multivariate stochastic systems with non-Gaussian inputs. The concepts of hybrid vectors (see e.g. In the following, except for specially pointing out, matrices are assumed to have appropriate dimensions. For two real vectors Consider the following stochastic nonlinear systems ( For this system,    In For the dynamic system given by As The purpose of filtering is to use available information of the system input and output to estimate In order to study the stochastic behavior of the multivariate mapping, the existing theory needs to be extended. For this purpose, the following definitions on hybrid random vectors, hybrid probabilities and hybrid characteristic functions are introduced to generalize some conventional concepts in probability theory. If a random variable This definition is a discrete value definition of the constant. Observably, we can define a continue value random variable of the constant if the impulsive function is considered as a probability density function (  A random vector  From the continuous value definition of the degenerated distribution (see the  If a variable contains both continuous and discrete values then the variable is referred to as a mixed random variable denoted by If a random vector  In this paper, the SOTH or the SSOTH means that the hybrid are brought by the linear mapping ( In order to simplify the formulation, in the following only SSOTH random vectors, where the degenerated sub-vector are independent to the other random sub-vector, will be considered. As an SSOTH random vector can be transformed from other SSOTH random vectors, the key issue here is how this hybrid characteristic function can be calculated. In the next section, we will present the solutions on the linear transformation and the algebraic sum operation among SSOTH random vectors. Under   Using the definition of the hybrid characteristic functions, it can be shown that    Again, using the definition of the hybrid characteristic functions, it can be shown that    If the HPDF of An alternative performance index should therefore be formed which measures directly the difference between     Using this lemma, the following new performance index Setting   Of course, one can also use the following cumulative performance index The weighting function Once the performance index In this subsection, we will study the conditions under which the filter error is stochastically, exponentially and ultimately bounded in the mean square sense. This will assure the practical use of the obtained filter. For this purpose, the following definition will be required. For system To simplify the expression, we introduce the following concept on hybrid cumulate generation functions. Let Using the above definitions, the following result can be obtained.    See   See As such, to make the filter design process clear, the solution route in the filter design can be summarized as the following five steps. Describe the stochastic behavior of Compute the joint hybrid characteristic function of Select a target distribution function and a weight function Compute the filtering gain matrices using Eq. Analyze the filter in terms of Although the SSOTH random vectors are considered, all the propositions, lemmas, and theorems can be applied to SOTH random vectors. The following simple example on SOTH random vectors will be used to demonstrate the proposed filtering algorithm where the system has the following dynamics. In most of the engineering processes, except some general noise (Gaussian or non-Gaussian), the systems may be disturbed by some swashing disturbances. Therefore in the model parameters, we introduce a hybrid random variable Also, random variable The response of the state vectors are shown in Moreover, as shown in Using the concept of PDF shaping, a new optimal tracking filter design for multivariate stochastic systems subjected to non-Gaussian noise is presented in this paper, where the key idea is to select the filtering gain so that the PDFs of the filtering error can be made to follow a target distribution shape. This has therefore extended the existing minimum variance based filtering algorithms. Indeed, if the targeted distribution is a narrowly distributed Gaussian PDF, then the proposed filter aims at obtaining a state estimation error whose PDFs is made as close as possible to a Gaussian shape. To effectively characterize the stochastic property of multivariate mappings in the filtering design, a new concept on hybrid characteristic functions is introduced. The relationship between hybrid characteristic functions of the hybrid random vectors are firstly established. These relationships are then employed to establish the filtering error dynamical systems, where the error characteristic functions are represented by the measured output and the hybrid characteristic function of the random input. To construct an optimal tracking filtering, a new index is constructed by using the Kullback–Leibler distance and the property of the characteristic function. Under this performance function, an optimal filtering algorithm is obtained, where the filtering gain can be nicely represented by a compact form, as shown in This work was supported in by NSFC (Grant No. 60721003, 60736026, 60828007), the national 973 project (Grant No. 2009CB320602), the 111 project (B08015) and partly by the Young Scholars Fund of BUCT.  Firstly, assume that Denote In the following, we will prove that  From