In this research work, the effects of pulse electroplating parameters on the microstructure, crystallographic texture and corrosion resistance of electrodeposited nickel−nanodiamond composite coatings are studied. The nickel coatings containing diamond nanoparticles were obtained from an additive-free Watts bath. It was found that increasing duty cycle, pulse frequency and applied current density encourages free growth mode (i.e. [100] direction). Microstructure coarsening was observed at high duty cycles, pulse frequencies and applied current densities associated with a development of [100] texture. Due to minimum crystal size, maximum residual stress was observed for the composites obtained at ip = 1 A/dm2 and f = 1 Hz. Incorporation of the ND particles shifts corrosion potential in positive direction, reduces corrosion current, enlarges the passive zone and considerably decreases the passive corrosion current density. Ni-nanodiamond coatings obtained at 1 A/dm2 had best corrosion resistance performance in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution.During the last century, nickel plating has been extensively used to enhance the aesthetics of the metallic surfaces and improve their wear and corrosion resistance. Electrodeposited nickel is usually applied in combination with electroplated chromium. However, hexavalent chromium which is used in chrome plating is a carcinogenic compound and many countries are planning to eliminate hard chromium One promising strategy to avoid the use of chromium is fabricating nickel composite coatings. Among different materials which are used as the reinforcement, detonation nanodiamonds are of special importance. Detonation nanodiamonds are attracting much interests in engineering fields due to their unsurpassed hardness and thermal conductivity. They are also non-toxic, nano sized single crystals and have good solid lubricating ability Electrodeposition Improvement of the wear and corrosion resistance of nickel matrix with incorporation of detonation nanodiamonds as the reinforcement has been actively reported However, our knowledge of the growth characteristics and the evolution of Nickel-nanodiamond microstructure is limited. The electrolyte composition, pulse frequency, current density and duty cycle have essential effects on preferred crystallographic orientation and crystallite size of electrodeposits. Up to our knowledge no research work has been dedicated to the investigation of the effects of these parameters on the microstructure and properties of the Ni-ND electrodeposits. The objective of this research work was the characterization of the microstructure and the texture of Ni-ND coatings produced by pulse current electrodeposition. Also the microstructure-properties relationship is discussed. Pulse current was applied to prepare pure Ni and Ni-ND nanocomposite coatings from a Watts bath. Electrodeposition conditions and bath composition are tabulated in Copper and nickel plates were used as the substrate and anode, respectively. The exposed area of anode (70 mm × 20  mm) was chosen seven times larger than substrate (20 mm × 10  mm) to ensure that no problem arises from anodic polarization. Prior to the deposition, the copper plates were polished, ultrasonic treated in acetone, immersed in HCl (15%) and rinsed in distilled water. Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM) and Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM) were applied to characterize the surface morphologies of the electrodeposits and nanodiamond powder. Powder was ultrasonic treated in ethanol for 30 min and dried on a copper grid. A Philips Bruker D8 diffractometer was used to study microstructure of the Ni and Ni-ND coatings. Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectroscopy (GDOES) was performed to measure the weight and volume fraction of the nanodiamond. Reported ND incorporation rates are average of two measurement. In order to correlate the Ni and Ni-ND coatings morphology and microstructure with their corrosion properties, electrochemical measurements were conducted. The corrosion properties were studied using ACM potentiostat at a scan rate of 1 mV s The accurate size of the ND particles was investigated employing TEM ( The preferred orientation of grains in a polycrystalline metal is defined as crystallographic texture. To effectively satisfy the material requirements in most of the engineering applications, a particular crystallographic texture has to be produced in a controlled manner. There are two main categories of crystallographic textures usually known as sheet texture and fiber texture. To describe a sheet texture requires determining the crystallographic plane aligned in the rolling plane of the sheet and the direction in that crystallographic plane aligned into the direction of rolling. Fiber texture is explained by the definition of the crystallographic direction aligned parallel to the fiber axis For a more detailed examination of the texture, the inverse pole figures of the reflections (111), (200), and (220) were calculated ( Quantitative information concerning the preferred crystal orientation may be obtained from the texture coefficient (TC), whose deviation from unity reveals a preferred growth. For investigating the preferred orientation of Ni-ND composite coatings, the texture coefficients were calculated by the following equation:  Inhibition by the H Formation of Ni(OH) [100] is the free growth mode for nickel. From The residual stress ( The microstructure became coarser with increasing current density ( Increasing duty cycle resulted in the same behavior. Shifting duty cycle from 10% to 75% resulted in an increase in grain size from 37 to 48 nm. At high duty cycles t  Grains with pseudo-pentagonal symmetry which is reported to be related to [110] preferred orientation. This type of morphology grains only observed for the Ni-ND coatings obtained at 75 °C. Large grains with irregular structure are related to [200] preferred orientation. This type of grains was observed for pure nickel electrodeposits obtained at high current densities. Also, it was observed in almost all of the Ni-ND coatings, except those which were obtained at very low duty cycle or current density. Grains with binary symmetry which is related to the [211] orientation. According to Tudela et al. In a few of the Ni-ND coatings no specific grain type was identified (for example see The Potentiodynamic polarization curves were recorded on Ni and Ni–ND composite coatings in a 3.5%NaCl electrolyte ( Moreover, corrosion potential of the nickel–ND composites shifts to more positive value with the incorporation of nanodiamond particles. According To Garcia et al. ND particles in nickel matrix act as inert physical barriers to the initiation and growth of pits, hence enhance its corrosion resistance In this research work, we elucidate the modifications in the texture of electrodeposited Ni-ND composites as a function of current density, duty cycle and pulse frequency. Incorporation of nanodiamond particulates increases the stability of [100] crystal preferred orientation. The residual stress of composites was calculated and it was revealed that incorporation of nanoparticles increases the compressive residual stress. Incorporation of nanodiamond particles shifts corrosion potential in positive direction and considerably improves the corrosion resistance of the nickel matrix.