The strength of Cu–Cr–X (X=Ag or Co) improved by intermediate heat treatments during the rolling process. The strength (798MPa) of Cu–Cr–Ag microcomposites with intermediate heat treatments at 550°C (IH 550) was found to be better than that of Cu–Cr–Ag microcomposites (423MPa) with no intermediate heat treatment (NH). The improvement of the strength is attributed to the refinement of the microstructural scale by thermo-mechanical processing involving intermediate heat treatments. Severely elongated Cr filaments along with relatively coarse elongated Cr particles are clearly observed on the longitudinal sections. The Cr particles in Cu–Cr–Ag microcomposites were observed to be larger than that of Cu–Cr–Co microcomposites because of the initially coarser Cr dendrites. On the other hand, the width between filaments in Cu–Cr–Ag (2.4μm) was found to be slightly smaller than that of Cu–Cr–Co (2.44μm). The finer filamentary structure in Cu–Cr–Ag can be attributed to easier refinements due to the stronger Cu matrix strengthened by Ag precipitates. Cu–Cr–Ag and Cu–Cr–Co microcomposite plates exhibited ductile fractures. The surfaces of the microcomposite plates show many fine dimples and relatively coarse dimples. Examination of the coarse dimples on the fracture surfaces revealed fractured Cr filaments or particles in the center.Microcomposites fabricated by mechanical working of ductile two-phase mixtures prepared by various techniques have been the subject of considerable research Deformation processed Cu–Cr microcomposite has attracted the interest of many investigators Billets of Cu–7 The evaluation of tensile mechanical properties of plates was carried out on a tensile testing machine equipped with an extensometer. All tensile tests were performed at room temperature using a strain rate of 5.5×10   As shown in    One of the most interesting observations in this study is that the strength improved by intermediate heat treatments during the rolling process. It should be noted that the strength (798 Based on a study of deformation processing and mechanical properties of Cu–Cr–X (X=Ag or Co), the following conclusions can be drawn: The strength of Cu–Cr–X (X=Ag or Co) improved by intermediate heat treatments during the rolling process. The improvement of the strength is attributed to the refinement of the microstructural scale by thermo-mechanical processing involving intermediate heat treatments. Severely elongated Cr filaments along with relatively coarse elongated Cr particles were clearly observed on the longitudinal sections. The Cr particles in Cu–Cr–Ag microcomposites were observed to be larger than that of Cu–Cr–Co microcomposites because of the initially coarser Cr dendrites. The width between filaments in Cu–Cr–Ag (2.4 This work was supported by the Korea Research Foundation (KRF-2001-041-E00431).