The oxidation of 0.1 and 0.5 M Fe2+ with O2 and with SO2/O2 mixtures is compared in the presence of CuSO4 at 80°C. The SO2/O2 system oxidises Fe2+ at a faster rate than the O2 system, particularly at low concentrations of Fe2+. With O2, the rate is second order with respect to Fe2+ concentration, and is catalysed by Cu2+. But with SO2/O2, the rate is independent of Fe2+ and is inhibited by Cu2+. It is proposed that copper catalyses the oxidation of Fe2+ by O2 through a mechanism that involves the formation of ionic CuO2
                     + and H2O2 as the oxidant. In contrast, oxidation by SO2/O2 is catalysed by Fe3+ in a free radical mechanism involving peroxysulphate radical that is inhibited by Cu2+. The presence of the free radical scavenger hydroquinone also inhibits the oxidation of Fe2+ with SO2/O2, but has little effect on the oxidation with O2. It is shown that when high concentrations of Fe2+ and Cu2+ are oxidised by SO2/O2, the reaction is initially dominated by the O2 reaction mechanism, but is overtaken by the SO2/O2 reaction mechanism as Fe2+ is oxidised and the concentration of Fe2+ decreases. The results indicate that the SO2/O2 system would oxidise ferrous ions faster than O2 to achieve higher levels of Fe(III) in solution during ferric leaching of minerals.The leaching of copper sulphide minerals by Fe As a part of our general interest in the applications of the SO All the reagents used were AR grade and the water was deionised to minimise traces of dissolved metal ions and salts. Experiments were carried out in a multi-neck, 0.5-L glass reactor that was placed in a thermostatic water bath controlled at ±0.5°C. The reactor was charged with 500 mL of accurately prepared ferrous sulphate solution, and heated to the preset temperature with constant stirring and sparging of pure nitrogen gas. The reaction was started by the introduction of a pre-determined gas mixture into the reactor, through a gas disperser. When required, an accurately measured and preheated copper sulphate solution was simultaneously added into the reactor. The solution pH was kept constant by automatic addition of NaOH as required. The potential of the redox system ( The oxidation of Fe The accepted mechanism for Fe Thus, the oxidation of Fe The presence of copper significantly increases the oxidation rate of Fe The generation of Cu Thus, the catalytic action of copper in the oxidation of Fe Although the presence of Cu Cher and Davidson Although the catalysed oxidation of S(IV) in the presence of trace amounts of iron has been extensively studied in the area of atmospheric science, the mechanism of S(IV) oxidation is a subject of contradictory discussion. Generally, three mechanisms are proposed in the literature: namely radical Kao Devuyst et al. Among the recent studies, Krause We have reported earlier that the oxidation of Fe The observations relating to the reaction mechanism included an induction period and the involvement of Fe(III) in the initiation of the reaction mechanism, which agree with the results in the previous studies reviewed above. We also observed that the maximum Eh for Fe(III)/SO A free radical reaction mechanism with the following steps was proposed: A non-radical mechanism, which involves the formation of H Due to our interest in leaching copper sulphide concentrates, the effect of a relatively high range of Cu It appears that at relatively high initial concentrations of both Cu When a 2% SO A comparison of the typical rates of Fe Hence, we conclude that SO During the oxidation of Fe It has been previously shown that the measured solution potential (Eh) of the Fe/SO In this study, a similar measurement of Eh as a function of Cu Krause In this study, the effect of hydroquinone on the oxidation was investigated to assist in identifying the predominant mechanistic routes. Hydroquinone has been reported to be an effective free radical scavenger with the standard potential  As reported in our previous study In contrast to the SO  The oxidation of Fe