Assessment of the most appropriate excavation method and related equipment plays an important role in the mining and civil engineering projects. Therefore, accurate methods of estimating the ease of excavation are required. For the past three decades, various empirical predictive methods have been proposed by a number of authors. Of these, rock mass classification systems are one of the most common means of excavatability assessment. Such classification systems assign quantifiable values to selected geotechnical parameters of the rock mass. The resulting ratings are then related to ease of digging and equipment type. Despite their widespread use in practice, they have some common deficiencies leading to uncertainties in their practical applications. These deficiencies are particularly related with the existing sharp transitions between two adjacent excavation classes and the subjective uncertainties on data that are close to the range boundaries of rock classes.
                  In this study, the basic principles of the fuzzy set theory were described and then the fuzzy set theory was applied to one of the conventional classification systems by following the Mamdani fuzzy algorithm. It was shown that the fuzzy set theory could effectively overcome the uncertainties encountered in the practical applications of conventional classification systems, and also provides more information on the obtained final ratings. To be able to check the performance of this approach in practice, case study data previously collected from operating surface mines were used. Finally, it was concluded that the fuzzy set theory could also be applied to other similar rock excavation classification schemes existing in the literature.The determination of the ease of rock excavation is one of the critical stages in surface mining and civil engineering projects. On many projects, the ease of rock excavation is mainly based on whether the rock can be economically excavated by mechanical excavators, or drilling and blasting is necessary. Due to the complexity of the excavation process and large numbers of parameters involved, approaches made for the determination of ease of excavation are essentially empirical. There are a number of methods available for assessing excavability of rock and relating equipment. The seismic wave velocity of the rock mass measured in the field is one of the widely used indices for the prediction of rippability and production rate of bulldozers In the recent years, various empirical classification systems have been devised for the general assessment of rock excavatability, or for specific applications such as rock rippability. Classification systems are based on gathered geotechnical data and observations made in the field for a variety of excavation processes. The adopted procedure in most of these classification systems is the quantification of geotechnical parameters that are related to machine performance, leading to a single rating or index. The ratings obtained in this way are then related to the ease of rock excavation classes and machine types to be used. Weaver Despite their widespread use, the existing conventional classification systems have some common deficiencies in practical applications. As briefly mentioned by Aydin As the fuzzy models can cope with the complexity of complicated and ill-defined systems in a flexible and consistent way, in the last two decades an increase in their applications to solve various problems in the field of mining geomechanics has been observed In this study, the “Diggability Index Rating Method” which is one of the most advanced conventional diggability classification systems was adopted as the reference diggability classification system A close examination of Except weathering, the rating on each input parameter is a fixed numerical score for a given rock class interval. In other words, same numerical scores are applied in the regions of both the lower and upper boundaries of class intervals. In some cases, such a rating procedure may result with a similar situation given in Another deficiency of the conventional classification schemes is the existence of sharp transitions between two adjacent classes. For example, in The above mentioned uncertainties or fuzziness encountered in the practical application of conventional rock excavation classification systems can be processed by using fuzzy set theory which enables a soft approach to handle such uncertainties. The fuzzy set was first introduced in 1965 by Lofti Zadeh as a mathematical way to represent linguistic vagueness In addition, fuzzy set theory can be used for developing rule-based models which combine physical insights, expert knowledge and numerical data in a transparent way that closely resembles the real world. Fuzzy set theory provides a systematic calculus to deal with linguistic information, and it performs numerical computation by using linguistic labels stipulated by membership functions To inference in a rule based fuzzy model, the fuzzy proposition need to be represented by an implication function. The implication function is called fuzzy “if–then” rule. A fuzzy if–then rule, also known as the fuzzy rule, assumes the form “if Each rule in a fuzzy model is a relation such as Most rule-based systems involve more than one rule. The process of obtaining the overall consequent (conclusion) from the individual consequents contributed by each rule in the rule base is known as aggregation of rules. In determining an aggregation strategy two simple extreme cases exist, namely; conjunctive system of rules and disjunctive system of rules In the case of system of rules that must be jointly satisfied, the rules are connected by “and” connectives. In this case aggregated output, For the case of a disjunctive system of rules where the satisfaction of at least one rule is required, the rules are connected by “or” connectives. In this case, aggregated output is found by the fuzzy union of all individual rule contributions, as The FIS is a popular computing framework based on the concepts of fuzzy set theory, fuzzy if–then rules, and fuzzy reasoning. FISs have been successfully applied in fields such as automatic control, data classification, decision analyses, expert systems, and computer vision. Because of its multidisciplinary nature, FISs are associated with a number of names such as fuzzy rule-based systems, fuzzy expert systems, fuzzy modeling, fuzzy associative memory, fuzzy logic controllers and simply fuzzy models The basic structure of a FIS consists of three conceptual components; There are several FISs that have been employed in various applications. The most commonly used include: Mamdani fuzzy model; Takagi–Sugeno–Kang fuzzy (TSK) model; Tsukamoto fuzzy model; Singleton fuzzy model. The differences between these FISs lie in the consequents of their fuzzy rules, and thus their aggregation and defuzzification procedures differ accordingly. In this paper, the Mamdani fuzzy model is widely used since this model is easier to interpret and analyze when compared with the others The Mamdani FIS was first proposed as an attempt to control a steam engine and boiler combination by a set of linguistic control rules obtained from experienced human operators The Mamdani method is perhaps the most appealing fuzzy method to be employed in engineering geological problems. For example, geological processes or phenomena are described with simple vague predicates such as “the weathering degree of the rock mass is high” In the Mamdani fuzzy model, the “if–then” rules take place of the usual set of equations used to characterize a system. The general “if–then” rule structure of the Mamdani algorithm is given in the following form: Although many methods of composition of fuzzy relations (e.g. min–max, max–max, min–min, max–mean, etc.) exist in the literature, max–min and max–product compositions are the two most commonly used techniques  Inputs in the FIS, “ Eq. Defuzzification refers to the way a crisp value is extracted from a fuzzy set as a representative value. Although there are a number of defuzzification methods in the literature such as The main elements of a fuzzy algorithm are the input–output sets and “if–then” rules ( The output of the fuzzy model is a final index rating, indicating the ease of excavation, whose membership functions are given in The final stage of the model is the construction of the “if–then” rules. The “if–then” rules were introduced to the fuzzy model by considering the rating probabilities which could be obtained from the adopted Diggability Index Rating Method. As the rating system has four parameters and each parameter has five subclasses, the number of “if–then” rules is 625. However; 225 rules that are not likely to come true due to the nature of rock mass were eliminated from the model. For example, if the rock is completely weathered, it should not be expected that the compressive strength is medium, high or very high. In order to be able to demonstrate the practical application of the constructed fuzzy model for the Diggability Index Rating method, geotechnical field data obtained from an intensive research program conducted at different surface lignite mines were referenced As a hypothetical example of the followed procedure, schematic representation of the fuzzy reasoning mechanism with five rules out of the constructed model's overall rule base is shown in Following the determination of the Final Index Rating, its membership degree is obtained by using the fuzzy sets which represent the output variable ( The digging conditions (or excavation classes) for each site, determined from both the Diggability Index Rating Method and the presently constructed fuzzy model, are given in However, in the conventional method, the existence of sharp transitions between two adjacent excavation classes, and the uncertainties on data that are close to the range boundaries of rock classes may present some problems in practical applications. For example, the obtained final rating index for Site 6 is Another advantage of the fuzzy model is to provide more detailed information about sites which have identical excavation classes. For example, in the conventional method the digging conditions for sites 22 and 23 are assigned as “Easy” with a same final rating of 45 ( Conventional classification systems developed for the assessment of ease of excavation and equipment selection are empirically proven recommendations, serving as a valuable guide for the civil and mining engineer. They provide quantitative information during the design stage of a project. Over the last 30 years there have been a large number of classification systems developed by different authors. The adopted procedure in most of these classification systems is the quantification of geotechnical parameters that are related to machine performance, leading to a single final rating or index. The final ratings obtained in this way are then related to the ease of rock excavation classes and machine types to be used. However, as emphasized in the present paper, these classification systems may posses some uncertainties or fuzziness in their practical applications. These limitations are especially related with the existing sharp transitions between two adjacent excavation classes and the subjective uncertainties on data that are close to the range boundaries of rock classes. It is well known from previous studies in the literature that such uncertainties can be best dealt by using the fuzzy set theory. In this study, the fuzzy set theory is applied to one of the conventional rock excavation classification systems by following the Mamdani fuzzy algorithm. It is shown that fuzzy set theory could be used as an effective tool in decision-making processes where uncertainties exist. The study also emphasizes the ability of fuzzy set theory to judge the obtained final ratings by means of constructed membership degree functions, a point that is not covered in the conventional classification systems. Finally, the results obtained from the practical application of the fuzzy set theory suggest that the same approach could be followed for other similar conventional rock excavation classification schemes existing in the literature.