Monodispersed CdTe quantum dots (QDs) were prepared by using thioglycolic acid as surfactants in aqueous solution. The thioglycolic acid was chemically adsorbed on the surface of CdTe QDs that enables the QDs positively charged. In week acidic media, propafenone is positively charged, which can combine with the CdTe QDs to form larger ion-association complex via electrostatic attraction and hydrogen bond. Moreover, the formed ion-association complex could increase the intensity of resonance Rayleigh scattering (RRS), second-order scattering (SOS) and frequency doubling-scattering (FDS) of CdTe QDs, and quench the CdTe QDs fluorescence. Importantly, under optimal experimental conditions, the increased RRS, SOS and FDS intensity, and quenched fluorescence intensity of CdTe QDs were in direct proportion to the propafenone concentration in a certain range, respectively. Among them, the RRS method exhibited the highest sensitivity. In a wide concentration range of propafenone from 0.003 to 7.0 μg mL−1, the detection limit could reach 0.96 ng mL−1, which was much lower than previously reported methods. To simulate practical applications, the possible foreign interfering substances were also investigated, such as common ions, amino acid, and glucide. The proposed method here is rapid, sensitive and shows promising application for detection of ppb level of propafenone in human serum.Quantum dots (QDs) have been widely used in applications of optical devices, medical diagnosis, and lasers, Up to now, the most studied QDs are mainly CdS, CdSe, CdTe, Propafenone is widely used in treating illnesses about the rapid heart beating such as atrial and ventricular arrhythmias [ Herein, CdCl The CdTe QDs were synthesized according to previously reported methods with slight modification [ 1.0 mL above as-prepared CdTe QDs solution, buffer solution and an appropriate amount of propafenone were added into a 10 mL volumetric flask, diluted with deionized water to the mark and mixed thoroughly with a gentle shake. After incubation for 30 min, the optical spectra of the solution were examined. The RRS spectra were recorded with synchronous scanning at λ The fluorescence, RRS, FDS, and SOS spectra were carried out on a Hitachi F-2500 spectrofluorophotometer (Hitachi Company, Japan). The UV–Vis spectra were recorded on a UV-8500 spectrophotometer (Tianmei Corporation, Shanghai). TEM characterization was performed with H-7500 transmission electron microscope (Hitachi Company, Japan) operated at 200 kV. The pH was adjusted by a PHS-3C pH meter (Leici, Shanghai). To expand the application of QDs in the analysis field, the water-solubility of QDs is particularly important. In our experiments, we applied a solution-phase method to prepare the CdTe QDs, this method possesses various advantages, such as convenient raw material sources, mild experimental conditions, simple method, green and cheap. The TEM image (  RRS is a special kind of elastic scattering when the wavelength of Rayleigh scattering is in or near its molecular absorption band. Due to the high sensitivity, simplicity, and rapidity, the RRS method has gained increasing interest in the fundamental studies. The RRS spectra of CdTe QDs, propafenone and CdTe QDs-propafenone system are shown in The FDS spectra of CdTe QDs-propafenone system are shown in Under the optimal experimental conditions, the FL, RRS, FDS and SOS spectra of the CdTe QDs-propafenone system were measured to study the interaction between the CdTe QDs and propafenone. Meanwhile, the linear relationship between the variation of optical intensity and propafenone concentration was calculated. The standard curves of FL, RRS, FDS and SOS methods for detection of propafenone are summarized and listed in The effect of acidity on the RRS intensity of the CdTe QDs-propafenone system was studied. In our experiments, BR buffer was used to control the pH value of the analytical system. Experimental results verified that the appropriate pH range of the CdTe QDs-propafenone system was 5.6–7.0. Below or above this pH range, the RRS intensity was significantly reduced. In this experiment, the pH 6.4 BR buffer solutions were used as the reaction medium and the optimal dosage of the BR buffer solution was 0.5 mL. The effects of different concentrations of CdTe QDs on the RRS intensity of CdTe QDs-propafenone system were investigated. The experimental results confirmed that the suitable dose of the CdTe QDs-propafenone system was 1.0 mL. The insufficient or excessive amount of CdTe QDs will affect the RRS intensity. The optimized concentration of thioglycolic acid-modified CdTe QDs in this experiment was 2.0 × 10 The influence of ionic strength on the RRS intensity of the CdTe QDs-propafenone system was studied by adding 0.1 mol L The interaction of CdTe QDs with propafenone was monitored at room temperature (∼25 °C) at different time scales. After 30 min of the reaction, the interaction process reached equilibrium and remained stable for more than 1.5 h. Thus, in our study, the RRS spectra were tested after 30 min to ensure the complete interaction of CdTe QDs with propafenone. It is well known that fluorescence quenching can be generally divided into two different mechanisms, static quenching and dynamic quenching, which can be distinguished by the temperature-dependent difference in the lifetime of the excited states [ Both static and dynamic processes can be described by the Stern-Volmer of Eq. In acidic media, propafenone can combine with CdTe QDs through electrostatic attraction and hydrogen bond to form larger ionic association complexes, in which induced the fluorescence quenching of CdTe QDs and the RRS intensity increment of system. The possible connection model of CdTe QDs with propafenone was shown in The possible reasons for the enhancement of RRS are discussed as bellows. When discussing the resonance-enhanced Rayleigh scattering effect, it is necessary to investigate the relationship between the resonance scattering spectrum and the absorption spectrum [ Increase of particle size of CdTe QDs For a molecule or material, other parameters are fixed, the larger size, the higher the RRS intensity. In weak acidic media, propafenone can combine with the CdTe QDs to form larger ion-association complexes, which has been proved by TEM images in For molecular propafenone, both benzene and ketone in its molecular structure are hydrophobic groups, which are not easily soluble in aqueous solution. Therefore, when propafenone is adsorbed on the surface of the CdTe QDs to form ion-association complexes, a hydrophobic interface will be formed between the complexes and the water. The formed hydrophobic interfaces also will increase RRS intensity. Under optimal experimental conditions, we studied the selectivity of the RRS method in the presence of a series of foreign substances, including amino acid, metal ions, albumin, etc. As the results in 2.0 mL fresh serum sample (healthy) was thoroughly mixed with 20% trichloroacetic acid and centrifuged at 4500 rpm for 10 min. Then diluted 1.0 mL aliquot of the supernatant to 20.0 mL, and used to detect the content of propafenone. The relative standard deviation (R.S.D.) and recovery were measured by the standard addition method. As shown in Thioglycolic acid-modified CdTe QDs with good dispersibility and uniform size were prepared in the aqueous solution. The interaction of CdTe QDs with propafenone was studied by UV–Vis absorption spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, RRS spectroscopy, FDS spectroscopy, and SOS spectroscopy. The reaction mechanism is discussed combined with fluorescence spectroscopy and RRS spectroscopy. In week acidic media, thioglycolic acid-modified CdTe QDs interact with propafenone mainly through electrostatic attraction and hydrogen bonding, resulting in sharp quenching of fluorescence and significant enhancement of RRS intensity. In a certain range, the propafenone concentration has a good linear relationship with the RRS intensity enhancement. Based on this, a new method for determining the ppb level of propafenone is proposed and then was applied to the determination of propafenone in serum samples. The experiment proved that this method is accurate, rapid and sensitive enough for determining propafenone at low ppb levels, and showed promising analysis application. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the