A nanostructured sensing device based on anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) nanowells was fabricated and investigated for hydrogen gas sensing. AAO nanowells with an average pore diameter of 73nm and with 2, 6, and 12min anodization time were immersed in a surfactant solution and coated with an 8nm film of palladium nanoparticles. The electrical resistance change of the nanostructured sensor with hydrogen gas exposure was used as the sensing parameter. The AAO nanowells and nanostructures were characterized using atomic force microscopy (AFM), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM), and contact angle measurements. Using argon as a carrier gas, hydrogen concentrations as low as 0.05vol.% (500ppm) can be detected at room temperature. Response times as fast as 1.15s were obtained for the AAO nanowell–Pd nanostructure detector which compared to current devices and nanostructures in development, is found to be considerably faster without compromising sensor response magnitude and selectivity.Hydrogen is envisioned as the most attractive basic and sustainable energy system to power future generations due to its high efficiency, renewable properties, and for being environmentally friendly Nanostructures have recently attracted the attention of scientists to overcome the limitations of current hydrogen sensing devices because of their surface activity, superior responsivity, and low-power consumption due to their small size. Some of the sensing materials that have been investigated include functionalized and decorated carbon nanotubes and films To date palladium is the most preferred active material for sensing devices due to its high selectivity and affinity to hydrogen. Hydrogen adsorbs and dissociates spontaneously in palladium and its alloys In this paper, we focus on the very thin AAO membranes with an aspect ratio of less than 10 to produce an array of nanowells AAO nanowells were fabricated by a two-step anodization process. Annealed aluminum foil 0.25 As demonstrated by Xu et al. The hydrogen sensing detector was mounted onto standard four-probe holders acting as a two-probe experimental stage with the copper wires soldered to two of the four-probe electrical contacts. The sample was sealed inside a small test chamber with a gas inlet and outlet; a detailed description of the system was reported previously The AFM images of the AAO nanowells anodized for 2, 6, and 12 Before the palladium deposition the AAO nanowells were chemically treated to modify the surface wettability. It has been reported that it is possible to enhance hydrogen responsivity of palladium films  Measurements were performed of the pore diameter and depth on the cross-sectional AFM images for both plain AAO nanowells and AAO nanowell–Pd nanostructure ( The characterization of the AAO nanowell systems was also carried out via FESEM. The hydrogen sensing properties were measured by exposing the Pd-nanostructure systems to various hydrogen concentrations: 1%, 0.5%, 0.3%, 0.2%, 0.1% and 0.05%, using argon as the carrier gas. Each sample was exposed to the gas cycle described above; the exposure to argon gas was done first to obtain a baseline reading. As indicated earlier, three gas cycle trials per hydrogen concentration were run and the resistance measurements were recorded. The increase in the electrical resistance of both systems as they become in contact with hydrogen is attributed to the formation of a hydride phase which would have higher resistivity. When palladium is exposed to hydrogen gas, the H Responsivity and response time were used to evaluate and compare the hydrogen sensing performance of the Pd-nanostructure sensors. Responsivity is defined by the formula: The Pd-nanostructure system anodized for 12 The response time as a function of hydrogen concentration for all three samples is shown in Since the response time is a measure of how fast the resistance rises to the 36.8% of the total increase, the inverse of the response time corresponds to the initial hydrogen adsorption rate. The AAO nanowell/Pd sensors were also tested using dry air as the carrier gas. Detailed results of this work will be reported elsewhere. Even though a side reaction that slightly lowered the responsivity due to the presence of oxygen Although the nanowell sensor has not yet been fully optimized, it must be noted that even for low levels of hydrogen gas (<0.2%) the response times are still modestly short, and faster than those reported by other investigations with comparable sensitivities. Sayago et al. showed responsivity of approximately 7–10% with response time of 2 We reported a hydrogen sensor with superior response time characteristics based on AAO nanowells fabricated in a simple laboratory setting. Using argon as a carrier gas, a good response down to the lowest tested hydrogen concentration of 0.05% (500 The submitted manuscript has been created by UChicago Argonne, LLC, Operator of Argonne National Laboratory (“Argonne”). Argonne, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science laboratory, is operated under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357. The work at UIC was financially supported by the U.S. National Science Foundation (Grant No. CMS-0529320). The authors would like to acknowledge the use of the field emission scanning electron microscope at the Electron Microscopy Center at Argonne National Laboratory.