In this research, the possibility of mechanochemical decomposition of ammonium paratungstate (APT) has been studied, and compared with thermal decomposition method. For this purpose, APT powders were milled using a planetary ball mill up to 36h and under air atmosphere. For thermal decomposition, APT powders were heated for 30minutes at 300 and 450°C in air atmosphere. X-ray diffraction (XRD), differential scanning calorimeter (DSC), and thermo gravimetric analyzer (TGA) were used to study the decomposition progress, and products. The XRD results showed that APT completely decomposed to WO3 by thermal decomposition, while the final product of mechanochemical decomposition was WO3 (H2O)0.5. According to DSC and TGA results, during thermal decomposition, ammonia and water released in four steps, and leaved WO3. By mechanochemical decomposition crystal water and ammonia liberated from APT structure, but structural water of APT remained. In both methods, an X-ray amorphous phase was the intermediate product of APT decomposition.Ammonium paratungstate (NH It might be possible that decomposition reaction takes place during high energy ball milling due to mechanical energy. In fact, thermal energy which is used for decomposition can be replaced by mechanical energy. This kind of reaction has been referred to in the literature as mechanochemical decomposition (MCD). During the mechanical milling, collisions between balls or ball and inner wall of mill container exert an extremely high stress (several GPa) on powder caught between them In this study, it was intended to decompose APT in air atmosphere by mechanical milling, and compare the results with its thermal decomposition. For this aim, XRD, DSC, and TG were used as characterization techniques. Ammonium paratungstate (NH In order to evaluate the possibility of mechanochemical decomposition, 5 For thermal decomposition, APT was heated in conventional electric furnace at 300 and 450 The decomposition progress was characterized by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) with Cu K Thermo gravimetric analyzer (TGA50/50H) and differential scanning calorimeter (Shimadzu DSC-60) with the rate of 10 X-ray analysis was used to monitor structural changes of APT during thermal and mechanochemical decomposition. XRD patterns related to mechanochemical decomposition of APT are shown in Structural analysis of APT has been studied with other researchers This reaction takes place at room temperature during ball milling. In fact, during ball to powder collisions, the bonds breaking happens, and crystal water and ammonia release. A comparison of XRD results (  In TGA curves of 12 and 36 By increasing the milling time, no significant changes in TG curves could be seen. It can be concluded that milling time has no effect on WO Thermal and mechanochemical modes of APT decomposition were compared in this research. XRD and TGA results showed that APT completely decomposes to WO