To evaluate the effect of gastrointestinal parasites on grazing behaviour, herbage intake and milk production in spring calving dairy cows, 12 naturally infected control cows were compared with 12 similar animals treated on three occasions (June, July and September) with eprinomectin. The cows were blocked according to calving date, parity, live weight and milk yield during week 2 after turnout and then allocated to the treatments. The grazing area was sub-divided into two sets of 12 replicated paddocks of equivalent size and topography. Pairs of either control or treated animals were randomly assigned to graze each paddock over the duration of the study. Within each plot, the pair of cows grazed a series of 1-day paddocks, of areas calculated to provide 72kg of herbage dry matter measured to ground level.
                  Faecal samples were collected from each cow in April, prior to allocation, and every 28 days thereafter. Samples were submitted for counts of nematode eggs (sensitivity 1epg) and the presence of Dictyocaulus viviparus larvae. Additional faecal samples were taken on each occasion for culture and nematode identification. Pasture samples for direct larval counts were collected at the same time as faecal sampling.
                  Behaviour measurements on all cows were made during three periods, once before the first treatment with eprinomectin and thence after the 2nd and 3rd treatments. During each behaviour measurement period, grazing and ruminating behaviour were recorded over two 24-h periods and measurements of components of short-term intake rate were made during a morning and a late afternoon grazing meal. Milk yield was recorded daily and milk quality was recorded weekly. Live weight and body condition score were recorded on the day of allocation, the day of initial treatment and thereafter at weekly intervals until the end of the trial.
                  The parasitological results showed low levels of faecal egg output throughout the study with group arithmetic means ranging from 0 to 6.8epg. Faecal culture yielded predominantly larvae of the genus Ostertagia, but the following genera were also identified: Cooperia, Oesophagostomum and Trichostrongylus. Pasture larval levels were also low with peak values of 135 and 58L3/kg DM herbage (7 August) in the paddocks grazed by the control and treated cattle, respectively. Thereafter, larval counts on paddocks grazed by treated cows declined to undetectable levels by October, while control paddocks remained at approximately 40L3/kg DM.
                  There was no effect of treatment on components of grazing or ruminating behaviour recorded over 24h or on short-term intake rates. There were significant differences between components of short-term intake rates measured during the morning and afternoon grazing meals.
                  The overall milk yield response to treatment with eprinomectin was +1.68kg/day solids-corrected milk (SCM) (P
                     =0.026). The overall response included significant (P
                     <0.050) increases in mean daily SCM yield following each of the three treatments, indicating a positive response to repeated treatments at several different stages of lactation. There were no significant differences in the overall percentages of fat, protein or lactose between control and treated groups.
                  The differences in live weight were not significant, although there was a consistent pattern throughout for the treated cows to be heavier than the controls.Previous work has shown that the use of anthelmintics to control gastrointestinal parasites in dairy cows may lead to an increase in milk yield ( The objective of the experiment was to evaluate the effect of naturally occurring infections of gastrointestinal parasites on milk production and herbage intake and to explore whether a behavioural mechanism might explain the benefit of anthelmintic treatment to lactating spring-calving dairy cows grazing ryegrass swards. The effect of treatment with an anthelmintic on the grazing and ruminating behaviour by cows managed under a daily-paddock stocking regime was examined over an 18-week period. The treated cows received the anthelmintic eprinomectin administered topically along the mid-line of the back, at the rate of 1 Twenty-four, March-calving, multiparous dairy cows of similar genotype, which had received no anthelmintic treatment the previous grazing season, other than treatment with nitroxynil for liver fluke at drying off, were used. The cows were selected from a group of 36 cows according to milk yield during week 2 after turnout, omitting those at the upper and lower extremes of the normal distribution. Cows were then ranked according to milk yield, blocked in pairs, and allocated randomly to either of the two treatments. Within treatments, cows were allocated to pairs and balanced as far possible for milk yield, calving date, parity and current live weight. Cows within each treatment were grouped together for droving at milking times and, on return to their paddocks, were separated into their pairs at the paddock entrances. Cows were observed for oestrus during the experiment and all animals seen showing signs of oestrus within the specified service dates were served immediately after the following milking and returned to their paddock with their treatment group. All cows were kept at pasture throughout the experiment and received 4 The grass swards, which had been established for at least 12 years and were predominantly of perennial ryegrass ( The cows were turned out to pasture in late April when ground conditions permitted. From turnout to mid May the cows were rotationally stocked, grazing as one group across the entire experimental area to ensure equivalent grazing and initial seeding with nematode eggs. Subsequently, the grazing area was sub-divided into two sets of 12 replicate plots of equivalent size and topography (East and South). At the start of the experiment in mid May, each pair of control or treated cows was randomly assigned to one plot in each set, for the duration of the study. Within each plot, the pair of cows grazed a series of 1-day paddocks of areas calculated to provide 72 Daily paddock areas were calculated weekly, based on locally derived regressions relating herbage mass (kg Measurements of sward surface height (SSH), at the time of 24-h grazing behaviour measurements, were made at 50 locations on each paddock using a sward stick with a 1 Faecal samples were collected from each cow in April, prior to allocation, and every 28 days thereafter. Samples were analysed for counts of nematode eggs and the presence of Pasture samples for direct larval counts were collected on the same days as the faecal samples, as described in MAFF Reference Book, 418, pages 31–32 ( Measurements of grazing behaviour and short-term intake rate (IR) in grams of herbage organic matter (OM)/min were made between 17 and 30 May, 25 and 31 July and 14 and 26 September (Periods 1, 2 and 3, respectively). In each behaviour measurement period, solid-state behaviour recorders ( The number of bites and non-biting GJM, the number of ruminative mastications and the total number of jaw movements during consumption of the supplements were counted automatically. The term ‘non-biting grazing jaw movement’ refers to those jaw movements not identified as bites and therefore includes jaw movements which may have a masticative or manipulative function. In each period, IR by each cow was measured during a morning and afternoon grazing meal using the differential weighing method, corrected for rate of insensible weight loss, as described by During measurement of IR, snip samples of herbage were taken representative of that consumed by the animals, for analysis for dry matter and organic matter content. Milk yield was recorded daily at each milking. Milk quality was recorded at four consecutive milkings per week starting on the Monday p.m. milking. Solids-corrected milk (SCM) yields were calculated using the equation of Tyrrell and Reid ( Live weight and body condition score were recorded 24 Due to the lack of independence between cows within each pair ( All cows in the study remained generally in good health throughout the trial with the exception of animals 1188 (control), which was removed from the trial on 2 August 2000 because of traumatic injury, and 1481 (treated), which was removed from the trial on 15 August 2000 because of suspected pneumonia. Comparable animals from the main dairy herd replaced these cows in order to maintain group size, but were excluded from data analyses. The weekly mean rising-plate meter heights did not differ between the paddocks occupied by the control and eprinomectin-treated cows following the first and subsequent periods of regrowth. The mean herbage mass derived from the plate height measurements are shown in No lungworm ( Faecal culture revealed the presence of the following genera: No nematode larvae were recovered in the pasture samples taken in May. Low numbers of larvae were found in some of the paddocks in June (4/12) and July (2/12). Peak values in both treatment group paddocks appeared in August when 5/6 of control paddocks were positive, with a mean of 135 larvae/kg herbage DM, and 4/6 of paddocks grazed by treated cows were positive with a mean count of 58 The results of the IR measurements made during the three periods are shown in The results of the analysis of the 24-h behaviour recordings are shown in There was no significant effect of treatment on ruminating behaviour ( Cows in the control group spent more than 30 There was no significant effect of treatment on the number of grazing meals over 24 There was no significant effect of treatment on milk fat, protein or lactose content in any week of the experiment, with the overall weekly mean values ranging between 3.97 (week 3) and 4.96 (week 20), 2.94 (week 2) and 3.63 (week 20), and between 4.21 (week 17) and 4.59 (week 1) The weekly mean daily solids-corrected milk (SCM) yields, adjusted by covariance analysis using the mean daily yield during the week prior to treatment are shown in The live weights of the control and treated cows, adjusted by covariance analysis for live weight before the imposition of treatments, are shown in The daily herbage allowance provided in the experiment was chosen to achieve a moderately high level of utilization (c. 40%) of the herbage measured to ground and accepting that daily intake by the cows would be restricted. The imposed daily allowance of 36 The rising plate meter heights on the swards did not differ between the paddocks occupied by the control and treated cows. Thus, given the limitation that a common, weekly-derived regression was used to estimate herbage mass, no differences existed between the estimated herbage mass present on the control and treated paddocks. Overall mean SSH measured at the time of the behaviour recordings did not differ between paddocks grazed by the control and treated cows, either before the cows entered the paddocks or when they left. In all cases, mean SSH was reduced by between 50 and 55%. Consistent with the literature, the faecal egg counts in this trial with adult dairy cows were very low. If the usual McMaster technique, with a sensitivity of 50 The faecal cultures may reflect more accurately the propensity for pasture contamination with parasitic nematode larvae, because the density of pasture larvae on the control paddocks was consistently higher than that on the paddocks grazed by treated cows from August onwards. The differences in bite mass, bite rate and IR between the measurements made during the afternoon and morning were mainly in response to the modification of sward structure by the cows during the period that they were present on the paddock. Bite mass, bite rate and IR are constrained by sward height ( Similarly, there was no evidence of any treatment effect on the time spent grazing and eating, the number of GJM and bites, or the number of grazing meals. Examination of the temporal patterns of grazing activity ( Under continuous variable-stocking management, total daily herbage intake may be estimated from measurements of IR and total time spent eating, despite the small changes in IR over the day ( This apparent lack of effect on grazing behaviour and herbage intake is in contrast to the results of an experiment in which cows grazed under continuous variable-stocking management ( Although the increase in ruminating time by the treated cows compared with the control cows was not statistically significant, the increase of 30 Eprinomectin treatment resulted in a consistent and, during 6 weeks, significant improvement in milk yield, which over the 18 weeks of the experiment represented an overall daily increase of 1.68 Additional small benefits appear to have been expressed in the slightly better liveweight performance by the treated cows. Previous work with autumn-born dairy heifers in their first grazing season has shown that subclinical nematode infections can be responsible for reductions in growth rates, when compared with anthelmintic-treated heifers ( The experiment demonstrates that a reduction in subclinical gastrointestinal nematode infections in adult dairy cattle can benefit milk yield, even when cows may be unable to respond by increasing their daily intake of herbage because of restrictive daily herbage allowances. In the absence of evidence for increased intakes, it must be concluded that improved milk production and live weight performance may result from improved digestive efficiency and a reduction of physiological stress in anthelmintic-treated cows. We wish to thank Miss Taryn Farrelly for assistance with field work; Miss Jess Whyte and dairy staff for milking and milk sampling; National Milk Records for analysis of milk samples, M. Cranwell and staff of the Veterinary Laboratories Agency, Starcross, Devon for counts of nematode eggs. This research was funded by Merial Animal Health Ltd. The Institute of Grassland and Environmental Research is supported through the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council. This research was carried out in accordance with the welfare standards approved by IGER's Ethical Review Procedure. Eprinex