The objective of this study is to investigate the techno-economic feasibility of supercritical water gasification (SCWG) of black liquor integrated to a Kraft pulp mill. The process simulations have been performed through Aspen Plus software. The assessment includes five integration scenarios: stainless steel 316 or Inconel 625 as the reactor materials and hydrogen or combined heat and power (CHP) as the target products. The results illustrates that Inconel reactor is more profitable for CHP production than stainless steel as well as providing lower production cost of hydrogen. Inconel is also more robust against loss of pulping chemicals and changes in the energy price. However, the assessment uses the experimental yields even though surface-to-volume ratio of the reactor will reduce in the industrial scale. Therefore, the results should be validated in pilot scale as well before implementation. Nevertheless, a special reactor configuration can increase surface area. The techno-economic results can be improved by comprehensive investigations of process conditions including also residence time, the concentration of reactor inlet and heterogeneous catalyst. In addition, the SCWG process integrated to a pulp mill can also receive feedstocks from other biomass sectors. This would improve the economic and environmental performances of those sectors as well.The importance of biomass has increased due to the environmental issues and fossil fuel depletion. Rather than 1st generation biorefinery, the sustainable industry could include integrated processes utilizing non-edible crops or waste and by-product streams. However, this requires advanced technologies currently in need of further investigations and techno-economical improvements. The main conversion routes include pyrolysis and gasification processes followed by the production of various fuels and chemicals [ As a major biomass sector, pulp and paper industry provides green energy and a potential for multi-product biorefinery. For instance, black liquor combustion consists of 12% of the whole combined heat and power (CHP) generation in Finland in 2014 [ SCWG is a potentially suitable process for by-products of a pulp mill, e.g. black liquor [ Integrating SCWG of black liquor can improve the profitability of a pulp mill. The recent studies reported promising yields of syngas [ The purpose of this study is to determine the feasibility of SCWG of black liquor integrated with a pulp mill. The SCWG process is designed by using the experimental data presented in a previous study [ This study investigates the integration of SCWG to a Kraft mill with the capacity of 400 000 air-dried tons (ADt) of pulp per year. The mill is assumed to produce 10 tons of weak Kraft black liquor (KBL) per ADt pulp. Transferring 20% of weak KBL results in the SCWG plant capacity of 100 t/h weak black liquor inlet. The basis for the process design include experimental data at temperature range of 500–700 °C and 25 MPa, with residence time of 1.3–1.9 min (constant inlet volumetric flow rate, residence time varying slightly with temperature) and in Inconel 625 and stainless steel 316 reactors [ SCWG process can convert part of the weak black liquor into syngas, defined as 20% in this study. The brine and char residue can be recycled to the recovery boiler to enable the recovery of pulping chemicals and to recover the energy stored in char. the gas engines and turbines of the mill utilized for CHP production flue gas from the recovery boiler utilized for heating to high temperature the excess heat to be utilized or sold Aspen Plus simulation requires feedstock definition, yields and thermodynamic methods. The stream class is defined as “MIXNC”. The non-conventional solid (NC Solid) components include lignin, ash and char. The enthalpy and density methods are defined as “HCOALGEN” (with all optional codes of 1) and “DCOALIGT”, respectively. These methods being originally suggested for coal would not cause significant errors since the organic part is mostly lignin and streams are very dilute.  The process concepts are similar for all the scenarios. The weak black liquor cannot be heated to supercritical temperature of water prior to the reactor due to the issue of inorganic salt deposition in pipelines. Therefore, the weak black liquor and the recycled liquid are fed separately to the reactor. The reactor operates adiabatically by adjusting temperature of recycled liquid so that the mixture of these two inlets result in temperature slightly above the reaction temperature to compensate the endothermic reaction enthalpies. Nevertheless, this temperature variation is only around 15 °C. The recycled liquid can be heated with flue gas, e.g. a pipeline into the recovery boiler then back to the reactor. The separation involves two steps: high-pressure separation to recover H The CHP production scenarios aim at maximizing the heating value of H  The heat integration plays a critical role to reduce the external energy need. The “SYNGAS” stream heats the “HEATEDEF” stream. In Aspen, HeatX type of unit does not allow crossing over the critical temperature whereas Heater unit can simulate this cross over. Therefore, the heat exchange between “SYNGAS and HEATEDEF” streams are simulated in two stages. First, “HPHOTINT” stream is set to 365 °C in the unit “HEATREAC”. Then, “HPHOTREC” temperature is set to 680 °C in the unit “HEATREA1” and the heat of this unit is transferred to “HEATREA2” where the syngas is further cooled. The heat exchanger “PRODCOOL” heats the black liquor feed with “COOLPROD” stream. Similarly, the heat exchanger “SYNEFF” heat the recycling liquid. In these heat exchangers, the specification is defined as 20 °C temperature difference between hot inlet and cold outlet.  Similar to energy production scenarios, low temperature favors the hydrogen amount in H   The equipment design is based on the chemical engineering design formulas [ The process units include the reactors, pressure vessels for phase separations, heat exchangers and pumps. The reactor is scaled up proportional to the capacity and designed as vertical vessel to enable solid separation. The reactor configuration can be applied as in VERENA pilot plant to avoid the plugging issues. The liquid feedstock and recycling supercritical water enter the reactor from the top. After flowing downwards, gas flows upwards through a dip-tube located at the center of the reactor. Meanwhile, solid phase is separated from downwards. For all scenarios, both HPSEP and LPSEP have the diameter of six times the minimum allowable diameter calculated via the settling velocity and are equipped with demister pad. These units are sized based on the liquid hold-up time of 10 min. Pumps are designed through the head and duty calculation [  The purchasing costs are shown in  Operating costs comprise variable and fixed costs. The variable costs include raw material, electricity for pumps, heat from flue gas and operating supplies. The fixed costs include labor, employee social benefits, supervision, laboratory, insurance and taxes, maintenance and plant overhead. It is assumed that CHP process generates energy as 30% electricity and 70% heat. With the electricity price of 75 €/MWh [ The black liquor cost is calculated based on the functionality and operation in the commercial treatment, as shown in Operating costs are listed in The revenues are calculated based on the functionality of product gases. For the energy production scenarios, the revenue involves the heating value in H  Profitability is evaluated based on net present value (NPV) and internal rate of return (IRR) for the energy production scenarios. For the hydrogen production scenarios, the manufacturing cost of hydrogen is calculated by setting NPV to zero at the project end time. The project lifetime is considered as 20 years with straight line depreciation model. The investment is applied in the year 0 and the operation starts in the year 1. The interest rate is assumed as 2% for the investment cost, and the discount factor is assumed as 5%. Eqs  The two critical aspects are the energy prices and cooking chemical loss, investigated for the sensitivity analysis. The sensitivity analysis on energy prices assumes that the heat and electricity price changes simultaneously with the same rate, thus changing the CHP price in the same rate. The chemical loss is reflected on the black liquor cost based on the loss fraction. The sensitivity results presented in  This study performs conceptual feasibility assessment useful for the initial evaluation and comparison of process alternatives. Since this methodology involves 30–50% inaccuracy; for the implementation purpose, the techno-economic assessment should be repeated including rigorous models and the current market data for the simplified aspects. In addition, this study assumes the same yields with experiments by scaling up the reactor proportionally to the inlet flow rates. This aspect should also be confirmed with pilot scale operations before industrial implementation. Since Inconel has more catalytic impact, the surface-to-volume ratio influences the gas yields [ From the simulation viewpoint, a future scope can be representing the properties of biomass with non-conventional components for the applications with more concentrated biomass streams. The simulation studies of SCWG were mostly conducted for conventional compounds, such as methanol [ Regarding the integration of SCWG to a pulp mill, Inconel is more efficient for both energy and hydrogen production. In addition, the reactors can operate adiabatically since thick walls due to high pressure can reduce the heating efficiency. Since the heating rate is influential on tar and char formation [ SCWG can be an attractive treatment especially for non-wood mills. The non-wood black liquor has currently no commercial treatment, causing environmental issues when discharging or even plant shut down. SCWG can provide a treatment solution: processing the whole black liquor. However, this also means that there is no infrastructure of CHP and turbines, thus requiring extra investment. As an advantage, non-wood black liquor has more hemicellulose and less lignin compared to KBL, thus implying less char and tar formation. For instance, SCWG of wheat straw black liquor was investigated under various feed concentration and residence time [ The results of techno-economic assessment can be improved by determining the optimum conditions based on comprehensive investigations. Further investigations can include residence time in the reactor, catalysts, the flow regime and concentration of the reactor inlet. For instance, lowering reactor inlet concentration provides higher thermal efficiency and hydrogen yield; however, this would require more CHP in the process operation due to higher amount of recycling SCW. Nevertheless, catalysts can enable sufficient yields at lower temperature, thus reducing the CHP need on the recycling SCW. Besides the alkali content in black liquor acting as homogeneous catalysts, transition metal catalysts can promote the gas yields as heterogeneous catalysts. Nickel catalysts have low cost while ruthenium is very active even with low metal loading [ The main obstacles for industrial application include high amount of char and solid deposition resulting in plugging. The comprehensive studies can be useful for determining the conditions with minimum char formation as well. Other measures of suppressing char formation include bimetallic catalyst and phenol addition. Phenol addition ensures dissolution of all lignin fraction and hinders repolymerization [ The long-term operational aspects include catalyst deactivation and corrosion. The deactivation can result from sintering of the heterogeneous catalysts [ Furthermore, the process can be improved when integrated to a pulp mill with LignoForce process, PWO of black liquor and lignin recovery by acidification. In addition, two parallel reactors can operate also for syngas and bio-oil as the target products. PWO downstream can be split between lignin recovery section, SCWG and HTL. This integration will increase the product spectrum further: lignin, bio-oil, hydrogen and CHP. PWO oxidizes sulphur and potentially prevents sulphur content in syngas, thus eliminating the need of gas cleaning operation [ In terms of sustainable biorefinery, it is economically more feasible to utilize all the waste streams from biomass sectors than processing a single feedstock. Sectoral integration was proposed as the biomass supply chain network [ This study investigates the feasibility of SCWG of Kraft black liquor integrated with a pulp mill, considering the potential opportunity to evolve pulp mill to multi-product biorefinery. The process is designed based on the experimental results and the purpose of product gases. The main expenses of the process are raw material cost and the cost of heat from flue gas. In addition, there is excess heat as an additional revenue source. Based on the present analysis, Inconel reactor is more profitable than the stainless steel reactor for both energy production and hydrogen production. In addition, the Inconel reactor is more robust against loss of pulping chemicals in SCWG process and variations in energy prices. On the other hand, these results require further validation during scale-up versus surface-to-volume ratio of the reactor due to the uncertainty in catalytic effect of the reactor material. SCWG can have further applications as well: a treatment option for non-wood mill or a regional biomass conversion process. These applications require experimental data and economic analysis with various biomass types. Nevertheless, since all types of biomass have high moisture content, hydrothermal processes become more suitable for biomass conversion. The authors would like to thank