A novel method of flocculation resulting in both rapid sedimentation and low sediment moisture is described. It relies on changing the inter-particle forces from repulsive to attractive (aggregation and fast settling results) and then back to repulsive (densification of sediment then occurs). The change in inter-particle force is controlled by a stimulus such as pH or temperature. The technique is demonstrated without polymer using the isoelectric point and pH as the stimulus. The polyelectrolyte chitosan produces faster sedimentation and clearer supernatants as a pH sensitive flocculant. Methylcellulose is an effective temperature sensitive flocculant. The sediment bed volumes can be reduced by between 10 and 45% depending upon the conditions which, as yet, have not been fully optimized.Brownian motion and small particle mass produce very slow sedimentation of colloidal particles dispersed in a liquid (such as water), making removal of these particles from the liquid a difficult operation. It is common practice that the particles are aggregated to facilitate more rapid settling and easy removal of the solids by gravity It is well known that the solution chemistry controls the interactions between individual particles Thus, the solution conditions that optimize sedimentation and consolidation are mutually exclusive. In usual industrial practice both sedimentation and consolidation occur while there is an attraction between individual particles. Usually sedimentation is optimized with less consideration of the consolidation. The aim of this paper is to communicate a novel solid/liquid separation method A zircon powder (>98% pure) was obtained from Opacfine, Australia. It had a density of 4.4 gm cm Low molecular weight (about 150,000 g/mol) chitosan (<1% insoluble mater and <2% residue on ignition) was purchased from Fluka. The chitosan was dissolved as a 1 weight percent solution in a 1 mol/L acetic acid solution in distilled water adjusted to pH 4 with HCl. The chitosan was allowed to dissolve for more than three days. Chitosan is positively charged at low pH, but looses its charge as pH is increased above neutral. When it looses its charge it becomes hydrophobic and is only sparingly soluble in water Initially the polymer concentration, temperature and pH were determined for each combination of polymer and particle to produce a stable repulsive particle suspension. Suspensions with various pH values and polymer concentrations were prepared and left to sediment in a 60 ml glass test tube for 24 h. Suspensions which continued to occupy nearly all of the tube volume for more than 24 h and where there was no distinction between a well formed sediment bed and clarified supernatant were designated as stable. Some combinations of particles, polymer and pH identified as producing stable suspensions are presented in column 4 of Three sets of experiments were conducted where the stimulus was changed from repulsive to attractive then back to repulsive in order to investigate the sedimentation, supernatant clarity and sediment density. The conditions presented are not necessarily the optimum conditions, but were chosen as conditions that illustrated the concept of improved dewatering by controlling the inter-particle interactions at each stage of the dewatering process. In each experiment the suspension was prepared at the pH, temperature, and polymer concentration listed in column 4 of A Horiba D24-E pH meter coupled with a Sensorex S200C epoxy sheared glass bulb pH probe was used to measure the pH. The pH was adjusted with analytic grade HCl and KOH. A simple method of controlling the inter-particle forces to be either attractive or repulsive uses the natural van der Waals interaction between particles to create the attraction and electrical double layer repulsion to create repulsion. This can be achieved by adjusting the pH to the iso-electric point to create attraction. The particles will aggregate and rapidly settle to the bottom of the container. Once the particles have formed a sediment bed and consolidated to the maximum extent that they will under the attractive force, the pH can be adjusted to a value away from the iso-electric point so that a repulsion will result. The sediment bed will then undergoes further consolidation over a period of time due to the repulsion.  Typically, small and slow settling aggregates are created when only the natural van der Waals attraction is used. Also the supernatant clarity of the aggregated suspensions in  Within a matter of 10 min the sediment occupied less than 25% of the tube volume for tubes 4 and 5 while the suspensions in tubes 1, 2, and 3 appeared to have virtually no sediment formation, and the suspension occupied nearly 100% of the tube volume. The sediments in tubes 4 and 5 continued to slowly consolidate. After about 15 to 30 min the rate of consolidation in tubes 4 and 5 slowed dramatically reaching a plateau level. (See After 24 h of sedimentation the sediment in tube 5 occupied 5.64 cm Another stimulus that can be used to reversibly change the interaction between particles from attraction to repulsion is temperature. One class of temperature sensitive polymers are soluble at low temperature but become insoluble and precipitate out of solution at higher temperature. The temperature at which the polymer becomes insoluble is known as the critical solution temperature (CST) In order to use temperature as a switch between repulsive and attractive particles, an appropriate amount of temperature sensitive polymer should be added to create a stable suspension at a temperature where the polymer is soluble. The temperature is then increased to that where the polymer becomes insoluble. The polymer will then become hydrophobic and there will be a driving force for the polymer to simultaneously adsorb on the particles as well as aggregate with other polymer molecules. Aggregation of particles will result and the aggregates will rapidly begin to settle. After the sediment has formed, the temperature can then be reduced to that where the polymer is again soluble. Under these conditions the particles will be made to become repulsive and additional water can be recovered from the dewatered product.  The suspensions without any polymer (tubes 1 and 2) remained stable for a period of several days at both room temperature and elevated temperature. The suspension containing 1 wt% methylcellulose remained stable at room temperature for several days (tube 3). As shown in Significant reduction in sediment volume and sediment moisture can be obtained by using a stimulus to control the interactions between particles in suspension. Initial aggregation of the suspension results in rapid sedimentation. Creating repulsion between particles within the sediment bed results in additional consolidation over a period of time and reduced sediment volume and moisture. Stimuli suitable to reversibly switch the particle interactions from repulsion to attraction include pH and temperature. Moderate (10–15%) reductions in sediment volume can be achieved using only electrical double layer repulsion and van der Waals attraction. Faster settling times, more significant reductions in sediment volume (up to 45%) and clearer supernatants result when a polyelectrolyte such as chitosan is used to aid in the dewatering. Finally, with the aid of a polymer such as methylcellulose temperature may be used as a switch mechanism, although in this case the sediment volume reduction is only moderate (about 10%) and the supernatant is not completely clear. Potentially the method could be used in improving solid/liquid separations in the mineral processing industry for example. One application would be to operate the thickener under conditions of attraction and the tailings pond under repulsion. The two unit operations could be operated under different pH or temperatures. Another application would be to operate a thickener with a temperature gradient from the top (clarifying zone) to the bottom (sediment bed). In practice this may prove more difficult than the first proposed application. Thanks to my colleagues Simon Biggs, Yaode Yan, and Graeme Jameson who helped me develop the concept of stimulant sensitive flocculation, and to my students Maxine Gabriel, Steve Mohr, Todd Woodward, and Carola Sepulveda who helped with some of the initial experimentation. Financial support was provided by the Australian Research Council through the Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes.