This study investigated the effects of cooling rate during solidification, heat treatment, and the addition of Mn and Sr on the formation of intermetallic phases in Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys. Microstructures were monitored using optical microscopy and EPMA techniques. The results reveal that the volume fractions of intermetallic phases are generally much lower in the furnace-cooled samples than in the air-cooled ones due to the dissolution of the β-AlFeSi and Al2Cu phases during slow cooling at critical dissolution temperatures. Strontium additions increased the volume fraction of the Al2Cu phase in the as-cast conditions at low and high cooling rates, as well as at varying ranges of Mn levels. Platelets of the β-AlFeSi phase were to be observed in the microstructure of the as-cast air-cooled samples with a DAS of 40μm at both Mn levels, while none of these particles were to be found in the furnace-cooled samples with a DAS of 120μm. Sludge particles were observed in almost all of the air-cooled alloys with sludge factors of between 1.4 and 1.9. These particles, however, were not observed in the furnace-cooled alloys with similar sludge factors. Solution heat treatment coarsens the Si particles in the non-modified alloys under both sets of cooling conditions studied. In the Sr-modified alloys, solution treatment has varied effects depending on the cooling rate and the level of Mn present.Aluminum–silicon (Al–Si) alloys are the most important of the aluminum casting alloys mainly because of high fluidity, low shrinkage in casting, high corrosion resistance, good weldability, easy brazing and low coefficient of thermal expansion. These alloys are extensively used in the automotive industry in areas such as vehicle weight reduction and fuel economy improvement The production of cast Al–Si alloys displaying improved quality, Commercial alloys are known to contain Fe impurities in the form of intermetallic phase, with Al and Si, or certain other elements, thereby comprising an important portion of the microstructure of Al–Si alloys. Particles formed during casting may negatively influence the material properties either during subsequent processing steps of the material or when the manufactured material part is put into service. It has been proposed that an increased solidification rate, Sr addition and/or the presence of transition elements will promote the development of the more compact, less harmful α-Al Manganese is the most common alloying element used as an addition to neutralize the effect of iron and to modify the morphology and type of the intermetallic phases The alloying elements such as copper and magnesium determine which constituents will precipitate. Copper is another important alloying addition made to aluminum because of its observable solubility and marked strengthening effect. Consequently, many commercial alloys contain Cu as either the major addition or as one of the principal alloying elements. Copper is frequently used in combination with magnesium, thereby improving the aging characteristics of the alloys The morphology of eutectic silicon in the Al–Si alloys has a major influence on mechanical and manufacturing properties. The structural modifications of Si particles may be obtained: (1) by the addition of chemical modifiers, (2) by the use of high cooling rates and (3) by solution treatment The research described herein aims at evaluating the effects of Mn and Sr additions, cooling rate during solidification, as well as heat treatment on the microstructure of Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys. The study is devoted to examining the effects of these parameters on the stability and volume fraction of the intermetallic phases. The Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys were melted in a 7-kg capacity silicon carbide crucible using an electrical resistance furnace. The melting temperature was maintained at 720 All melts were degassed using pure, dry argon injected into the melt for ∼15 Specimens for solution heat treatment (25 For metallographic examination, samples were sectioned off from each specimen, then mounted and polished. The microstructure was analyzed using an Olympus PMG3 optical microscope. The characteristics of eutectic Si particles, including area, length, aspect ratio, roundness and density, were measured and quantified using a Leco 2001 image analyzer system in conjunction with the optical microscope. For each sample, 50 fields at a magnification of 500× were examined, so as to cover the entire sample surface. The various phases observed in the samples were identified by means of electron probe microanalysis (EPMA) together with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) and wavelength dispersive spectroanalysis (WDS). The volume fraction of the phases was determined using a NORAN Instruments microanalyzer operating at 15 The microstructures of the Al–11Si–2.5Cu–Mg alloys used in the present study contain mainly α-Al, eutectic Si, and Fe- and Cu-intermetallic phases. Of relevant interest to the investigation are the characteristics of intermetallics and Si-particles as affected by the cooling rate during solidification, by the solution treatment, and by additions of Mn and Sr. The results obtained will be discussed in the following subsections. The main intermetallics in these alloys are Al  The volume fraction of Fe-intermetallics increases with the Mn level in the as-cast air-cooled samples, as can be observed in In the heat-treated air-cooled samples, the dissolution of intermetallics may be observed after solution heat treatment, where the volume fraction of Fe-intermetallics decreases. The dissolution of the β-AlFeSi particles in the Mn-containing alloys and the associated variations in the volume fraction of Fe-intermetallics may be explained in terms of low solubility of Fe in solid aluminum is low (∼0.052% at 655 This dissolution is more pronounced in the low-Mn alloys (E1T, E2T and E3T) and more evident in the Sr-modified alloys (E2T and E3T), as will be demonstrated through a comparison of In the case of heat-treated furnace-cooled samples, it can be observed that heat treatment causes a slight decrease in the volume fraction of Fe-base intermetallics in 0.65% Mn-containing alloys compared to the decrease reported for alloys containing 0.45% Mn, as shown in According to a number of authors, the addition of Mn stabilizes the compacted Chinese script morphology phases According to Bäckerud and Chai In the present study, the Mn was added with Mn/Fe ratios in the range of 0.9–1.8. It is therefore expected that according to the above research, only the Chinese script phases will display any stability in the microstructure. The results show that the high-Mn/Fe ratios are not sufficient to produce complete stability in the α-AlFeSi phase compared to the β-AlFeSi phase at the cooling rates studied. In alloys containing high levels of Si, the composition of the sludge phases may be expressed as α-Al  It would appear that the sludge forms in the relevant alloys at lower sludge factors of 1.4–1.9 in the air-cooled samples with a DAS of 40 It was also observed that, in alloys containing sludge, the α-AlFeSi phases form mainly within the α-Al phase, as shown in The morphology of eutectic Si plays a vital role in determining the mechanical properties of Al–Si alloys. The density of Si particles per unit area is generally much higher in the air-cooled samples than it is in the furnace-cooled ones, as given in The density of Si particles increases with the addition of Sr in all the alloy conditions studied ( For furnace-cooled alloys, the increase in Sr level increases the Si-particle density in the as-cast samples, The mean distance between Si particles, It should be noted that the measures in Meyer’s equation are for Si particles in the interdendritic regions. In the non-modified condition, solution heat treatment increases It will be observed that, more often than not, the Si particles in the air-cooled samples are more rounded than in the furnace-cooled samples. The non-modified samples contain Si particles which display a low roundness ratio, whereas the Sr-modified samples contain particles with a relatively higher roundness ratio in both the as-cast and solution-treated conditions. As may be seen from Solution heat treatment increases the degree of particle roundness, especially in the Sr-modified sample, as may be seen from In the furnace-cooled samples, solution heat treatment increases the roundness of particles in the low-Mn alloys. This effect decreases with an increase in the Sr level in the high-Mn alloys ( The aspect ratios of Si particles are observed to be lower in the Sr-modified alloys than they are in the non-modified ones; these are thus 2.63 in the non-modified E1 alloy and 2.26 and 2.21 in the E2 and E3 modified alloys, respectively. The ratio is also lower in the air-cooled samples than it is in the furnace-cooled ones ( This lower ratio is evident from the difference seen between the aspect ratios of the as-cast structures of the H1 and H3 alloys (2.94 and 2.83, respectively) and the solution heat-treated samples (2.83 and 2.40, respectively). This difference is consistent with the results obtained by Gauthier et al. The average area of Si particles is higher in the furnace-cooled H alloys than in the air-cooled E alloys, as shown in It was also observed that the structure of the slowly cooled samples, Solution heat treatment has different effects on the Si-particle areas depending on whether it is applied to the non-modified or Sr-modified samples. In the non-modified samples, as a general rule, the solution treatment renders the Si particles coarser. This is evident in the E1T and H1T samples, compared to the E1 and H1 samples, where the particle areas are 57.39, 54.89, 36.83 and 47.77 Increasing the Mn level is known to raise the formation temperature of the Al(Fe,Mn)Si phases in the 380-type alloys which have more or less a similar composition to that of the alloys being investigated The dissolution of these phases increases the supersaturation of the matrix since additional Fe and Mn atoms are released into it. Both Mn and Fe atoms are known to tie up the vacancies in Al Variation in Si-particle length is a measure of modification, as well as a useful tool in characterizing the structural changes of Si particles and consequently for predicting the material properties. The Si-particle length in the non-modified samples is greater than it is in the Sr-modified samples for both the as-cast and the solution-treated conditions, as well as for air- and furnace-cooled samples ( The level of Sr also plays a role here, in that the higher the Sr level, the shorter the Si particles. This fact is best represented by the variation in particle length from 17.18 The Si-particle lengths are generally greater and less homogeneous in the furnace-cooled samples than in the air-cooled samples. This is similar to the case of Si-particle areas as discussed previously. The low cooling rate increases the particle size and is likely to have a different effect on the dispersal of particle lengths, so that Si particles in the slowly cooled samples become less homogeneous, as may be seen from the standard deviations provided in In air-cooled samples, such as the E alloys, the solution treatment increases the length of Si particles in the non-modified condition and, by contrast, decreases their length in the Sr-modified condition ( Solution heat treatment has different effects on the length of Si particles in the furnace-cooled samples. The treatment decreases the length of the particles in the high-Mn-containing alloy (H4T With regard to the Sr-modified alloys, solution treatment decreases the Si-particle length in the low-Mn alloys and increases it in the high-Mn alloys. Consequently, the particle lengths decrease from 15.37 to 6.42, and 11.15 to 6.68 Based on the present work, the following main conclusions may be drawn. The volume fractions of intermetallic phases are generally much lower in furnace-cooled samples compared to air-cooled samples as a result of the dissolution of the β-AlFeSi and Al The dissolution of Fe-intermetallics, mainly β-AlFeSi, takes place during heat treatment of the air-cooled samples, where a decrease in volume fraction is observed only in the low-Mn alloys as opposed to an increase in the high-Mn alloys. Platelets of the β-AlFeSi phase were to be observed in the microstructure of the as-cast air-cooled samples with a DAS of 40 In the furnace-cooled alloys, the changes in Si-particle density resulting from solution treatment are dependent to a large extent on the Mn level rather than on the Sr level, with lower density manifesting in the low-Mn alloys and higher density in the high-Mn alloys. In the air-cooled alloys, solution treatment increases the particle roundness in the Sr-modified samples and has no effect on the non-modified ones. In the furnace-cooled samples, solution treatment increases the roundness of particles in the low-Mn alloys (0.45% Mn). This effect decreases with an increase in the Sr level in the high-Mn alloys (0.65% Mn) so that the roundness begins to diminish at 300 Solution treatment coarsens the Si particles in the non-modified alloys in both the cooling conditions investigated. In the Sr-modified alloys, solution heat treatment has different effects depending on cooling rate and Mn level, while it increases the Si-particle area slightly for the air-cooled samples. In the furnace-cooled samples, however, solution treatment decreases the Si-particle area significantly in alloys containing 0.45% Mn and increases it in those containing 0.65% Mn. The Si-particle lengths are generally greater and less homogeneous in the furnace-cooled samples than in the air-cooled ones. Solution treatment coarsens these particles and leads to spheroidization. The response to spheroidization is higher in the Sr-modified alloys and the response to coarsening is higher in the non-modified alloys. High-Mn levels promote coarsening and provide the impetus for a resistance to the spheroidization of Si particles, while low-Mn levels do the opposite. Financial support received from the General Motors Powertrain Group is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also wish to thank the Microanalysis Laboratory, Department of Geoscience, (Earth and Planetary Sciences), at McGill University for carrying out the quantitative image analyses. The authors also would like to thank Dr. W. Khalifa of Faculty of Engineering, Cairo University, Egypt for his help with the present work.