Natural bone consists of natural polymers, collagen fibers and nanocrystals of minerals, mainly nano-hydroxyapatite (n-HA). Bone cells, which maintain the activities and metabolism of bone, are supported by and interact with this organic–inorganic hybrid matrix in nature. Artificial bone tissue scaffolds based on natural hybrids of cellulose acetate (CA) and nano-hydroxyapatite (n-HA) were fabricated in a bio-mimicking 3D matrix architecture using a single step nanomanufacturing technique and were used for in-vitro bone regeneration studies for up to 14days. Osteoblasts grown on these scaffolds were found to interact strongly with the HA nanoclusters that were uniformly distributed on the CA fibers, promoting cell elongation, growth and phenotype retention. Hexagonal apatite crystals were shown to crystallize on the n-HA seeds. The natural, open, hybrid, 3D nanoscaffolds thus appear to be most promising bone repair agents.Nano-hydroxyapatite (n-HA) is a popular material for use in bone regeneration. HA is the major mineral constituent of the natural bone, known for its excellent bioactivity, biocompatibility and osteoconductivity  Scaffolds were seeded into wells of a 24-well tissue culture plates. Stainless steel retaining rings (snap rings) [McMaster-Carr #9158OA161] were used to secure the scaffolds in the bottom of the wells. Scaffolds were sterilized by incubating with 70% ethanol for 30 The CellTiter 96® AQueous Assay uses the novel tetrazolium compound (MTS) and the electron coupling reagent, phenazine methosulfate (PMS). MTS is chemically reduced by cells into formazan, which is soluble in tissue culture medium. The measurement of the absorbance of the formazan can be carried out using 96 well microplates at 492 The metabolic activity of cells was monitored using a tetrazolium compound (MTS) that is chemically reduced by metabolically active cells into formazan (CellTiter 96® Aqueous One Solution Cell Proliferation Assay, Promega, Madison, WI). The amount of formazan produced is an indicator of the cell viability. The measurement of formazan absorbance was performed in 96 well plates after several days of incubation. Standard curves were prepared by diluting a series of cell suspensions from 15.7 Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® dsDNA reagent is an ultra sensitive fluorescent nucleic acid stain for quantitating double-stranded DNA (dsDNA) in solution (quantitation of relative cell number). The proliferative ability of cells was studied using a fluorescent nucleic acid dye that quantifies double stranded DNA (dsDNA) (Quant-iT™ PicoGreen® Kit, Invitrogen). A standard curve was prepared using 1 Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) is an osteoblast phenotypic marker. After cells were cultured for a particular period, the scaffolds were transferred to fresh wells and all wells were rinsed with PBS 2 This technique is for demonstrating deposits of calcium or calcium salt so it is not specific for the calcium ion itself. Samples were fixed with 100% ethanol for 30 To evaluate cell morphology on the scaffolds, samples were prepared for EM staining. Samples were washed 2 times with PBS and fixed with 2.5% gluteraldeyde [Sigma] for 2 The continuous CA-HA composite electrospun fibers have ultrafine fiber diameters of about 300 Cell differentiation and functional activity of osteoblasts were evaluated using the Alkalinephosphatase (ALP) expression. ALP activity is recognized as an important marker of an osteogenic phenotype, so its expression can be used to evaluate the bone forming potential of the cells The detection of mineralization (Von Kossa staining) was performed on days 1, 7, and 14 after the seeding process started ( Samples were also collected for electron microscopy to examine cell spreading and morphology and to assess cell fiber interactions. The cells exposed to the nano scaffolds interacted with multiple fibers. Anchoring sites for cell attachment to the fibers were visualized by SEM. Furthermore, the nanoclusters of hydroxyapatite mineral were consistently located at the edge of cells, which provides additional evidence that they act as anchoring sites for cell attachment to the fibrous hybrids. This improvement in cell adhesion and growth are deemed to the biological role of HA.  Osteoblasts are anchorage-dependent cells whose attachment to scaffolds depends on the relatively high surface area and the porosity of the scaffold. The electrospinning process produces fibers with small diameters and correspondingly high surface area-to-volume ratios that are suitable for osteoblast attachment, while allowing for cell migration. The mechanisms responsible for interactions between cells including osteoblasts and the engineered fibers are partially understood. Relatively abundant proteins such as fibronectin, laminin, vitronectin, and collagen may first adsorb to a material HA is also known for its direct involvement in bone cell differentiation and mineralization processes Finally, pores found in tissue-engineered scaffolds are the spaces in which cells reside In summary, by employing the electrospinning technique, ceramic–polymer nano-composites were successfully manufactured and applied in bone tissue engineering. CA-HA nano scaffolds were proved to promote favorable adhesion and growth of osteoblasts as well as to stimulate the cells to exhibit functional activity of bone cells. Overall, our studies suggest that both the morphology and structure of the CA-HA composite scaffolds play important roles in facilitating cell spreading and differentiation and enhance apatite mineralization. Based on our observations, the electrospun CA-HA nano scaffolds are considered as a promising candidate for bone tissue engineering application. Funding for this work was provided by the