Carbon dioxide sequestration by a pH-swing carbonation process was considered in this work. A multi-step aqueous process is described for the fractional precipitation of magnesium carbonate and other minerals in an aqueous system at room temperature and atmospheric pressure. With the aim to achieve higher purity and deliver more valuable mineral products, the process was split into four steps. The first step consists of Mg leaching from the magnesium silicate in a stirred vessel using 1M HCl at 80°C, followed by a three step precipitation in reactors in sequence to remove Fe(OH)3, then Fe(OH)2 and other divalent ions, and finally MgCO3 nucleation and growth. Hydrated magnesium carbonate [MgCO3∙3H2O, nesquehonite] crystals were confirmed using X-ray diffraction (XRD) as final products. The optimal pH of precipitation reactors based on the maximum solid purity and production was determined by carrying out detailed mass balance. The maximum productivity and highest purity for nesquehonite were found to be dependent on pH values for the two last steps. The results also demonstrated that the process is optimized at pH9 and 10 for the second and third step of precipitation, respectively. The highest carbonation efficiency expressed as the conversion of Mg ions to magnesium carbonate reached 82.5 wt %. The maximum magnesium content in the final product was 99.21 wt % of MgO when the second precipitation reactor pH was equal to 9. This experimental study demonstrates that carbon dioxide sequestration requires at least 3.74 times the weight of ore to provide the Mg for mineral production. This confirms the possibility to use this process route for CO2 mitigation.Carbon sequestration has been identified as one of the future solutions to mitigate increased CO Due to environmental and economic goals, carbon capture and utilization (CCU) have received more attention recently. Despite extensive research efforts, this process still faces many challenges. Further scientific work in this area is aimed towards solving some of the limitations of carbonation processes including low efficiency, high process costs, slow extraction kinetics, high energy consumption and unfavourable net CO Carbon sequestration can take place in dry and aqueous conditions. To the best of our knowledge, the presence of water provides faster carbonation reaction kinetic as well as enhanced levels of conversion ( Olivine and serpentine deposits are large enough to fix anthropogenic CO Carbonation is carried out in separate stage after extraction. Carbon sequestration products could be sent back to the mines of origin to restore the pre-existing landscape. To support the disposal capacity of carbon sequestration a land reclamation project could use the product and act as product storage. The carbon dioxide mineral sequestration process seems to be an attractive and achievable option for carbon dioxide storage that can produce value-added materials. It is a credible solution to reduce carbon sequestration costs. Producing high purity product from the carbonation process can make mineralization a more economically feasible process ( It was found that different classes of magnesium carbonate with different morphology can be precipitated from extraction solution via reaction with carbon sources ( Supersaturation is the driving force for nucleation and growth of the nesquehonite crystals ( Nesquehonite is an effective flame retardant, as is to be expected from its large volatile and endothermic content, but suffers from a relatively low decomposition temperature. It is thermodynamically stable and the molecular structure remains unaffected by temperature up to 370 In previous research ( In this work, a four stage mineral carbonation process in the aqueous phase was studied. In order to minimize the energy and material consumption, the scope of the study focuses on finding the optimum pH at each stage for maximum productivity and purity of the final product produced from the carbonation reaction. The silicate mineral used in this study was magnesium silicate ore purchased from Quebec, Canada. The overall experimental work consisted of the following stages: the dissolution of mineral solid sample with the production of MgCl the removal of the impurities from Filtrate 1 by a pH-swing using sodium hydroxide producing Filtrate 2 after removing Fe The removal of Fe The carbonation of Filtrate 3 with Na In the extraction experiment, 40 After the dissolution experiments, Filtrate 1 was used for the first precipitation step which is the impurities removal by adding 1 The source of carbon dioxide was from carbon dioxide gas that had been captured by contacting the gas with an alkaline solution (NaOH) to produce sodium carbonate ( In the final stage, the carbonate of the base (1 All precipitation reactors were operated under semi batch condition. In the previous work ( After finding the optimum value for pH In order to find the conversion for each ion it is important to obtain an accurate mass balance. The determination of the content of Mg and Fe ions in the dissolution liquid was carried out by sampling an aliquot of 0.5 In this work, the Mg removal efficiency during the three stage precipitation process was calculated based on the mass balance between the content of Mg in the initial leachate and that of the remaining Mg in the final solution as expressed in Eq. Here, C The pH was measured using a METTLER TOLEDO SevenEasy pH meter (S20). Solid samples were analysed by TC (total carbon analyser, SHIMADZU, TOC-V Thermogravimetric and differential thermal analyses (TG-DTA) were conducted on the final carbonated product (P The efficiency of the mineralization process has been calculated by measuring the amount of carbonated Mg and the residual Mg in the final solution. The average milled ore particle diameters were between 10 and 50 During the extraction, solid particles release Mg, Fe ions and other mineral elements into aqueous solution. The residual solids are composed mostly of silica. XRF analysis shows that 82.9 wt % of solid residue in the first step is SiO The pH at the end of the extraction reaction is about 0.58. In the first step for precipitation, sodium hydroxide (NaOH) was gradually added to the leachate solution from extraction. The concentration during the feeding process is not a good reference for judgment because the mother liquor volume increases along with the increasing pH. The conversion for each ion was calculated using mass balance. About 62 wt % of the iron from the mother liquor is precipitated when the pH is adjusted up to 5 in the first precipitation reactor while only 14 wt % of the total Mg ions in the mother liquor is precipitated in this step indicating that the impurities precipitated faster than magnesium in the solution when the pH increased gradually. In order to achieve a purer end product containing magnesium carbonate, it is better to make the impurities precipitate in earlier stages to remove them first. The experimental results show that the effect of the base when pH is below 5 is more significant on iron precipitation in comparison with magnesium. It needed approximately an additional 25 vol % of base to increase the pH up to 5 where only 14 wt % of total magnesium and 62 wt % of iron ions were removed by precipitation. In the previous work ( XRF analysis of the first step precipitates after washing (appears to remove few soluble Mg The reaction rate is rapid in this step. According to Most Fe It was observed that only 0.05 In order to consider the parameters governing process efficiency the solid products were obtained and analysed with XRF after drying to determine the solid compositions. The results are shown in It was observed in the experiments that the amount of sodium carbonate needed in the fourth reactor for magnesium carbonate precipitate decreased when the pH As shown in The influence of alkalinity on the precipitation reaction and magnesium and iron mass transfer from liquid to solid significantly affects material purity and quantity of production. The pH was controlled to ensure the isolated precipitation of iron hydroxide without formation of magnesium carbonate. Increasing the quality and quantity of the products can improve the application of value-added material and increase the capability of marketing for mineralization industry. It could cover the CO After finding the optimum pH In the final step, needle like particles exhibiting smooth surfaces (nesquehonite Mg  About 0.25 to 0.3 (vol Na To determine the carbon sequestration potential, the pure carbonated product resultant of optimum condition was dried, and its CO The thermal measurements and thermogravimetry (TG) were carried out using TGA machine. The pure P The thermal decomposition of nesquehonite, during heating cycle, demonstrated that at temperatures below 350 All peaks in XRD pattern of the obtained sample of P Narrow peaks reflect the high degree of crystalinity of the precipitate. The crystal properties depend on precipitation conditions. No peak for other impurities is observed, indicating that the obtained magnesium carbonate has high purity. In designed experiments supersaturation was controlled by addition method. SEM images of final product showed that some parts of the precipitated solid in the last reactor contain an amorphous phase. Needle like crystals in The multi-step aqueous carbonation process was carried out by carefully controlling the pH of the solution in each precipitation step. The subsequent precipitations produce essentially two distinct products: iron hydroxide and magnesium carbonate. Next, specific operating conditions were sought to allow the precipitation of impurities and magnesium separately rather than as a mixture. Experimental synthesis of magnesium carbonate from highly concentrated magnesium solutions showed that pH We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the