Pipe wear in paste backfill mining operations represents a great cost to mining companies. The replacement of prematurely worn pipes results in the shut down of the entire paste system. Abrasion testing performed on various pipe lining samples yielded both quantitative and qualitative data. Both standard and non-standard methods were explored during testing. The pipe materials are ranked by their relative wear resistance as well as energy per unit mass loss. The latter may allow for better prediction of pipe wear, this in turn could prove worthwhile when scheduling maintenance downtime for such a system where cost savings would be beneficial.Paste backfill is for safe storage of tailings underground, and provides the required surface support and reduces the footprint of the surface tailings storage area, if any. Beyond these advantages, the remaining ore can be mined from pillars that were initially left in place to support the mine ( Tailings exiting the mill are sent to the paste plant where they are combined with various additives and chemicals. This paste, when pumped underground and set, will have the desired strength to support the rock above. The paste, depending on the type of mineral present contains over 47 Abrasive wear in pipes results when solids make up a large percentage of the fluid being transported. These particles interact with each other, the fluid media and the pipe walls. This can be described by a measured mass of pipe lost and an energy term calculated from the applied force a particle is exposed to and the distance the particle slides along the pipe wall ( This can all be modeled experimentally in a laboratory using the abrasion wheel test where the abrasive wear is determined as a function of the applied force on the wheel, the test specimen’s hardness and density, the abrasion angle of the abrasive used and the distance travelled ( Testing the wear resistance of pipe lining samples was completed using a modified version of the ASTM G65-04 This machine was originally developed for the Eight possible pipe materials were tested to determine which should be used to replace the current steel pipe. Initial tests were performed with Ottawa Foundry Sand used as the abrasive. As with all previous testing, the abrasive is sized to fit the size fraction −20 to +50 Tyler Screen Numbers. The pipe samples were sized to 50 The abrasive was loaded into the machine, and introduced into the test chamber forming a flowing curtain between the rotating wheel and the sample. A load was applied to the sample such that the sample experiences a predetermined force against the wheel. The sample test was run for 2 In addition to these tests, four samples were selected and tested with abrasives supplied by the mining company; these abrasives were constituents of their current and proposed paste mixture. The names of the abrasives and pipe samples for these extra tests are located in the tables below (see The Supplied Sand was run within the same size distribution as the Ottawa Foundry Sand. The tailing samples, unfortunately, did not fit this size distribution; they were too fine to flow into the test chamber with gravity alone, a slurry mixture had to be created. The slurry was just over 40% solids by mass; this allowed the abrasive to flow into the test chamber with greater ease.  Most proposed pipe materials outperformed the current pipe material, the Kalprotect samples were more abrasion resistant than the current pipe material, also they occupied four of the top six rankings.  With abrasion being the primary source of wear in paste backfill systems, proper design and selection of materials will be of critical importance. The pipe material will be directly responsible for the availability of the paste backfill system. The tests performed with the steel wheel abrasion machine replicated the abrasive wear phenomenon present in the paste backfill piping system. Having determined experimentally pipe lining material wear rates, it is possible to use these rates to estimate liner performance in the field. However, further modeling and validation work is required in order to use this experimental data to predict pipe system wear life. Based on the experience predicting steel media wear in tumbling mills, it is conceivable to tie these wear rates with paste pipe flow to the development of pipe liner wear model that could predict wear and help schedule downtime for maintenance. Once validated against industrial data, such a model could contribute to reducing overall paste backfill operating costs.