Nisin and curcumin loaded (NCL) nanomats having 172 nm mean diameter were successfully fabricated. The effect of NCL nanomats in terms of limitation of Total Mesophilic Aerobic (TMAB) and Lactic acid bacteria (LAB) in fish fillets was tested during the analysis period. On the 4th day, while TMAB load of C was 6.61 log CFU g−1, that of the sample coated with NCL nanomats was found to be 3.28 log CFU g−1. TMAB load of control samples reached above 6 log CFU g−1 on the 4th day of cold storage, TMAB load of fish samples coated with nanomats reached the same level up to the 12th day. The shelf life of coated fillets was extended to 12 day. 3–4 logarithmic decrease was obtained in LAB count by NCL nanomats during the analysis period. On the 4th storage day, the hardness value of C sample decreased 21% compared to NCL samples. All sensory attributes of C samples were acceptable by the 4th day of the storage; while sensory attributes of NCL samples were acceptable by the 10th day of storage. The study revealed that nisin and curcumin loaded nanomats could be effectively used to improve the quality of fish fillets.Nanotechnological applications may offer a potential alternative to protect antimicrobials, enhancing their efficacy and stability for food application. Among the various approaches electrospinning for the preparation of nano-scale materials is one of the most attractive methods ( Nisin used in more than 40 countries as antimicrobial agent in foods is a cationic polypeptide produced by certain strains of Curcumin is a natural polyphenolic bioactive ingredient obtained from the dry rhizomes of In the study, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) which is biodegradable polymer was used as a polymer to produce nanomats. PVA has been used since the early 1930s in a wide range of commercial and food applications due to good film-forming property ( All chemicals used were of analytical grade. PVA, nisin from The dope solutions (10 mL) were prepared by a single solvent system. 0.8 g nisin was dissolved in 1 mL pure water containing 0.1 N HCl. 0.001 g of curcumin is added to this solution and mixed with magnetic stirrer until a completely homogeneous mixture is obtained. PVA solution was prepared by dissolving the PVA in pure water (20% w/v) with heating and under constant stirring for 3 h. 10 mL dope solution with nisin and PVA was fitted with a syringe. The flow rate of the electrospinning dope solution was 1.2 mL h The morphology of nanomats was observed by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) (Zeiss Supra 50 VP, Oberkochen, Germany). The electrospun nanomats were coated under vacuum and the working conditions were the acceding voltage 5 kV, working distance 8 mm with magnifications of 150.00×. The thermal stability of nanomats was investigated by differential scanning calorimeter analysis (DSC, PerkinElmer DSC 8000). Samples were placed in an aluminium pan which was then sealed and melting point and enthalpy change was determined using empty pan as a reference. The heating rate was 10 °C min The electrospinning solution containing nisin and curcumin was collected onto the aluminum foil. For surface-coating process, these aluminium foils were used. Fish fillets (40 ± 2 g) were randomly separated into two groups (n = 18 fillet in each group). The first group was untreated and used as the control (C). The fillets of the second group were treated with nisin and curcumin loaded nanomats (NCL). Approximately 1.5 × 10 At each sampling interval, 10 g-portion from the center of the fillets was homogenized with sterile peptone water, in a Stomacher 400 (Colworth, London, UK) for 1 min. Appropriate serial dilutions (10 The hardness of fish fillets was measured by using a TA.XT Plus Texture analyzer (Stable Micro Systems, Ltd., Surrey, UK), equipped with a specific cylindrical probe (P/25). Samples were compressed under the following conditions, a pre-test speed of 2.0 mm s Color analysis of fish fillets was performed by using a colorimeter (Model CR-400, Konica Minolta Sensing, Inc., Osaka, Japan). The lightness ( Each fish fillet sample was evaluated by a trained 10-member panelist. The sensory questionnaires measured intensity on a 9-point points hedonic scale (weak to strong) for the following attributes odor, texture and overall acceptance. In this sense, 1, 4, 5, and 9 determine dislike extremely, dislike slightly, neither like nor dislike (neutral) and like extremely, respectively ( Data were analyzed using JMP version 9.0.2 (SAS Institute, Inc., Cary, USA). All data were reported as means ± SD (standard deviation). Differences among means were evaluated using Tukey's multiple range tests at a significance level of The morphology of nanomats was evaluated by using SEM. The SEM images of the nanomats showed that the formation of PVA based nisin and curcumin loaded nanomats ( Thermal characteristics of materials used in food technology are crucial properties to understand the thermal behaviour and to know the suitability of these materials to thermal processing. With this respect, we performed DSC analysis in the nisin and curcumin loaded nanomats, and The results of TMAB counts are given in LAB constituing a large group of non sporulating Gram positive, rods and cocci ( Freshness is one of the most significant properties affecting the perception of consumers and it is directly linked to appearance, texture, and taste. The hardness is important quality parameter to determine the freshness of fish. With the texture measurement, the freshness of fish can be directly evaluated ( Color is an important factor in order to determine the fish quality. As stated by Sensory analysis results are given in The texture attribute showed a similar trend to that of odor attribute for the fish fillets coated with NCL nanomats. Instrumental texture results and sensory texture scores were consistent. Panelists evaluated the fish fillet with finger, the firmer fillet was evaluated as a better and it gained the higher score. On the 2nd day, the panelists rated the color of NCL samples higher ( Nisin and curcumin loaded nanomats were successfully produced by using a electrospinning dope solution. SEM images confirmed successful formation of nanomats. This study aimed to obtain high antimicrobial activity with less nano-materials for the fish fillets. In this regard, the nanotechnology application effectively improved the acceptability of the fish fillets during cold storage period. The authors would like to thank the