Nanoindentation creep behaviour of nickel at room temperature has been modeled based on the obstacle-controlled dislocation glide mechanism. Using the model, the effects of two important materials parameters viz. the activation free energy required by dislocation to overcome an obstacle without any aid from external stress, ΔF and the athermal flow strength, τ
                     0, which is the flow strength of solids at 0K are systematically studied. It has been found that ΔF plays a dominant role in room temperature creep properties of nickel. The role of ΔF is particularly dominant in determining the time dependent deformation. On the other hand, role of τ
                     0 is more crucial in the case of instantaneous deformation.With the increasing downscaling of microelectronic devices and the development of microelectro mechanical systems (MEMS), understanding of the mechanical properties of materials at a small volume is becoming very important. Nanoindentation is a unique technique that can provide information on both elastic and plastic properties from a very small volume, typically several tens of nanometers to several hundreds of nanometers across. Studies show that indentation creep i.e., plastic deformation under a constant load can be more significant at submicroscopic than at macroscopic depths Indentation creep has been studied by a number of researchers The formalism of indentation creep used in the present study is essentially based on that suggested earlier Strain rate produced by mobile dislocations of density, Shear stress is related to hardness, Hull and Bacon  The effect of activation energy for dislocation glide, Δ Data extracted from The model used in the present study was applied to nanoindentation creep of vapour deposited nickel film by Pollock et al. Both these parameters Implicit in the present model is the assumption that the nature of the obstacle does not change with deformation. However, with deformation at room temperature the obstacle density do change Obstacle controlled dislocation glide model has been used to investigate the effects of activation free energy required by dislocation to overcome an obstacle without any aid from external stress, Δ The author would like to thank Dr. Anisul Haque, IWFM, BUET for his kind help with the numerical solution.