The contribution of closed pores to total porosity in most cases exceeds 60%. It plays a critical role in gas storage and transport in coal seam. However, few studies about gas transport model considering the closed pores were reported. In this paper, we tried to construct a constitutive equation of coal considering the closed pore effect. Then, the model of gas transport in coal seam with closed pores was proposed, including gas diffusion between closed pores and open pores as well as gas seepage in fracture. Then, 4 cases were carried out to investigate the influence of various factors on the gas transport in coal seam. Results show that the total gas production decreased with the rising closed porosity, desorption time and stress, while increased with the initial permeability. Furthermore, the closed porosity and desorption time shows a remarkable effect on the contribution of pore to total gas production, followed by the initial permeability and stress. Then, their influence degree on gas pressure difference shows the same trends with that on gas production contribution. Furthermore, the stage characteristics of various curves were analyzed. Finally, the field data from gas extraction of Yangliu coal mine in Huaibei coalfield was used to validate our model, indicating that our model can match the field data better compared with the model without closed pores effect.Coal mine safety is one the most serious problems in China. In February 2019, National Coal Mine Safety Administration (NCMSA) reported that there were 224 coal mine accidents and 333 deaths in 2018. Among of them, mine gas disaster was still the first killer in mine safety production. For example, the coal and gas outburst caused 5 deaths and 5 injures in Didaoshenghe coal mine of Heilongjiang Province on May 4, 2018. Similarly, it caused 13 deaths and 7 injures due to a coal and gas outburst in Zimuga coal mine of Guizhou Province on August 6, 2018. In Liyuanba coal mine, the gas explosion made 5 deaths and 4 injures on October 15, 2018. Furthermore, from January 2012 to August 2017, there were 2645 coal mine accidents and 4798 deaths in China, including 265 mine gas disasters and the corresponding 1437 deaths, accounting for 10% and 30% respectively. Further, there were 105 mine gas disasters and the corresponding 508 deaths among the 239 major accidents and 1097 deaths, which accounts for 43.9% and 46.3% respectively. Furthermore, there were 66 major mega-accidents and 1096 deaths, including 41 mine gas disasters and the corresponding 749 deaths, accounting for 62.1% and 68.9% respectively. Therefore, it is undeniable that mine gas disaster is the “first killer” in mine production It is well known that, coal, as a kind of natural porous media, is composed of pore, fracture and coal skeleton However, it is noticed that all above models only considered the gas diffusion in open pores. Recently, some studies found that the closed pore is also an important component for coal pore/fracture system In this paper, the pore/fracture system is divided into 3 parts: closed pores, open pores and fracture. First, the influence of closed pores on the matrix deformation was considered. Then, the constitutive equation of coal was constructed taking into account the closed pores effect. Furthermore, the model of gas transport in coal seam was built, including the gas diffusion among closed pores, open pores and fracture, as well as the gas seepage in fracture. After that, the model was imported into COMSOL Multiphysics to investigate the influence of various factors on the gas transport in coal seam. Then, the mine gas extraction data from No.10 coal seam of Yangliu coal mine, Huaibei coalfield was used to validate this model, showing that our model can match the field data better than the model without closed pore effect. In this paper, the influence of closed pores on the gas transport is considered. As described in As described above, during the mine gas extraction process, the gas in closed pore diffuse to open pore and fracture due to the concentration gradient, which can be expressed as: The gas in closed pore is composed of adsorbed gas and free gas. Based on Langmuir equation In this work, the matrix pore is composed of closed pore and open pore. Therefore, Langmuir volume constant can be defined as: Then, the mass transfer between closed pore and open pore as well as fracture can be defined as: Many works have reported the gas diffusion coefficient in coal Therefore, substituting Eq. Then, based on the ideal gas law Substituting Eqs. Therefore, Eq. Based on the mass balance law, the gas change in open pore can be expressed as where The gas in open pore includes adsorbed gas and free gas. Based on Langmuir equation, we get: As described above, Then, combining Eqs. Therefore, Eq. According to mass balance law As described above, we can get: Furthermore, according to Darcy’s law, we have: Combining Eqs. Furthermore, in order to import Eq. Eq. According to the dual-porosity effective stress law of porous media, the effective stress of coal seam can be defined as However, is this work, the coal seam is composed of closed pore, open pore, and fracture. A single matrix pore pressure cannot describe the difference between closed pore and open pore. Furthermore, the sorption-induced swelling stress was ignored in Eq. Therefore, Eq. Furthermore, the equilibrium differential equation can be expressed as Then, based on the poroelasticity, the constitutive equation of coal seam is: Then, combing Eqs. Some studies constructed the model of pore deformation according to liner elasticity theory It is generally believed that the pore deformation is regarded as small deformation. Therefore, the porosity can be defined as based on single-porosity model: Recently, some studies reconstructed the porosity governing equation based on dual-porosity effective stress law, which can be expressed as Furthermore, the coal seam was assumed to be under uniaxial compression and isothermal conditions, leading to However, this model ignored the influence of closed pore pressure and stress on the fracture porosity. Therefore, in this work, this model can be rewritten as: Then, the coal deformation can be defined as: Furthermore, Eq. Substituting Eq. Furthermore, it is generally believed that the permeability is controlled by the fracture porosity. Based on cubic equation, the permeability can be expressed as Therefore, combing Eqs. In this paper, a 2D model was carried out to investigate the influence of the closed pores on the gas production. The physical model is shown in As shown in  As shown in  As shown in  As shown in  It is generally believed that the closed porosity increases with the rising coal ranking. In this paper, our model was used to describe the mine gas extraction of No.10 coal seam in Yangliu coal mine, Huaibei city, Anhui province, China. The detailed coal mine background and borehole layout are shown in As shown in  The pore/fracture system is divided into 3 parts: closed pores, open pores and fracture. First, the constitutive equation of coal was constructed taking into account the closed pores effect. Furthermore, the model of gas transport in coal seam was built, including the gas diffusion between closed pores, open pores as well as fracture and gas seepage in fracture. The influence of various factors on the gas transport was investigated. Results showed that, the total gas production decreased with the rising closed porosity, desorption time and stress, while increased with the initial permeability. Furthermore, the closed porosity and desorption time shows a remarkable effect on contribution of pore to total gas production, followed by the initial permeability and stress. Moreover, their influence degree on gas pressure difference shows the same trends with that on the gas production contribution. Finally, the stage characteristics of various curves were analyzed. This work was supported by the Future Scientists Program of “Double First Rate” of In this paper, the 1075 working face of Yangliu coal mine, Huaibei coalfield, China was selected as the research area. The coal seam thickness is 2.85–3.50 m, the coal seam dip angle is 2–6°, and the maximum of gas pressure is about 2.65 MPa. In order to eliminate the risk of coal and gas outburst, the floor drainage roadway was carried out to extract the coal seam gas. For the mechanical roadway, 20 borehole stubs were carried out to extract the coal bed gas. As shown in 