Kaempferol (KEM) has been observed to stimulate Krt-14 protein which subsequently contributes to matrix maturation and mineralization in rat primary osteoblast cells. Incorporation of Krt-14 siRNA results in reduced mRNA and protein expression after 48h post transfection and remained low for 9days. At day 9 Krt-14 siRNA significantly reduced mineralization without concomitant change in the cell number. ColI and OCN gene expression was reduced in Krt-14 siRNA-treated osteoblast cells. Soluble osteocalcin and collagen levels were markedly decreased in conditioned medium as well as in acid-salt soluble cell-ECM layer treated with Krt-14 siRNA compared to control siRNA treated cells corroborated at the ultrastructral level by AFM. Further, knockdown of Krt-14 and inhibitors against AMPK and mTOR, repressed the activation of mTOR and mineralization attenuated by KEM confirmed the role of Krt-14 in mineralization. These findings strongly suggest that Krt-14 regulates osteoblast mineralization by organizing osteoblast derived ECM.Kaempferol (KEM) a natural flavonol stimulates cytokeratin-14 ( Cytoskeleton elements keratins belong to intermediate filament family Our previous study on osteoblast differentiation in response to KEM showed that KEM secured competent bone collagen mineralization in calvarial osteoblast cells   Further, to determine Further, to determine To determine whether Following the significant reduction of the mRNA level of Gene expressions data suggest that knockdown of Here we characterized how reduced  Mineralizing osteoblasts are under a constant demand of energy and Our results suggest that KEM augments osteoblastogenesis by increasing It is envisaged that KEM a natural flavonol serves as a phytoestrogen to regulate matrix maturation and mineralization Further, we determine osteoblast mineralization by analyzing expression of genes that were associated with an ordered progression of increasing assembly and deposition of ECM proteins in presence or absence of Osteoblastogenesis is an ordered progression of increasing assembly and deposition of ECM proteins, such as osteocalcin and type I collagen. Matrix mineralization is the ultimate step in bone formation. In line with this, our study shows that kaempferol has osteogenic potential and directly modulates All experiments were performed in accordance with IAEC (Institutional Animal Ethical Committee, New Delhi, Ref. No. IEAC/2013/19) guidelines. Experimental protocols were approved by CSIR-Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow. Cell culture medium and supplements were purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). All fine chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). siRNA was purchased from Qiagen and 1- to 2-day-old rat pups were used to harvest 20 to 35 calvaria for osteoblast culture. Calvaria were isolated, cleaned and digested with 0.1% collagenase and dispase by repeated digestion (15 Cell viability was determined by 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl) -2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT, Research Organic, Cleveland, USA) dye reduction assay Total RNA was extracted by homogenizing cells using 1 Total RNA was extracted by homogenizing cells using 1 At 80% confluency RCO's were trypsinized and 2 The AFM imaging was performed using a Multimode AFM (APER, Research Italy). The imaging was done in the air with a standard non-contact mode. Samples were prepared on the clean glass coverslip. The V-shaped standard narrow cantilever with length 125 We have determined surface fiber density index (SFDI) using AFM. SFDI index was used to determine cytoskeletal surface, higher index represents a flatter surface whereas low index represent smooth surface. SFDI index calculated using following formula Four candidate siRNAs for RCO's were seeded in 12-well plates (25,000 RCO's were grown to 60 to 70% confluence followed by exposure to various treatments of siC and si Rat primary osteoblast were incubated with siC and si Osteocalcin were determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay kits purchased from Immunodiagnostic Systems Inc. by following the manufacturer's protocols Collagen levels were determined using a Sirius red dye binding method (Sircol soluble collagen assay; Biocolor Ltd, Carrickfergus, Northern Ireland) as described in manufacturer's protocol in conditioned medium as well as acid-salt soluble and insoluble fraction by collagen standards provided with the kit Ten 1- to 2-day-old rat pups were divided into two equal groups and given subcutaneous injection of KEM at One-way ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls multiple comparison test used and data was expressed as mean The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at Vikram Khedgikar, Priyanka Kushwaha, Jyoti Gautam, Shewta Sharma, Ashwni Verma, Dharmendra Choudhary, Prabhat R Mishra, and Ritu Trivedi have no conflict of interest. Grant from Study conception and design: Prabhat R Mishra, RituTrivedi. Acquisition of data: Vikram Khedgikar, Priyanka Kushwaha, Jyoti Gautam, Shewta Sharma, Ashwni Verma, Dharmendra Choudhary. Analysis and interpretation of data: Vikram Khedgikar, Ritu Trivedi. Drafting of manuscript: Vikram Khedgikar, Ritu Trivedi. Critical revision: Prabhat R Mishra, Ritu Trivedi. Grant from