The technical viability of the BRISA process (Biolixiviación Rápida Indirecta con Separación de Acciones: Fast Indirect Bioleaching with Actions Separation) for secondary copper sulphides has been proved. One concentrate and two ores with chalcocite and covellite as the dominant copper minerals have been leached with ferric sulphate at 12 g/L of ferric iron and pH 1.25 in agitated reactors. Effects of temperature and pulp density have been investigated. The copper extraction from the final concentrate (with 45% Cu) was 90% at 80 °C and 8 h leaching with minor jarosite precipitation. Higher degrees of recovery would require the use of a catalyst such as silver to dissolve the chalcopyrite (minor constituent) of the concentrate. An alternative treatment is proposed for this concentrate consisting of cold leaching of the concentrate (20 °C, 2 h, 34% Cu extraction) and the smelting of the leach residue. The copper extraction from ores (with 1–2% Cu) at 70 °C ranged from 77% to 98% depending on the pulp density and the size fraction of the ore. Since the ferric iron demand was very low for ores, the solid recycle could be omitted in the BRISA process and it would be possible to operate directly at high pulp densities, which represent both a technical and an economic advantage. On the other hand, as copper extraction at 25 °C is very high (up to 70% Cu), a ferric leaching in two stages, the first one at 25 °C and the second one at 70 °C, could be an interesting choice in order to minimize energy costs.
                  The BRISA treatment of these ores would allow the recovery of the copper content of the fine fraction (which is not suitable for heap leaching) and the reduction of time and increase in copper extraction from the coarse fraction as compared with heap leaching treatment.At present, the treatment of copper ores containing secondary copper sulphides as the dominant copper minerals is carried out by following two routes. Pyrometallurgy (smelting) is used in which two industries participate: the mining industry that obtains a copper concentrate from the raw material, and the pyrometallurgical industry that concerns smelting, converting and electrolysis to obtain cathode copper. From the mining industry's point of view, the pyrometallurgical route entails a considerable grinding cost to get the very fine sizes required in flotation and some copper losses in the subsequent flotation operation. On the other hand, the net value of the concentrate is determined through a negotiated smelter contract consisting of three components. (1) Payment schedule. It determines the basis for calculating the quantity of metal that will be actually paid for in the concentrate (“payable metal”). This normally consists of an assay adjustment and the payment term. The assay adjustment is a reduction in the concentrate grade and is often a function of the grade itself. The payment term determines what proportion of the adjusted grade is actually paid for. Penalties for copper content are usually 1% in concentrates with less than 36% Cu and 1.4% in concentrates with more than 43% Cu. (2) Treatment and refining charges. (3) Penalties for deleterious elements. An increase in treatment charge according to the level and type of elements that may be considered problematic in terms of processing and/or increased environmental costs. Besides, for copper concentrates, penalties for sulphur are applicable in concentrates with less than 25% S, being higher as the %S decreases below this value. Copper concentrates obtained from flotation of secondary copper sulphides (with low S/Cu ratios) are expected to have high penalties derived from their high copper and low sulphur contents. Hydrometallurgy is used following the Thin Layer Bacterial (TLB) heap leaching process. In this process, a heap of crushed and sulphuric acid-cured ore is irrigated with a dilute sulphuric acid/ferric sulphate solution (usually aqueous raffinate from the solvent extraction circuit) that naturally contains ferrooxidant and sulfooxidant bacteria which colonize the heap and catalyze the leaching process (1) Good permeability and porosity is required to allow leaching solution to percolate through the heap and to ensure adequate wettability and reagent access to all reaction zones. Permeability is predetermined by ore characteristics and particle size. The curing process results in agglomeration of fines generated during crushing; even so, if the crushed ore contains a significant quantity of fines, pellets start to break after several weeks of irrigation, causing the plugging of heaps, which is a major problem leading to low copper recoveries due to a lack of solution contact with particles and shortfall of oxygen supply for bacterial growth. Also, the presence of “dead zones” may be due to the gangue mineral reactivity (i.e. silicate polymers, gelatinous materials coming from reaction between silica and sulphuric acid, that form an impervious layer). (2) Good conditions for bacterial growth are required. Heap conditions are not always the optimum for bacterial growth. In general, the oxygen transfer from the air to biomass is reduced due to the low level of liquid turbulence. Besides, biooxidation is inhibited towards the bottom of the heap due to restrictions of air accessibility through the agglomerates. Since there is no temperature control, biomass is exposed to local temperatures. Local temperature is rarely the optimum for bacteria to flourish (from 25 to 35 °C). Heaps are irrigated with aqueous raffinate from the solvent extraction circuit. The raffinate will contain different amounts of organic matter depending on the solubility of the solvent used and the mechanical losses due to entrainments, which may affect bacterial activity. Since bacteria involved in sulphide leaching are strict autotrophs, organic matter is potentially inhibitory to their growth, thus lowering the kinetics of copper dissolution and leaching These problems lead to high leaching times in heaps (from several months to several years) to achieve a copper extraction that does not exceed 70% in most cases. An alternative hydrometallurgical process for the treatment of secondary copper sulphide ores and concentrates is the BRISA process (Biolixiviación Rápida Indirecta con Separación de Acciones: Fast Indirect Bioleaching with Actions Separation) In the BRISA process, developed to improve the kinetics of bioleaching, the bioleaching process is performed in two separate stages: (a) a chemical stage based on (a) The chemical stage is performed in stirred tank reactors in which copper extraction can be enhanced by thermal activation and the use of catalysts (usually silver ion), the use of high pulp densities also being possible (b) The ferrous iron biooxidation is performed in flooded packed-bed reactors in which bacteria are attached on inert material particles forming a biofilm. The operation temperature is the optimum for bacterial growth. Oxygen supply is enhanced by the use of air diffusers that create very fine bubble streams and the residence time distribution is managed by controlling the liquid flowrate, thus leading to high ferric iron productivities. In recent years, ferrous iron biooxidation reactor designs have experienced a noticeable development The aim of this work is to establish the technical viability of the treatment of secondary copper sulphide minerals via the BRISA process. One concentrate and two ores with secondary copper sulphides as the dominant copper minerals have been leached with ferric sulphate solution. Ferrous iron biooxidation of liquors has already been studied and optimized Three minerals have been studied: Final copper concentrate from Empresa Minera Mantos Blancos (Chile). This concentrate is sold to the pyrometallurgical industry. Ore from Compañı́a Minera Cerro Colorado (Chile). Two different fractions of this material were studied, corresponding to the fractions generated after crushing in the mine: fine fraction, with a particle size less than 200 mesh (74 μm), and a coarse fraction, with a particle size between 74 μm and 12.7 mm. The company treats this ore by heap bioleaching. Ore from Sociedad Minera Cerro Verde (Perú). It comes from a deposit called “Tajo” and is not treated because its bioleaching in heaps (which is the leaching method employed to obtain copper in Cerro Verde) would lead to serious problems of percolability due to its high clay gangue content. Samples of the three materials were mounted in polished sections for mineralogical study using optical microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (EDX). The mineralogical data are summarized in Available granulometric data are shown in Samples were also analyzed by wet chemical methods using reagent grade chemicals and distilled water. The chemical analysis of materials is shown in Leaching experiments were conducted in two different types of reactors under batch leaching conditions, shake flasks and stirred tanks. In all cases, ferric sulphate solutions were first heated to the desired temperature and the reaction was initiated by adding a dried mineral sample. Experiments were conducted in 250-mL Erlenmeyer flasks with 100 mL of ferric sulphate solution. The flasks were continuously agitated on an orbital shaker at 280 min Experiments were carried out in a 7-L glass, baffled thermostatted vessel mechanically stirred with a six-bladed flat disk turbine. The solution volume was 4 L and the stirring speed 800 min In all tests, the water losses due to evaporation were determined by weight and were taken into account during recovery calculations. At the end of the experiment, the slurry was filtered using 0.45 μm Millipore filters. The leach liquor was analyzed for metals and the solid cake was washed with distilled water, dried and chemically analyzed. Copper extractions were calculated from mass balance and analysis of solids (feed and residue). Unless otherwise stated, the experimental conditions were: shake-flask test, initial pH of solution 1, ferric iron concentration 12 g/L Copper and iron concentrations in leaching liquors were determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy. Ferrous iron concentration was determined by standard potassium dichromate solution in an automatic titrator. Solids were analyzed by a wet chemical method, using 1:3 concentrated HNO  Because all the experiments were carried out at low ferric iron concentration (12 g/L) in batch systems, the studied pulp densities need to be low. However, in a continuous operation via the BRISA process, a portion of the leach liquor is recycled back through the reactor after ferrous iron biooxidation The effect of temperature on the copper extraction was studied in stirred tanks over the range 20–90 °C at pH 1.25 and 1 w/v % of pulp density. The leaching results shown in It can be observed It should be noted that copper extraction in these conditions did not exceed 93% and this is due to the fact that the copper present as chalcopyrite requires a catalyst to be dissolved Another possibility for this concentrate consists in a treatment inspired by the Escondida process Leaching of the concentrate at 20 °C for 2 h via the BRISA process. As 34 wt.% Cu is removed in the concentrate Smelting of the leach residue. So, part of the copper will be sold as high purity SX-EW copper and part as concentrate. Two sets of experiments at 25 and 70 °C were carried out for each size fraction. The pulp density was varied from 10% to 30%. As expected, the copper extraction is influenced by the initial particle size of the ore. Three experiments were performed at a pulp density of 25 w/v %: 25 °C without ferric sulphate, and 25 and 70 °C with ferric sulphate. It is important to note that the ferric iron demand is very low for materials B and C, which represents both technical and economical advantages in the BRISA process, since the solid recycle could be omitted and it would be possible to operate directly at high pulp densities. On the other hand, as copper extraction at 25 °C is very high The results obtained show that secondary copper sulphides in ores and concentrates can be effectively leached by the BRISA process. The chemical stage of the process has been studied for three materials: a copper concentrate with 45% Cu and two ores with ∼1% Cu and ∼2% Cu with chalcocite and covellite as the dominant copper-bearing minerals. Ferric sulphate leaching was carried out in agitated batch conditions with 12 g/L Fe The authors express their appreciation to Empresa Minera Mantos Blancos, Compañı́a Minera Cerro Colorado and Sociedad Minera Cerro Verde for making available the samples used in this study.