Three types of wood pellets samples, including two types of commercial pellets and one type of lab-made control pellets were torrefied in a fixed bed unit to study the effect of thermal pretreatment on the quality of wood pellets. The quality of wood pellets was mainly characterized by the pellet density, bulk density, higher heating value, Meyer hardness, saturated moisture uptake, volumetric energy density, and energy yield. Results showed that torrefaction significantly decreased the pellet density, hardness, volumetric energy density, and energy yield. The higher heating value increased and the saturated moisture content decreased after torrefaction. In view of the lower density, lower hardness, lower volumetric energy density, and energy yield of torrefied pellets, it is recommended that biomass should be torrefied and then compressed to make strong pellets of high hydrophobicity and volumetric energy density.In view of the low energy density, off-gassing, self-heating, poor water-resistance associated with the transportation, storage, and handling of regular wood pellets, thermal pretreatment by torrefaction has been considered as a promising method to make stable wood pellets of higher energy density and hydrophobicity In the present work, two types of commercial wood pellets and one type of control pellets prepared in a laboratory single-die pelleting unit were thermally treated in a fixed bed unit under the torrefaction conditions. Density, heating value, hardness, saturated moisture content, volumetric energy density, and energy yield of those torrefied pellets were then determined. The densification–torrefaction procedure was further evaluated by comparison with the quality of torrefied pellets made from densification of torrefied sawdust. White commercial wood pellets from Premium Pellets Ltd., brown commercial wood pellets from Shell Premium Pellets, and pine woodchips from FPInnovation were used in the present work. Pine woodchips were crushed in a hammer mill (Glenmills Inc., U.S.A.; Model: 10HMBL) installed with a 3.18  A bench-scale fixed-bed tubular reactor unit was used for the torrefaction (thermal treatment) of three wood pellet samples. The tubular reactor has an inside diameter of 27 The optimal torrefaction conditions were found to correspond to a weight loss of around 30% at the reaction temperature, ranging from 250 to 350 The weight loss (WL, %wt) was determined by measuring the pellet mass (M The Meyer hardness of wood pellets was also measured by the MTI 50 A humidity chamber (ESPEC CORP, Japan; Model: LHU-113) was used for the measurement of the saturated moisture content of pellets. Before the moisture uptake tests, wood pellets were dried in the THELCO laboratory PRECISION oven at 105    At the same 30% torrefaction weight loss, Peng et al. reported that the density of single torrefied pellets compressed from torrefied particles with a die temperature of 230 The difference in single pellet density between pellets made from torrefaction of three wood pellet samples and compression of torrefied SPF sawdust (a mixture of spruce pine and fir with more than 80% pine) is also shown in  The Meyer hardness of both untreated wood pellets and torrefied wood pellets made from the torrefaction of wood pellets was measured. The Meyer hardness was 12 The moisture uptake of torrefied wood pellets was examined in the humidity chamber with air at 90% relative humidity and 30   Pertinent properties of the regular wood pellets, torrefied wood pellets and pellets from torrefied sawdust from the current study and previous studies are compared in The heating value, saturated moisture content, and energy yield of torrefied wood pellets were almost the same as pellets made from the compression of torrefied sawdust. The single pellet density and the hardness of torrefied wood pellets decreased significantly with increasing the degree of torrefaction or the weight loss. The decrease in single pellet density counteracts the increase in higher heating value for torrefied pellets, leading to a slightly lower volumetric energy density for torrefied pellets, which may increase the storage and transportation costs. The low strength or hardness of torrefied pellets may also impose difficulties in safe handling of torrefied pellets because of dust generation. In comparison, pellets made from compression of torrefied sawdust could have similar density and strength as regular pellets, as well as higher volumetric energy density than regular pellets, making them suitable for storage and long distance transportation. Therefore, it is recommended that torrefied pellets should not be made from the torrefaction of wood pellets; instead, research and development on torrefied pellets should be focused on optimizing the die design and operating temperature and pressure to compress torrefied sawdust into strong and durable pellets at a low energy consumption, or choosing some binders and optimizing the content of some binders. The authors are grateful to the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (