Yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) buffer layers were deposited by a metal organic chemical vapor deposition technique using a single liquid source for the application of YBa2Cu3O7−δ
                      (YBCO) coated conductor. Y:Zr mole ratio was 0.2:0.8, and tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as a solvent. The (100) single crystal MgO substrate was used for searching the deposition conditions. Bi-axially oriented CeO2 and NiO films were fabricated on {100} 〈001〉 textured Ni substrate by the same method and used as templates. At a constant working pressure of 10 Torr, the deposition temperatures (660–800 °C) and oxygen flow rates (100–500 sccm) were changed to find the optimum deposition condition. The best (100) oriented YSZ film on MgO was obtained at 740 °C and O2 flow rate of 300 sccm. For a YSZ buffer layer with this deposition condition on a CeO2/Ni template, full width half maximum values of the in-plane (ϕ-scan) and out-of-plane (ω-scan) alignments were 10.6° and 9.8°, respectively. The SEM image of YSZ film on CeO2/Ni showed surface morphologies without microcracks. The film deposition rate was about 100 nm/min.Significant effort has been directed towards developing high-current superconducting wire technologies A HTS coated conductor consists of an aligned YBCO film and buffer layers on a metal substrate. The buffer layers are needed to prevent the chemical reaction and compensate for the lattice mismatch between the YBCO film and the metal substrate. The degree of the alignment of the YBCO film is dependent on the alignments of the buffer layers. A template with aligned buffer layers can be made by two well known processes, named ion beam-assisted deposition (IBAD) In the RABiTS process In this study, the CeO  The textured Ni substrate with the size of 1 The first buffer layers, CeO YSZ films were fabricated on MgO single crystal substrates at various deposition temperatures and O The YSZ films were deposited on NiO/Ni and CeO The alignments of the YSZ films on CeO  The CeO This research was supported by a grant from Center for Applied Superconductivity Technology of the 21st Century Frontier R&D Program funded by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Republic of Korea.