Results of density and viscosity measurements for aqueous solutions of MgCl2 (0.5–3.5 mol L−1) and MgCl2
                     +10% NiCl2 (0.5–3.5 mol L−1) at temperatures of 25, 60 and 90 °C show an almost linear increase in density with total concentration, while low nickel contents and temperature have comparatively small effects. Viscosities of MgCl2 solutions rise sharply at 25 °C but are significantly lower at 90 °C. The viscosity of 3–4 mol kg−1 MgCl2 at 90 °C is similar to water at 25 °C. Nickel has no significant effect on the viscosity of these solutions.
                  Results of heat capacity measurements for aqueous solutions of MgCl2 (0.5–3.5 mol L−1) and MgCl2
                     +10% NiCl2 (0.5–3.5 mol L−1) at temperatures of 60 and 90 °C show that the heat capacities of these solution decrease significantly with total concentration, while the effects of low nickel contents and temperature are again comparatively small.This work is part of an on-going program of research concerned with aqueous solutions of magnesium and other chlorides relevant to the development of atmospheric chloride leach processes ( In this work, the densities and viscosities of aqueous electrolyte solutions of magnesium chloride and a mixture of nickel chloride in magnesium chloride were measured at temperatures from 25 to 90 °C. Since significantly higher temperatures are relevant to the operation of some plants, accurate characterization of these solutions to temperatures as high as 120 °C is highly desirable. Accordingly, methods for the reliable extrapolation of density and viscosity data to the required temperature have been developed. In addition, comparative data that have been found in the chemical literature are presented and systematic trends in the physicochemical properties of interest have been identified. Densities were measured at 25.00, 60.00 and 90.00 °C (± Approximately 4 mol kg Density measurements at 60.00 °C and particularly at 90.00 °C proved difficult due to micro-bubble formation that could be observed directly in the (glass) vibrating tube of the density meter. The problem became less severe after heating of the solutions to 90 °C, degassing and reheating; however, reliable values at 90.00 °C could not be obtained for the more dilute solutions, in which air is more soluble than in concentrated solutions. Experimental results are given in Binary solutions contain just one electrolyte plus the solvent (water). Densities of MgCl Densities of NiCl In Eq. The prediction of the densities of mixed electrolyte solutions from those of the binary solutions has been investigated in numerous studies. The essence of these results, demonstrated over a large number of cases, is that the densities of ternary solutions (containing two electrolyte plus the solvent) can in general be predicted accurately on the basis of the densities of their binary components assuming Young's rule ( We have applied Young's rule to predict the densities of mixed MgCl As described above, densities of the binary solutions were calculated (for total molalities) from the equations for MgCl The reliability of this method is clearly evident in The densities of binary and mixed MgCl Equations for the calculation of viscosities of binary and mixed MgCl The agreement between experimental ( The Excel spreadsheet was used to predict densities at 120 °C and the results are given in  Solutions prepared for the density measurements above were also used to determine their kinematic viscosities at 25.0, 60.0 and 90.0 °C using the following equation Measurements at 25.0 °C were performed in a water bath that was maintained at (25.00 In this work, Schott–Geräte (Germany) Ubbelohde Viscometers were employed, capillaries type 53001-0a (diameter ∼ Literature values for MgCl Experimental results are given in Viscosities of MgCl The experimental data were correlated using a simple equation (Eq. The parameters for Eq. Agreement between experimental and calculated values is generally better than 1% (up to 2% only in a few cases); a better agreement cannot be expected given the simple form of Eq. A significant amount of heat capacity data for binary MgCl A recent comprehensive review on the thermodynamic properties of MgCl One flow-calorimetric study at 25 °C ( Heat capacities of NiCl In Analogous to densities, heat capacities of ternary solutions can be predicted on the basis of the heat capacities of their binary components assuming Young's rule ( The conclusions drawn from the literature data are similar to those found for densities, i.e. the heat capacities of MgCl Preparation and analysis of solutions is described in For the heat capacity measurements, a Calvet-type differential heat flux calorimeter (Setaram C80, France) was employed. As the theoretical and experimental details of such measurements have been described in the literature ( The twin calorimetric system consists of a sample and a reference cell, of about 15 mL volume each, which are placed inside a metallic block. The cells are surrounded by two thermopiles connected in such a way that the differential heat flux during heating or cooling can be measured with high sensitivity. Similar to heat capacity measurements with a differential scanning calorimeter (DSC), a ‘classical’ three-step procedure was employed which took into account the differences in heat capacity of both the cells themselves and their contents. Measurements typically comprised three different runs corresponding to the following operating conditions with regard to the sample cell: (1) empty, (2) filled with water, and (3) filled with the solution under investigation. The reference cell was in all cases filled with water. Each run consisted in having the temperature of the metallic block increased from 30 to 100 °C at a heating rate, From the basic equation for heat capacity determination under steady-state conditions ( Since the cells are under atmospheric pressure and completely filled with solution, the calorimetric signal corresponds to a certain volume and the value thus determined is the isobaric heat capacity per unit volume, ( The procedure was tested with a 4.000 mol kg Experimental results for MgCl  The measured heat capacities of the 3.0294 mol kg The present measurements confirm that the densities of mixed magnesium chloride–nickel chloride solutions can be predicted reliably by Young's rule, a linear The present results and the modelling capabilities developed in this work provide a comprehensive characterization of density, viscosity and heat capacity behaviour of mixed, concentrated aqueous magnesium chloride–nickel chloride solutions which are considered reliable to a temperature of at least 120 °C.