This study is the second part of an ongoing investigation to recover and upgrade rare earth elements (REE) minerals from iron oxide–silicate rich tailings (IST) generated at a South Australian mining operation. Previous work (Part 1) has shown that REE minerals are preconcentrated in a high-intensity magnetic concentrate and non-magnetic tails along with iron oxides and silicate minerals, respectively. As a part of the overall beneficiation and enhanced REE minerals recovery strategy, complementary studies involving downstream froth flotation of the magnetic preconcentrates were conducted and the results presented in this paper. Froth flotation of the preconcentrates was carried out using sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid as collectors in the presence of sodium silicate and starch as depressants. A comparison of rougher flotation of the preconcentrates indicated that hydroxamic acid produced higher total rare earth oxides (TREO) recoveries (91–93%) with enrichment ratio ranging 1.03–1.30, whereas sodium oleate produced relatively higher upgrade (1.50–1.55 ratios) with significantly lower recoveries (12–36%). Scavenger and cleaner flotation tests were conducted on selected concentrates and tails, where further upgrade was achieved at the expense of recovery. Two process flowsheets for recovering REE minerals were then developed. Flowsheet 1 includes magnetic preconcentration followed by flotation using both collectors, whilst Flowsheet 2 includes magnetic preconcentration prior to hydroxamic acid flotation. Typical metallurgical results indicated Flowsheet 1 produced a final concentrate grade of 1.55% at 55% TREO recovery, whilst rejecting 47% Fe and 74% Si, whereas a final concentrate grade of 1.67% at 72% TREO recovery, with 39% Fe and 59% Si removed using Flowsheet 2. The REE minerals, in combination with mainly silicates in the non-magnetic tails, allows better upgrade, with 2.5 times enrichment through hydroxamic acid flotation, compared to 1.93 times enrichment from the REE–iron oxides magnetic preconcentrate. Florencite, which was not recovered and upgraded by magnetic separation, was successfully recovered and upgraded along with bastnäsite and monazite by froth flotation. The study has revealed that froth flotation can be used to complement the recovery of REE minerals by magnetic separation, suggesting the IST could be exploited for REE beneficiation. However, it is obvious that minerals liberation and particle size distribution are critical in achieving enhanced REE minerals recovery and upgrade.The main aim of ore beneficiation plants is to produce metal or mineral concentrates for subsequent hydrometallurgical or pyrometallurgical processes, by removing a significant amount of penalty or deleterious gangue metals or minerals ( Froth flotation has over the years proven to be the most effective and efficient technique for REE beneficiation, using fatty acids (sodium oleate, oleic acid, and linoleic acid) and hydroxamates as collectors ( The IST used in this study has been identified to contain sub-economic REE grade, mostly comprising cerium (Ce), lanthanum (La), neodymium (Nd), praseodymium (Pr), and yttrium (Y). Over 160 Mt of REE-bearing IST has been generated from mining operations in South Australia, for which no economically viable processing method for recovering the REE exists. Such tailings and other low grade ores in South Australia are noted to contain ~53 Mt of REE ( Preliminary characterisation of the IST indicated a total REO (TREO) grade of 1.07 wt%, with about 96% light REE (mainly Ce, La, Nd, and Pr), and Y being the most abundant heavy REE. Mineralogical characterisation indicated that the REE were mineralised as fine-grained bastnäsite, monazite, stetindite, florencite, brannerite, and stillwellite in complex associations with hematite, goethite, quartz, annite, illite, and muscovite as the major gangue minerals. A multistage magnetic preconcentration process was applied to the IST, with the results described in previous publication ( The multistage magnetic separation process was reasonably effective at low magnetic field intensity (0.11 T) in rejecting 25% iron oxides content of the original feed (IST) and produced two REE preconcentrates; (a) high-intensity preconcentrate (PMC) – 51% TREO content at an enrichment ratio of 1.17 and (b) non-magnetic tails – 41% TREO content at an enrichment ratio of 1.00 ( In some mineral processing settings, preconcentrates from various physical separation processes (e.g. magnetic, gravity, and electrostatic separation) could be used as feed for hydrometallurgical operations based on the process economics. Where large quantities of gangue minerals are in the preconcentrates, further processing will be required to provide cleaner feed to downstream hydrometallurgical treatment. It is imperative that significant amount of deleterious minerals/metals are removed prior to subsequent hydrometallurgical processing. Failure to do this can result in incurring treatment charges and penalties, as well as transportation and handling cost, which can consequently affect the commercial returns of the process. The presence of high levels of deleterious minerals/metals can also impact negatively on the safety of equipment (e.g. smelters) and operational efficiency. Froth flotation plays a significant role in the removal of such deleterious minerals/metals, to produce rich concentrates for subsequent hydrometallurgical operations ( If this is possible, then major possibilities will arise. The content of penalty/deleterious elements will be reduced, which will subsequently increase the market value of the final REE concentrate. Ultimately, it will also inform stakeholders on identifying potential optimisation works to undertake, as no economically viable process for recovering REE minerals in the IST is available. This will eventually offer additional value to existing, developing, and prospective primary commodity (copper, gold, uranium) ores with low/sub-economic REE grade. Furthermore, this will also establish new knowledge by providing greater understanding for South Australian low grade ores/tailings beneficiation for their REE content. The aim of this study is to investigate the potential of further recovering and upgrading REE minerals in preconcentrates which were obtained from magnetic processing of a typical South Australian IST via froth flotation. Specifically, the performance of sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid as collectors in recovering and upgrading REE minerals was compared in the presence of depressants (sodium silicate and starch). Using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning electron microscopy (QEMSCAN), the recovery and upgrade of different REE minerals were ascertained, especially brannerite, florencite, and stetindite for which there is paucity of data and knowledge on their flotation response. A further goal was to assess the extent of iron oxides and silicate minerals removal during the flotation process, with the help of the depressants. As part of the ideal goal of identifying possible REE minerals recovery strategy, two different flowsheet configurations, including magnetic and froth flotation separation processes were proposed and compared. This paper outlines details of the various separation strategies, their benefits, and processing challenges. Preconcentrates obtained from a multistage magnetic separation process conducted on the IST ( Flotation tests were carried out using 1.2 L Denver D-12 subaeration cell (Denver Equipment Company, Colorado, USA). Pulp of 25 wt% solids was prepared and transferred into the flotation cell. The impeller speed (800 rpm), air flow rate (3.5 dm A detailed description of each flotation stage has been presented, along with the results obtained in Section 3. Reagents dosages used in this work are based on previous flotation tests conducted on the IST by The two magnetic preconcentrates (PMC and non-magnetic tails) obtained from the IST were subjected to ICP-MS analysis and the results of valuable chemical composition have been presented in Detailed mineralogical composition of the samples obtained via QEMSCAN analysis is shown in The particle size distribution of the magnetic preconcentrates obtained via laser diffraction method have been compared in Batch rougher flotation tests were conducted on PMC using 3000 g/t sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid, respectively in the presence of 1500 g/t each of sodium silicate and starch at pulp pH 9 over 5 min. The results obtained are shown in  Tails from sodium oleate rougher flotation tests were further subjected to scavenger flotation using 3000 g/t hydroxamic acid in the absence of depressants, to boost recovery as higher recoveries were achieved with hydroxamic acid during the roughing stage. The scavenger concentrates were then cleaned with 3000 g/t each of sodium silicate and starch in the absence of a collector. During the scavenging stage, 85% TREO recovery was obtained at a concentrate grade of 1.21%. However, the TREO grade increased from 1.21% to 1.38% with a corresponding decrease in recovery from 85% to 58% during the cleaning stage. Although the Fe content (67%) remained higher than the TREO, the overall decrease in recovery of the gangues by the depressants contributed to the TREO upgrade in the cleaner concentrate as shown in With about 90% mass of PMC recovered into the flotation concentrate during the rougher stage using hydroxamic acid, a two-stage cleaner flotation was carried out using 3000 g/t each of the depressant. Results obtained from the cleaner flotation along with the rougher stage tests are shown in The non-magnetic tails were also subjected to flotation using either 3000 g/t sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid, respectively in the presence of 1500 g/t each of sodium silicate and starch at pulp pH 9 over 5 min.  The rougher tails generated from sodium oleate flotation of the non-magnetic tails were scavenged using 1500 g/t each of sodium silicate and starch over 5 min at pulp pH 9. This resulted in a further increase in TREO recovery by 13% with a corresponding upgrade from 0.90% to 1.78%. The rougher and scavenger concentrates were combined to produce a final flotation concentrate of grade 1.70% at an overall TREO recovery of 49% as shown in Since the majority of TREO reported into the concentrate generated from hydroxamic acid rougher flotation, a decision was made to further clean the concentrate in the presence of 3000 g/t each of the depressant. The process produced a cleaner concentrate assaying a grade of 1.94% TREO at a recovery of 78%. As expected, the recoveries of Fe and Si decreased during the cleaning stage as shown in The Fe and Si rejected during sodium oleate flotation of non-magnetic tails were higher than those rejected during hydroxamic acid flotation. The enrichment ratios obtained in this work, although low, are consistent with those obtained in a previous study by From the respective test works (magnetic and froth flotation separation) conducted on the IST, two processing methods were developed as shown in The final flotation concentrates obtained from Flowsheet 2 were selected for QEMSCAN analysis because they recovered higher proportion of the TREO and showed comparatively better upgrade. The modal mineralogy of the concentrates is reported in mass percentage of the total identified minerals as shown in  A notable outcome of the flotation studies is the enhanced recovery and upgrade of florencite, which was otherwise in trace amount (<0.02%) and was considered as one of the ‘other REE minerals’ in the IST. The results suggest that hydroxamic acid flotation efficiently recovered and upgraded florencite from both the PMC and non-magnetic tails, with significantly high enrichment ratios (>16) at mineral mass abundances of 0.16% and 0.34%, respectively ( Preconcentrates obtained from a previous multistage magnetic separation process ( The experimental results suggest that froth flotation can be used to recover and upgrade REO in the magnetic preconcentrates. However, a key challenge observed from this work is that, the rejection of iron oxides and silicate gangue minerals is associated with a corresponding REO loss to the flotation tails, hence the generally low concentrate grades. This is an indication of the abundance of composite REE–gangue particles in the ore. This suggests that diagnostic grind–flotation tests may be considered in future works to ascertain any chance of achieving REE minerals liberation to promote selective gangue minerals removal. At pulp pH 9, both sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid have been reported to adsorb chemically onto REE minerals’ surfaces ( Generally, higher TREO recoveries from the PMC compared to non-magnetic tails were observed when either sodium oleate or hydroxamic acid was used. However, flotation concentrates obtained from the non-magnetic tails had higher TREO grade regardless of the collector used. This could be attributed to the ability of hydroxamates to form strong metal complexes with cations such as Al Mineralogical analysis on the non-magnetic tails indicated the dominance of silicate minerals (83.07%), mainly quartz (36.10%), annite (22.69%), and illite (14.49%), with comparatively low iron oxides (<6%) content. Sodium oleate and hydroxamates have poor selectivity for silicate minerals (  The dominance of fine/ultrafine particles in the flotation feed also contributes significantly to the generally low TREO grade in the concentrates. A review of the literature has indicated that the presence of fine/ultrafine particles have detrimental impact on the recovery and upgrade of valuable minerals ( Entrainment recovery is defined as an unselective mechanical transfer process, where suspended gangue mineral particles, migrate to the flotation froths and are recovered along with valuable minerals. Gangue mineral particles <50 µm are typically recovered by entrainment ( The works of Overall, the upgrade obtained from downstream flotation of magnetic preconcentrates was low. However, the final flotation concentrates could serve as a typically feed for hydrometallurgical processes such as leaching. Recent advances in hydrometallurgical operations have paved way for the feasibility of REE extraction from low grade unconventional resources such as mine tailings, fluorescent lamps, and permanent magnets ( Typically, leaching operations are primarily concerned with achieving REE recovery with minimal attention to selectivity ( However, the REE–silicate rich flotation concentrate (with significantly low Fe content) has an added advantage, since Fe is known to be deleterious to REE recovery and extraction during hydrometallurgical operations, and is regarded as a penalty element ( Furthermore, a review of the literature has indicated that desliming could produce the desired upgrade of valuable metals or minerals in complex fine/ultrafine ores or stockpiled tailings ( Froth flotation separation was used to complement the recovery of REE minerals obtained by magnetic separation of an iron oxide–silicate rich tailings. Flotation tests conducted on the magnetic separation products indicated the feasibility of improving both REE minerals recovery and upgrade using sodium oleate and hydroxamic acid in the presence of sodium silicate and starch through multistage froth flotation processes. The multistage flotation results are as follows: Flotation of PMC (assaying a grade of 1.25% TREO, 39% Fe, 9.47% Si) Rougher–scavenger–cleaner (sodium oleate + hydroxamic acid) flotation obtained 70% TREO recovery at 1.17 enrichment ratio, with 25% Fe and 52% Si removed. Rougher–cleaner hydroxamic acid flotation obtained 80% TREO recovery at 1.16 enrichment ratio, with 17% Fe and 62% Si removed. Flotation of non-magnetic tails (assaying a grade of 1.08% TREO, 11.90% Fe, 27.70% Si) Rougher–scavenger sodium oleate flotation obtained 49% TREO recovery at enrichment ratio 1.57, with 52% Fe and 80% Si removed. Rougher–cleaner hydroxamic acid flotation obtained 78% TREO recovery at 1.80 enrichment ratio, with 22% Fe and 56% Si removed. Two processes for recovering REE minerals from iron oxide–silicate rich tailings have been developed based on the results obtained in the present work and magnetic separation process (in Part 1 – Flowsheet 1: WHIMS followed by sodium oleate + hydroxamic acid flotation produced 55% TREO recovery with concentrate grade of 1.55%. Flowsheet 2: WHIMS followed by hydroxamic acid flotation produced 72% TREO recovery at a concentrate grade of 1.67%. QEMSCAN analysis conducted on final concentrates from Flowsheet 2 confirmed the upgrade of REE minerals. Flotation concentrate from the high-intensity magnetic preconcentrate contained 2.14% REE minerals (representing an upgrade of 1.93, calculated based on mineralogical data on IST feed). Flotation concentrate from the non-magnetic tails contained 2.78% REE minerals (representing an upgrade of 2.50, calculated based on mineralogical data on IST feed). Florencite, which showed poor magnetic response, was successfully recovered and upgraded (with 50 times enrichment) by froth flotation. Stetindite and brannerite showed poor flotation response. Bastnäsite and monazite were successfully recovered and upgraded by froth flotation. With more than 53 Mt of REE lost to tailings of similar mineralogical characteristics in South Australia, the experimental results suggest that the iron oxide–silicate rich tailings used in this study can be considered as an unconventional source for REE minerals beneficiation. This could present a comparatively inexpensive means to produce REE minerals concentrate compared with those produced from ores obtained from in-situ mining, which require comminution to obtain suitable size fraction for subsequent beneficiation. However, significant process optimisation is required to scale-up the experimental results. This work was supported by the Australian Government Research Training Program Scholarship and Future Industries Institute of the