Objectives
                  Two processes underlie food comminution during chewing: (1) selection, i.e. every particle has a chance of being placed between the teeth and being subjected to (2) breakage. Selection decreases with particle number by saturation of breakage sites, and it depends on competition between smaller and larger particles for breakage sites. Theoretical models were tested which describe competition between various sizes X. In the one-way model, small particles cannot compete with larger ones because of their smaller height. In the two-way model, small particles may compete when piled between antagonistic teeth.
               
                  Design
                  Five subjects participated in one-chew experiments on cubes made of Optosil®. The critical particle number (nc(X)) at which saturation starts, and the number of breakage sites (nb(X)) were determined by varying particle numbers (nX
                     ) for single-sized cubes of 1.7-6.8mm. Using nc(X) and nb(X), the models predicted relationships between number of selected particles (ns(X)) and nX
                      in one-chew experiments using simple mixtures with only two sizes. A fixed number (mean 6 or 26) of larger cubes (X
                     =6.8 or 3.4mm) was mixed with various numbers (16–1024) of smaller cubes (X
                     =4.8, 2.4 or 1.7mm), thus varying the factors X, nX
                     , and possible particle piling (for X
                     <4mm).
               
                  Results
                  The one-way model was largely followed with small numbers of smaller particles and the two-way model with large numbers.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The two-way model applies to chewing a food which yields a loose aggregation of different-sized particles following an initial phase, whereas other circumstances may be favourable for the one-way model. As conditions of a food bolus can be approached by embedding hard Optosil particles in a soft medium, the models will, apart from dentistry, be of interest for controlling flavour release in food engineering.One of the major functions of chewing is to prepare food for safe swallowing by mixing it with saliva and by grinding large particles into small fragments. Due to this fragmentation, the surface area of the food is increased yielding a more efficient breakdown by enzymes in the mouth and later in the gastrointestinal tract. The food comminution in human mastication has gained a great deal of attention in many fields of research. In the field of dentistry, chewing efficiency/performance of subjects with a natural dentition has been compared with that of patients wearing dentures for examining the extent to which chewing function is restored by dental prostheses and implants ( As in industrial comminution processes ( Two categories of factors influence the selection as well as the breakage process, As oral structures including the dentition are evolutionary adapted to the available food, describing and explaining relationships between the selection process and food-related factors is of primary interest ( Apart from particle size, the selection chance also depends upon the particle number as a food-related factor. The number of breakage sites which are available on the teeth, is limited because of a limited number of antagonistic teeth. Hence, the selection chance will be smaller the more the teeth become saturated with particles ( A theoretical model has been developed to describe selection of single-sized particles as a function of their number, and this model has been confirmed in one-chew experiments for a range of particle sizes of 1.2-9.6 The aim of the present study was to test the theoretical selection models for particle mixtures experimentally. In one-chew experiments, relationships were determined between number of selected particles and the number of offered particles while being part of a simple mixture which included only two sizes. The factor of possible particle piling was varied by choosing appropriate particle sizes. Observed relationships between number of selected particles and number of offered particles were compared with those as predicted by the two selection models for mixtures. While details about the theoretical background can be found in a previous study ( A theoretical model describes the number of particles of any single particle size An in which in which The selection model for single-sized particles (Eq.  The selection model for a single particle size has been extended to a model for a mixture of particle sizes. Two competition mechanisms have been considered: A one-way competition in which large particles hamper the selection of smaller ones without the reverse occurring, and, A two-way competition between large and smaller particles. General assumptions in both types of models for particle mixtures are: The breakage sites of smaller particles are dispersed over the post-canine teeth and are a subset of the breakage sites of larger particles; If particles of size In the one-way competition model, it has been specifically assumed that particles of descending size are successively engaged between the antagonistic teeth and that particles of smaller size which are not yet engaged are completely free to move. Because of a smaller height, small particles can then not compete with large particles for breakage sites during a chewing cycle ( In the two-way competition model, it has been specifically assumed that small particles pile between antagonistic teeth when they are locked up in a restricted space between these teeth and further between the tongue and the cheek (cf. Discussion). Piling of small particles will compensate the height advantage of large particles and small particles will therefore occupy part of the breakage sites of large particles when a mixture of particles of different sizes is placed between antagonistic teeth ( According to the one-way competition model, with the general case of particles of size  Simple particle mixtures were used in the present study including only two particle sizes, According to the two-way competition model, with the general case of particles of size in which  The models for selection in mixtures use values of affinity, The validity of each model for mixtures was tested in one-chew experiments by comparing relationships between the number of selected particles ( Apart from number of particles, another factor of interest for testing the models was the absence or presence of a possible piling of particles at the engagement of the food between antagonistic teeth ( a constant number of cubes with an edge size 6.8 a constant number of cubes of 3.4 a constant number of cubes of 6.8 The study was carried out in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration, and approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Dundee (Ref no. UREC 13098). Five subjects, 3 males and 2 females, who gave informed consent, participated in one-chew experiments. The mean age was 30.3 years (SD 3.9). The subjects had a good general health (no medication), and a sufficiently complete natural dentition (allowing missing third molars) with normal occlusal relationships. Temporomandibular disorders (jaw muscle pain and/or pain in the temporomandibular joint), or disturbances of intra-oral or Using brass moulds, cubes were made of Optosil The procedure of preparing Optosil particles with a regular shape has been described in detail previously ( Each subject was asked to attend two 1.5  Each feed was placed in a separate labelled cup. Small numbers of cubes of a particular size in feeds were prepared by counting. The mean weight per cube obtained after counting of many small samples, was then used as a reference for preparing large samples of the same cube-size in the feeds by means of weighing. All cube samples were weighted with an accuracy of 1 The observer was seated in a ¾ portrait direction with respect to the subject, at a distance of 2 The subject was instructed by the observer to transfer the cubes from the spoon to the tongue, and was then instructed to start pseudo-chewing to obtain a natural dispersion of the cubes in the mouth and to produce some saliva. Thus, like during real chewing, the lower jaw was opened and closed rhythmically with closed lips, with the test food in the mouth, but without hitting the food by the teeth. In order to approach the main features of real chewing as much as possible, each closing movement of pseudo-chewing included a horizontal component from the midline by which the antagonistic posterior teeth were vertically aligned at the working side. Furthermore, the subject carried out pseudo-chewing at a pace of natural chewing, hence automatically. During this pseudo-chewing the subject had to finish a closing movement as a real chew with final transport of the food to the teeth and subsequent breakage when the observer, who was awaiting the end of an opening phase, instructed the subject unexpectedly (by speaking out the word “chew”) to carry out this single real chew. The subject carried out the real chew smoothly by continuing the natural pace of the rhythmic jaw movements as much as possible. The observer varied the number of pseudo-chewing cycles randomly between 3 and 15 cycles before instructing “chew”. A few one-chew trials on particles were exercised at the start of each session before the actual experiments were carried out. Following the chew, the subject immediately spitted out the chewing outcome in the coffee filter. The chewing outcomes in the coffee filters were cleaned using a diluted solution of a detergent in warm water (60 The dried bags were weighted with an accuracy of 1 For particles from the experiments using mixtures, hand-sieving was first carried out using a single sieve aperture which retained non-damaged cubes of the larger size and subsequently with a sieve aperture which retained non-damaged cubes of the smaller size. For each combination of cube size  in which  in which nX is the number of particles of size The In order to restrict the duration of a session with calibration experiments to 1 ½ hours, the number of data points in the However, the relationship between the number of breakage sites, Furthermore, the relationship between the critical particle number, Curve-fitting of which follows from Eq. Function values of  In order to determine which model describes best the empiric in which in which Apart from examining how the number of selected cubes from the smaller size varies with the number of offered particles from that size in the presence of a constant number of the larger size, it has also been examined how many of these larger cubes were selected in the presence of a varying number of smaller cubes (stage 3 in In order to determine which model describes best the empiric Statistical analyses were performed using Graphpad software (Graphpad Prism 6.07; Graphpad Software Inc., San Diego, CA). For each type of mixture, MSD may depend on two factors, An optimal description of experimental data points by a model is characterized by an MSD value which is close to zero. Even with an optimal description, a small residual value of a mean MSD will occur at a group level because of some scatter in the experimental data which is related to a limited number of trials per feed in individuals and to a subject sample of limited size. A residual value of the mean MSD was most closely approached in the present study by the condition with the minimum in MSD values of all conditions. In order to determine which of the other conditions had also a nearly residual MSD value, the mean MSD value of each of these conditions was compared with the one of the minimal mean MSD using a two-sample Student’s  As an example of individual results, For the three types of mixtures, the two models and the two ranges of numbers of the smaller size, For the mixtures of 6.8 and 4.8   In addition to the analysis of selection of smaller size in mixtures, the selection of the larger size has also been analysed. As an example of individual results, For the three types of mixtures, the two models and the two ranges of numbers of the smaller size,  Although significance was not reached for the factor ‘ Regarding selection of the larger size (3.4 Regarding selection of the larger size (6.8 Although modern processed diets often yield a soft sticky food bolus, human post-canine teeth with their fairly blunt cusps are adapted in the hominid evolution to break brittle hard foods like roots and nuts anyhow ( The starting point of modelling selection is quantifying the influence of the food-related factors, particle size and number. The influence of anatomical and physiological factors, which is reflected in the values of the model parameters can be specified by systemically varying these factors in other studies, either by comparing subsamples of subjects which differ preferably only in one of these factors or by experimentally changing a factor within subjects. Furthermore, as will be outlined below, the conditions of a food bolus can be approached by embedding hard Optosil particles in a soft medium. The influence of the medium on selection is then also reflected in the values of the model parameters. Hence, the selection models have the potential of feeding computer simulation studies with information needed to model the entire comminution process of food during chewing, including a transition from a loose aggregation of particles towards a food bolus. In the present study, the theoretical models for particle mixtures were most rigorously tested by carrying out one-chew experiments using simple mixtures which consisted of different sizes and numbers of Optosil cubes. The models for mixtures include two types of parameters, The affinity factor Ranges of offered particle numbers of the smaller size occurred in which either the one-way model was followed regarding prediction of selection of the smaller particles, or the two-way model. Furthermore, a range of particle numbers occurred with an inter-model transition of the data points. These findings indicate that the calibration experiments using single-sized particles provide adequate information on affinity factors and number of breakage sites, which remain valid in models for mixtures. Whether the one-way model or the two-way model is most adequate to describe selection in mixtures from the present study depends on conditions like type of mixture with possibly particle piling or no piling, and the amount of particles of the smaller size. In the mixtures with cubes of 6.8 and 4.8 The transition of the selection of 4.8 In the mixtures of 3.4 and1.7 The findings regarding the role of both models in one-chew experiments with simple mixtures, are representative for conditions of selection during a natural chewing process. Chewing is usually started on a batch of single-sized large particles, for example, eight Optosil cubes of 8 After the initial phase of chewing, large particles will become scarce and smaller fragments of various sizes will be produced in such large numbers that particle piling will occur extensively. Selection of the various sizes will then follow the two-way interaction model. Apart from findings of one-chew experiments with simple mixtures, the validity of the two-way model in a later phase of natural chewing also follows from the model’s prediction that the ratios of selection chances between two arbitrary sizes will be constant during chewing. In the natural chewing process, the selection chance Although particle conditions may be in favour of the one-way model during the first initial cycles when chewing is started on a batch of large particles of a food which forms a loose aggregation of particles, the difference with the two-way model regarding selection of large particles will be small because of a small affinity for small particles. Hence, small fragments will not (one-way model) or hardly (two-way model) be able to compete with the large particle for breakage sites when they are initially present in small numbers. A small difference between both models occurred indeed in the one-chew experiments when considering the number of selected particles of the larger size in the presence of small numbers of the smaller size ( Although Optosil has been used as an artificial test food which forms a loose aggregation of particles to date, conditions in a food bolus can be approached by embedding hard Optosil particles in a soft medium. The influence of the soft medium on selection parameters of the harder particles can be determined in one-chew experiments, after recovering of the hard particles and fragments from the medium. Embedding will influence the process of concentrating Optosil particles between teeth, As outlined below, the experimental validation of the theoretical selection models for particle mixtures here provides the essential knowledge to determine the conditions for a controlled flavour release by varying particle shape, size and number ratio in mixtures and the way of particle embedding. Many foods contain a mixture of particles (and more than one ingredient food component) in a matrix. By measuring selection and breakage of particles made of an artificial test food like Optosil, under various conditions, further insight will be gained in how flavour can be released during chewing of particles of a real food, and in designing new food products.  The study of The conclusion of a possible involvement of the two-way model, even in the initial phase of chewing, is reinforced by considering the mutual effective heights of the two most extreme cylinder sizes used. The smallest dimension of both sizes of cylinders was so similar (4–5 Anyhow, the observation of a smaller degree of selection of the smaller particles in a mixture than when chewed on their own ( Calibration experiments using particles of single sizes provide adequate information on affinity factors and numbers of breakage sites available on the teeth for an accurate description of selection according to either the one-way or the two-way interaction model for particle mixtures. One-chew experiments using simple particle mixtures consisting of a constant number of larger cubes and varying numbers of smaller cubes show that with increasing particle numbers of the smaller size, a transition occurs from a description of selection according to the one-way model to a description by the two-way model. This finding suggest that the height advantage of the larger particles in the mixture for being engaged between the teeth is compensated for either by a tilted orientation or by piling of the smaller particles, when smaller particles become abundant. At the one hand, the conditions during a later phase of natural chewing on a food which forms a loose aggregation of particles, The authors report no conflict of interest. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the University of Dundee (ref no. UREC 13098). We are grateful to the subjects for their kind cooperation in this study. We are also grateful to