Indium extraction from synthetic indium-bearing zinc ferrite (IBZF) was investigated using sulfur dioxide as a reductant in sulfuric acid medium, and the recovery of indium and the full use of sulfur dioxide were achieved. The leaching kinetics of indium from synthetic IBZF were studied, and the influence of leaching temperature, particle size, initial sulfuric acid concentration and sulfur dioxide partial pressure were investigated. The results showed that the leaching efficiencies increased as the leaching temperature increased from 65 to 85 °C, the initial sulfuric acid concentration increased from 5 to 65 g/L, the sulfur dioxide partial pressure increased from 0.10 to 0.30 MPa, and the particle size decreased from 150–270 μm to 48–58 μm. The unreacted shrinking core model was applied well to the kinetics of indium leaching, which showed that the rate was controlled by a chemical reaction with a calculated activation energy of 57.22 kJ/mol. The order of indium leaching with respect to particle size, initial sulfuric acid concentration and sulfur dioxide partial pressure was −0.2343, 0.02625 and 0.35618, respectively. Meanwhile, sulfur dioxide could reduce the dependency of IBZF dissolution on the initial sulfuric acid concentration.Indium is a significant metal that is widely used in electronics, medicine and health care, photoelectronics and computers, etc. ( In the traditional zinc hydrometallurgy process of roast-leaching-electrowinning, a large majority of indium is inevitably access to residue. Because it contains a certain amount of iron in sphalerite, zinc ferrite (ZnFe In addition to these two methods, the reductive leaching method is also an effective method for recovering indium from zinc leaching residue. It has been reported that reductive conditions during leaching increase the dissolution rate of ZnFe There is currently no paper on the reductive leaching of synthetic IBZF. In the present study, the leaching of indium from synthetic IBZF using sulfur dioxide as a reductant was investigated. The effects of leaching temperature, particle size, initial sulfuric acid concentration and sulfur dioxide partial pressure on the indium leaching process were studied. The experiments were performed with IBZF, which was artificially synthesized. The synthesis method was established previously ( In the pressure leaching experiment, the synthetic IBZF was leached in an HY-GF1501 autoclave (Hunan Huae Microwave Technology Co., Ltd. Changsha, China). Its volume was 1 L and the lining material was PTFE. The sulfuric acid used in the experiment was analytically pure, and the sulfur dioxide supplied was industrial pure sulfur dioxide. Six grams of IBZF and deionized water were added to the autoclave, and the stirring rate was set at 500 rpm. The sample was then heated to the set temperature under electric heating. When the temperature reached the set value, sulfuric acid was pressed into the autoclave by sulfur dioxide. The solid-to-liquid ratio was maintained at 1:100 during the whole experiment. A 4 mL leaching solution was withdrawn at appropriate time intervals, and the concentration of indium was analyzed by ICP emission spectrometry. The indium leaching efficiency ( To study the effect of sulfur dioxide as a reductant during indium leaching, comparative experiments were performed under the same conditions: leaching temperature, 85 °C; initial sulfuric acid concentration, 30 g/L; and sulfur dioxide partial pressure, 0.25 MPa. The results are shown in Sulfur dioxide provided a reductive atmosphere in the leaching process; thus, the Fe  To research the rate-controlling step and kinetic parameters of indium leaching using the SO If the reaction was controlled by the interface chemical reaction ( Eq. The effect of the leaching temperature on indium leaching from IBZF was investigated in the range of 65 to 85 °C at different reaction times with particle sizes of 48 to 58 μm, initial sulfuric concentrations of 65 g/L and sulfur dioxide partial pressures of 0.2 MPa. The results are shown in To determine the control step of indium leaching, the indium leaching efficiencies at different temperatures were substituted into Eqs. The effect of the particle size on the indium leaching efficiency was studied using five different particle size fractions: 48–58 μm, 58–75 μm, 75–106 μm, 106–150 μm, and 150–270 μm. In the experiments, five different particle sizes of IBZF were used at a leaching temperature of 80 °C, an initial sulfuric acid concentration of 65 g/L, and a sulfur dioxide partial pressure of 0.2 MPa. The results, shown in The indium leaching efficiencies under different particle size conditions were substituted into Eq. The conclusion that the indium leaching was controlled by the interface chemical reaction in the SO To research the effect of the initial sulfuric acid concentration on the indium leaching efficiency, experiments were performed in solutions containing different initial sulfuric acid concentrations at a leaching temperature of 85 °C, particle size of 48 to 58 μm, and sulfur dioxide partial pressure of 0.2 MPa. After 120 min, the indium extraction increased from 62.07% to 85.00%, when the initial sulfuric acid concentration was increased from 5 to 65 g/L. It has been shown that H The indium leaching efficiencies obtained with different initial sulfuric acid concentration conditions were applied to Eq. The sulfur dioxide in the leaching process acted as a reductant, which provided a reductive atmosphere, and ferric iron was reduced to ferrous iron under constant conditions, which could accelerate the decomposition of IBZF (Eq. The indium leaching efficiencies under different sulfur dioxide partial pressure conditions were applied to Eq. The calculations showed that the activation energy and the order of the reaction with respect to leaching temperature, particle size, initial sulfuric acid concentration and sulfur dioxide partial pressure were consistent with the unreacted shrinking core model for the process, which was controlled by the surface chemical reaction. Therefore, the leaching of indium based on this study could be clearly determined by Eq. Taking into account the experimental results, the factors such as leaching temperature, initial sulfuric acid concentration, and sulfur dioxide partial pressure had a great influence on indium leaching from synthetic IBZF in mixed SO This study was financially supported by the