Under continual disturbance such as vibration, tumbling, flow or aeration, granular or powder systems can display solid or fluid like behavior. Using a well-mixed system of same size (0.2 mm) non-cohesive glass beads and iron powder, we show that gentle aeration can completely segregate the components thereby reducing the entropy of mixing to create near total order from an initially chaotic mixture. We quantify the time dependence of the segregation process and identify two dynamic pathways that dominate depending on the intensity of the aeration. Such findings can facilitate the search for energy efficient methods to process granular systems in pharmaceutical, mining and waste recovery industries.A report by the US National Research Council on Condensed Matter and Material Physics 2010, intended as “a decadal survey of opportunities and challenges”, noted that “much of the richness of the world around us arises from conditions far from equilibrium” and studies in “condensed matter and materials physics is uniquely positioned to spearhead progress in the field of far-from-equilibrium behavior” However, the focus on spatially complex 3D segregated states are perhaps of less relevance if the objective is to separate components of such mixtures. For mixtures with different size components, segregation by sieving is the obvious approach, but for mixtures of similar size constituents, the density difference can be exploited. Here, we investigate the dynamics and mechanisms of segregation due to relatively gentle aeration of a 50:50 mixture of non-cohesive spherical glass beads and iron powder. We determine the conditions under which the mixing of an initially random mixture can be reduced to achieve a near totally ordered state of complete segregation and investigate the time-dependent dynamics of how this is comes about. A cylindrical container of inner diameter 100 mm was filled to a depth of 100 mm with a random mixture of glass beads (GB) and iron powder (IP) that are spherical particles of 0.18–0.21 mm diameter. A uniform air stream was injected into the bottom of the container at a controlled superficial air velocity The observed variation of the minimum fluidization velocity, For a 50:50 GB + IP mixture, the minimum fluidization velocity was 6.0 cm/s. For air velocities between this value and the minimum fluidization velocity of the pure IP of 9.2 cm/s, extended periods of aeration would result in increasing degree of segregation between the components. The most notable and potentially useful results occurred for air velocity in the range 9.2 cm/s < To obtain quantitative information about the dynamics of the segregation process and to quantify how the bed density evolved with time as the aeration proceeded, we stopped the airflow after different aeration periods and recorded the vertical variation of the composition of the powder mixture. We do so by excavating the 100 mm powder bed from the top in 10 mm layers and characterized the composition in each layer in terms of the volume fraction of iron powder, A succinct overview of such extensive results on the spatial-temporal evolution of an initially random 50:50 mixture can be obtained by considering the segregation efficiency, The results in To gain insight into the reason for a faster initial segregation rate at the lower end of the velocity range 9.2 cm/s < u < 11.8 cm/s, we determine the initial flux of iron powder within the first 10 s of aeration as a function of depth in the bed. The change in the IP volume fraction, Δ Thus the initial fluxes Now it is evident that at air velocities Whereas most studies of the segregation of powder mixtures focused on the distinctive 2D or 3D spatial patterns of the segregated state, practical requirements of segregation are that the final phases are of high purity and are well separated spatially to facilitate easy extraction. This report is concerned with how this may be achieved for a 50:50 mixture of non-cohesive powders of identical size by using aeration. Starting from a well-mixed chaotic state, near total order of complete segregation can be achieved within a defined range of air velocity. And within this velocity range, differences in the rate of separation and the final efficiency that is attained can be exploited to optimize the operational efficiency of the separation process. Although it is true that segregation reduces the entropy of the powder system, the total entropy of the process must have increased. The dynamic performance is quantified in terms of the time required and the degree of segregation that can be achieved. The time dependence of the segregation efficiency, At low aeration velocities from just above the minimum fluidization velocity of the 50:50 mixture, at This work was supported in part by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 