The production of superior metallurgical-grade silicon requires the use of ultra-clean coal containing <1.5% ash with no iron contamination. The magnetite suspension utilized for coal cleaning in a dense-medium cyclone (DMC) is a detrimental impurity in the final coal product that dramatically diminishes the purity of silicon. A prior study has demonstrated that several silica-based materials may be suitable alternatives that eliminate iron contamination. To further improve the separation performance and evaluate the silica-based media, DMC separation tests were conducted based on a statistically designed program to identify the role of various operational parameters (i.e. medium relative density, silica media blend ratio, and cyclone apex diameter) in maximizing organic efficiency and minimizing low-density bypass. An ideal medium composition with a bimodal particle size distribution considerably improves medium stability properties while also eliminating the undesirable effects of apex diameter on the DMC separation efficiency. Low-density cutpoints (<1.35) are hindered by medium instability, but these issues can be rectified by increasing the amount of fine media particles or decreasing the apex diameter.Modern coal preparation plants use a wide range of low-cost separation processes to generate high-quality clean coal for a number of different downstream markets and applications. While the majority of the U.S. coal is utilized in electrical power generation and steel making, silicon production is a unique market that requires ultra-clean coal A prior study has demonstrated that various silica-based media are feasible alternatives for magnetite in dense-medium cyclone (DMC) coal cleaning operations Development of the DMC took place during World War II at the laboratories of the Dutch States Mines (DSM), now known as Stamicarbon. In the early 1950's, DSM issued an authoritative volume defining various equipment and operational parameters needed to optimize cyclone performance. While this work is quite voluminous, some of the common standards include the typical diameters of feed inlet, vortex finder (product overflow outlet), and apex (reject underflow outlet) expressed as a ratio of the cyclone diameter. Optimum performance was suggested with a vortex-to-apex ratio of 1.8 and an operating inlet pressure equivalent to a static head of nine times the cyclone diameter. The cyclone manufacturer specified these components to provide the desirable capacity and separation characteristics The performance of the DMC is not only influenced by the cyclone geometry and operating conditions, but also the medium properties, including stability and rheology. Medium stability (a measure of solid particle settlings rates in suspension) and medium rheology (medium resistance to fluid flow) have a contradicting influence on DMC performance, and an optimal solution requires a balance between the two properties. As shown by He and Laskowski, the morphological and physical characteristics of the media, such as the medium RD, solid concentration, particle shape, particle size, and level of slimes contamination, all affect the medium properties and subsequently the DMC performance Medium stability directly influences the DMC separation performance by creating density gradients along the radial axis in the separation zone of a DMC Medium stability is primarily governed by particle settling rates, and this behavior is dependent on the drag force caused by varying particle and suspension characteristics. With all other factors equal, the density differential across a horizontal section of the cyclone may be decreased by stabilizing the medium through the addition of low-density ultrafine particles or by the use of fine and irregularly shaped particles The medium rheology can be determined by Casson viscosity and Casson yield stress parameters. Although these two parameters are independent, they jointly define the rheology behavior of the dense-medium Studies have suggested that at any given solid content, suspensions with bimodal particle size distribution (25% to 40% ultrafine particles) will produce a highly stabilized dense-medium with a viscosity comparable to monomodal suspensions. The unique rheological characteristics of bimodal suspensions may have significant potential for dense-medium separation applications. The results reported from previous studies indicate that the stability of the bimodal magnetite-based dense-medium is not correlated with the apparent viscosity parameter. Specifically, a bimodal dense-medium composed of a coarse and a fine size fractions may enhance the medium stability with minimum changes in the medium apparent viscosity Since the early 1950's, the majority of DMC studies have focused on the stability and rheology characteristics of dense-medium as well as the impact of various operating parameters such as, overflow-to-underflow ratio and inlet pressure on the DMC performance. Despite these efforts, few studies have investigated the impact of apex diameter and its interaction effect with the medium stability on the overall DMC separation efficiency. In addition to this large knowledge gap, most of the prior studies have been conducted using magnetite-based media that is common to the traditional coal preparation industry. Although some recent studies Given these uncertainties, this paper presents a detailed parametric study of DMC performance using silica-based media. The Box-Behnken statistical design was used to develop a text matrix that examined three operational factors, namely apex diameter, medium RD, and media blend ratio. Laboratory-scale DMC tests were conducted according to the experimental design, and the results were used to determine various indicators of separation efficiency, including low-density bypass and organic efficiency. Lastly, empirical statistical models were developed to determine the predominant factors influencing separation efficiency and DMC performance. These models provide guidance on the equipment and operational configurations that optimize performance. The materials, samples, and procedures used for testing have been fully described in a prior communication The coal sample used for the performance assessment of the medium was obtained from the DMC process streams of an operating coal preparation plant in Southeastern Kentucky. The coal samples originate from the Blue Gem seam, which is characterized by low middlings, ash, and sulfur contents. These high quality specifications designate Blue Gem coal as an ideal source of carbon raw materials in the silicon production process. Feed samples were collected on site and subsequently screened to obtain the 6.35 Silica sand was obtained from a local producer of high quality material. The silica sand was relatively coarse with 82.51% of the material being in the 250 Experimental design methods and response surface techniques have been widely applied for process analysis to determine the relationship between process parameters and the performance efficiency indicators. These methodologies may employ full factorial, fractional factorial and central composite rotatable designs. Of the all three methodologies, the fractional factorial and central composite rotatable designs require fewer number of experiments and as a result they are considered time and cost efficient strategies Box-Behnken designs, as rotatable or nearly rotatable designs, are employed based on three-level fractional factorial designs. The number of required experiments in a Box-Behnken design can be calculated as Medium RD, silica fume/sand ratio, and apex diameter were selected for investigation since medium RD and percentage of silica fume directly affect the stability properties of the dense-medium. Additionally, the influence of apex diameter on DMC separation performance becomes more significant when an unstable medium is used DMC performance tests were conducted using a pilot-scale DMC operating in closed loop ( Using the float-sink data, partition curves (recovery to clean coal vs. RD) were generated for each test trial. These curves were used to determine high ( To evaluate the DMC operational sensitivity, empirical models and three dimensional plots were developed from the experimental data to reveal the relationship between operating factors and separation performance indicators (i.e., organic efficiency ( To quantitatively validate each statistical model, the “Lack of fit” test was conducted. Lack of fit compares the process variability (pure error) with the variation of results obtained from the statistical model (lack of fit), and a value > The significance of the individual parameter and associated interactions effects was determined by testing the hypothesis that the corresponding coefficients in the empirical expressions were zero. A coefficient of zero implies that the parameter is not significant, since it can be removed from the model without affecting the model fit. The analysis of variance and f-statistic values were used for prescreening the model terms. Any parameter with the The statistical modeling and analyses results do not necessarily indicate that the models have predictive capacity. Since these empirical models were only based on a limited number of experimental runs, the models are not suitable for extrapolation beyond the current range of conditions. Nevertheless, they do provide a rigorous means of determining parameter influences and exploring combinatory effects. The knowledge gained from these empirical models may be later used to guide fundamental modeling efforts, but the development a fully predictive model was beyond the scope of the current effort.  The results also indicate that an increase in the silica fume concentration generally improved the separation efficiency. This outcome is indicative of the medium instability that causes significant gradation within the cyclone. The fine silica fume addition stabilized the coarse silica sand suspension at the lower RD cutpoints and promoted better performance. The impact of silica fume concentration on the DMC separation performance was clearly demonstrated in test numbers 1 and 3 where, at the same medium RD and apex diameter, a 20% increase in silica fume ratio noticeably enhanced the separation efficiency. Without the stabilizing component, separation efficiency decreased, and the performance became more sensitive to the apex diameter. A smaller apex at lower medium RD values generally led to more efficient separations. As medium RD and silica fume concentration increased thereby resulting in improved medium stability conditions, the impact of apex diameter considerably decreased. This result can be demonstrated by comparing tests 5 and 7 as well as tests 9 and 11. Tests 5 and 7 were both conducted at low medium RD and moderate silica fume ratios. By reducing the apex diameter by 10 The DMC test results obtained from the Box-Behnken design were utilized to describe organic efficiency ( The analysis indicated that medium RD, percentage of silica fume, apex diameter and their interactive effects were all significant parameters for the estimation of The analysis revealed that poor medium stability, was a significant factor is triggering poor organic efficiency. As demonstrated in the prior study As fully described in the previous study According to the performance data in When the dense-medium is not completely stable under the conditions of low medium density values and low silica fume concentration, the apex diameter significantly influenced separation performance and provided the ability to correct for the negative effects of an unstable medium. A smaller apex often leads to an increased RD cutpoint by changing the position of zero vertical velocity zone, thereby, causing more near-gravity and low-density material to report to the overflow product stream. The improved coal recovery with little impact on the product ash content leads to higher organic efficiency values when a smaller apex was utilized. These results fully verified the findings obtained from the prior study on the effects of apex diameter on DMC performance To further investigate the causes of poor DMC performance efficiency, low-density bypass (  When the dense-medium is unstable, density gradients are expanded from the inner core to the outer wall of the cyclone thereby resulting in a significant range of medium RD values through the cross-section of the cyclone. As a result, low-density, high-quality coal particles have the ability to approach the outer wall where the downward velocity of the medium carries the particle to the underflow stream as reject. Increasing the diameter of the apex shifts the envelope of zero vertical velocity in the cyclone toward the air core into the relatively low-density gradients created by the unstable medium. As a result, the large apex combined with the unstable medium results in a significant amount of low-density bypass. The problem is compounded by the impact of a low volumetric flow rate in the overflow stream created by a large apex diameter. When the volumetric amount of medium reporting to the overflow stream drops below a critical level, coarse low-density particles are unable to exit due to physical constraints, and are ultimately lost to the reject stream. To minimize low-density bypass due to an insufficient medium flow rate, the typical practice is to maintain the medium-to-coal ratio in the overflow stream above 3:1 As shown in When operating at a low medium RD of 1.35, low-density bypass occurred under nearly all combinations of apex diameters and silica fume concentrations considered in the investigation as shown in Silicon production requires the use of high quality coal that contains < 1.5% ash and limited concentrations of other trace elements such as iron. Ultrafine magnetite is commonly used in coal cleaning to form a dense medium with a RD that can produce the required coal quality. Although magnetite recovery circuits are employed, small quantities remain attached to the coal, and this unavoidable contamination has a negative impact on the quality of the final silicon product. As such, a study was conducted to evaluate silica-based materials as a substitute for magnetite in the DMC cleaning operation. Prior research has advocated the benefits of bimodal media in balancing medium stability and viscosity, and as a result, the current investigation evaluated various blends of fine silica sand with an ultrafine silica-based byproduct to form the medium to be used in a DMC. A statistically-designed test program was performed to optimize the sand blend and apex diameter over a range of medium RD values. Four conclusions are derived from the parametric studies: Coal meeting the quality specifications for silicon production can be produced at a high efficiency level using a medium having a RD below 1.40 and consisting of a blend of silica materials if the apex is sized appropriately. In a DMC separation using silica-based dense-medium, the separation efficiency was closely related to the medium RD. At lower medium RD values, the effect of medium stability played a major role. Poor separation efficiency was achieved due to the instability of the silica sand-fume suspension at low medium RDs. By increasing the medium RD, medium stability was enhanced, which resulted in better separation efficiency. The diameter of the apex strongly affected the organic efficiency and low-density bypass parameters when the dense-medium was unstable. At low medium RD values with low silica fume concentrations, decreasing the diameter of the apex significantly improved organic efficiency values and decreased the bypass of low-density, high-quality coal particles to the reject stream. The stability of the medium at low RD values was significantly improved by using a mixture of fine silica sand and ultrafine silica fume material. The blend of silica sources provided a bimodal particle size distribution, which has been previously reported and confirmed in this study to provide enhanced medium stability. Increasing the percentage of silica fume to as high as 50% of the total material used to form the dense-medium resulted in high separation efficiency values and lower losses of low-density, high-quality coal to the reject stream when using medium having a RD as low as 1.35 in a DMC. The authors also acknowledge the technical contributions provided by Dr. Datta P. Patil.