The Florida phosphate industry uses millions of pounds of fuel oil per year for phosphate flotation. It is of significant environmental and economic benefit to reduce the usage of fuel oil. This paper presents laboratory-testing results from both a FIPR in-house research program and a contractual project with University of Utah. In the FIPR in-house project, three different flotation feed samples were obtained for laboratory testing. Initial laboratory rougher flotation tests were performed to compare the response of 10 petroleum-based froth modifiers plus one sample of rosin oil derived from tall oil rosin. Successful flotation tests, in which 1/3 of several selected petroleum-based modifiers was replaced by rosin oil, resulted in a P2O5 recovery increase. The Utah project showed that the addition of a nonionic polymer could reduce fuel oil use by up to 50% for flotation of coarse phosphates. The mechanisms by which polymers improve phosphate flotation was studied.Long-chain fatty acids used for commercial flotation applications go through an ionization process between pH 4 and 10. At pH around 8.0 there is an ion molecular complex (RCOOH–RCOO–) present in 1:1 proportion Non-polar hydrocarbon oils have an essential role in flotation. The Florida phosphate industry uses about 150 million pounds a year of fuel oil in the forms of No. 5 oil or kerosene. One of the effects of oil or kerosene is to increase the resulting contact angle of a mineral against air bubbles substantially over the value in its absence thereby accelerating kinetics and making possible the flotation of larger particles, both as a result of stronger adhesion of individual particles to bubbles and , equally, of the flotation of air/mineral/oil aggregates as well as individual particles The industry has been using excessive amount of fuel oil mainly for controlling foaming. There are two principal techniques for destructing foams. Defoaming may be accomplished by either neutralization of the surfactant responsible for foam formation or its displacement. Thus an addition of suitable metallic ions to produce insoluble salts with anionic surfactants may be effective in foam suppression whenever surfactants such as alcohols and nonionic polyoxyethylenes are absent in the system. Equally effective may be an addition of an oppositely charged surfactant which gives a reaction product with the foam-forming surfactant in the form of an insoluble precipitate or mixed micelles with extremely low residual concentrations of both surfactants. Insoluble fatty acids esters, alkyl phosphates, and alkyl amides probably act in this manner. The second means of eliminating the surface elasticity relies on displacing the adsorbed surfactant from the interface with a nearly insoluble film of oil. Silicone and perfluorohydrocarbon oils are very effective foam inhibitors if dispersed in aqueous solutions as an emulsion, with or without a diluent Although tremendous amount of fuel oil is being used for controlling foaming, excessive foaming still occurs in many plants, which causes appreciable waste of fatty acids. Fuel oil may not be the most effective defoamer for phosphate flotation. A small amount of an additive or a commercial defoamer could reduce fuel oil usage dramatically. Excessive use of fuel oil is not only costly, but also causes environmental concern, because fuel oil does not biodegrade as fast as other flotation reagents such as fatty acids and amines. The first step of this research program was to document the relative performance of various petroleum derivatives as froth modifiers/auxiliary collectors during anionic rougher flotation of Florida phosphate, followed by determination of the potential value of rosin oil as a partial substitute for some of the petroleum derivatives, thereby reducing the flotation water contamination by these reagents. The fuel oils currently used to control froth character and increase tall oil collector “pull power” include No. 5 oil, reclaimed oil and possibly Bunker C/diesel mixtures. These petroleum derivatives are currently priced at about $0.04–$0.07 per pound (in bulk quantities). Locating cheap reagents suitable as partial substitutes for these petroleum products is a challenging task. An effective substitute reagent must not only help prevent excessive frothing, but must not result in a decrease in “pull power” without using extra collector during rougher flotation. If a more costly substitute reagent (or reagent combination) is found that increases collector strength without adversely affecting the flotation selectivity, any resultant phosphate recovery increase should improve the overall processing cost. For example, using sodium silicate plus some rosin oil substitution for fuel oil might increase both rougher and amine (cleaner) circuit recoveries resulting from beneficial changes in froth character and higher rougher concentrate (amine feed) grade. Rosin oil is produced by thermal decarboxylation of natural rosin and/or tall oil rosin acids. Basically, it contains a mixture of cyclic hydrocarbons plus variable amounts of impurities. When produced from tall oil high-rosin acid fractions, the rosin oil contains some fatty acids and unreacted rosin acids. The rosin oil used for the current testwork was produced by Westvaco many years ago and had an acid number of 50. Three samples of flotation feed were used for the current laboratory testwork. These samples are designated as A, B and C. Rougher flotation of A feed was performed using NH The current laboratory flotation tests used 0.70–0.86 lb of NH When no froth modifier was used for lab flotation, very poor results were obtained. The successful performance of the two froth modifiers containing cyclic hydrocarbons (Philflo oil and Westvaco rosin oil) is noteworthy. The partial substitution of rosin oil for fuel oil was considered to be worthy of additional flotation testwork. Four petroleum-based froth modifiers were selected for flotation tests using partial substitution of rosin oil. Diesel, PCS fuel oil, Coastal #5 fuel oil and IPC reclaimed oil were selected for these tests. Westvaco rosin oil (0.2 lb/ton of feed) was used with each selected modifier (0.4 lb/ton of feed) in place of the selected modifier (0.6 lb/ton of feed). Flotation test results are presented for comparison in In order to further evaluate the potential use of rosin oil as a partial substitute for fuel oil, three exploratory flotation tests were performed using plant B feed. Soda ash (0.84–1.44 lb/ton of feed) was used to obtain a conditioning pH=9.0–9.2. Liqro GA tall oil collector was used at the 1.0 lb/ton of feed level for all tests except the last one. Again, rosin oil improved flotation recovery, as shown in It should be pointed out that when only rosin oil (plus N-silicate) was used as the froth modifier, excellent selectivity but poor P To further evaluate the potential use of rosin oil as a froth modifier during flotation of southern extension black phosphate, eight flotation tests were performed using C plant feed. Soda ash (0.80–1.32 lb/ton of feed) was used to obtain a conditioning pH=9.0–9.2. Liqro GA tall oil collector was used at the 1.0 lb/ton of feed level for all tests except the last one. N-silicate was used at the 0.4 lb/ton of feed level for some tests. The conditioning and flotation parameters used with the PCS and Cargill feeds were used again. Very poor selectivity occurred using #5 fuel oil (0.6 lb/ton of feed) without using N-silicate. The selectivity was greatly improved when N-silicate was used. The combination of fuel oil (0.6 lb), rosin oil (0.2 lb) and N-silicate (0.4 lb) gave the best results from an overall concentrate grade/recovery standpoint. This flotation concentrate analyzed 29.67% P Rosin acid soap (Dresinate) was tested many years ago as a Florida phosphate collector. It performed poorly and usually produced voluminous “foamy” froths. For the current tests wherein rosin oil was substituted for 1/4–1/3 of the fuel oil requirement, flotation froth was concluded to be very good and persistant throughout each 2-min test period. It is possible that interactions occur between rosin oil, fuel oil, tall oil composition and sodium silicate that affect flotation rate and froth character, but are not completely understood at the present time. Sodium silicate use in local phosphate flotation plants has been shown to improve froth character and probably flotation rate as well as improve selectivity. The development of a customized phosphate collector by direct decarboxylation of a high-rosin tall oil vapor at the producer's tall oil fractionation plant is an interesting concept. This collector ideally would contain fatty acids and rosin oil with minor rosin acids and would require less fuel oil when used in phosphate flotation. The economics of producing this type of reagent are beyond our ability to determine. At present, we do not even know if the decarboxylation stage would work in the presence of a relatively large fatty acid content in the processing feedstock. If not, blending of the fatty acids with rosin oil produced at the fractionation plant might be desirable. The practicality of this approach should probably be discussed with an appropriate tall oil fractionation chemist, if we can locate one who is willing to help. Flotation tests discussed in part I confirmed that #5 fuel oil is the most feasible frother/extender for fatty acid flotation of phosphate, when both flotation performance and cost are considered. It was also demonstrated that partial replacement for #5 fuel oil was possible, achieving equivalent or better phosphate recovery. This part of the research was focused on optimizing the partial replacement of #5 fuel oil, particularly by rosin oil. In addition to No. 5 fuel oil and rosin oil, five froth modifiers were used to replace about 25% of the No. 5 fuel oil during laboratory flotation tests. The froth modifiers were added to the conditioner along with the pH regulator (soda ash) and the phosphate collector (Liqro GA T.O. and No. 5 fuel oil). Follow-up flotation tests were also performed adding the froth modifier surfactant to the flotation cell water for comparison purposes. The various froth modifiers tested and their current approximate cost per pound are listed in Flotation recoveries for the tests performed using the various froth modifiers as partial fuel oil substitutes are presented in All tests were performed using 500 g of feed (dry basis). Conditioning for 2 min at about 75% solids was employed as in all previously reported tests. Flotation time was normally 2 min except for tests with tributyl phosphate wherein 3 minutes was required as a result of the slow flotation rate observed. Tall Oil collector and No. 5 fuel oil base levels were 1.0 and 0.6 lb/ton of feed for all tests, respectively. Soda ash use was 0.84–0.92 lb/ton of feed to produce a conditioning ph of about 9.0–9.2+. The use of 0.2 lb of froth modifier per ton of feed equates to about 20 ppm of the modifier in the flotation cell water. The data presented in Four flotation tests were performed wherein rosin oil was added during conditioning in quantities of 0.0, 0.1, 0.2 and 0.4 lb/ton of feed along with constant standard tall oil plus fuel oil amounts of 1.0 and 0.6 lb/ton of feed, respectively. Mean values for concentrate % P Three froth modifiers were selected for a brief flotation test series to illustrate the effect of using 0.4 lb of N-brand sodium silicate to improve rougher flotation selectivity and possibly froth characteristics. As with previous tests, 1.0 lb of tall oil plus 0.6 lb of fuel oil were used as the standard phosphate collector. The sodium silicate was added during the final 20 s of conditioning. All other independent flotation variables were the same as used with previous flotation tests. The results showed that the use of sodium silicate resulted in about 5–6% P Difficulty in coarse phosphate flotation arises from the relatively large mass of the particles and the reduced froth stability. Improvements in fluid dynamics (reduced turbulence), froth stability, and hydrophobicity of the particle surface should result in improved flotation performance. Notwithstanding the previous efforts, the efficiency of coarse phosphate flotation frequently remains unsatisfactory. More research is needed for further improvement of coarse phosphate flotation. PEO surfactants have been successfully used in de-inking flotation and mineral flotation The results reveal that several PEO polymers show a favorable effect on the phosphate flotation recovery when used together with the traditional fatty acid/fuel oil collector. The concentrate grade (%P Presented in The flotation results obtained using PEO-1 addition and using fatty acid/fuel oil alone are compared in It can be seen that at a collector addition of less than 700 g/t, only a limited amount of phosphate was floated, 20–60% when fatty acid/fuel oil was used as collector. As expected the PEO-1 had a favorable effect and facilitated phosphate recovery at lower fatty acid/fuel oil additions. For example with only 10% PEO-1 addition, 85–90% of the phosphate was floated at a collector addition of 500 g/t (comparing to 60% without PEO-1). To achieve the same 85% flotation recovery 1200 g/t of traditional fatty acid/fuel oil collector is needed. Fuel oil usage for phosphate flotation may be reduced by about 30% by substituting a portion of fuel oil with certain froth modifiers, with rosin oil being the most promising. The higher cost for rosin oil can be offset by improved flotation recovery. Addition of a non-ionic polymer (PEO-1) could reduce fuel use by up to 50% for coarse phosphate flotation. PEO-1 accomplishes this by increasing the contact angle, improving froth stability and helping dispersion of fatty acid collector. The Florida Institute of Phosphate Research is acknowledged for sponsoring the two research projects (FIPR #97-02-125 and #96-02-113R). The authors appreciate the following companies for supplying samples for the studies: CF Industries, Cargill Fertilizer, IMC Phosphates and PCS Phosphate. Special thanks are given to the FIPR Beneficiation Technical Advisory Committee for their support and technical input.