We propose here the concept of semiautomatic measurement of soluble copper and lead in atmospheric deposition by the coupling of filtrating-bulk passive sampling by an atmospheric elemental fractionation sampler (AEFS) designed for fractionation of soluble and insoluble elemental species, and square wave anodic stripping voltammetric detection on screen printed electrodes. The voltammetric parameters were optimized to provide a reliable method for Pb(II) and Cu(II) monitoring with detection limits in the low ngmL−1 range. The method was validated by analyzing ambient water certified reference materials with good agreement between measured and certified values. The monitoring system was tested during a 1month experimental campaign in a suburban area and proved useful to monitor copper changes in the atmospheric deposition. Lead was also measurable after fortification since its levels were under the detection limit of the voltammetric method. The results obtained were contrasted by a lab based standard ICP-MS method with good correlation. Our results are promising about the possibility of routine field use of unattended voltammetric measurements of trace element monitoring in atmospheric deposition.Trace element contents in atmospheric deposition are a relevant source of environmental information. Elemental profile data set are routinely measured within atmospheric surveillance activities, for the assessment of potential effects of deposition on receiving ecosystems and also for pollution source identification and apportionment. Standard analytical protocols for atmospheric trace element monitoring are based on the use of passive or active sampling protocols, sample transfer to the lab, and measurement of total elemental concentration by GF-AAS, ICP-AES or ICP-MS. Sampling intervals are long, typically days to weeks so immediate insights and interpretations are generally not available for field adjustment and modifications of experimental sampling strategies and protocols. Methods published by the European Monitoring and Evaluation Program (EMEP) An alternative approach aims to obtain the analytical information at sampling points or close in field, to provide a better-resolved spatial and temporal view of chemical properties of atmospheric deposition. Moreover, automated measurements allow unattended operation and can be associated with remote data transfer for improved monitoring of atmospheric processes and environmental impacts. Some instruments have been developed and validated for online measurement of aerosol and gaseous atmospheric chemical parameters. A particle-into-liquid collector for rapid measurement of aerosol bulk chemical composition was described by Weber et al. Passive sampling is a useful and affordable alternative to more sophisticated active samplers or automatic dry-only/wet-only collectors within short and long term atmospheric monitoring activities, especially for unattended and power free operation at remote places, and it is a standard in the frame of trace element monitoring in atmospheric deposition Copper and lead were selected as model ions to test the proposed analytical system due to their environmental relevance. The environmental impact of copper is powered by the magnitude of mineral extraction, the diversity of industrial processes and the wide dissemination of its products, which makes it an atmospheric tracer of a range of anthropogenic activities as traffic All chemicals used for the preparation of stock and standard solution were of analytical grade. 1000 The proposed semiautomatic system for soluble lead and copper monitoring in atmospheric deposition samples was constructed by coupling an atmospheric sampler and a voltammetric detection device ( Screen-printed gold electrodes (SPGE) strips were purchased from Ecobioservices (Firenze, Italy). They are designed in a three electrode configuration printed on the same platform. The working electrode (Ø 3 A standard ICP-MS protocol for Cu(II) and Pb(II) determination in the atmospheric deposition samples was applied on a PerkinElmer ELAN 9000 equipment (Waltham, MA, USA) for accuracy check of the electrochemical results. The instrument parameters used in the analytical determination were 1000 The proposed analytical device was deployed outside our laboratory located at the University of Extremadura, Badajoz campus, Spain. Atmospheric deposition samples were collected in days with rain events (rain events with total volume collected minor than 0.5 The voltammetric method was based on a previously described protocol described methods for Pb(II) in river water The step potential influence on simultaneous Cu(II) and Pb(II) voltammetric stripping signals was studied in the range from 2 to 8 The influence of the stirring speed during the deposition step was tested in the interval from 480 to 1280 Finally, the influence of the deposition time on the peak currents was tested in the interval from 0 to 120 Voltammetric stripping calibration data for Cu(II) and Pb(II) on the SPGEs were estimated by analyzing in triplicate standard solutions of increasing concentrations. Copper was calibrated from 0 to 125 Two certified standard reference materials, namely SPS-SW2 Batch 121 Elements in Surface Water and SPS-SWW2 Batch 108 Elements in Waste Water were assayed to test the applicability of the proposed voltammetric method for Cu(II) and Pb(II) in environmental matrices. Three subsamples of each reference material were assayed using the previously optimized variables. In the case of SPS-SW2 the measured concentration for Cu(II) was 91.1 The proposed analytical system for sampling, fractionation and voltammetric analysis of the elements in the soluble fraction of atmospheric deposition was tested during a field campaign in April 2014. 9 samples were collected and assayed by SWASV and ICP-MS, and the results are shown in A new analytical system for semiautomatic measurement of soluble concentration of Cu(II) and Pb(II)in atmospheric deposition has been constructed and validated in field conditions. The combination of an atmospheric elemental fractionation sampler and optimized square wave voltammetric stripping analysis based on screen printed gold electrodes SPGEs, connected to portable instrumentation, allows continuous monitoring of Cu(II) in real atmospheric deposition samples. The reliability of the monitoring system has been demonstrated by analysis of certified reference materials and contrast with standardized lab based ICP-MS measurements. The portable characteristics of the passive sampler and the voltammetric instrument (screen-printed electrodes, miniaturized potentiostat, laptop or PDA control) aside to the flexibility, ease of operation and low price of the developed method, open the possibility for routine use of unattended voltammetric measurements for field determination of Cu(II) and Pb(II) and related trace elements in atmospheric depositions. This work is supported by the