Glucocorticoids (GCs) exert profound effects on bone and are essential for human osteoblast differentiation. However, GCs are still interpreted as negative regulators of bone formation, mainly caused by the detrimental effects on bone after clinical use of GCs. In this paper we emphasize the importance of GCs for proper human osteoblast differentiation and matrix mineralization. We show that human osteoblast differentiation needs to be triggered by GCs in a specific time-window during the early stages of development. Exposure to GCs in the beginning of osteoblast development induces a dose dependent increase in alkaline phosphatase activity and matrix mineralization. GC-induced differentiation stimulated expression of genes involved in bone formation and suppressed genes that negatively regulate bone formation and mineralization. Furthermore we highlight the importance of local cortisol activation in osteoblasts by expression of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 1 (11β-HSD1).Osteoblast differentiation is a complex process regulated by many endocrine, paracrine and autocrine factors. In human and rat bone marrow stromal cells GCs are crucial for the induction of osteoblast differentiation and formation of a mineralized extracellular matrix ( SV-HFO cells were cultured in αMEM (GIBCO, Paisley, UK) supplemented with 20 For DNA measurements, 100 ALP activity was assayed by determining the release of paranitrophenol from paranitrophenylphosphate (20 For quantification of the mineral content cell lysates were incubated overnight in 0.24 For Alizarin Red S staining cell cultures were fixed for 60 Apoptosis was measured through the binding of annexin V and uptake of propidium iodide (PI) by flow cytometry using a Apoptest-FITC kit (Nexins research, Kattendijke, The Netherlands). For analysis 10,000 osteoblasts were counted using a FACScalibur (Becton Dickinson). Percentage total apoptotic cells was calculated by counting vital (unlabeled), apoptotic (annexin V stained), necrotic (PI stained) and late apoptotic cells (double stained). Proliferation was examined by [ Osteocalcin was determined in the cultures medium. Osteocalcin was assayed by radioimmunoassay by incubating overnight with Cortisone to cortisol conversion in SV-HFO cells was measured as described previously ( Total RNA was isolated using RNA-Bee solution (Tel-Test, Friendwood, TX) according to the manufacturer's protocol. To remove calcium (derived from extracellular matrix), RNA was precipitated by overnight incubation with 4 Data presented are the results of at least two independent experiments performed in triplicate. Values are the means To demonstrate the importance of GCs for human osteoblast differentiation in more detail we used the pre-osteoblast model SV-HFO ( Studies using human osteosarcoma cells and mouse osteoblasts show that GC treatment inhibits osteoblast cell number and proliferation ( Data clearly show that osteoblasts need to be directed by GCs to differentiate and mineralize. Moreover osteoblasts need to be triggered by GCs in a specific time-window during the early stages of development. This is demonstrated in Besides clear phenotypic characteristics like matrix mineralization, GC-induced differentiation regulates a wide variety of genes that control proper osteoblast differentiation and matrix mineralization. Here we show several examples of genes that are regulated after GC-induced differentiation. In these experiments we analyzed gene expression (mRNA) in the first, second and third week of culture in both differentiated (DEX treated) and non-differentiated cultures (non-treated control). GC-induced differentiation resulted in up-regulation of osteoblast markers like Runx2, collagenIα1 and ALP ( A more complex regulation of gene expression by DEX is shown for osteocalcin (OCN). OCN is the most abundant non-collagenuous protein in bone matrix, which gene contains a Vitamin D responsive element (VDRE) ( Both OCN and OPN are markers of osteoblast differentiation and OCN is used as a serum marker for bone turnover. Nevertheless these genes are down regulated by GC-induced differentiation. At first sight this seems to contradict a positive role of GCs in osteoblast differentiation. However, despite their use as markers of bone formation, the exact role of OPN and OCN in the bone matrix is not fully understood. In contrast, they seem to act as negative regulators of the mineralization process. OPN and OCN-deficient mice show increased amounts of mineral in their bones ( In summary during GC-induced osteoblast differentiation genes are either up-regulated or down-regulated to stimulate osteoblast differentiation and proper matrix development. The genes discussed here are only a small set of the genes that account for osteoblast differentiation and matrix mineralization. In the literature also other genes are described that are regulated by DEX treatment in osteoblasts like, TGFβ1, bone sialoprotein, osterix and others ( The importance of GCs for proper osteoblast differentiation and bone forming function is emphasized by osteoblastic expression of 11β-HSD1. Expression of 11β-HSD1 in osteoblasts provides an efficient mechanism for the local activation of GCs in bone. In a previous study we showed that 11β-HSD1 is regulated in a differentiation dependent manner in osteoblasts ( The major aim of this study was to underscore the significance of GCs for proper human osteoblast differentiation. GCs are essential for human osteoblast differentiation, which is in marked contrast to the widely studied murine osteoblast differentiation. The human GC-induced differentiation process is summarized in The detrimental effects on bone after clinical use of GCs is in this respect unclear but might be caused by various potential mechanisms. It might be duration (i.e. long term) or concentration dependent. However, in our studies we examined a range of concentrations and treated the cells continuously. GC effect might be dependent on osteoblast differentiation stage and act inhibitory at very late stages of osteoblast differentiation and osteocytes (