Evaluation of reagents to be the potential frothers for copper-molybdenite sulfide mineral flotation is systematically studied. A frother characterization methodology including, the parameters of frothing system, namely, initial dynamic frothability index (IDFI) and initial dynamic froth collapse rate (IDCR) are used in the analysis of dynamic frothability of reagent and in selection of potential frothers. Flotation tests using the reagents as frothers for copper-molybdenite sulfide mineral are conducted to determine the metallurgical performance of these potential frothers. The metallurgical performance of the flotation is also used to confirm the potential frothers selected by using the parameters of the frothing system. IDFI and IDCR can also be used in the formulation of frother mixtures from the reagents, to meet a certain desired frother property.Various commercially available frothers can show different froth properties because of different chemical structure and operational conditions. Frother concentration typically used in flotation are extremely low (5 Recognizing the mineral flotation process is a complex interactive system, and individual frother has rather well defined optimal rate of flotation, which has lead to extensive frother blending. It was found that the impact of the blended frothers on total recovery is noticeably greater than any changes possible by changing the collector dosage ( Froth height has been used as one of important parameters to characterize frothability of a reagent. A reagent with strong frothing ability tends to produce stable froth with high volume. However, there are some limitations in using froth height only to explain some phenomena in mineral flotation: 1) Some reagents show good flotation performance but can not produce a high froth. 2) The froth height depends upon frother dosage and the measured froth height has been reported at the arbitrary frother concentration. 3) For two froths with the same froth height, they might have different bubble size distribution, coalescence rate and further a different flotation performance. 4) Froth height also can not be correlated well with the quality of froth products because of complicated effect of froth drainage due to bubble coalescence. A higher Cu or Mo recovery from high froth is expected at sacrifice of flotation selectivity. The Cu and Mo grade decreases and forms a Cu and Mo distribution with the froth height due to the effect of drainage. A satisfactory explanation of fine hydrophobic flotation phenomena can not be reached without considering the bubble coalescence in froth. Froth volume and bubble coalescence are both important parameters influencing the quality of froth. Delicate balance between froth height and bubble coalescence is necessary to get an optimized flotation results. A good frother must produce a high froth volume to get high mineral recovery while maintaining some bubble coalescence or collapse rate to guarantee metal grade in concentrate. However, there is no simple correlation between coalescence inhibition and froth height. Different methodologies have been developed to compare and evaluate the frother performance. Two new parameters of frothing system for evaluating the frothability of frothers, including Initial Dynamic Frothability Index (IDFI) and Initial Dynamic Collapse Rate (IDCR), have been reported and measured ( The copper ore sample tested is from Green Valley, Arizona. The copper ore, as received, was crushed through a jaw crusher and then screened through a 10-mesh sieve. The coarse portion was passed through a roller crusher. The two streams were combined, blended, and then split into 650-g/head package and ready for use. Prior to flotation, the desired grind time and lime addition were determined. Three grind times are selected and three test heads were ground for respective times in order to bracket the desired grind. The determined grind time is 11 min for each head in ball mill and addition of lime is 1 g/head with a pH value of 11.5 in supernatant of sample after grinding. Sample size analysis showed that the flotation feed has a top size of 295 μm and 58.86% finer than 74 μm. The Cu, determined by Atomic Absorption Sepctrophotometry, was 0.348% and Mo 0.026%. The chemicals used in flotation include collectors, promoter and 14 tested frother reagents ( The flotation machine used was DENVER laboratory type. The 2000 cc cell was used and was fitted with double blade mechanized froth removal paddles that revolved at 35 rpm. The pulp level was maintained at a constant level. A 650-g sample of copper ore was conditioned in 1800 cc of de-ionized water for 4 min with agitator revolving at 1500 rpm. Then frother was added, after another one minute of conditioning period, the air was supplied at 6 L/min (1.8 GPM) and the paddle was energized. The froth was collected at flotation time 1.5 min and 4 min. The concentrates and tailings were filtered, dried overnight, ground and sampled for chemical analysis. Dry concentrate and tailing samples were treated by acid leaching. The filtrate was diluted for analysis of copper and molybdenum content analysis. Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (Model: PERKIN-ELMER2380) is used in chemical analysis. Copper and molybdenum recoveries in concentrate are defined as Flotation of selectivity, SI The froth height, Retention time of froth in liquid column is defined in Eq. To evaluate the frothability of the reagents, a new parameter is derived. This new parameter (IDFI) is derived from the changes of initial time (IRT) with reagent concentration ( From Eq. IDFI indicates the frothing ability of a reagent and it is independent of frother concentration. The product of IDFI and Froth height begins to decrease due to bubble coalescence once the aeration is stopped. Different frothers show different collapsing rate. The initial collapse rate (ICR) is defined in Eq. To evaluate the coalescence ability of the froth by a reagent, a new parameter is derived. This new parameter (IDCR) is derived from the changes of initial collapse rate (ICR) with reagent concentration ( IDCR tells the froth collapsing ability of a reagent and it is independent of frother concentration. The product of IDCR and As shown in  A reagent with an IDCR value between 20 and 100 cm dm Selectivity index (SI) is a composite quantity of recovery and grades in concentrate and tailings. Correlation between SI and IDFI for the reagents tested is shown in The product of IDFI and Although changing a reagent dosage might improve the frothability of a less active frother, it is not feasible to apply a high dosage in practice. Mixing different reagents with different frothabilities to synthesize the reagent mixtures is a better solution. The frother mixtures are generated by combining reagent 12 and reagent 7 at different weight percentages. The IDFI values of synthesized frother mixtures are given in Reagents 1, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 are medium strong or strong frothers. They yield the high copper-molybdenite recovery and selectivity. They can produce medium to high froth volume during flotation. Reagents 1, 2, 5 and 7 are strong frothers, while reagents 3, 6, 8, 9 and 11 are medium strong frothers. Reagents 3, 5 and 8 have very high froth persistency, which is much higher than that of reagent 13 (DF250). Thus, these reagents should be avoided to prevent the downstream operation problems. Reagent 7 has exceptional high IDFI value of 1166 s dm Reagents 4, 12 and 14 are very weak frothers. They can not produce a stable thick froth due to their rapid froth collapse rates. They yield both low recovery and selectivity for copper-molybdenite sulfide. Reagents 1, 6, 9, 10 and 11 are medium and strong frothers with medium and high froth collapse rates. Reagents 1 and 10 have a combination of IDFI and IDCR values to produce high quality of concentrate with low recovery or low quality of concentrate with high recovery. Both reagents have low froth collapse rates and can cause unstable thin foam. Thus, reagents 1 and 10 should also be avoided. Reagents 6, 9 and 11 are potential frothers. They yield reasonable high recovery of copper and molybdenum with high selectivity. The IDFI values range from 250–400 s dm Apply the parameters of the frothing system previously studied, and study the frothability of twelve reagents in copper-molybdenite flotation performance, the following conclusions can be drawn. The parameters for the frothing system developed in the previous study, which include Initial Dynamical Froth Index (IDFI), and the Initial Dynamical Collapse Rate (IDCR), can be used to describe the characteristics of the frothers for mineral flotation. IDFI is a froth volume formation rate related to quantity, which can be used to relate to the mineral recovery. IDCR is a froth calescence and dissipate rate quantity, which can be used to relate to the concentrate metal grades. Selection of potential frothers among twelve reagents was concluded based on the IDFI and IDCR values and flotation performance of copper-molybdenite flotation using these reagents as frothers. The selected frothers are ECOSOFT Solvent PE, ECOSOFT TM Solvent PE and TEXAS CITY OXO Mixture (reagents 6, 9 and 11), which correspond to IDFI values in the range of 250–400 s dm IDFI, IDCR and IDFI