Fractures of the distal radius are commonly treated with cast immobilisation; however, those potentially unstable injuries with dorsal comminution may need operative intervention. This intervention is usually with manipulation and Kirschner wires but advances in locking-plate technology have enabled surgeons to achieve anatomical reconstruction of complex fracture patterns, even in poor-quality osteoporotic bone.
                  To ascertain if fixed-angle volar-locked plates confer a significant benefit over manipulation and Kirschner-wire stabilisation, we prospectively randomised 56 adult patients with isolated, closed, unilateral, unstable extra-articular fractures into two treatment groups, one fixed with K-wires and the other fixed with a volar locking plate.
                  Functional outcomes were assessed using Gartland and Werley and Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) scores. These were statistically better in the plate group at 3 and 6 months. Radiological assessment showed statistically better results at 6 weeks, 3 months and 6 months, post-operatively. In the plate group, there was no significant loss of fracture reduction.Fracture of the distal radius has an incidence of 36.8/10 Volar plates offer a number of distinct advantages over other techniques, including precise periarticular reconstruction, avoidance of dorsal scarring and disruption of the dorsal branches of the anterior interosseous artery, improved implant coverage within the pronator fossa and reduced risk of tendon irritation and attrition. They are also biomechanically superior, with an implant stiffness that will support the physiological loads placed on the wrist joint. Percutaneous pins cannot protect against radial collapse in osteoporotic bone as they are not load-bearing devices. It was the aim of this study to compare both the functional and radiological outcomes of extra-articular distal radial fractures managed using volar locking plates with closed manipulation and percutaneous K-wire fixation in a prospective randomised manner. This study was performed at two district general hospitals, serving a combined patient population of 500 Patients with closed, unilateral, dorsally displaced, unstable extra-articular distal radius fractures (AO classification type A) were eligible for inclusion and were admitted either from the emergency department or from the fracture clinic. Instability was defined as dorsal angulation (>20°), dorsal comminution and radial shortening (>4 Patients were randomised by computer-generated permuted block envelopes to either the plate fixation group or the K-wire fixation group. In the plate fixation group, a volar approach was made to the distal radius through the floor of the sheath of flexor carpi radialis. The plate was used to indirectly reduce the fracture, if necessary. This was achieved by placing the locking screws in the distal fragment first and using the plate as a lever to manipulate the distal fragment into the correct position. Two plates were used in the study, the Hand Innovations DVR-Anatomic plate and the Synthes LCP T-plate 3.5 In the K-wire fixation group, closed reduction of the fracture was performed and fixation was achieved using three 1.6-mm percutaneous pins ( To ensure standardisation between the two arms of the study, both groups were immobilised post-operatively in a below-elbow cast for 6 weeks. Early activity in the percutaneous pinning group was not an option as they do not support load. Further follow-up was performed at 3 and 6 months. Clinical evaluation was performed by a senior physiotherapist, who was blinded to the treatment modality used. Outcome scoring was performed using the Gartland and Werley scoring system and the shortened version of the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand outcome measure (quickDASH). A power analysis was performed by a medical statistician, who calculated the sample size that would detect either any significant change in radial length or dorsal inclination, or a difference in DASH or Gartland and Werley scores. Data were summarised by medians rather than means because of the non-normal distribution. For the same reason, groups were compared using non-parametric Mann–Whitney Patients were prospectively recruited over a 36-month period. A total of 79 patients met the criteria for inclusion. Of these, 56 agreed to participate. Thus, 27 patients were entered into the study directly on admission to hospital. A total of 29 patients were entered into the study via the fracture clinic at 1 week when it was identified that the fracture position had slipped with cast treatment. Nineteen of these latter patients had undergone closed manipulation and plaster-cast treatment by the emergency department under haematoma block or Bier's block. The mean interval between injury and operation was 6 days (range 0–20 days). A total of 27 patients were randomised into the plate group and 29 into the K-wire group. There was no significant difference in the demographics of each group ( The grade of surgeon was similar for both groups. A consultant orthopaedic surgeon performed 20 (74%) of the volar plate and 18 (62%) of the K-wire fixations. The remainder of the operations was performed by senior orthopaedic specialist registrar trainees or associate specialists. No patients were lost to follow-up. The functional outcome as assessed by the Gartland and Werley score and patient-assessed functional outcome using the DASH score were significantly better in the plate group than in the K-wire group at 3 and 6 months ( The radiological assessment was performed by two authors at a 6-month interval between the two assessments to assess both intra- (kappa value 0.79) and interobserver (kappa value 0.68) error, Radiological assessment showed that the immediate post-operative reduction was better in the plate group than in the K-wire group in terms of dorsal tilt ( No specific complications were recorded in this particular group of plate fixations within the time limits of the study. In the K-wire group, complications were recorded in eight patients (28%). These included pin-site infection in five patients (17%), superficial radial nerve palsy in one patient, carpal tunnel syndrome secondary to loss of fracture position in one patient and a painful migrated pin in one patient. Two of the pin-site infections were treated with oral antibiotics, but in the other three, in addition to antibiotics, the K-wires were removed early with loss of fracture reduction. Three patients in the K-wire group required a second operation. These were re-manipulation and re-pinning of the fracture with decompression of the carpal tunnel in the patient with carpal tunnel syndrome, retrieval of the painful migrated pin and a corrective osteotomy for a patient with a malunion. There were no cases of complex regional pain syndrome in either group. None of the patients in the plate group underwent a second operation. The complication rate and re-operation rate were statistically significantly different in the two groups ( This is the first prospective randomised controlled trial to examine the outcomes of percutaneous pinning versus locked-plate fixation for unstable extra-articular fractures of the distal radius. We have found both superior functional and radiological outcomes at 3 and 6 months post-injury in injuries treated within locked internal fixation. Patients in this group also had significantly less complications than those treated with percutaneous pinning. The ability of fixed-angle volar plates to maintain fracture reduction has previously been demonstrated in clinical studies, which have included intra-articular distal radius fractures. Biomechanical studies have demonstrated that volar locking plates are considerably more stable than percutaneous pins in unstable distal radius fractures. To date, only two retrospective reports exist, directly comparing fixation with volar-locked plates and percutaneous pinning. Oshige et al. By contrast, this study was a prospective, randomised trial of the unstable type A fracture, which is potentially the most controversial fracture pattern, as opinion is often split as to what requires fixation and what does not. Various radiographic indices have been described in the literature as being predictive of instability. Despite the loss of potential patients at enrolment, no participants were lost to follow-up after randomisation. Whilst we acknowledge that many surgeons would mobilise patients treated with volar-locked plates early, it was thought that introducing different mobilisation and physiotherapy protocols would introduce a strong element of bias, skewing the functional outcome measures. The follow-up period of 6 months was relatively short; however, it is unlikely that functional outcomes would change significantly after this period, and, in a study population including many elderly patients, more would be expected to be lost to follow-up with a longer study period. Prior statistical calculation indicated that approximately 30 patients should be included in each group. However, the emergence of a statistically significant difference between the groups with the numbers achieved in each arm, 27 (plating group) and 29 (Kirschner wire group), led to the conclusion of the study. The relatively high percentage of consultant-led operations in each group meant that surgeons with a specialist interest in trauma and those with other interests operated on patients within the study cohort. This combination of surgeons of differing levels of experience and interest suggests that these results do not reflect a particular expertise with the newer technique and should, hence, be reproducible in other centres, by both consultants and trainees alike. Functional results were assessed by two commonly used, validated upper-limb scoring systems. It is appreciated that the Gartland and Werley system, being a demerit point system, has a tendency to give good results (to achieve a poor result, the wrist must be deformed and have a poor range of movement, stiffness and severe osteoarthritic change). However, it is a system that has been used in many previous studies and its inclusion as an assessment tool has its worth, to compare with previous research. A more modern system is the quickDASH. This was selected as a simple, validated patient-rated outcome tool. Failure of K-wire fixation to maintain reduction in all patients, particularly in osteoporotic bone, has been previously been reported. In this series, we witnessed a number of complications with percutaneous pinning, and observed an inferior functional and radiological outcome when compared with volar-locked plates. The incidence of significant complication associated with the use of volar plates in this study was zero. We recognise that other series have highlighted important concerns regarding damage to both the flexor and extensor tendons Distal radial fractures have historically been treated in a conservative fashion, probably because of Abraham Colles stating “the limb will at some remote period again enjoy perfect freedom in all its motions and be completely exempt from pain,” Prior to the recent expansion in locking-plate technology, percutaneous pinning remained the most popular form of treatment for distal radial fractures. The growth in popularity of volar locking plates has led manufacturers to focus further on the development and marketing of increasingly sophisticated plate designs, with the most contemporary systems offering fragment specific fixation via polyaxial screw configurations. We recognise that the decision to treat a fracture with a volar-locked plate is multifaceted, depending not only on the personality of the fracture, but also on the physiological status and functional demand of the patient. Advocates of percutaneous pinning would argue that it offers an economical and simple method for the management of distal radial fractures. However, we have clearly shown that for the treatment of dorsally displaced, unstable distal radius fractures across all age groups, volar-locked plates achieve a superior radiological and functional outcome with minimal complications. There are no conflicts of interest, financial or otherwise.