Ozone is a very powerful oxidant with a wide range of industrial applications. Due to its reactivity with aromatic and unsaturated compounds, ozone can be used as a chemical pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass. Ozone reacts through direct and selective reactions with lignin, while no significant cellulose degradation occurs. The main effects of ozone are lignin removal and an increase in pore volume and specific surface area, increasing enzyme accessibility to cellulose and the production of fermentable sugars. This chapter reviews the technology of ozone pretreatment for biofuel production from lignocellulosic substrates and points out the main reaction parameters that should be considered to develop efficient processes with lower ozone consumption. The effect of ozone in lignocellulosic biomass is also described.Lignocellulosic materials represent an abundant, cheap, and readily available source for the production of biofuels and bioproducts through enzyme-based processes. The main obstacle is its low digestibility due to the complex structure of the plant cell wall, formed by lignin, cellulose, and hemicellulose, closely associated with each other The objective of this chapter is to give an overview of the use of ozone as a pretreatment of lignocellulosic materials to produce biofuels, summarizing the effect of this oxidant on lignocellulosic biomass characteristics, the influence of operating parameters, and the production of degradation compounds that can affect the subsequent conversion of monosaccharides to biofuels. Ozone is an irritating gas, heavier than air, very reactive, unstable, and it cannot be stored and transported, so it has to be generated on-site from air or oxygen. Ozone, a nonlinear triatomic molecule, is about 14 times more soluble in water than oxygen but considerably more unstable. The stability of ozone is influenced by temperature, pressure, pH, and the ionic strength of the aqueous solution. The resonant structure of ozone, characterized by end oxygen atoms with only six electrons, defines its strong electrophilic nature. The oxidation potential of ozone is 2.07 Ozone reacts mainly due to two mechanisms: direct reactions with molecular ozone and indirect reactions with the radical species that are formed when ozone decomposes in water. Direct reactions are selective and limited to unsaturated aromatic and aliphatic compounds as well as specific functional groups. Due to its dipolar structure, the ozone molecule may lead to 1-3 dipolar cycloaddition on unsaturated bonds, with the formation of ozonides according to the Criegee mechanism ( Lignocellulosic materials include wood, grass, forestry waste, agricultural residues, and municipal solid waste Lignin has a role in providing structural support, impermeability, and resistance against microbial attacks. Lignin is a complex and amorphous heteropolymer made of monolignols: coniferyl, sinapyl, and Ozone is a promising reagent for the oxidation of lignin due to its reactivity with aromatic and unsaturated compounds. The most substantial effect of ozone is on lignin degradation. Hemicellulose can also be slightly degraded through nonselective ozone reactions. As the lignin content decreases, the solubilization of hemicellulose can increase because both compounds are solubilized together in a lignin–hemicellulose complex Ozonolysis of lignin from corn stalks has shown the formation of chemicals soluble in water, such as carboxylic acids (glycolic, oxalic, malic, malonic, glyoxalic, glyceric); aromatic acids ( When most lignin has been already removed, the oxidation of holocellulose can start. Ozone can cleave glycoside bonds, leading to the oxidation of functional groups to carbonyl and carboxyl compounds, lactones, and hydroperoxides In the lignocellulosic biomass pretreatment, ozone is usually used as a single oxidant. However, there are organic compounds that can act as protectors of cellulose The effect of ozone as a delignifying agent has the following characteristics over other chemical treatments Degradation is essentially limited to lignin, although hemicellulose can be slightly attacked, and cellulose is hardly affected. The specificity of ozone toward lignin, in comparison with other delignifying processes, is a clear advantage, because it produces lower weight losses during pretreatment. Ozone can be generated on-site as needed, thereby avoiding chemical supply problems in isolated areas, storage, transport costs, and the safety problems associated with shipping and handling. Ozone generation does not require a large-scale application to be economically feasible. Its use is very attractive for local use with various types of biomass available in steady supply. Reactions are carried out at room temperature and pressure, which reduces the capital and energy costs. The atmospheric pollution impact of the process is minimal, because residual ozone can be easily decomposed to oxygen using a catalytic bed. In any case, the process has to be designed to optimize ozone consumption, so ozone leftover should be minimal. Ozone does not leave strongly acidic, basic, or toxic residues in the treated material. Therefore, ozonated lignocellulosic materials can be used as animal feed. As it was explained before, ozone treatment led to the production of soluble products, mainly carboxylic acids (oxalic acid, acetic acid, and formic acid), which can interfere in the subsequent steps of enzymatic hydrolysis and microbial fermentation The first studies on the treatment of lignocellulosic biomass with ozone were focused on enhancing its nutritive value Neely An essential factor is the percentage of water in the lignocellulosic material. Sugimoto et al. The ozone concentration in the gas flow seems to have less effect than the water content. As expected, an increase in the ozone concentration increased the reaction rate, although not in a proportional manner Particle size seems to have the least effect on lignocellulosic pretreatment. The reaction time increases with an increase in particle size. However, little was gained by reducing the Studies refer to the use of ozone as a pretreatment in batch reactors and fixed bed reactors. The simplest configuration is a fixed bed column. However, channeling and uneven ozone exposure are the main drawbacks of this configuration Studies concerning the use of ozone as a lignocellulosic biomass pretreatment include agricultural residues, forestry waste, herbaceous biomass, and waste cellulose. Major efforts are aimed at studying the optimum conditions of ozonation to reduce ozone consumption and increase the yield of fermentable sugars in the subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis step. The effects of ozonolysis on lignocellulosic biomass are described below. Wheat straw was treated with ozone in a fixed bed reactor until complete decolorization to increase the digestibility of cell wall sugars García-Cubero et al. Lignin on barley straw was also effectively degraded with ozone Cotton stalks mainly contain lignocellulose and have the potential to serve as a low-cost feedstock for biofuel production through proper pretreatment, hydrolysis, and fermentation The ozone pretreatment of cane bagasse to increase the production of fermentable sugars in the enzymatic saccharification step has been studied by different researchers. Eqra et al. Hardwood lignin, with a higher content of syringyl units, is more easily degradable than softwood, a guaiacyl lignin that is not easily degraded by acids The ozonolysis of poplar sawdust increased its value for cattle feed due to lignin degradation Lignin degradation by ozone pretreatment was also observed in softwood residues, such as cedar and cypress sawdust Lee et al. The utilization of used printing paper as a raw material for bioethanol production has been assessed by Kojima and Yoon Ozone is generated by an electrical discharge, imposing a high-voltage alternating current (6–20 Ozone has proved to be an efficient oxidant for a very wide range of lignocellulosic feedstocks. Ozone attacks mainly lignin, releasing soluble compounds of low molecular weight, mainly organic acids such as oxalic, formic, and acetic acids. Hemicellulose can be slightly solubilized, whereas cellulose remains practically intact. Sugar recoveries in the subsequent saccharification step depend strongly on pretreatment conditions and substrates. Values ranging from 40% to higher than 80% have been reported (