The homogeneous dispersion of carbon nanotubes (CNT) remains a hindrance in exploiting the exceptional properties associated with CNT in polymer/CNT composites. Here we present for the first time the key role of sodium salt of 6-aminohexanoic acid (Na-AHA) in assisting debundling the multiwall carbon nanotubes (MWNT) through specific interactions leading to homogeneous dispersion within polyamide6 (PA6) matrix during melt-mixing. The composite fabricated via this route exhibits low electrical percolation threshold of 0.5wt% at room temperature, the lowest reported value in this system so far. FTIR and Raman spectroscopy reveal the existence of ‘cation–π’ interaction between Na-AHA and MWNT. The phenomenon of reactive coupling between amine functionality of Na-AHA and acid end group of PA6 during melt-mixing is also established.Polymer composites containing carbon nanotubes (CNT) have emerged as advanced multifunctional materials in view of exceptional mechanical, thermal and electrical properties associated with CNT In connection with the method of composites preparation, solvent casting of polymer/CNT suspensions and in situ polymerization lead to better dispersion of CNT as compared to melt-mixing, which is otherwise technologically more viable. It is also observed that the application of shear during melt-mixing promotes the breakdown of the ‘aggregate’ In this work a novel modifier (sodium salt of 6-aminohexanoic acid, Na-AHA) has been prepared to induce improved dispersion of MWNT in the melt-mixed PA6/MWNT composites. The state of dispersion has been assessed through AC electrical conductivity measurements. Polyamide6 (PA6, zero shear viscosity PA6/MWNT (either purified or Na-AHA modified) composites were prepared by melt-mixing in a conical twin-screw extruder (Micro 5, DSM Research, Netherlands) at 260 The AC conductivity measurements were performed in the frequency range 10 Thermo gravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using powder samples of AHA and Na-AHA using Netzsch (STA 409 PC) thermo gravimetric analyzer in inert atmosphere with heating rate of 10 The frequency dependence electrical conductivity at room temperature (20 In view of the existing challenges regarding the dispersion of MWNT in semi-crystalline polymer matrix, we have developed an ionic modifier containing reactive functionality to control the dispersion of MWNT in PA6 matrix. Na-AHA has been prepared in order to establish ‘cation–π’ interaction with MWNT, and also to exploit the concept of reactive coupling between the amine group of Na-AHA and acid end groups of PA6 during melt-mixing. It is expected that ‘cation–π’ interaction would lead to initial debundling of MWNT, which will be retained in the solid-state as well due to melt interfacial reaction. In this context, use of imidazolium salts in controlling the dispersion of either SWNT In order to check the thermal stability of Na-AHA, thermogravimetric analysis is carried out for AHA and Na-AHA. The onset of thermal degradation is found to be above 375 In order to further assess the state of dispersion of Na-AHA modified MWNT in PA6 matrix we perform AC electrical conductivity measurements. It may be noted in FTIR spectroscopic analysis ( To provide more insight related to the nature of the modifier (Na-AHA) in controlling the dispersion of MWNT in PA6/MWNT composites, we further selected Na-salt of mono and di substituted adipic acid and prepared composites with 2 A novel modifier has been prepared to facilitate uniform dispersion of MWNT in melt-mixed PA6/MWNT composites. Retention of ‘network-like structure’ in solid state with significant refinement was observed even at lower MWNT concentration in presence Na-AHA, which was assessed through AC electrical conductivity measurements. Reactive coupling was found to be a dominant factor besides ‘cation–π’ interaction in achieving low electrical percolation in PA6/MWNT composites. FTIR and Raman spectroscopic analysis further revealed the existence of the specific interactions involving Na-AHA and MWNT. These nanocomposite materials can therefore be tailored depending on the end use as antistatic devices, capacitors and EMI shielding materials. The authors duly acknowledge the financial support from the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India (SERC Fast Track Scheme, Project No. 04DS047). We would also like to acknowledge Microcompounder Central Facility at IIT Bombay, Centre for Research in Nanotechnology and Science (CRNTS) and Sophisticated Analytical Instrumentation Facility (SAIF), IIT Bombay for Raman Spectroscopy and TEM experiments.