The objective of the present research is to analyze the role of SiC addition and load on the fretting wear of Mg–SiCp composites. The friction and wear properties of Mg–SiCp/steel contacts are studied with variation of SiC particulate volume fraction and load and compared to those of pure Mg/steel contacts. The wear mechanisms are investigated in detail using analytical techniques such as EDX, EPMA and Raman spectroscopy. In all the fretting contacts, the tribochemical reactions are observed to be dominant. In the early stage of fretting, abrasive wear dominates due to formation of MgO. In composites, the presence of harder SiC particulates causes severe abrasion. As the fretting continues, MgO undergoes tribochemical reaction and forms soft, viscous hydrated magnesia. In composites, hydrated silica formed from SiC, reacts with hydrated MgO and forms a dense hydrous magnesium silicate (DHMS), clinoenastatite. These soft, viscous triboproducts (hydrated MgO and DHMS) smear on the worn surfaces and decrease the friction coefficient. The experimental results reveal that the effect of SiC particulate loading (especially higher volume fractions) on friction coefficient is more significant compared to the normal load applied during fretting.Ever growing demand for stiffer, stronger and lightweight materials has created a large interest in the development of metal matrix composites (MMCs). The advantages of MMCs can be realized by the selection of proper matrix, reinforcement and processing technique. The specific properties of the MMCs such as stiffness and strength can be tailored by reinforcing with a ceramic material. MMCs have potential for several engineering applications in aerospace and automotive sectors, e.g. connecting rods, pistons and cylinder liners Mg-alloys have potential applications where higher specific mechanical properties are desirable Most of the published research in the case of Mg-based composites is focused on severe conditions (load>10 Mg–SiC The fretting experiments were performed using a computer-controlled fretting machine, (DUCOM TR281-M), which produces a linear relative oscillating motion with ball-on-flat configuration. By a stepper motor, the flat sample is made to oscillate with a relative linear displacement of constant stroke and frequency. The displacement of the flat sample is monitored by an inductive displacement transducer and a piezoelectric transducer is used to measure the friction force. Variation in tangential force is recorded and the corresponding coefficient of friction is calculated on-line with the help of a computer-based data acquisition system. Polished pure Mg and Mg-composites were used as flat (moving) materials. Six millimeter diameter bearing grade (commercial SAE 52100 grade, hardness 63-65 HRc, data from supplier) steel balls were used as counter bodies (stationary). Prior to the fretting tests, both flat and ball were ultrasonically cleaned in acetone. The fretting experiments were performed on Mg and Mg–SiC After each test, the worn surfaces of both the flat and the ball were observed using an optical microscope (Zeiss). Further detailed characterization of the worn surfaces was done using a scanning electron microscope (JEOL-JSM840) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX). Raman laser spectroscopy (SPEX-1877E Triplemate) and Electron microprobe analyzer (EPMA JEOL-JXA8600) with wavelength dispersive X-ray analysis (WDX) were used to identify the triboproducts formed on the worn surfaces. The wear volumes of both flat and ball were calculated from the measured wear scar diameters using the equation given by Klaffke Typical microstructures of Mg base matrix and its composites studied in this investigation are shown in The friction and wear properties of pure Mg and its composites were studied under fretting contacts. The effect of load was investigated by keeping the other fretting variables (10 The wear volumes of Mg and its composites are computed by measuring the wear scar diameter on the worn samples. The specific wear rates, calculated using the Klaffke's Eq. Detailed microstructural investigation using SEM–EDX, EPMA and Raman spectroscopy was carried out on the worn surfaces of Mg and its composites to understand the mechanisms governing the fretting wear. The overall topographical features of worn scars formed on pure Mg flats are shown in The details of the worn surfaces are observed at higher magnification to understand the operating mechanisms ( The worn scars formed on Mg–SiC Raman spectroscopy and EPMA analysis were employed to analyze the chemical composition of the triboproducts. Raman analysis ( The detailed EPMA analyses using X-ray mapping of relevant elements like Mg, Si and Fe (both on 9.8 and 26.3 In the early stages of fretting experiments, Mg being a soft metal (compared to bearing steel ball) undergoes extensive plastic deformation ( In the case of composites, the generation of Mg debris becomes severe due to abrasive action of SiC particulates. However, the peak COF values recorded in Mg and its composites (at any given load) are different. COF values obtained with Mg–SiC A detailed analysis was carried out on the worn surfaces and the chemistry of tribolayer provides interesting information about the differences. The scars formed on composite materials exhibit almost similar features that are seen in Mg metal. The only major difference is that the abrasive wear is more severe due to SiC particulate. However, the reaction product that formed in composites appears brighter (for example see The smearing of tribolayer is affected by two factors: (a) volume fraction of SiC particulates and (b) load. When the volume fraction of SiC particulates is high, the tribochemical layers sets in at early stages of fretting wear and the contact surfaces experience low COF values from very early stage. In 26.3 The implication of this work is significant in real life applications. In Mg–SiC  One of the important experimental observation is that the beneficial effect of SiC addition is only realized for 26.3% SiC containing composites, while the tribological behavior of Mg–9.8% SiC composites is largely dominated by the matrix effect. In the fretting contacts of steel/Mg–26.3% SiC During fretting, in the early stage, abrasive wear is dominant due to oxide formation. In composites, the abrasion is much higher due to presence of SiC particulates. After approximately 1500 fretting cycles, the abrasive wear gradually transforms to tribochemical wear with the formation of hydrous oxides. In pure Mg, MgO reacts and forms hydrous magnesium oxide, Mg(OH) The reduction in friction and wear of composites is observed only at higher reinforcement content (26.3