The strain hardening and the strain rate sensitivity of a material are important phenomenons which are required to be studied during the plastic deformation of any material and these also are the important parameters in the study of workability criteria of the metals. The present investigation has been undertaken to propose the constitutive relationship for porous powder metallurgy parts during upsetting operation. The instantaneous parameters namely the work hardening exponent, the strength coefficient, the density coefficient and the strain rate sensitivity were evaluated during the cold working of sintered aluminium–iron composite with different iron particle sizes and percent of iron content under various stress state conditions, namely, the uniaxial, the plane and the triaxial. Sintered preforms with aspect ratios of 0.44 with different initial preform densities ranging from 0.8 to 0.92 were prepared and cold forged. The variation of above-mentioned parameters with respect to the relative density has been proposed for the different percent of iron content and the various sizes of the iron particles, for different initial preform densities and for the different stress state conditions. Studies showed that there is a tremendous variation in the above parameters for different iron particle sizes and iron contents, for different initial preform densities and for different stress state conditions.The forging of metal powder preforms or the production of powder metallurgy components having difficult shapes and curves is the latest and drastically growing technique in the metal working technology. The process of producing powder metallurgy components using powder metal forging is basically a combination of two conventional processes, namely powder metallurgy (P/M) and forging. The powder metallurgy components are being widely used for sophisticated industrial applications. The worldwide popularity of powder metallurgy lies in the ability of this technique to produce such complex shapes with exact dimensions at a very high rate production and low cost. Quite often, this technique is used for material systems that are hard to machine and difficult to cast due to detrimental solidification behaviour of material chosen. Green The strain hardening is an important phenomenon, which governs the plastic behavior of materials. It is also referred as work hardening in the referred literature. This phenomenon occurs during the plastic deformation due to the generation and interaction of dislocations. The dislocation density increases with increasing degree of deformation. Basically, the larger the number of dislocations produced, the larger their interaction and hence the larger the stress are required for the yielding of metal. Ductile fracture is the common mode of failure, which is a complicated phenomenon that is dependent upon process parameters such as stress, strain, strain-rate and friction, and the material parameters such as strain hardening exponent and the strain rate sensitivity. An experimental and numerical study on ductile crack formation in tensile test with different specimens was investigated by Yingbin Bao The strain gradient plasticity theory was applied In this work, a new constitutive relationship for the strain hardening behavior of aluminium–iron powder composite has been proposed for various stress state conditions, namely, the uniaxial, the plane and the triaxial. The instantaneous density coefficient ( Mathematical expressions used and proposed for the determination of various upsetting parameters for different stress state conditions are highlighted in the subsequent subsections. Compression of a P/M parts under the conditions of frictional, the average density constraints, an increases in average density becomes eminent. Friction enhances densification but at the same time decreases the height reduction at fracture. The state of stress in a homogeneous compression process is described according to expressions proposed by Abdel-Rahman et al., It is expected that the continuance of compression would result in an increase in diameter and, therefore, the corresponding hoop strain also increase due to the fact that it is tensile in nature and would increase till it is reached to the fracture limit. Once the fracture is initiated, the forming limit strain is the same as the effective strain and the same is given here under: According to Narayanasamy and Pandey However, the hydrostatic stress ( The hoop strain ( According to Narayanasamy and Ponalagusamy From Eq. Since The effective stress can be determined from the following relation as explained elsewhere As described elsewhere The strain hardening exponent ( It is assumed that the consecutive compressive loads were specified as 1, Now Eq. Taking natural logarithm on both sides, Similarly, Taking natural logarithm on both sides, From Eq. Similarly Taking natural logarithm on both sides, As mentioned elsewhere According to Levy–Mises equation Atomized aluminium and iron powders of the characterization stated in The sintered preforms were cleaned from the sand particles and the dimensional measurements made before and after each deformation. The deformation of the preform was carried out between two flat open dies hardened to 50–55 Rc and tempered to 46–50 Rc on a 100      The effective stress is found to be higher comparing to the hoop stress and the mean or hydrostatic stress. The mean or hydrostatic stress is found to have the lowest value. The mean or hydrostatic stress is found to be compressive in nature for the plane stress condition and tensile in nature for the triaxial stress condition. The effective stress due to the triaxial stress condition and the plane stress condition coincides with each other (becomes same value) at larger axial strain value for the case of higher initial preform density. The instantaneous density coefficient ( For the initial aspect ratio of 0.56 and the initial preform density of 0.88, the instantaneous density coefficient decreases, reaches the lowest value and then increases towards the end of deformation with increase in the relative density. This is for the case of less number of pores and high pores height. For the initial aspect ratio of 0.35 and the initial preform density of 0.8, the instantaneous strain-hardening exponent ( For the initial aspect ratio of 0.35 and the initial preform density of 0.88, the instantaneous strain hardening exponent value decreases rapidly from higher value, reaches the lowest value and then increases towards the end of deformation with in the relative density. This is for the case of low porosity and low pores bed height. For the initial aspect ratio of 0.72 and the initial preform density of 0.88, the instantaneous strain hardening exponent value decreases, reaches the lowest value, and then increases reaching the peak value and then decreases with increase in the relative density. This is for the case of high pores bed height and less porosity. The instantaneous strain rate sensitivity decreases rapidly from higher value to lower value with increase in the relative density irrespective of the aspect ratio and the initial preform density. For the initial aspect ratio of 0.35 and the initial preform density of 0.8, the instantaneous strength coefficient value decreases from peak value with increase in the relative density. This is for the case of high porosity and less pores bed height. In the case of higher aspect ratios for the initial preform density of 0.88, the instantaneous strength coefficient decreases, then increases, touches the peak value and then decreases with increase in the relative density. This is for the case of low porosity and higher pores bed height.