The surface defects and roughness of orthodontic Ni–Ti archwires are related to the manufacturing and surface finishing processes employed. On grouping archwires according to their surface characteristics instead the commercial brand, comparisons can be made of the influence of different surface finishings upon the corrosion resistance of Ni–Ti archwires. This novel approach shows that orthodontic Ni–Ti archwires can be grouped into 5 surface patterns according to a dominant surface defect. Each pattern is derived from a given manufacturing process and shows a different response to corrosion in several media.Nickel–titanium (NiTi) alloys are the most common orthodontic archwires used in clinical practice, thanks to their good clinical and mechanical properties The surface defects and roughness are related to the manufacturing processes and different surface finishings involved In previous corrosion studies The present study characterizes archwire surface using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and the Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope System (LSCM) to establish criteria for classifying the Ni–Ti orthodontic archwires according to their surface condition. Seventeen NiTi archwires (0.016 The archwires were classified according to their surface using 18 variables, of which 7 were used in this study ( We used 400× SEM images to measure each variable in three different areas each measuring 10,000 The surface roughness of the NiTi archwires was measured using LSCM (Leica TCS-SP2). The microscope was previously calibrated using a Mitutoyo precision reference specimen (Code no.178-601) with R Multivariate regression analysis was used to evaluate the existence of correlations between the variables, using the SPSS version 14.0 statistical package. We have been able to group the wires according to their mechanical finishing thanks to the correlation between the surface pattern and a predominant defect ( The surface conditions of the archwires in our study were variable, and good quality was observed in few of them — in coincidence with the findings of other authors Since the production techniques are generally similar for all types of wires corresponding to one same manufacturer The five surface patterns found in our study are described below. The The The The The In good agreement with other studies, we found small differences in the chemical composition of Ni–Ti. Archwire characteristics may result mainly from thermomechanical treatment There is a clear correlation between manufacturer and surface roughness, indicating uniformity in the manufacturing process Orthodontic Ni–Ti archwires subjected to mechanical treatment can be grouped into 5 surface patterns according to the existing dominant defect. Each pattern is derived from a given manufacturing process and shows different responses to corrosion in several media. In future corrosion or surface studies the pattern must be taken into account. In addition, manufacturing standards should be developed to avoid patterns that are less resistant to corrosion. We appreciate the cooperation in this study of Dr. Juan Luis Ribas (LSCM expert) and the