This paper describes an approach to estimate uncertainty propagation in mineral processing separation circuits. Since most modeling and simulation tools only consider deterministic input values, the inherent uncertainty induced by variable feed grade and stage unit recovery are not included in the design and optimization process. The method described in this paper combines the linear circuit analysis approach and the law of the propagation of errors. The result is a method that can be used to estimate uncertainty propagation, even in the early design stages where extensive experimental data is unavailable. To validate this approach, Monte Carlo simulations were conducted on 35 simple two, three, and four-unit circuit designs and the data was analyzed to show distribution statistics for circuit recovery, product grade, and separation efficiency. Both methods show nearly identical results, but the new methodology also gives fundamental insight on the reasons why certain circuits propagate uncertainty for specific performance indicators.Mineral processing and other physical separation plants often employ complex multi-unit circuits to overcome the inherent inefficiencies of single unit operations. In most cases, single units are deficient in meeting final product specifications while maintaining recovery and grade at economically-favorable levels. Additionally, these single unit inefficiencies also lead to product variable and prediction uncertainty, which is then compounded by varying feed grades and slow lagging process control. Multi-unit circuits can mitigate these issues; however, the circuit design must be carefully considered, as additional units do not necessarily equate to improved performance. As a result, the optimal design of the separation circuit is a complex and open-ended engineering problem that requires a comprehensive and deliberate approach. Unfortunately, the vast number of feasible configurations as well as competing design objectives have led to an overreliance on trial-and-error and iterative approaches based on a deterministic solution ( Prior to the advent of process modeling and simulation tools, most circuit designs were determined by heuristic methodologies and established industry practices ( To hasten this approach, numerous researchers have identified optimization approaches that mitigate the need for blind iterative simulation, and a comprehensive review of these strategies has been presented by As an alternative to the modeling, simulation, and numeric optimization design approach, linear circuit analysis (LCA) is a tool that evaluates and ranks separation circuit designs through simplified algebraic formulations ( Most of the preceding circuit design methodologies, including LCA, have been constructed, implemented, and validated using a deterministic modeling approach. Nevertheless, several researchers have shown that uncertainty can be a significant factor in many mining and mineral processing applications. Uncertainty is a broad term, and may be haphazardly applied in the context of mineral processing plant design. Generally, sources of uncertainty in physical operations may include measurement errors, systematic errors, natural variation, inherent randomness and subjective judgments ( While individual causes of uncertainty are significant, the circuit designer must also consider the compounded uncertainty imputed by the actual circuit design and stream connections. Current predictive modeling tools often consider static input values; however, some recent studies have investigated the impact of stochastic input data on the final separation performance for various circuit configurations ( Given the complexity of the current optimization strategies for mineral processing circuit design, this paper presents a novel approach to uncertainty quantification based on LCA. In summary, the following objectives are identified: Review the LCA approach and derive a means to quantify uncertainty using LCA and the law of propagation of error principles (Section Compare the results of the simplified law of propagation of error approach to the more rigorous Monte Carlo approach in quantifying uncertainty in circuit recovery, separation efficiency, and grade (Sections Prescribe a means to apply the new method in practical applications (Section Linear circuit analysis (LCA), as a circuit evaluation technique, is employed to assess the separation performance of multi-unit circuits only based on unit arrangements and stream interconnections ( The fundamentals of LCA are well-illustrated using series of simple examples. Consider the single-unit operation shown in This type of analysis can be extended to multi-unit separations by algebraically deriving a function to describe the circuit concentrate-to-feed ratio ( As shown in This equation indicates that the numeric circuit recovery value ( Detailed descriptions and applications of these techniques have been thoroughly explained in the literature and include: original LCA derivation and separation sharpness ( Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS, or stochastic simulation) refers to a numerical and probabilistic analysis technique which is based on (pseudo) random sampling from a domain of input parameters with a known statistical distribution. This random sampling is repeated a “large” number of times, and given enough iterations, the MCS method allows one to quantitatively evaluate uncertainty and variability in risk assessments by determining the distribution of expected outcomes from a standard deterministic process model. MCS has been implemented in a variety of business, technical, and scientific domains, and details on how to implement MCS are well-documented in a number of texts, including While business and financial applications have seen the most widespread use of MCS (e.g. value projects, options and portfolios), mineral and energy industry practitioners have also experimented with its use, particularly in hydrocarbon reservoir analysis ( In the current paper, MCS is used to numerically determine distributions of process performance indicators (i.e. circuit grade, recovery, and separation efficiency) when given a specific circuit design and distributions of input feed grade and recovery values for single unit operations. At a macroscopic level, nearly all of the uncertainty in the circuit design problem arises from distributed inputs for the circuit feed grade and numerous operational parameters that are ultimately reflected in the recovery values of individual units. As a result, for the purpose of comparative evaluation of circuit configurations, a suitable MCS approach needs to only consider these parameters as stochastic inputs, rather than the individual factors that contribute to unit recovery. Furthermore, this approach (which focuses strictly on comparative evaluation of circuit designs) negates the need for a unit operation process model, which may also be subject to further uncertainty. Ultimately, if the input distribution for unit recovery and feed grade are known, the output distribution of the circuit performance indicators can be readily determined by MCS. These results can then be analyzed to determine how the circuit design influences circuit uncertainty (i.e. output distribution width), when given the same distribution for the input parameters. While mineral price and other economic factors are also significant distributed parameters, they have been excluded from this analysis to rather focus on the technical components of uncertainty propagation. As described above, the separation performance of each mineral processing circuit can be specified using a unique analytical transfer function that can be derived from LCA. This function has considerable value in assessing separation performance and explaining the fundamental circuit characteristics that modify separation performance. As an extension of these prior LCA methods, this algebraic formulation may be employed to characterize the uncertainty or distribution width inherent to a particular circuit configuration using the propagation of uncertainty principle (or propagation of error, LPE). This method is distinct from the MCS approach as it does not require iterative simulation and, in principle, could be performed using a simple hand calculator. Second, since the results are given in an analytical, rather than numeric form, a more fundamental analysis can be performed to determine the causal factors for circuit uncertainty. LPE is used to determine the statistical impact of the uncertainty that one or more input variables have on a function evaluation. The uncertainty of a quantity is often quantified as the standard deviation ( The LPE may be applied to quantify the uncertainty in the circuit recovery of specific particle classes using circuit analytical transfer functions determined from LCA. Each individual P (i.e. stage recovery value) value constitutes an input parameter, and thus, the LPE calculation only requires the partial derivative of the circuit analytical function with respect to each P value. This general formulation is given by: As is typical for LCA analyses, the problem can be reduced to two dimensions by assuming each P value to be equal. After this simplification, Eq. After simplification, While the constant P simplification is obviously not true for operating circuits, it does provide a general means to rank circuits and expose fundamental relationships. It also provides a convenient method of graphical analysis. Nevertheless, this simplification does not preclude the method from more sophisticated multi-dimensional analysis, if the information can be estimated during the circuit design. This simplification also indicates, at a minimum, the approximate recovery value and the deviation of that recovery value are needed to perform an LCA uncertainty analysis.  This analysis is extended in the right panel of While the theoretical development has focused on unit recovery uncertainty, a similar approach can be used to determine the uncertainty in other circuit performance indicators such as grade and separation efficiency. Algebraic functions for these parameters can also be readily derived for any circuit when given the circuit transfer function and information on the inventory of various particle classes. The purpose of this study is to determine the utility of the LPE-LCA methodology in evaluating uncertainty in mineral processing circuit configurations. Since different circuit designs are expected to expand and contract the distribution of outcomes, the LPE-LCA methodology may provide a simple and straightforward approach to estimate these changes for any circuit configurations when given limited input data. This evaluation was conducted by first simulating several generic one, two, three, and four-unit circuits using MCS with a specified distribution of various input parameters. For simplicity, only two components (valuable and gangue) were considered in these simulations, and the variation in plant operational parameters was simplified to be reflected solely in the unit recovery. Global recovery, product grade, and separation efficiency were then calculated for each simulation, and the results were compiled by determining the mean and moments of the resultant distribution. To analyze the uncertainty of each separation performance factor, the standard deviation of each population was determined. For comparison, the single unit was considered the reference case, and all standard deviation values for multi-unit circuits were evaluated as a ratio to this single unit case. As a result, a new uncertainty metric, “relative uncertainty”, is defined to compare the variability induced by different circuit designs relative to the variability in a single unit. Parallel to this MCS study, LPE-LCA was also used to predict the relative uncertainty of the various performance indicators (recovery, grade, and separation efficiency) solely from the circuit design using Eq. The various measures and comparisons of uncertainty were performed on generic circuit configurations covering a range of standard design templates. When given numeric values for unit recovery and feed grade, the circuit transfer functions in Global recovery of gangue materials is defined similarly: Global separation efficiency of circuit is defined as the difference between global recovery of valuable and gangue materials: MCS was executed to evaluate the behavior of 35 generic one, two, three, and four-unit circuits when considering normally distributed feed grade and individual unit recovery values as input data. Following the MCS study, the LPE equation was applied to each analytical circuit solution to calculate the relative uncertainty of global recovery using Eq. The results of the MCS study demonstrate the contrasting behavior of different separation circuits under similar uncertain conditions. For example,  Similar observations are shown for the relative uncertainty of separation efficiency and concentrate grade in As discussed in the theory section, comprehensive circuit evaluations may be carried out based on the fundamental of LCA-LPE concept using analytical circuit solutions. Additionally, a quantitative validation is provided in While the current results show excellent similarity between MCS and LPE results, the prior work by In the current paper, both MCS and LPE approaches were implemented to estimate the projected uncertainty of various circuit transfer functions. These analytical transfer functions meet the assumption of independent input parameters; however, few circuits may meet the linearity criteria. Considering the current outcome and the conflicting results presented by  Additionally, Consequently, these results collectively indicate that the abbreviated LCA-LPE method is suitable for the initial evaluation of uncertainty in mineral processing circuit design, and the first derivative graphs, such as those presented in This paper has described a novel approach to circuit uncertainty quantification using circuit transfer functions derived from linear circuit analysis, and the law of the propagation of errors. The theoretical development of this method has been explained, and a Monte Carlo simulation was used to validate the applicability of the method. From this study, four key conclusions are derived: The separation circuit configuration has the ability to suppress or increase the uncertainty of various performance indicators relative to that of a single unit. The nature of this modification is dependent on both the stream interconnection and the stage recovery value. The law of propagation of errors, when combined with linear circuit analysis, is a suitable method to estimate the nature and direction of these modifications. This method only requires the stream connection diagram and estimates of the mean and uncertainty of input parameters, including stage recovery and feed grade, to provide these fundamental insights. While the LCA-LPE method can be simplified to only include the circuit configuration as the sole input parameter (see Eq. The accuracy of the LCA-LPE method is dictated by the relative standard deviation of the input parameters, with more uncertainty in the input parameters producing less accurate predictions. Nevertheless, at reasonable levels of uncertainty, the LCA-LPE results coincide very well with the MCS, validating the utility of the method in preliminary circuit design. Altogether, the methods described in this paper provide another tool to the circuit designer who is working with limited input data early in the design process. In addition to the traditional technical objective functions (grade, recovery, separation efficiency), this method provides a quantitative basis to implement multi-objective function optimization, whereby the technical parameters are maximized, while risk or uncertainty is minimized.