Cobalt and nickel are important strategic resources. Solvent extraction is an efficient way to separate and recover cobalt and nickel from spent batteries like ternary LIBs, NiMH and Ni-Cd batteries. In this paper, we introduce an unsymmetrical dialkylphosphinic acid INET-3 – which possesses excellent extraction and separation performance for heavy REEs – to cobalt/nickel separation for the first time. We investigated its extractabilities for cobalt and nickel and did some comparisons with those of MEXTRAL 507P and Cyanex 272. We studied effects of several parameters on cobalt/nickel separation including saponification ratio, Ni/Co ratio, temperature and anions (SO4
                     2− and Cl−). We also evaluated its extraction capacity for cobalt via two methods: one is contacting the organic phase continuously with fresh working solutions, and the other is increasing phase ratio A/O. Besides, we explored its selectivity for impurities including copper, zinc, manganese, calcium and magnesium and studied stripping behaviors of cobalt and nickel coordinated with INET-3. The results show INET-3 has stronger extractability for cobalt and nickel than Cyanex 272, while weaker extractability than MEXTRAL 507P. High saponification ratio and temperature favor cobalt/nickel separation, while SO4
                     2− and Cl− are on the contrary. For systems with Ni/Co ratio ≤81:1, the Co/Ni separation factors all exceeded to 130. The selectivity of INET-3 was in the order Zn2+ > Cu2+ > Mn2+ > Co2+ > Mg2+ ≈ Ni2+ > Ca2+. Its extraction capacity for cobalt was less than that of Cyanex 272 at the same initial conditions. The loaded cobalt can be easily stripped by diluted sulfuric acid.Cobalt is one of the most important strategic resources. It has been widely used in the fields of super alloys, hard alloys, catalysts and batteries, etc. In recent years, a booming global demand for cobalt occurred due to the rapid growth of power batteries, especially ternary lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) ( Cobalt always coexists with nickel in nature because of their similar physicochemical properties. Many spent batteries also contain both cobalt and nickel, like ternary LIBs ( Solvent extraction (SX) is an efficient way to separate cobalt from nickel compared with precipitation and ion exchange. Extractant is the foundation for Co/Ni separation in SX. The most commonly used extractants for this task are 2-ethylhexylphosphonic acid mono-2-ethylhexyl ester (EHEHPA, PC 88A or P507) and di-(2,4,4′-trimethylpentyl)-phosphinic acid (Cyanex 272). P507 is efficient for low Ni/Co ratio systems. However, it is inefficient for high Ni/Co ratio systems due to its low Co/Ni separation factors. It has been reported that its maximum β Though many other extractants and synergistic extractant systems have been studied to recover, extract and separate Co/Ni, like Cyanex 301 ( Studies on extraction and separation performance of INET-3 for REEs reveals that (1) its extraction ability is between that of P507 and Cyanex 272, (2) its separation performance for heavy REEs is superior to that of Cyanex 272 ( All the metal sulfates were analytical reagents (A.R.). Among them, CoSO INET-3 was synthesized in our own lab ( An MTC-100 Thermo Mixer-Heat/Cool, a kind of vortex oscillator, was adopted for batch extraction experiments. It was manufactured by Spring Instrument Co., Ltd, Jintan, Jiangsu. The aqueous phase pH was determined by a FE20 METTLER TOLEDO pH meter equipped with a LE438 pH electrode. The electrode was calibrated with 4.01 and 6.86 standard buffer solutions every time before determination. The metal ion concentration in the aqueous phase was determined at the State Key Laboratory of Advanced Metallurgy in the University of Science and Technology Beijing by an Optima 7000DV ICP-OES manufactured by PerkinElmer. The general extraction procedure was described as follows: Certain volumes of extractant organic solution and metal ion aqueous solution were measured and placed in a 50-mL centrifugal tube. The tube was sealed then and oscillated on the Thermo Mixer for 30 min at 1500 r/min at a certain temperature. The oscillating speed and time were sufficient to reach the extraction equilibrium. The equilibrium pH was adjusted by adding several microlitres of high concentration NaOH or H To obtain the extractant solutions preloaded with cobalt and nickel, a mixture of equal volumes (150 mL each) of an aqueous binary solution containing 55.8 mg/L Co and 2.9 g/L Ni and a 90% saponified extractant solution (1.0 × 10 Equal volumes (10 mL each) of the obtained extractant solution preloaded with cobalt & nickel and stripping acid (HCl, HNO Organophosphorus acids extract metal cations through cation exchange mechanism ( Based on As it would release protons during cobalt extraction by INET-3, the equilibrium pH will decrease and lead to low extraction percentages of cobalt and nickel. Therefore, extractants are always saponified to a certain degree before extraction. To find out the propriate saponification ratio, the effect of saponification ratio on Co/Ni separation was investigated at a high Ni/Co ratio of 52:1. The results are shown in To investigate cobalt and nickel separation performance of INET-3 from high Ni/Co ratio solutions, experiments were carried out from Co-Ni binary solutions with Ni/Co ratio of 11:1, 25:1, 52:1 and 81:1. The results are shown in Extraction capacity is a very important factor to evaluate the comprehensive performance of an extractant. The extraction capacity of INET-3 for cobalt was investigated and compared with that of Cyanex 272. The experiments were carried out through fiercely mixing a 50 mL extractant solution (C To our surprise, though the acidity of INET-3 was stronger than that of Cyanex 272, its extraction capacity for cobalt was lower than that of Cyanex 272 under the same conditions. This was contrary to their extractability for cobalt as shown in The amount of cobalt loaded in the organic phase at different phase ratios was investigated. The extractant concentration in the organic phase was 1.0 × 10 It is important to know the extraction behaviors of other metal ions coexisting in leaching solutions during Co/Ni separation. To explore this, extraction was carried out at different pH To explore the Ca Effect of temperature on Co/Ni separation was investigated from 15 °C to 55 °C. The aqueous phase was a binary cobalt–nickel solution with initial pH of 6.32. The initial Co and Ni concentrations were 64.14 mg/L and 61.39 mg/L, respectively. The results are shown in To investigate the effect of SO Considering HCl and its mixture with H We investigated and compared the stripping behaviors of cobalt and nickel loaded in INET-3 and Cyanex 272 organic phases using strippants of H The stripping efficiencies of cobalt coordinated with INET-3 and Cyanex 272 were both in the order HCl > H From INET-3 was an unsymmetrical dialkylphosphinic acid whose acidity was stronger than that of Cyanex 272. Its extraction and separation performance for cobalt and nickel can be concluded as follows: (1) For cobalt and nickel, INET-3 possesses weaker extractability than MEXTRAL 507P while stronger extractability than Cyanex 272, indicating the loaded cobalt can be more easily stripped compared with MEXTRAL 507P. (2) It is efficient for cobalt selective extraction from high Ni/Co ratio systems. For systems with Ni/Co ratio ≤81:1, the Co/Ni separation factors exceeded to 130. (3) The extraction capacity of INET-3 for cobalt was less than that of Cyanex 272 at the same initial conditions. This was in accordance with the results of phase ratio effect on cobalt extraction. (4) The extractability of INET-3 for non-ferrous metal ions was in the order Zn  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Special thanks to Kopperchem Corp., Ltd. for kindly providing us MEXTRAl 507P. This work was supported by the