The dry dense medium separation of iron ore based on floating and sinking of ore particles in a gas–solid fluidized bed was investigated using zircon sand as the fluidized medium. The float-sink of ore particles with mean size D
                     ave
                     =23.6mm was investigated as the fluidizing air velocity and the float-sink time were varied. It was found that gangue with density less than 2850kg/m3 which float is able to be separated from valuable ore with density greater than 2850km/m3 which sink. The set point (density where half the particles float and half the particles sink) decreases with increasing the air velocity, and that the float-sink separation is completed within 2min. The influence of different sized ore particles in the float-sink experiments was also investigated. As a result, the iron ore with D
                     ave
                     ⩾17.6mm are successfully separated. As D
                     ave decreases below 17.6mm, the ore particles with density near the set point tend to scatter in the fluidized bed without floating or sinking, resulting in separation efficiency which decreases with decreasing D
                     ave. This indicates that the size of the ore particles is one of the major factors to achieve high separation efficiency.Mineral processing It is well known that a gas–solid fluidized bed has liquid-like properties such as density and viscosity Iron ore is an important raw material to make steel, which is powerfully supporting our sustainable life. Demand for iron ore will increase due to the growth of developing countries, in particular Asian countries. Typically, run-of-mine iron ore is crushed to be −100 Typical run-of mine iron ore from Australia was supplied by a mining company. The ore was screened into different size fractions of +6.3 An apparatus for the float-sink experiments was supplied from Nagata Engineering Co., Ltd. (Kitakyusyu, Japan). The apparatus consist of a cylindrical acrylic column (inner diameter of 29 The zircon sand was fluidized at a given air velocity The ore particles of Additional float-sink experiments were carried out at differing float-sink times The effect of ore size In summary, iron ore was separated into gangue as floaters and valuable ore as sinkers in a dry dense medium of gas–solid fluidized bed using zircon sand as a fluidized medium. The set point decreases with increasing the air velocity. This study was supported by Industrial Technology Research Grant Program in 2008 from the