The use of lithium-ion batteries (LIB) has grown significantly in recent years, making them a promising source of secondary raw materials due to their rich composition of valuable materials such as Co, Ni and Al. However, the high voltage and reactive components of LIBs pose safety hazards during crushing stages in recycling processes, and during storage and transportation. Electrochemical discharge by immersion of spent batteries in salt solutions has been generally accepted as a robust and straightforward discharging step to address these potential hazards. Nonetheless, there is no clear evidence in the literature to support the use of electrochemical discharge in real systems, neither are there clear indications of the real-world limitations of this practice. To that aim, this work presents a series of experiments systematically conducted to study the behavior of LIBs during electrochemical discharge in salt solutions. In the first part of this study, a LIB sample was discharged ex-situ using Pt wires connected to the battery poles and submerged into the electrolyte solution on the opposite end. The evolution of voltage in the battery was measured for solutions of NaCl, NaSO4, FeSO4, and ZnSO4. The results indicate that, among the electrolytes used in the present study, NaCl solution is the most effective for LIBs discharge. The discharge of LIB using sulfate salts is however only possible with the aid of stirring, as deposition of solid precipitated on the electrodes hinder the electrochemical discharge. Furthermore, it was found that the addition of particulates of Fe or Zn as sacrificial metal further enhances the discharging rate, likely due to an increased contact area with the electrolyte solution. While these findings support the idea of using electrochemical discharge as a pre-treatment of LIBs, severe corrosion of the battery poles was observed upon direct immersion of batteries into electrolyte solutions. Prevention of such corrosion requires further research efforts, perhaps focused on a new design-for-recycling approach of LIBs.Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have recently gained popularity due to a massive increase in demand of portable electronic devices such as laptops and mobile phones. In addition, the number of electric vehicles on the roads is forecasted to rise significantly in the near future ( Batteries in general, and LIBs in particular, have complex material compositions in which valuable metals can be found, such as Cu, Li, Co and Ni ( Typically, the structure of all batteries is similar, regardless of the battery type or chemistry, and consists of the following main components: anode and cathode, a separator to keep these electrodes apart, an electrolyte, and an outer shell for protection. Currently, most recycling processes involve the crushing of batteries to liberate the valuable contents from their outer shell, which is commonly made of plastic or steel ( To minimize the risks during crushing of LIBs, various approaches have been suggested. Some solutions include freezing LIBs with liquid nitrogen before crushing ( One possible solution for this problem is to completely discharge the batteries before handling, as this would release all chemical energy stored, rendering the battery unreactive ( In previously published literature, several authors have claimed that the electrochemical discharging of batteries in recycling plants is a process well known and commonly used ( The first set of experiments was performed using external Pt wires connected to the poles of the battery and submerged in aqueous salt solution contained in a stirred beaker, thus closing the circuit ( To ensure comparability of the experiments, all measurements of discharge In a subsequent series of experiments, batteries were directly submerged in the salt solution. In such experiments, two more LIBs were used, namely BL-4C 3.7 V 860 mAh and BL-5C 3.7 V 1020 mAh (Nokia, Finland). For elemental analysis, it was decided to study LIBs from different manufacturers: an EB425161LU 3.7 V 1500 mAh (Samsung, South Korea) and BL-4CT 3.7 V 860 mAh (Nokia, Finland). All experiments were carried out at room temperature and no artificial gas atmosphere was applied. The salt solutions initially chosen for the experiments were NaCl (Merck, p.a.), NaSO In the second experimental series, the discharge was accelerated by using cathodic protection. In practice, this means the introduction of an additional metallic element into the system, which should corrode preferably over the battery connectors. In an industrial setting, these elements could also provide the potential to redirect the energy retrieved from a battery to a different use, providing the possibility to harvest energy as a by-product. Similar studies have been performed by The last set of experiments was carried out by submerging the battery samples into the electrolyte solution to simulate the industrial application method suggested by other authors (e.g., The first set of experiments was performed to observe the basic discharging phenomena claimed to happen using NaCl salt solutions widely reported in the literature ( Although the water splitting reactions require a theoretical potential of 1.23 V, a higher voltage may be needed in reality. The actual value depends on the electrocatalyst material and, in the case of Pt catalyst, it has been reported as 1.68 V ( Even though the electrochemical potential in Reaction The discharging profiles as a function of time for a LIB in 4 different electrolyte solutions at various salt concentrations are presented in As seen from the profile obtained with NaSO With respect to the use of FeSO In the case of ZnSO The formation of metallic Zn is substantiated by the grey hue of the precipitate ( In summary, NaCl provides an efficient media for discharging batteries since it does not result in precipitate formation. None of the sulfate salt solutions was able to entirely discharge the batteries, likely due to precipitate deposition on the Pt connectors. As seen in As mentioned in Section For comparison, The second phase of the experimental work hereby presented was to introduce an additional metallic component into the system to provide an additional possibility upon which the energy of a battery can be redirected, potentially accelerating the discharging process. The use of metallic additives in battery discharging processes have been published previously: With the use of Fe flakes ( Discharging with Zn powder in 20% NaCl solution was also considerably faster than without a metallic component ( The measured discharge time was comparatively longer with Zn powder, even though it particle size is smaller than Fe flakes and consequently offers a higher contact area for the transfer of electrons. It can thus be said that, when using metallic particles, the LIB discharge is more strongly influenced by the type of metallic species rather than its size, at least within the dimensions used in the present study. The effect of sacrificial metal particles with a wider size range will be a scope of a future study. Once it was demonstrated that electrochemical discharge using chloride and sulfate solutions is possible, the last experimental stage was to mimic the foreseen industrial preparation process by submerging a fully charged LIB from into salt solution. The experiments were performed using a stagnant 20% NaCl solution. A second experiment was carried out in the presence of metallic particles. In all cases, the connectors on the battery corroded instantly within seconds, hindering the discharging reaction. The corrosion product also blocked the connectors preventing the accurate measurement of voltage in the submerged battery. Examples of the corroded batteries after submersion in the electrolyte solution are shown in In order to develop a strategy to prevent the corrosion of the battery poles when batteries are submerged in electrolyte, it is necessary to identify their composition. Only in that way, an electrolyte that could minimize the corrosion of the poles could be potentially found. With that aim, two fully discharged LIB batteries from different manufacturers were dismantled and their connectors analyzed with XRF. As presented in As result of the study hereby presented, it has become evident that the current LIB materials have not been designed for bulk discharge or recycling. Considering that there are no uniform standards for the connector materials design or composition, eliminating the corrosion of connector poles during electrochemical discharge upon submersion in electrolyte solutions appears to be a practically impossible task at present. It is thus surprising that, while LIB discharging cannot be performed in practical terms by submerging the batteries in salt solution, this approach has been proposed as a feasible alternative in previous literature ( This study presented a systematic experimental study aimed at demonstrating whether the idea of electrochemical discharge of LIBs using salt electrolyte solutions is a practical pre-processing step in recycling industries. In With the aim of improving the rate of discharge, fine metallic particles were introduced into the system. Fe flakes provided the fastest discharging reaction but an undesired by-product contaminated the electrolyte solution. For industrial process, the discharge in the presence of metallic particles in a 20 wt% NaCl solution with stirring seems as the most promising option, provided the corrosion of the current connectors can be prevented. Indeed, the corrosion of the battery connector poles is the main practical challenge for electrochemical discharge of LIBs, as it leads to incomplete discharge or leakage of internal battery components. This represents a strong limitation to its current implementation in industrial processes, even when other authors seem to have overlooked the implications of this inevitable phenomenon. The results of the present work shed some light into an issue that demands further efforts from the research community. If LIB recycling is to be promoted, perhaps the fabrication standards for LIBs need to be modified, taking into consideration a design-for-recycling philosophy, involving the material composition and physical structure of external components such as casings and connectors. The research hereby presented was supported by the METYK-project (grant number 3254/31/2015), funded by Finnish innovation agency (TEKES), as well as the “CloseLoop” project and the Raw Materials Infrastructure (RAMI) supported by Academy of Finland. Mr. Olli Virtanen is acknowledged for his help on the experimental measurements.