Cementation is a prominent purification technique used for removal of copper, cadmium, cobalt, and nickel from impure zinc sulphate solution obtained after leaching of zinc ore. Zinc dust is primarily used for this purpose still the extent of purification is limited. The present study represents the encouraging result in context to utilization of zinc dust for better purification by altering its dosage, size and morphology. The investigations showed that 300% excess zinc dust dosage than stoichiometric results in enhanced cement formation. The study also revealed that fine size and ball milling of zinc dust favors cementation. Zinc dust of −300 mesh (BSS) after 2 h ball milling highly purifies the impure solution within 2 h contact time. The yield of the impurities removal after the optimized cementation is 100, 99.99, 100 and 15% for Cu, Cd, Ni and Co respectively. The kinetics of cementation has been also studied and revealed that the reaction is in mixed controlled mechanism for copper and cadmium cementation. At the same time, for nickel, it is considered to be chemically controlled. The activation energy for the cementation of copper, cadmium and nickel were 38.19, 30.87 and 68.15 kJ /mol, respectively. The estimated activation energies were found within the range which corroborates with the mixed and reaction model and ensures industrial feasibility of the proposed process.Nowadays, utilization of pure zinc plays a vital role in human life and thus it has become a strategic material. Primary zinc production is carried out by hydrometallurgical route, in which zinc is leached out by sulphuric acid followed by electrowinning. During the leaching process, impurities like copper, cadmium, cobalt and nickel are also dissolved into leach liquor to some extent depending upon their concentration in the ore. The presence of these impurities in neutralized zinc sulphate leach solution is not recommended for the subsequent electrowinning process. These impurities lower the hydrogen overvoltage, allowing deposition of hydrogen at cathode causes to fall of current efficiency ( The complete removal of arsenic, antimony and germanium has been experienced at the initial iron precipitation stage after immediate leaching. The Presence of remaining major impurities results in adverse effects on the zinc recovery during electro-winning in a different manner. Copper diminishes the current efficiency, and cadmium contaminates the cathode zinc during electrowinning ( Cementation is the most prominent purification technique which involves the precipitation of relatively noble metal ion from a solution by introducing a highly reactive metal which carries an electrochemical reaction ( Zn is in the form of zinc dust. Researchers have investigated cementation of these impurities form Zn-leach liquor. It was found that the initial concentration of copper, stirring speed, temperature, concentration of acid, pulp density and pH plays an essential role in the cementation of copper ( Researchers also found that behavior of the cementation of cadmium and nickel which is mainly influenced by their initial concentration, quantity and size of zinc dust, time, temperature and stirring speed ( Investigators experienced that best purification practice for removal of copper and cadmium demands excess amount of zinc dust (E.g.- 30% excess amount for cadmium at 70 °C ( pH value also increases during cementation due to the reduction of hydrogen ions, formation of metal hydroxide on the surface of the metal by the dissolved oxygen as shown in eq. (3). At the same time, cobalt is also a good catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction. The activation energy for the cementation can be higher than actual due to hydrogen evolution ( Studies showed that the cementation of copper, nickel, and cadmium becomes more favorable with the addition of zinc dust. On the other hand, the cementation of cobalt remains relatively unaffected because it is very slow, except in the presence of activators such as copper, arsenic, and antimony with a minimum temperature of 70 °C ( The survey of the research outcome indicates that cobalt removal can't be achieved together with other impurities suspected that alteration in surface area of the zinc dust particles may improve the rate of cementation of all impurities ( Keeping the hypothesis of The industrial zinc dust for the present work is supplied by The synthetic solution of zinc sulphate with copper, cadmium, cobalt and nickel as primary impurities is prepared by dissolving of their corresponding sulphate salts in the distilled water as reported by ( The experimental studies were car ried out by using a ceramic top type digital hot plate cum magnetic stirrer with an attached PID temperature controlled and thermocouple (Accuracy ±1 °C). During experiments 200 mL of synthetic zinc sulphate solution was poured into a beaker and heated to desired temperature with magnetic stirring using a PTEF coated magnetic pellet. Once the fixed temperature was attained, zinc dust was added to beaker slowly to yield good mixing without accumulation. To study the effect of particle size, the zinc dust of −100 + 200 mesh, −200 + 300 mesh and − 300 mesh particles are used, whereas to study the morphology effect of the zinc dust, modified ground zinc dust samples are utilized. Solution samples are collected at regular intervals of time during cementation and analyzed by In order to purify the zinc sulphate solution, the amount of excess zinc dust required is optimized initially. For that, zinc dust (325 mesh) with different amounts such as 100%, 200%, 300%, and 400% than stoichiometric requirement are used at 50 °C. Cementation of copper and cadmium are more active at 50 °C ( It can be seen from The optimized amount of excess zinc dust (300%) is further used to remove impurities from zinc sulphate solution. The purification process is performed with optimized excess zinc dust quantities having different particles sizes such as −100 + 200 mesh, −200 + 300 mesh and − 300 mesh. It is observed from Similarly the reduction of nickel is more or less similar for −300 mesh and − 200 + 300 mesh sized particles. The final concentration of nickel after 120 min descends to 3.52, 1.88 and 1.5 mg/L for −100 + 200, −200 + 300 and − 300 mesh sized particles, respectively as shown in As mentioned earlier, the cementation of copper from zinc sulphate solution at 50 °C provided best results, when 300% of excess zinc dust with the particles size of −300 mesh size was utilized. However, cadmium and nickel were not completely removed in the above experimental conditions. Therefore, it is necessary to look for effective alternative method to remove other impurities from the solution. It has been observed that the smaller particle size of the zinc dust gives better results due to a higher surface area per unit volume. Hence, it is suspected that surface area modification of the particles may enhance the removal of the impurities. Therefore, −300 mesh size was ball milled for shape modification. At the same time some particles are slightly reduced in size also. In order to observe the shape change during ball milling, SEM micrographs were taken before and after the experiments. From SEM-EDX it is noted that the amount of metallic zinc content is slightly minimized after 2-h ball milling ( BET surface area analysis also revealed the increasing in the surface area of zinc dust after ball milling. Surface area of zinc dust before ball milling is 4.18 × 10 The variation of the concentration of impurities (Cu, Cd, Ni and Co) during cementation with ball milling is displayed in For the kinetic study of cementation of copper, cadmium and nickel, zinc dust of the optimized conditions was used (300% excess, 300 mesh, 2 h ball milled). Four experiments were conducted for this study at different temperatures from 30 to 60 °C, fixing the total time of cementation at 2 h. From these investigations, it has been observed that the cementation of impurities gradually increases with increasing temperature from 30 to 60 °C. The complete cementation of copper was observed in 10 min at 30 °C whereas it took only 5 min at 40, 50 and 60 °C. The concentration of cadmium after 2 h of purification at 30 and 40 °C were 20 ppm and 7 ppm respectively. But it was completely cemented in 90 min at 50 °C and 60 min at 60 °C. The concentration of nickel after 2 h of purification at 30 and 40 °C were 8 ppm and 7 ppm respectively. But it was completely cemented in 60 min at 50 °C and 15 min at 60 °C. The activation energy for the cementation of copper, cadmium and nickel with optimized zinc dust were 38.19, 30.87 and 68.15 kJ /mol respectively. The activation energy of copper and cadmium falling in the range of mixed controlled mechanism, while the activation energy of nickel is in the range of chemical controlled model. ( During the process of removal of impurities from zinc sulphate solution, the dissolved impurities reacted with zinc dust and precipitated out. After filtration of the solution, the filtered residue was collected, washed, dried and subjected to XRD analysis and elemental analysis using EDS (SEM). X-ray diffraction pattern of the filtered residue is shown in Zinc dust can be utilized for purification of zinc sulphate solution, essential liquor in the zinc production plants. With the addition of 300% excess zinc dust, the removal of primary impurities from zinc sulphate solution was accomplished at 50 °C and 2 h of cementation. From the amount of impurities removed it was found that – 300 mesh size zinc dust with 300% excess quantity was better than − 100 and − 200 sieves zinc dust, with the same excess quantities, for the cementation. 2 h ball milled dust gave better cementation results compared to – 300 mesh zinc dust. The surface area per unit volume of the particles increased the rate of cementation. Also, from the quantitative analysis of zinc dust by EDS, it was found that no significant change was observed in its composition. Therefore, improvement in the cementation was due to the change in shape of the zinc dust after ball milling. Authors express thanks to Head, Department of Metallurgical Engineering, The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at