The meeting was held at the Ohana Keauhou Beach Resort, a beautiful and quiet place located in the Big Island of Hawaii. This conference and workshop dealt with cutting edge research in the science and engineering of two of the world’s key separation processes. Flotation and flocculation are extensively used in the material supply chain for technologies that are relevant to telecommunications, fuel cells, ceramics, waste removal/recycling processes and the minerals industry, for example. It was an appropriate opportunity to combine the recent advances on process fundamentals with performance and design of industrial flotation/flocculation cells, at a focused conference involving some of the world’s leading researchers, and practitioners, drawn from academia, research institutions and industry. A total of 54 participants from 12 countries attended the oral presentations and panel discussions. The four day conference included 10 plenary lectures of keynote speakers and 20 presentations of target speakers. (1) The first day was devoted to bridging flocculation in wastewater and fine particle treatment processes. Dynamic monitoring of floc formation, breakage and re-growth has shown a more detailed information on these processes than a simple jar test procedure. Polyelectrolyte-assisted separation of suspended solids from aqueous phases and their subsequent dewatering was used to gain a perspective on the current state of knowledge of flocculation and dewatering. According to the author, this assessment was meant to raise some dialog on opportunities for improving the understanding, and to provoke responses to the question “do we yet know enough to be dangerous or helpful on the industrial scale?”. Upcoming flocculation and flotation techniques and equipment as well as their potential in different science and engineering fields, namely in the treatment of liquid effluents and recovery of mineral fine particles were analyzed. Critical issues on dispersion/flocculation and selective flocculation studies as well as stability and kinetics of flocculation by polymers were also matter of discussion. Unconventional flocculation and flotation techniques applied to mineral processing were reviewed as potential alternatives to recover fines and ultrafines particles. A case of study was the first plant installed in Chile for mining effluent treatment by DAF (dispersed air flotation). (2) Day two was focused on advances on bubble-particle encounters/models in flotation. Experimental observation has shown evidence that two mechanisms can be responsible of rupture process of liquid films: the growing fluctuation waves on fluid interfaces and nucleation inside the film. It seems reasonable that collection of hydrophobic particles will preferably occur through micro-bubble formation on the mineral rather than attachment of existing bubbles. Thus, tiny bubbles forming on the particle surface facilitate the attachment of larger bubbles and in this way activate flotation by additionally cluster formation. A general flotation model that allows to relate turbulence and collision to attachment and detachment has been developed. On the other hand, force measurements using an AFM (atomic-force-microscope) has been used to study the particle–particle and bubble–particle interactions, curves for Ea (energy barrier) for the coagulation and flotation are of the same shape, suggesting that both are controlled by the same mechanism, i.e., hydrophobic interaction. Also, a colloidal probe technique was used to measure forces to study the boundary slip of water on hydrophilic surfaces and electro-kinetic effects. In a laboratory flotation column, it was observed that there exists a particle contact angle for which froth phase recovery is maximum (i.e. contact angles around 63°). This finding confirms that particle hydrophobicity plays a key role in bubble coalescence and froth stability. However, the interactive effects of particle characteristics such as hydrophobicity, particle size and shape, on froth stability and froth recovery remains as a challenge to froth phase modeling. Analysis of the flotation kinetic process, using a first-order attachment–detachment model, suggests that an improved flotation cell would be sparged with small bubbles and operated at lower, more uniform turbulent energy dissipation rates. Studies on particles movement near bubbles using high speed video microscopy showed that the bubble–particle sliding attachment interaction is not satisfactorily described by the available theories, and that the water film was probably ruptured due to the submicrometer-sized gas cavities existing at the hydrophobic particle–water interface. The attachment efficiency of quartz particles with nitrogen bubbles was estimated, at different operating conditions, from experimental collection efficiency measurements and collision efficiency calculated with the Generalized Sutherland equation model (GSE). (3) Day three covered the area of flotation cells and their operation. Experimental studies in a laboratory flotation column have shown that the froth phase is an efficient collection zone as well, especially if hydrophobic particles are fed into the froth, avoiding the turbulence of the pulp. Thus the flotation particle size range can be extended greatly, especially for collection of coarse particles. A model for drainage in a rising froth was developed and tested with fluorescein tracer in a two-dimensional froth column. Separation performance strongly relies on froth stability, in particular the grade, which depends critically on bubble coalescence and bursting. A methodology for calculating the stability of froths using information about the stability of individual films has been proposed. From laboratory and industrial tests it was observed that the quality of the top of the froth corresponds to the maximum attainable grade of the ore being floated. This parameter has been used to characterize the grade-recovery curves in laboratory batch and continuous plant operations. The loss of considerable amounts of valuable minerals in tailings generated in flotation processes are strongly related to the presence of fine particles (i.e. less than 10–20 μm). Now because of depletion of old deposits, there are more operations with low mineral grades and or fine disseminated ores, then the task of fine particles flotation becomes more relevant and attractive. It is believed that, the problem of selective flotation of fine minerals can be partially solved with the help of “turbulent microflotation”, using the experience from flotation water purification. Dissolved air flotation, DAF, using microbubbles of less than 100 μm, is used for removal of suspended solids from water and wastewater treatment. This means that suspended solids down to a particle size of 5–10 μm are removed effectively from water. Recent developments using turbulent flow conditions, in DAF processes, showed a better control of hydraulics in comparison with conventional DAF units operating with laminar flow. The current status of column flotation regarding practical aspects on process design, modeling and control was discussed. New applications of pneumatic flotation, i.e. Jameson cell, for wastewater treatments in food factories were also presented. (4) Day four covered the topic of diagnostic process chemistry in flotation and flocculation. Statistical methods based on time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) has been applied for diagnostic surface analysis in sulfide flotation. Recently in situ FTIR/IRS technique has further extended the understanding of adsorption phenomena and the state of the adsorbed collector in flotation chemistry of non-sulfide minerals, such as semi-soluble salt minerals such as phosphate minerals, fluorite, calcite and barite. Dynamic surface tension measurements (DST) have been applied to study the adsorption of different types of surfactants and polymers at the air/water interface, using the maximum bubble pressure method (MBPM). Practical aspects of the effect of electrochemical conditions in grinding mills on the flotation process has been evaluated at laboratory scale. Particularly the reduction of anodic dissolution of iron by using grinding balls with elevated chromium levels. For example, the replacement of iron or steel media containing elevated chromium levels is relatively common in tower mills used for regrinding in Australia. Finally, the need of flocculation for particle size enlargement in mineral processing circuits was analyzed. The application is required to improve both the particles separation, by selective aggregation, and dewatering using non-selective aggregation. In conclusion, despite the significant advances on process fundamental knowledge that have taken place alongside with major engineering investigations of the performance and design of industrial flotation/flocculation cells, further work has to be done to answer some key questions, i.e. metallurgical scale-up, froth transportation and ultrafine and coarse particle recovery, specially in large flotation cells. Thus, new efforts must be oriented to fill the gap between scientific knowledge and industrial requirement. At the time the conference was running the eruption of a volcano located around 120 km was at the center of the news. After the conference, tours to see the volcano’s area and other beautiful landscapes closed a fruitful week. . The workshop was attended by 64–70 delegates, comprising approximately: Eight independent environmental engineering consultants specialising in mining and mineral processing. Some of the major companies represented included Metago, SRK and Digby Wells and Associates. 22 technical representatives from the local mining and mineral processing industry (including both research and operational divisions). The various Anglo divisions and operations were particularly well represented, although delegates from Avmin and Lonmin were also present. Six representatives from the service industries (including Larox, Pelichem and Hatch). 28 representatives from both national and international universities and other research organisations. The aim of the workshop was to address issues of water and tailings management, sustainable development and integration of environmental management in process design, and the significance of these aspects in mineral processing options. A good blend in terms of general overview and technical case study papers as well as representatives from various interest groups resulted in this aim being achieved to a high degree of success. The workshop was particularly successful in stimulating communication and an exchange of ideas between industry, consultants and researchers. This, in turn, served to create an enhanced awareness of the current environmental practises within, and problems faced by, mining and mineral processing operations, as well as the research activities currently being conducted in regards to these issues. The first three papers, by Paul Jourdan, Roberto Villas-Boas and Michael Solomon, dealt with a fairly holistic view of sustainable issues in the mining industry, providing an interesting and stimulating background and perspective to the more technical aspects of water and general environmental management. The general consensus seems to be that, on a project basis, mining is a temporary and hence an inherently unsustainable activity. However, in terms of its ability to generate secondary and tertiary industries (capital goods, services, consumables, manufacturing, technology development etc.), mining has the potential to be highly sustainable and a major driving force for economic, social and political development, particularly in third world countries. The realisation and development of this potential requires considerable collaborative action from governments, communities and corporations, in terms of both general policies and strategies as well as more comprehensive/holistic mine life cycle planning. Although the technical papers were of a high standard in general, two papers in particular generated substantial interest and discussion. These included a paper by Andrew Wood from SRK, which provided an excellent overview of the opportunities and limitations to improve water management and environmental protection in the mining and mineral processing industries, as well as a paper by Peter Gunther from Anglo Coal, which dealt with technologies for the treatment of AMD. The general management of water resources and post-closure environmental impacts appear to be two environmental issues of particular concern to the local mining and mineral processing industries at present. Mining and mineral processing operations are under considerable economic and environmental pressure to improve and optimise the management of water resources, both in terms of maximising usage and minimising impacts. Concerns regarding post-closure liabilities, in terms of both regulatory restrictions and remediation costs, appear to be mainly related to long-term seepage from tailings and residue dumps, and flooding of discontinued mine shafts. In dealing with these issues, environmental and operational engineers are faced with significant challenges. These include: Insufficient transfer of research-based knowledge and technologies. There appeared to be a general consensus that, although a lot of significant research and development had and still was being undertaken in the environmental field, transfer and implementation of this knowledge is not taking place effectively and timeously. Complexities involved in the implementation of integrated environmental management systems. Although the recent trend towards a more integrated approach to environmental management is generally perceived to be a step in the right direction, environmental engineers and other technical operators appear to be finding the complexities involved in the implementation of such systems to be problematic, particularly in terms of delaying the decision-making and mitigation implementation processes. The lack of tools and methodologies, particularly ones which are practical as well as time and cost-efficient, is forcing many operational engineers to adopt an “any action is better than no action approach”, which is preventing proactive particularly in terms of adopting cleaner technologies as opposed to end-of-pipe treatments and closure planning. Legislation which is considered to be unreasonable, controversial and ever-changing. Particular interest was demonstrated in research currently being conducted on AMD. Workshops of this nature play an important role in improving links between industry and research organisations, and ensuring that research activities will ultimately result in improved process performance, through both the development and transfer of viable technologies as well as the enhancement of national expertise. Key elements to the success of such workshops include: Defining clear workshop objectives that are linked to current challenges and shortcomings in terms of industry practises. Ensuring that the content of the papers and presentations are in line with such objectives. Ensuring that the relevant interest groups are well represented. A special thanks to Meg Winter and her team for their organisational skills, hard work and professionalism. The 39th Symposium on the Physicochemical Problems of Mineral Processing was held at Polanica Zdroj (Lover Silesia, Poland) and was attended by more than 50 participants. Delegates to the meeting included researchers not only from Poland but also from Australia (four persons), Egypt (two persons) and United Kingdom (one person). The first session was devoted to celebration of the 80th birthday of Professor Andrzej Pomianowski. The topic of his lecture was “Modelling of surface phenomena”. The symposium comprised nine sessions each dedicated to a specific topic of research such as flotation, adsorption and modification, extraction and metals recovery, environmental issues, and various aspect of mineral engineering. The organizers of the symposium were Institute of Mining Engineering, Wroclaw University of Technology and the Committee of Mining of the Polish Academy of Science. Presented papers at the symposium were published in the Physicochemical Problems of Mineral Processing Journal, volume 36, 2002, ISSN number 0137-1282 and in the conference proceedings, which contain eight papers in Polish (ISSN number 0324-9670). The next Physicochemical Problems of Mineral Processing Symposium will held on 22–24 September 2003 in Polanica Zdroj, Poland. The papers should be sent to Dr. Zygmunt Sadowski by the end of March 2003. The IXth International Mineral Processing Symposium was held in the picturesque location of Cappadocia. It was jointly organized by Hacettepe and Osmangazi Universities. 309 participants attended the symposium of whom 39 were from 15 different countries namely from USA, Australia, Austria, Brazil, Bulgaria, Egypt, Germany, Italy, Mongolia, Russia, South Africa, South Korea, Sweden, The Netherlands and Turkey. Six plenary lectures were given by internationally renowned experts; Prof. A.J. Lynch, Prof. G.J. Jameson, Prof. E. Forssberg, Prof. K. Sastry, Prof. V. Boas and Dr. D. Sutherland. In total 67 oral and 23 poster presentations were submitted of which 27 were by foreign authors. The program was accompanied by an exhibition. Forteen domestic and foreign companies provided the visitors with information on their products and services. Extended abstracts of presentations have been published: ISBN 975-491-127-4. We believe the event has promoted the interchange of experience between the specialists and has helped us all to realise the current challenges we face and future opportunities we have in mineral industries. Mineral Processing 2002, the annual conference of the Western Cape Branch of the South African Institute of Mining and Metallurgy, took place on the 1st and 2nd of August at the President Hotel in Cape Town’s Bantry Bay. Organised in collaboration with the University of Cape Town, the University of Stellenbosch, and Cape Technikon, this was the 21st conference in the series. With 200 delegates drawn from 12 countries on six continents, it can truly be said to have come of age. From small beginnings, starting in the seaside town of Gordon’s Bay in 1982, the conference has established itself as the premier annual mineral processing forum for South Africa. Although far removed from its main mining industry customers, it has always enjoyed their enthusiastic support. This year was no exception, with more than 80 delegates representing 12 mining and processing groups and another 40 from half that number of equipment and chemical manufacturers supplying the minerals industry. Technical and academic credibility of the programme was vouchsafed by the presence of some 40 researchers from other universities and research institutions, many of whom presented papers, in addition to the home team from the Cape institutions. Established initially to showcase local research and researchers, this year’s programme of 43 technical papers included 12 presentations from overseas groups, whilst a further five were concerned with collaborative research involving overseas partners, such as the international nature of minerals processing research in the 21st century. The Western Cape institutions are in the forefront of this movement, with the presence of Professor Jim Finch, who delivered the opening plenary lecture entitled “Managing gas dispersion: a way to improve flotation plant performance”, occasioned by the AMIRA-sponsored research collaboration between the JKMRC, UCT, and now McGill University in Montreal. The technical programme included two sessions––11 papers––concerned with aspects of flotation, while the total number of papers on comminution/classification topics was only eight. Unusual by world standards, this reflects the needs and priorities of the South African platinum industry, the main supporter of local research. The rewards for even a small improvement in flotation recovery of platinum group metals are very large indeed, and warrant a major international research programme. Other topics within the programme ranged widely over, inter alia, modelling and simulation, metal accounting, smelting and a range of biotechnologies for the minerals industry, reflecting the diversity of work being undertaken at the southern tip of Africa. Exceptionally delegates enjoyed review papers from three members of the Steering Committee for the XXll International Mineral Processing Congress, to be held in Cape Town from 28th September until 3rd October next year. With an Organising Committee founded on the team that put together Mineral Processing 2002, this will surely be something not to be missed. The conference attracted 62 researchers from 17 countries around the world with the following profile: 43 from academia, 16 from industry and three from government laboratories. Five sessions were organized: Emerging industrial applications. Recent advances in novel measurement techniques. Recent advances in modeling and simulation methods. Advances in understanding forces in fluid-particle systems. Advances in understanding effects of particle characteristics on multiphase flows. Seven 40-min keynote speeches were delivered and 34 20-min papers presented. The keynote presentations provided reviews of the state-of-the-art developments in respective subjects and helped wide-range discussions. In addition, there were 20 posters in a dedicated poster session. To promote more dialog and interaction among the participants, 30 min were allocated for free discussions at the end of each session and 2-h free time was scheduled after lunch. The conference began with presentations and enthusiastic discussions on industrial applications. That set the tone for the entire conference. The informal nature of the conference encouraged free discussions of new and sometimes controversial ideas. Most participants agreed that the conference was timely and the exchanges of ideas were evident throughout the conference. Many expressed the delight in interacting with researchers from so many different fields. As a participant put it during a discussion: Innovation comes from the boundary of different fields. At the wrap-up session, the following issues were discussed as potential topics for future conferences: Process analysis and synthesis for nano-particle technologies. More effective description and measurement of structured materials. How to characterize samples with small quantities. More consensus in how to model and when to include inter-particle forces. Benefits of simulation and modeling from more collaborations between academia and industry. Applicability of the concept of drag coefficient in complex flow systems. Post-simulation statistics. This two-day International Symposium on Solvent Extraction was held at Regional Research Laboratory (CSIR), Bhubaneswar, Orissa, India. Geographical distribution of delegates: About 100 delegates from South Korea, Bangladesh and India took part in the deliberations. Indian delegates are from Bhabha Atomic Research Center (BARC), Mumbai; Indira Gandhi Center for Atomic Research (IGCAR), Kalpakkam; Nuclear Fuel Complex (NFC), Hyderabad; Heavy Water Board (HWB), Talcher; Indian Rare Earths(IRE), Kerala; Uranium Corporation of India Ltd. (UCIL), Jaduguda; IIT-Roorkee; IIT-Madras; Institute of Science, Mumbai; Shivaji University, Kolhapur; National Metallurgical Laboratory (NML), Jamshedpur; Regional Research Laboratory, Tiruvanathapuram’ Regional Research laboratory, Bhubaneswar; and Indian Institute of Technology, Hyderabad. The programme was broadly divided into nine technical sessions. Out of these, three were devoted to papers related to non-ferrous metals, two each for nuclear elements and analytical applications and one each for design simulation and solvent development. The three sessions on non-ferrous metals covered a wide range of metals viz. Zn, Cu, Ni, Co, Ca, Mn, Cd, V, Ti, Hg, Ga, Ta, Sb, Zr, Nd and Lanthanides. Separation and recovery of these metals from solutions arising out of a variety of feed materials such as molybdenite concentrate, brass-ash, ocean nodules, brine-sludge of chloro-alkali industry, Bayer liquors, tantalites–columbite ores was presented by authors. In addition to the flow sheet development work, aspects such as synergism and kinetics of extraction were also covered in some of the papers presented. Some papers dealt with improvement in plant practices and commercialization of research activities. The papers related to nuclear metals covered, uranium–thorium extraction, their separation, nuclear fuel reprocessing and development of new reagents. The two sessions on application of solvent extraction in analytical chemistry included papers on estimation of metals by extractive-spectrophotometric methods. New reagents were proposed for determination of Cu, Pd, Ni, Ti, Co, Hg, Pt, Pb etc. The session on design and simulation covered aspects such as third phase formation, interfacial tension extraction using columns, extraction using liquid membranes and the effect of ultra-sound on oil extraction. The session on solvent development highlighted the efforts made by various institutions on the synthesis of reagents, mostly the LIX type reagents, tri-butyl phosphate and phosphoric based extractants. The Symposium Proceedings of (637 +xv) pages have been brought out on this occasion and it was edited by Prof. Vibhuti N. Misra, Dr. S.C. Das and K. Srinivasa Rao. This volume is published by M/s Allied Publishers Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi. ISBN 81-7764-356-8. The 7th International Symposium on Environmental Issues and Waste Management in Energy and Minerals Protection was held in Calgiari, Sardinia. It was last held in the US, Canada, Australia, Italy, Turkey and again in Canada in the year 2000. It is a biannual event and the next two symposia have been scheduled for Antalya, Turkey in 2004 and New Delhi, India in 2006. It attracted over 210 participants and a wide range of quality papers from 37 countries of Europe, North and South America, Australia, Asia and Africa. 130 papers were accepted for oral presentation in two parallel sessions and 40 others were presented in poster sessions. The goal of this conference series is to discuss a number of technical, economic and legal aspects concerning environmental issues and to propose suitable solutions aiming at assuring the supply of raw materials and the availability of energy, while safeguarding the values of the surrounding territory, during the entire life cycle of industrial activities. Technical sessions were focused on sustainable development, environmental impact assessment, waste management practices and environmental monitoring, environmental issues in open pit and underground mining, control of effluents from mineral processing, metallurgical and chemical plants, clean combustion engineering and alternative energy sources, emerging technologies for environmental protection, mine site closure and land rehabilitation, tailings disposal and rehabilitation, slope stability, acid rock drainage, soil/water pollution and decontamination techniques, environmental impacts including national reports and case histories, computer modeling and applications, waste/pollutants characterization and chemistry and recycling. The sessions that the author could attend due to parallel papers were characterized by lively discussions, which were worthwhile. The plenary session included three interesting keynote papers by P. Reid on sustainable development and mining, D.A. Summers on environmental enhancement through high pressure waterjet application and Z. Agioutantis and M. Karmis on SDPS for windows: an application for subsidence prediction, optimum mine design and environmental control. The sustainable development session included, among others, the papers by R. McNamara and T. Cooney on the role of the imperial smelting process in the sustainable management of mineral wastes and other residues and K.L. Sandvik and H. Ese on the design of a pollution free new sulphide mine, based upon the experience from closure of Norwegian mines and ten years of subsequent research. The environmental impacts assessment session included among others the papers by E.Y. Baafi on geostatistical site characterization of pollutants at Casey station in Antarctica and M.J. Garcia et al., on characterization of organic (PAHs) and inorganic contamination associated to the risk assessment related to coal mines closure. The wastes management practices and environmental monitoring session included, among others, the papers by R.H.P. Lingering et al., on relation between the in situ and the ex situ quality of dredging sludge and S. Nicol et al., on SGM Furtei gold project: environmental management and monitoring. The control of effluents from mineral processing, metallurgical and chemical plants session, included among others the papers by E.W. Koch et al., on an investigation of the chemistry involved in the mixing of an industrial effluent with fine ash, R.R. Carneiro et al, on red mud neutralization and K. Fytas on air emissions and the Canadian metals industry. The tailings disposal and rehabilitation session included, among others, the paper by R. Frilander on modeling approach: the environmental pollution caused by the seepage of the waste and tailings dam three case studies from Finland. The clean combustion engineering and alternative energy sources session included among others the papers by M.N. Wendt and C.W. Mallett on utilization of solid and gaseous waste from coal mines for lightweight aggregate and M. Zilberchmidt et al., on environmental and economic potential of thermal treatment of high sulfur coal wastes. The mine site closure and land rehabilitation session included the papers by R. Ciccu et al., on reclamation and environmental rehabilitation of a mine site: the case of Genna Luas (south western Sardinia), M. Kyzeridi et al., on reclamation scenarios of mined out open pits using GIS tools and V. Pavlovic et al., on open pit mines recultivation, reliability and control. The acid mine/rock drainage and the soil/water pollution and decontamination techniques sessions included, among others, the papers by N. Tasse and D. Germain on performance of forestry wastes for the treatment of acid mine drainage through a reactive barrier, R.A. Kleiv and M. Thornhill on initial neutralization of acid mine drainage using magnesium rich olivine; K. Naicker et al., on acid mine drainage arising from gold mining activity in Johannesburg, South Africa; R. Dessi et al., on remediation of soil contaminated by heavy metals: batch and kinetic studies for Montevecchio soils; S. Somot et al, on leaching tests on pyritic mill tailings stabilized and solidified by lime-fly ash binders; A. Mameli et al., on lead uptake by natural zeolites; J. Martins et al., on vermiculite: a mineral to clean water in the mining industry and A. Krestou et al., on uranium (IV) removal from aqueous solutions using natural zeolites. The waste/pollutants characterization and chemistry session included among others the papers by E. Cukrowska et al., on column leaching and chemometric evaluation of the mobility of toxic elements in gold mine polluted land and F. Battaglia-Brunet et al., on arsenic oxidation by a chemo-autotrophic bacterial population: influence of dissolved bacteria population. Finally, the recycling and recovery of useful components from industrial waste session included among others the papers by I. Tarasova et al., on re-use of iron-rich water treatment sludges, C.H. Sampaio et al., on cyanide recovery in hydrometallurgical plants and T. Sasaoka et al., on utilization of fly-ash as backfilling material in mining and civil engineering fields. Very interesting technical tours were organized in mining areas and industrial plants, including the oil refinery at Sarroch, the Sulcis coal field and alumina plant with red mud embankment at Portovesme, the SMG gold operations and environmental reclamation at Furtei and the lead/zinc smelter at Portovesme and Genna Luas slag disposal facilities. Last, but not least, the assistance provided by the symposium chairman Prof. Raimondo Ciccu and the conference secretariat (Kassiopea group) throughout the conference is greatly acknowledged. Copies of the proceedings (ISBN: 88-900895-0-4) can be ordered to: SWEMP (R. Ciccu, Ed.), c/o DIGITA Dipartimento di Geoingegneria e Tecnologie Ambientali, Università degli Studi di Calgiari, Piazza d’Armi, 09123 Calgiari, Italy. Tel.: +390706755526 Fax: +390706755523 Email: ciccu@unica.it Web address: Additional information on SWEMP 2002 can be found on the conference webpage