Recycling of a material is defined as submitting the material to secondary processing steps that produce the same material with the same properties as the original primary product. Recycling can in some instances be conducted several times, the material undergoing, after primary processing, several cycles of secondary processing, service, and recovery without significant degradation. This is, for instance, the case for conventional aluminum alloys ( Primary processing of metal matrix composites is essentially the bonding of the composite ingredient materials, metallic matrix and reinforcement, so as to form a percolating metallic matrix containing the reinforcement as an embedded second constituent. The main issues in primary processing of metal matrix composites are to achieve bonding between the two usually nonwetting ingredient materials and to avoid deleterious interface reactions after contact between these constituent materials is established. Frequently, primary metal matrix composite processing yields near-net-shape products, at times by the very nature of the process, and also often because these composites are very difficult to machine. Depending on the composite and the component at hand, the material can be recycled, or alternatively more profitably reused in another form after reclamation. Recycling of metal matrix composites takes advantage of the already achieved bonding between matrix and reinforcement. Recycling of metal matrix composites is attractive, given that it provides the commercial benefit of avoiding the frequently costly primary processing, and on some occasions saves expensive reinforcements. There are, however, some specific issues that must be taken into account in the recycling of these materials. Namely, it is important to avoid excessive thermal exposure in the recycling process if the constituents are mutually prone to chemical interaction. Also, because metal matrix composites are prone to accumulation of internal damage during deformation, their recycling or reuse will often require severe nondestructive testing to verify that the microstructural integrity has been preserved. Another concern that is specific to the recycling of metal matrix composites is that the reinforcement of metals is frequently only used for partial, localized, reinforcement of metal-based components. With such components, an additional effort is necessary to separate the composite from the unreinforced section, in order to allow recycling of both materials separately. Reclamation of the composite ingredient materials requires work to separate the two constituents of the metal matrix composite. Although the interface free energy of the reinforcement in the composite often exceeds its surface free energy in air, matrix/reinforcement separation does not occur spontaneously because the complementary free surface energy of the matrix has to be formed anew in the process. This results in a positive total free energy barrier, which must be overcome in the reclamation process. This barrier can be overcome by several methods, one being the use of insoluble flux materials having a smaller surface energy with the reinforcement than the matrix. Other processes for metal matrix composite reclamation rely on gravity for separation of the composite constituents. These can be aided by blowing bubbles of an appropriate gas through the molten composite, so as to separate the reinforcement by attachment and flotation with gas bubbles (this process is akin to froth flotation processes used in ore preparation). An additional issue in reclamation of expensive reinforcements like fibers is that their properties are often degraded in the process. In some cases, when the reinforcement is far more costly than the matrix, reclamation of the reinforcement alone can be envisaged; this is achieved with relative ease by dissolving the matrix chemically. Given the relatively wide variety of metal matrix composites and components made therefrom, recycling and reclamation of these materials raises issues that depend on the materials class. Issues specific to the two principal metal matrix composite classes are therefore more specifically addressed in what follows, together with questions specific to reclamation of composite ingredients. Cast primary metal matrix composite products containing relatively low volume fractions of discontinuous reinforcements, like foundry ingots, extrusion billets, or rolling slabs, can be recycled with comparative ease. If the recovered metal matrix composite cannot be used for the same component and application at equal performance quality, reuse can be envisaged for different applications allowing a certain degree of downgrading of the performance of the material. In the case of components selectively reinforced by particulates, remelting results in dilution of the reinforcement, yielding a different composite; here again, the resulting material could be reused in a different application. With particulate reinforcements at volume fractions less than 30%, recycling of the composite can be achieved by remelting if the constituents are not overly reactive. The foundry composite alloy AlSi9Mg/SiC/10-20p ( Aluminum alloys of the 2xxx, 6xxx, and 7xxx series reinforced with alumina particles react at the interface even close to the solidus temperature. Therefore, any remelting process can potentially alter the composite constituent phases and properties. In the case of AA6061/Al It has been proposed to reuse particle reinforced aluminum alloys for the production of aluminum foam ( Particle reinforced metals also have the attribute that they can be disintegrated into smaller fragments without disintegration of their microstructure. Machining chips of these materials can thus be reused to fabricate MMC components by solid state compaction methods. This solid state process has the added advantage of minimizing interfacial reactions between matrix and reinforcements. Metal matrix composites with short or continuous fibrous reinforcements are usually produced by infiltration of preforms, in a process that also defines the final shape of the metal matrix composite, and which can also produce fully or partially reinforced components. Recycling of such composites would thus require preservation of the shape of the component. For example, the alumina short fiber preform ring reinforcing the crown of an aluminum alloy piston can be recuperated during remelting. Although the matrix is molten, such MMCs are mechanically stable up to about 850°C ( Particle reinforced metals with particulate volume fractions greater than 40% are also frequently prepared by melt infiltration of powder preforms. It may be envisaged to reshape simple geometries of these composites to some extent by forming processes; if remelted, the volume fraction of reinforcement might be increased if some of the matrix is squeezed out during secondary pressure casting ( Isolated ceramic particulates or fibers can be removed from aluminum or magnesium melts by conventional salt addition or fluxing techniques as executed to remove oxide films ( The efficiency of particle removal by fluxing is related to the probability of contact between the ceramic constituent and the flux. Duralcan, as a supplier of particulate reinforced aluminum, proposes to incorporate the salt into the melt, agitated by injecting gas (  A melt extraction technique was reported ( The reclamation of the reinforcement free of metal matrix can be achieved by dissolving the matrix chemically. The necessary effort will increase with the volume fraction of the inert reinforcement, because convection is progressively hindered. Such leached reinforcement, especially fibers, could be chopped for reuse as discontinuous reinforcements.