Flotation froth can be considered as a complex surface consisting of geometric elements characterized by different colors, surface reflectance, dimensions and “texture” according to the process behavior. Froth surface characteristics can thus be considered an indicator of the process. This paper presents the algorithms and the procedures developed by the authors to set up a digital flotation surface modeling (DSFM) strategy to utilize the identification of those elements of a feature vector (consisting also of other froth bubble numerical parameters such as color, morphological and morphometrical attributes) to classify froths with respect to conventional process characteristics such as recovery and grade.The flotation process is the most exploited system for separation of different minerals in the mineral processing industries. Yet it is still one of the most unstable and unpredictable steps in mineral separation circuits. The difficulties in controlling the flotation process derive: from the complex system of interrelated operating variables (milling efficiency, chemical additions, airflow rate, etc.) affecting the final performance of the system; from unavoidable changes in ore characteristics in most industrial circuits, making any fully automatic control almost impossible; from the strong inertia of the system, which results in long delays between the manipulation of control variables and the appearance of visible effects in the process and (vice versa) delays between changes in the separation efficiency and observable variations in the monitored process parameters. Especially concerning the third issue, it has been noted since the implementation of the first system to realize a circuit control in the beginning of the 1960s that froth appearance, apart from being a good process indicator, is also the quickest indicator of chemical–physical changes in the underlying pulp phase and in the ore characteristics. Expert operators often use the froth surface appearance to detect possible problems in flotation performance. In the same way, digital remote image acquiring systems can be used to monitor the froth surface. Images can be analyzed to obtain useful input parameters for a process control system. Different froth monitoring strategies can be adopted in flotation circuits Image acquisition aimed at a simple remote visualization of the froth surfaces and the froth discharging efficiency. Acquisition and image analysis aimed at a classification of the froth status, to be used by a control expert system or plant operator/manager. Acquisition and image analysis aimed at predicting the current process efficiency expressed as mineral grades and recovery. This paper describes a system of image analysis and parameterization aimed at predicting grade. In particular, an integrated technique of 3D froth rendering and common color, morphological and texture analysis is used to give a real time prediction of the separation efficiency. The system is cell-based, meaning that all the measures, analyses and estimates refer to a single cell of a flotation bank. All the developed techniques have been tested in a flotation plant processing a complex sulfide ore. The plant is owned by Boliden in Garpenberg (Sweden). The process monitoring strategy relies on a data acquisition system consisting both of common process variable control devices (pulp level and flow-rate, airflow rate, froth height, chemical additions, X-ray fluorescence, milling energy consumption), an image acquisition system and an image analysis system, which are connected to the circuit control system Image acquisition is carried out using a digital color camera placed perpendicularly over the flotation cell and shielded inside an aluminum cover. The light source is provided by a single 500 W halogen lamp placed perpendicularly over the cell beside the camera. The images acquired are 256×256 pixels, reproducing a section of the froth surface about 20×20 cm wide. The portion of the surface acquired must be well distant from the discharge weir in order to capture an undisturbed section of the froth. The image acquisition frequency is governed by the following analysis procedures being the most time-consuming operations in the whole monitoring process. A minimum frequency of 2 min should be assured in order to obtain near real time monitoring. Data analysis is aimed at reducing the numerical complexity of the data, extracting effective indicators of the froth status and obtaining a feature vector of the flotation froth. Process data acquired with a greater frequency than the froth image acquisition frequency are averaged over time in order to reduce their frequency to the image processing frequency and also to compensate possible noise. Image processing consists of, Color analysis (RGB, HSI, HSV spectra)—scan line analysis. Textural analysis. Morphological analysis. 3D rendering and 3D surface analysis. The parameters extracted from the images are combined with the other available process parameters to produce the feature vector (14 parameters, minimum every 2–3 min). Grade prediction is achieved by using just a few of the feature parameters according to which mineral in the froth has to be forecast. The choice of the feature vector subset to use in the prediction may be made based on the results of a previous research phase aimed at detecting sensible indicators (color or bubble morphology parameters) for each mineral. A simple second-order polynomial is used to correlate the froth feature parameters to the mineralogical performance of the cell. Image analysis consists of the extraction of the red, green and blue channels from the image from which the average color intensity and the standard deviation of the color intensity were calculated. The same parameters are generated for the hue saturation intensity (HSI) and hue saturation value (HSV) representations of the color planes Three-dimensional froth modeling is based on the approximation of each bubble constituting the froth surface to an ellipsoid having a parabolic vertical section. By intersecting all the ellipsoids, it is possible to build an elevation model of the froth surface Ellipsoids are geometrical figures generated by the rotation of a parabola around its axis. Parabola curvature is changed during the rotation: the resulting surface has elliptic horizontal sections. The parameters necessary for the generation of the ellipsoids are obtained from the analysis of the froth image. The image is segmented as described above and pre-processed. Segmentation, followed by bubble boundary detection, is aimed at obtaining the geometrical parameters of each bubble as it appears on the image plane in order to use them for the modeling ellipsoid. Pre-processing consists of a sequence of operations aimed at transforming the light intensity image profiles into elevation profiles. The result of the pre-processing is an image whose gray levels are directly proportional to the elevation of the bubble surface at those points Removal of dark spots; these are removed by detecting the regions with a light threshold criterion and then assigning them the light intensities of their neighboring pixels. Removal of reflections; reflections are bright peaks on the light intensity profile. They are detected by applying a light threshold to the image. Then they are removed by applying a procedure similar to that utilized to remove the dark spots. Post-filtering and scaling; a scale 1:3 is adopted between pixel intensity and point elevation. After this pre-processing, a first digital elevation model (DEM) of the surface is obtained. The geometric parameters of each ellipsoid are obtained from the analysis of the segmented image and the primary DEM, i.e. from: The geometrical analysis of the bubble boundaries as they appear in the segmented image. Bubble light intensity profiles and gradient analyses. The geometrical grid of the 3D model is usually less precise than the one used for the image in order to reduce the complexity of the following 3D analysis. The obtained surface is analyzed adopting a fractal analysis technique aimed at quantifying the degree of ruggedness and complexity of the surface. Clarke's triangular prisms algorithm is adopted The triangular prisms method uses the triangular upper faces of some prisms to approximate the froth surface model and to compute the froth area; as the number of used prisms is increased and hence their dimension decreases, the resolution of the analysis increases. The smallest fluctuations of the surface are considered in the computation of the area; therefore decreasing the width of the prism sides increases the measured area. The relation between the prism side and the measured area is bi-logarithmic, hence the froth model surface has a fractal structure and its fractal dimension can be evaluated to assess the rate of increase of the surface area. The fractal analysis described above shows that the froth structure is characterized by two different fractal dimensions. The breakpoint between the two fractal regions always occurs in the same position; the second fractal allows one to recognize and tell the different froth structures selectively. The parameters obtainable with 3D analysis are: Low-resolution fractal dimension. High-resolution fractal dimension. Total froth surface area. The feature vector resulting from the image analysis is a set of 14 parameters constituted by a first set of color parameters linked to froth images textural attributes (eight parameters), a second set of morphological parameters linked to bubble shape characteristics (four parameters), and a third set of parameters derived from the 3D modeling (two parameters). In addition, the following process parameters are acquired: Pulp level. Froth height. Airflow rate. Frother dosage. Collector (activator) dosage. According to the mineral grade, it is possible to find a subset of parameters from the feature vector described above that allows consistent estimates of specific mineralogical parameters. The estimates are obtained considering first- and second-order correlation between the feature vector elements and the mineral grade or recovery. The example presented below is of an estimate function adopting three parameters (although two parameters are usually sufficient). It has been noted that, adopting this polynomial approach, it is possible to find a dominant element of the feature vector for each mineralogical parameter: the dominant feature alone allows prediction precision up to If the detection of the dominant parameter (usually a color parameter) and of the ancillary parameter subset is done in a research phase, different ancillary feature parameters can be adopted according to different process conditions. This is possible by comparing, during ordinary system runs, the prediction results obtained with different combinations of feature vector elements. If a currently unused ancillary feature is found to be more reliable for long-term prediction, it is swapped in the prediction function (adaptive correlation). An automatic system has been developed, which is able to detect the optimal prediction parameters by exploiting the low-frequency measurements (6–8 min) of an X-ray fluorescence froth mineral grade analyzer. It works by making first- and second-order regressions between two or three feature vector elements and the analyzer measurements. The technique described above was applied to the control of a complex sulphide ore flotation plant in Sweden. The ore consists of copper, zinc and lead sulphides in a gangue of schists (mainly talc represented by the large amount of MgO present in the first stages of the flotation circuit). The copper–lead flotation circuit, which is followed by a complex lead–copper separation circuit and by a zinc flotation circuit, was monitored and controlled in the experiments. The prediction results derived from a large number of experiments covering different process conditions and ore characteristics are presented in For copper grade prediction, the following image analysis parameters were adopted for prediction equations (then compared with the actual measured grades): first-order: high-resolution fractal dimension, average hue, bubble 5% passing size. second-order: high-resolution fractal dimension, average hue, hue standard deviation. Zinc grade prediction: first-order: high-resolution fractal dimension, average blue, bubble 5% passing size. second-order: high-resolution fractal dimension, average value (=gray intensity), dextrin dosage. MgO grade prediction: first-order: total froth surface area, average value, 2D fractal residual area second-order: total froth surface area, average value, 2D fractal residual area The application of a digital flotation surface modeling (DSFM) technique has been found to be effective in characterizing the froth surface according to different flotation conditions. The parameters extracted from the 3D model of the surface and from the image analysis (color and morphological features) allow prediction of grades of minerals in the flotation froths. A full monitoring of the separation performance can be used for an automatic control of the process variables and the chemical additions.