Anthropogenic Hg emission control has drawn worldwide attention along with enactments of strict legislation. In response to the need for mercury emission control from flue gases in coal combustion, studies have focused on mild pyrolysis as a promising technology for mercury removal before combustion. However, reaction pressure has not yet been studied, which might affect mercury removal in mild pyrolysis. In this paper, three types of powdery bituminous coal, Coals A-C, from the western plateau area of China, were studied. The core aim was to explore the effect of low reaction pressure on the efficiency of Hg removal. Data of the three coals under different pyrolysis pressures showed that reducing the pressure would improve the mercury removal rate and removal efficiency and that the effect was distinguished by coal type. The role of pyrolysis pressure in Hg removal was limited. When the residence time was long enough, the eventual Hg removal was dependent on the thermal decomposition temperature. These findings might be of some guidance for designing pyrolysis reactors. Furthermore, this article aims to provide some explanation about the mechanism and offer guidance for optimizing the technological parameters of Hg removal by mild pyrolysis.In recent years, hazardous trace elements such as Hg, As, Se in coal have been the focus of increasing interest In response to the need for mercury emission control, extensive efforts have been made to develop technologies for reducing mercury emissions from coal-fired power plants. Present studies on controlling mercury emissions have focused mainly on end-of-pipe control technologies, including gas-phase oxidation, catalytic oxidation, and adsorption In published studies, much attention has been paid to the pyrolysis of coal In the western plateau area of China, the atmospheric pressure is low, because of geographical high altitudes, and the Hg content in coal is high Three powdery bituminous coals (Coals A-C) were studied, which came from western China. The samples were crushed, ground, and sieved through a 200-μm sieve and then divided and air-dried prior to use. The proximate and ultimate analyses of these three coals were obtained as Chinese national standards GB/T 212-2001 and GB/T 476-2001, and the results were shown in  To analyze their Hg content, oxygen was required to burn the coal and residual coke samples. During this process, the temperature of the furnace remained at 900 Mild pyrolysis was performed according to the following procedures. First, the coal sample was placed in a quartz tube outside the heating zone and purged with nitrogen at a rate of 10 Mercury removal efficiency Hg content in solid samples, including coal and coke, was measured on the basis of the combustion method as follows. First, coal and coke samples were fully burned under 1 The amount of Hg contained in the ash sample was determined by microwave-assisted digestion. The digestion step was conducted in accordance with the Ontario Hydro Method standard At the same time, the Hg content in the H The mercury content of char was calculated to be defined as Experiments with As is known to all, temperature is an important factor in the thermal removal of mercury A quartz tube was heated to the desired temperature and maintained constant before the coal sample was moved into the tube to pyrolyze. Different temperature points were selected within the range of 100–800 For Coal A, Hg removal was only 43% at 400 As shown in Examination of the results in In addition,  To explore further about the effect of pressure on Hg removal at different temperatures, Coal C was selected to conduct low-pressure pyrolysis at 300 and 400 At the lower temperature (300 It was clear to find that Hg removal was almost the same (approximately 20%) at 300 Generally, pyrolysis pressure had a certain effect on Hg removal, and the determining factor was still the temperature. If the residence time (10 To sum up, lower pyrolysis pressure could enhance mercury removal. It is inferred that thermal removal of mercury from coal consists mainly of the following two phases: (1) the generation of gas-phase Hg via the reaction of solid-phase Hg; and (2) the mass-transferring process of Hg vapor through the microporous channel. Therefore, Hg removal efficiency and rate are limited to these two processes. First, lower pressure strengthens the devolatilization process of coal particles, because heating, physical, and chemical changes occur in the volatiles, and the internal pressure of coal particles increases, resulting in the swelling phenomenon. Lower external pressure causes a higher pressure drop between the external and the inner, such that the volatiles escape at a faster rate, which furthermore accelerates the release of mercury. Second, the melting point, sublimating point, or decomposition temperature of Hg occurrence and compounds might decrease at lower pressures, such that they exhibit greater activity at the same temperature, which was helpful for mercury release. Third, lower pressure accelerates the free movement of the released mercury; thus, mercury concentrations around coal particles decrease. The free movement of mercury molecules inside coal particles is more violent, and the adsorption of coal or char weakens. It is noteworthy that low pressure might also hinder the release of mercury; consequently, a thin atmosphere might weaken the convective heat transfer between the gas and coal particles. Correspondingly, the temperature will decrease. However, studies on both the theory in the literature Moreover, as shown in Compared with the end-of-pipe control technologies, such as activated carbon injection technology for mercury removal, the pretreatment of mild pyrolysis might be more advantageous because of the volume of combustion gases and the highly diluted concentration of mercury-based pollutants. Moreover, it can realize multi-pollutant removal. Therefore, mild pyrolysis for mercury removal is a promising technology. This paper focuses on three bituminous coals with high Hg contents, Coals A-C, from the plateau of western China, to understand the effect of low-pyrolysis pressure on the precombustion thermal removal of mercury from coal. Through an experimental study, the research demonstrated that reducing the pressure can enhance Hg removal, resulting from reducing the resistance of the mass-transferring process of Hg vapor through the microporous channel, thus making it easier for Hg to release from coal particles. The reaction pressure played a key role in mild pyrolysis for mercury removal. The obtained results were meaningful to promote the industrial application of mild pyrolysis for mercury removal, especially for the design of pyrolysis reactor. Therefore, it is adaptable for some coals to improve Hg removal by reducing pressure. The effect of pyrolysis pressure on Hg removal is limited. If the residence time is sufficiently long, the eventual Hg removal is decided by the thermal decomposition temperature. As a result, choosing an appropriate pressure and temperature should be taken into comprehensive consideration to achieve the desired Hg removal and to minimize consumed energy with less reaction time. The