Status, scope, and relevance of metals biotechnology are outlined in this chapter. Major applications of this interdisciplinary technology include biomining concepts, mineral beneficiation, metals extraction, and understanding and control of environmental degradation and pollution. Metals biotechnology could provide several innovative alternatives for environmentally benign mining, metal extraction, and materials processing. Many mine- and mineral-inhabiting microorganisms contribute to natural formation and conversion of mineral forms (biogenesis and biomineralization). Microbes have been interacting with metals and minerals for billions of years, participating in the formation of many biomaterials. Microbes have now been recognized as important geological agents, playing significant roles in mineral formation, degradation, sedimentation, geochemical cycling, and weathering. These organisms are capable of mineral dissolution to release metals ions from which pure metals can be obtained (biohydrometallurgy). They are also capable of bringing about selective dissolution of minerals or separation of undesirable mineral constituents from a multimetal-ore matrix (mineral biobeneficiation). When grown in presence of or exposed to minerals, these organisms develop toxic-metal and toxic-mineral tolerance and secrete metal- and mineral-specific bioreagents. Mineral and metal-binding biomolecules find applications in selective mineral and metal separation. Microbial communities near and on the minerals in an ore deposit are a very rich source of genetic information which could be utilized to create synthetic and modified microbiomes that extract, concentrate, and beneficiate metal forms There exist microbe-metal-mineral cycles for metals and elements such as carbon, sulfur, nitrogen, phosphorous, iron, and many others. Metal biotechnological processes have the potential to transform currently uneconomical ore reserves into viable resources. Microorganisms facilitate valuable metal recovery from metal-containing wastes such as slags, tailings, mined overburden, E-wastes, and acid mine drainage. Rare metal recovery using metal biotechnology has gained prominence recently. Some recent developments in metals biotechnology include “urban mining” which is a potential method to leach out and recycle precious and base metals from electronic wastes. Bioleaching under low redox potentials and anaerobic conditions as in reductive dissolution has been taken advantage of in recent years Ever-increasing stringent environmental regulations are expected to put pressure for development of metal recycling and recovery processes from waste streams and urban and industrial wastes. Metals biotechnology will definitely fit in this scheme of things. Key advantages of microbial processes for metal recovery include specificity, energetic, cost effectiveness, and environmental acceptability. However, challenges associated with complex wastes and toxicity problems need to be addressed to. Innovations in metals biotechnology could provide innovative alternatives to changing scenarios in metals production from exploited difficult mines and wastes. Enhanced exploration costs coupled with location of economic ore deposits at greater depths have created problems in recent years. Average grades of major mineral deposits have been decreasing. Mining ocean floors and terrestrial deeper depths have imposed practical constraints. Other than scarce primary mineral deposits, amounts of metal containing wastes generated by mining and metallurgical industries have indeed become staggering. Besides, mined overburden containing lean grade rocky mass accumulated due to years of mining need to be tackled as a source of strategic metals and environmental threat. Mining from sea water, ocean floors, recycling of used metal components and wastes as well as recovery from wastes tailings, slags, and effluents may became critical issues in the near feature. Recovery of scarce elements (precious and rare-earth metals) from electronic wastes and also from process streams has already become a recent trend of great significance. Biomining and bioremediation have become familiar terms in metals biotechnology to describe microbially mediated metal extraction and decontamination of polluted sites. Novel biotechnological processes developed over the past two decades have the potential to redefine the metal extraction sequences currently being followed. Major mechanisms through which mining microbes interact with minerals and metals still remain complex, whether related to bioleaching, biofouling, or microbially influenced corrosion. Besides, it has now been well established that microbes have been interacting with metals and minerals for billions of years under the earth’s crust and ocean sediments, playing a major role in the evolution Keeping in mind the enormous scope of metal biotechnology as outlined earlier, the following aspects are discussed in this book with emphasis on industrial applications and environmental relevance. Biotechnology-materials interface illustrating role of microorganisms in mineral and metal biogenesis, formation of biomaterials, biomimetic strategies relevant to metallurgical processing and examples of minerals, and ore deposits formed due to biomineralization. Microbiological aspects of microorganisms encountered in acid mine drainage and bioleaching operations. Known mechanisms in microbe–mineral interactions. Bacterial attachment mechanisms to various mineral surfaces are highlighted. Electrochemical aspects are brought out. Metal-tolerance and use of preadapted microorganisms in bioleaching are illustrated with examples. History of biohydrometallurgy traced chronologically to bring out major developments in the area since ancient times to the present period. General methods adopted in biohydrometallurgical practices such as dump, heap, “in situ” and stirred tank leaching of ores and concentrates are discussed in detail. Advantages and disadvantages of various bioleaching technologies are highlighted from an engineering point of view. Bioleaching practices adopted for extraction of specific metals from their ores and concentrates are discussed with examples from copper, uranium, zinc, nickel, cobalt, and gold. Electrochemical principles and concepts play a major role in bioleaching processes since many sulfide minerals behave as electrodes in a leaching medium. Galvanic effects are very prominent in multimineral systems. Selective dissolution of active sulfide minerals (e.g., sphalerite, pyrrhotite, and pentlandite) can be brought about in presence of nobler minerals such as pyrite and chalcopyrite. Bioleaching reactions can also be controlled with respect to reaction rates under the influence of applied DC potentials and currents. A new process, termed, Electrobioleaching has been developed to achieve selective and rapid dissolution of desired sulfide mineral constituents from complex multisulfide ores and concentrates. Also, use of electrochemical bioreactors has been demonstrated to promote rapid growth of Microbially induced mineral beneficiation is an emerging area which has not been commercialized yet. As different from bioleaching, which involves bacterial oxidation and dissolution of minerals for metal extraction, biobeneficiation can be used to beneficiate as-mined ores with a view to removal of undesirable mineral impurities, thus enriching them with the desired mineral phase before metal extraction. Microbially induced flotation and flocculation of ores can be brought about through microbe–mineral interactions which render the mineral surfaces hydrophobic or hydrophilic through surface chemical alterations. Many mineral-specific bioreagents containing exopolysaccharides and proteinaceous compounds serve as flotation collectors and depressants as well as flocculants or dispersants. The use of biobeneficiation is demonstrated with relevance to beneficiation of iron ores, bauxite, clay, sulfide ores containing sphalerite, galena, chalcopyrite, pyrite, and arsenopyrite as well as various industrial minerals such as limestone, dolomite, and silica sands. Realizing the current novel developments in metals biotechnology, extended applications are illustrated with respect to reduction bioleaching, bioprocessing of rare-earth elements, bioprocessing of metallurgical wastes such as slags, tailings, fly-ash, flue dusts, used batteries, sludges, and spent catalysts. Bioprocessing of different electronic wastes has assumed great significance since they are treasures of multiple metals such as gold, silver, copper, rare earths, zinc, cadmium, nickel, and aluminum. “Urban biomining” of metals has become possible to tackle the generation of voluminous quantities of electronic wastes. Polymetallic sulfide ores, black schists as well as ocean nodules are potential sources of base and noble metals. Application of bioleaching to treat such complex resources has become relevant and commercially viable. Biofouling, biodeterioration, and microbially influenced corrosion constitute a significant area in metals biotechnology and metallurgical aspects of biofouling and resulting microbial corrosion of various metals and alloys are analyzed. Biodeterioration of cements and concretes as well as microbial corrosion of steel-reinforced concretes are illustrated. Similar to biofouling and microbial corrosion, generation of acid mine drainage is yet another deleterious consequence of microbial interactions with metals and minerals. Types and microbial aspects of acid mine drainage are illustrated with respect to involved microorganisms, mechanisms, tests for prediction of acid formation and prevention, and remediation methods. Case studies from commercial mining operations are outlined to bring out the practical significance of acid mine drainage and its remediation through biotechnology. For students, researchers, and professionals interested in the area of metals biotechnology, it becomes essential to familiarize with experimental and research methods and protocols. With this in mind, a complete chapter is devoted to experimental and research methods in metals biotechnology. Experimental protocols and procedures for isolation, identification, and enumeration of various microorganisms are illustrated. Bioleaching test methods are analyzed with respect to simulation of mining conditions. Similarly, research methods in mineral biobeneficiation, microbial corrosion, and evaluation of acid mine drainage are described.