Atomic force and scanning electron microscopy have been used to study the surface topography and crystal growth mechanism of gibbsite crystals in industrial Bayer liquors. AFM images of the as-grown basal face of industrially produced gibbsite show that the surface is rough and contains diamond shaped features, whereas freshly cleaved basal planes show steps of one unit cell height. An array of steps terminating within the crystal was imaged, indicating the presence of an emergent screw dislocation. Typical AFM images of the prismatic faces contain molecular steps parallel to the basal face.
                  Growth on single faces of synthetic crystals has been observed by a series of ex situ growth experiments in both industrial (impure) and pure synthetic liquor at constant supersaturation and temperature. The results reveal that growth in plant liquor is almost inhibited on the prismatic faces, while further immersion in pure solution induces growth by formation of prism-shaped nuclei. This may suggest that organics from plant liquor adsorb strongly to the growth sites on the prismatic faces, preventing the incorporation of the growth units, and further growth in pure solution occurs by nucleation and spreading of surface features.
                  Growth on the basal faces of gibbsite in plant liquor occurs by a birth and spread mechanism, which may suggest that the interaction of process liquor organics within process liquor with the basal face is different than their interaction with the prismatic faces.Aluminium tri-hydroxide (as the gibbsite polymorph) and γ-AlO(OH) (boehmite) are the major constituents of bauxite, which is treated in the Bayer process by hydrothermal digestion, followed by seeded crystallization of aluminium trihydroxide as gibbsite from supersaturated sodium aluminate solution. The gibbsite that is produced industrially is normally in the form of ca. 150 μm agglomerates of tablets and prismatic crystals. However, organic compounds which largely result from degradation of humic matter during the digestion stage of the bauxite ore accumulate to quite high concentrations in the recycled plant liquor of many refineries. Many thousands of organic molecules have been identified in Bayer liquors, from complex aromatic and aliphatic species, down to the degradation product, sodium oxalate. It has been suggested that molecules with specific combinations of hydroxyl and carboxyl groups can be particularly potent as gibbsite crystal growth inhibitors ( The effect of specific organic compounds on gibbsite crystal growth from synthetic solutions has been studied using various techniques based mainly on solution analysis (for example It is well known that the presence of impurities in the system can affect the growth of a crystal. Some impurities can suppress growth entirely; some may enhance growth, while others may exert a highly selective effect, acting only on certain crystal faces and thus modifying the crystal habit. Impurities can influence crystal growth mechanism by changing the properties of solution (speciation or solubility) in a number of ways, for example, by changing the characteristic of the adsorption layer at the crystal–solution interface and influencing the integration of the growth units ( The objective of this study is to investigate the effect of industrial plant liquor, which contains organic compounds, on the growth mechanism of the two morphologically important faces of gibbsite, by conducting a series of ex situ growth experiments on the same area of the crystal using atomic force microscopy, similar to our earlier work on the growth of gibbsite in pure solution ( The crystal structure of gibbsite is monoclinic, space group For the characterisation study, industrial single gibbsite crystals were produced by Aluminium Pechiney and supplied by Queensland Alumina Limited. The crystals were typically 100 μm in diameter and were cleaved along the (001) face with tweezers. An alternative form of industrial gibbsite crystals (Malakoff) was supplied by Worsley Alumina Pty Limited. For AFM imaging, industrial crystals were attached to a stainless steel disk with double sided tape before placing in the AFM for imaging. Environmental Scanning Electron Microscopy (ESEM) micrographs of the crystals were taken using an Electroscan E-3 ESEM. Crystals were attached to a glass slide with carbon double sided tape. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images were taken using a Philips XL30 Instrument. Samples were gold coated before imaging. Samples were analysed for organic carbon content using a Dohrman DC190 carbon analyzer. For the ex situ AFM study, seed crystals were grown by homogenous nucleation of pure synthetic liquors. The composition of the liquor is expressed using the standard North American industry notation of The equilibrium solubility of Al in such a caustic solution at 80 °C is 1.37 M ( Pure synthetic solutions were prepared by dissolving aluminium wire (99.9%), previously washed with acetone and then with deionised water to remove possible grease contamination, in hot sodium hydroxide solution (AR grade). The resulting solutions were diluted with deionised water to the required volume and then filtered through a series of membrane filters made of poly ethersulfone (0.45 and 0.20 μm), respectively. For the seed preparation, stainless steel disks with a diameter of 1.5 cm were covered with 0.60 Industrial (impure) growth solutions were made using spent plant liquors, which had been filtered and analyzed for AFM investigations were carried out in air with a Digital Instruments Multimode AFM, using a 15 μm scanner. All the AFM images were collected in the contact mode. Wide triangular shaped 100 μm cantilevers made of gold coated Si ESEM micrographs of the basal and prismatic faces of single Pechiney and Malakoff crystals are shown in  AFM images of the uncleaved basal faces of Pechiney and Malakoff are shown in These observations may suggest that the growth on the basal faces of these crystals under the formation conditions proceeds by nucleation possibly affected by the presence of line or surface defect, and the height of those nuclei is more than one unit cell.  Another possible cause for the formation of the striations could be macroscopic growth rate fluctuations of the crystal face, which are caused by fluctuation in supersaturation as well as differences in impurity segregation ( An image of the prismatic face of another Pechiney crystal shows growth hillocks (  The edges of the nuclei are wavy, which may suggest that organic impurities present in the solution are adsorbed on the surface and are almost immobile, thereby making the addition of growth units discontinuous. With further immersion in plant solution, the features spread and coalesce and few more nuclei are formed on the surface (  The same seed was later grown in pure solution that has the same supersaturation (0.71) at 80 °C. From the growth sequence shown above, we may suggest that under the experimental conditions used here, organics in the plant solution are adsorbed strongly at the active growth sites on the prismatic faces of gibbsite, almost blocking them from further growth. With immersion in pure solution, the presence of adsorbed impurities enhances growth by stimulating nucleation. These results are in good agreement with the observations of The differences in the effect of organics on the growth on the basal and prismatic faces could be attributed to differences in surfaces structures between the faces, and consequently differences in the interaction of the organics with the surfaces. The differences in nuclei morphology, formed on the basal and prismatic faces confirm the effect of surface structure on growth. AFM has been used to study the effect of organics on the crystal growth of gibbsite. AFM images of the cleaved basal face of an industrial crystal show steps of unit cell height. Images of the basal face of another crystal showed some steps ending within the bulk, indicating the presence of screw dislocations and tilt or twist boundaries. Typical AFM images of uncleaved basal faces of gibbsite show hexagonal shaped areas that are related to the symmetry of the parent crystal, and slightly tilted with respect to each other. The surfaces of the prismatic faces of gibbsite are generally characterised by layers and striations parallel to the basal plane which could be due to twinning perpendicular to the From the results described in this paper, it is clear that there are a variety of defects on the basal and prismatic faces of industrially produced gibbsite. It is likely that most of these defects originated during crystal growth and some of them as a result of the production conditions (organic effects, collisions in the crystallizer, etc.). Ex situ AFM observations of single gibbsite crystal growth in plant solution have shown that organics present in the solution do not strongly inhibit the growth on the basal face, as growth was observed to occur by a continuous birth and spread mechanism. Nevertheless, organics had an effect on the shape of the nuclei. In contrast, organics slow the growth on the prismatic face, as almost no growth was observed in plant solution, and subsequent immersion in pure solution caused growth by nucleation and spreading of thick particles, with morphology similar to the crystal face. Further work is required to investigate the effect of specific organics on the crystal growth of gibbsite using AFM. We would like to thank Queensland Alumina Limited and Worsley Alumina Pty Limited for supplying the gibbsite samples and for financial support, which made purchase of the AFM possible. We thank Dr. Chris Vernon and Mr. Daniel at CSIRO Division of Minerals (Waterford), for the liquor analyses. This work has been supported by the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) Program and the Mineral and Energy Research Institute of Western Australia, and this support is gratefully acknowledged.