More than a decade has passed since the first injectable bone substitutes were introduced for use in orthopaedic trauma, and over recent years the number of commercial products has increased dramatically. Despite the fact that these bone substitutes have been on the market for many years, knowledge amongst potential users on how and when they might be useful is still fairly limited. Most injectable bone substitutes belong to one of two major groups: by far the largest group contains products based on various calcium phosphate (CP) mixtures, whilst the smaller group consists of calcium sulphate (CS) compounds. Following mixing, the CP or CS paste can be injected into – for instance – a fracture space for augmentation as an alternative to bone graft, or around a screw for augmentation if the bone is weak. Within minutes an in situ process makes the substitute hard; the mechanical strength in compression resembles that of cancellous bone, whereas the strength in bending and shear is lower. Over time, CP products undergo remodelling through a cell-mediated process that seems to mimic the normal bone remodelling, whilst CS products are dissolved through a faster process that is not cell-mediated. For CP, a number of clinical studies have shown that it can be useful for augmentation of metaphyseal fractures when a space is present. Randomised studies have verified that CP works especially well in tibial plateau fractures when compared with conventional bone grafting. So far the number of clinical studies on CS products is very low.
                  Development at present seems to be heading towards premixed or directly mixed products as well as new compounds that contain fibres or other components to enhance bending and shear strength. Products that are based on combinations of CP and CS are also being developed to combine the fast-dissolving CS with the stronger and more slowly remodelling CP. Injectable bone substitutes, and especially CS, have also been targeted as potentially good carriers for antibiotics and growth factors.Injectable bone substitutes that are self-setting in situ can bring significant benefits in several clinical situations, such as augmentation of osteoporotic fractures, treatment of maxillofacial defects and deformities, and for certain indications in the spine. Even though the first injectable bone substitutes were introduced more than a decade ago, they still in many ways represent a new treatment option where currently the proper indications for many products have yet to be defined. In fact, it might be reasonable to state that the orthopaedic community is still within the learning curve in many aspects of many of these products. The rapid development – including the frequent introduction of new products – makes it very difficult for most potential users to be aware of differences and similarities between the products and when and how to use them. The purposes of this paper are to describe the basic aspects of the most common of the injectable bone substitutes that are currently available, to present relevant clinical data to increase awareness of how these products can be used and what to expect when using them, and finally to provide some future perspectives. Most injectable bone substitutes are delivered as one or two dry powders and a fluid which are mixed in the operating room either manually or with a mixing machine. After mixing, the paste-like cement is injectable for a few minutes after which it cures through a slightly exothermic or isothermal reaction. There are two major categories of CPC, including apatite (precipitated hydroxyapatite) – e.g. Norian SRS More recently, surgical grade CSCs such as BonePlast By combining fast-resorbing CSCs and slow-resorbing CPCs, composite materials have been developed that might enhance vascular infiltration and replacement of the graft by new bone, whilst providing osteoconductive and mechanical support. CPCs are osteoconductive and undergo gradual remodelling over time in a pattern similar to that of normal bone. Animal studies have shown a good contact between CSCs and the surrounding bone with no or only limited inflammatory reaction. A common finding is a precipitated layer of a biological apatite on the surface that has been suggested to enhance cell attachment. The property often used to characterise the mechanical behaviour of injectable bone substitutes is their compressive strength. Since they are intended to replace bone, it is important to remember that compressive strength of human cortical bone ranges between 90 and 230 Within a few minutes after injection, CPCs harden due to crystallisation, after which an initial compressive strength of 5–10 In general these products are brittle and weak, although the strength depends on the form of calcium sulphate used. The vast majority of clinical studies have been made with various calcium phosphate compounds; unfortunately there is a shortage of clinical studies with other injectable bone substitutes. Injection of polymethylmethacrylate cement (PMMA) into a fractured vertebral body has resulted in considerable pain relief and possibly strengthening of the vertebrae, Trochanteric fractures only rarely present any healing difficulties. The main concerns are instead related to mechanical problems in achieving stability due to osteoporosis. In displaced femoral neck fractures the high complication rate after internal fixation has favoured prosthetic replacement, especially in elderly patients. Even though deficient blood flow is the primary cause for complications in displaced femoral neck fractures, there are reports indicating that good stability can improve outcomes after internal fixation. A biomechanical study by Stankewich et al. Fractures of the tibial plateau often involve depression of the articular fragments and instability that makes surgery necessary. Elevating the depressed articular fragments often reveals a metaphyseal space outlined by crushed cancellous bone. This space is commonly filled with autologous or allogenic bone graft. Although autograft has desirable osteoconductive and osteogenic properties, it does not provide enough mechanical stability to allow full weight bearing until the fracture has healed. In comparison, CPC and other injectable bioactive cements can provide immediate strength, reducing the time to full weight bearing ( The relative benefits of surgical versus non-surgical treatment of calcaneal fractures are controversial. The rationale for using injectable bone substitutes in calcaneal fractures is to fill the space under the subtalar joints, thereby providing an augmented construct as shown in a biomechanical study. Fractures with severe comminution or bone loss at the fracture site may be difficult to stabilise with plaster alone. The use of bioactive cement may make it possible to fill the metaphyseal defect, improve fracture stability, and reduce immobilisation time. In a biomechanical study intra-articular distal radius fractures augmented with CPCs were significantly more stable and had significantly higher strength and failure load compared with fixation with K-wires. For certain fracture types, including severely impacted valgus fractures, surgical intervention is considered advantageous. A common problem after surgery is secondary displacement due to inability to provide adequate fixation during healing. One reason seems to be the lack of cancellous bone support due to the space created behind the reduced humeral head. In a case series the subchondral space was filled with CPC in 29 patients with severely impacted valgus fractures. Most injectable bone substitutes consist of a powder and a liquid that are mixed immediately before use. The ability of the surgeon to properly mix and inject the cement within the prescribed time is crucial. Therefore, several premixed injectable bone substitutes that are stable in the package and set after injection have been described, as well as dual-paste (two components) premixed cement. In general, premixed cement tends to have slightly lower strength. One of the most attractive features of injectable bone substitutes, besides providing mechanical support, is their potential use for controlled release of therapeutic or bioactive agents. The authors have no conflict of interest related to the present manuscript.