Extraction of rare earth elements from bastnasite (REFCO3) and monazite (REPO4) after fluorine fixation was studied. Chlorination kinetics of fluorine-fixed flotation bulk concentrate with ammonium chloride was found to follow the regional reaction model. The chlorination was found to involve two series steps with nuclear growth occurred in normal to surface direction. Internal diffusion was identified to be the rate limiting step of the chlorination process and an apparent activation energy of 36.8 kJmol was determined.Bastnasite (REFCO Recently, a new de-fluorination process is being developed in our research group. In this process, MgO is used during first stage roasting to fix the fluorine as an insoluble magnesium fluorite while converting the rare earth elements to rare earth oxides. After fixing fluorine, calcine is mixed with NH The flotation bulk concentrate was provided by Baotou Rare Earth Inc., Baotou city, Inner Mongolia, China. Chemical analysis of the bulk concentrate showed 52.1% rare earth oxides, 9.0% Ca, 2.0% Fe and 7.2% F, balanced by other minor elements. Reagent grade NH In each experiment, 10 g of flotation concentrate was mixed with 3 g MgO. The mixture was placed in a muffle furnace and roasted at 600 °C for 80 min to fix fluorine as water insoluble MgF After the fixation of fluorine, the calcine is chlorinated with NH In For a nucleation process consisting of The To further confirm reactions involved in fluorine fixation and ammonium chloride chlorination, solid samples were collected at various stages of the reactions and were characterized by X-ray diffraction. The XRD patterns of the rare earth flotation concentrate confirmed that major rare earth elements are contained in bastnasite and monazite. After fluorine fixation with MgO roasting, the peaks corresponding to bastnasite and monazite disappeared, accompanied with the appearance of peaks corresponding to La In a typical multiphase chemical reaction process, the apparent reaction rate constant ( The controlling step of the chlorination process can be identified by the temperature coefficient of reaction rate constant. The temperature coefficient often refers to the increase in reaction rate constant caused by a temperature increase of 10 °C ( Chlorination with ammonium chloride was found to be successful at recovering rare earth elements from bastnasite (REFCO Financial support for this project provided by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (59804004) and Chinese Outstanding Youth Science Foundation (59725408) is greatly appreciated.