Composite samples of tailings containing gold (1.35g/t) and significant amounts of silver (155g/t) were subjected to batchwise cyanide leaching to assess the feasibility of extracting gold and silver. The tailings are waste solids arising from flotation and leaching operations whereby the flotation product (sphalerite concentrate) is calcined and then solubilised into dilute sulphuric acid solution and eventually sequestered from the electrolyte by electrowinning. Silver and gold are part of the zinc refinery residue, flotation tailings and to a limited extent the calcine leach tailings. Mineralogical results showed that composite tailings are refractory in nature (44% quartz, 17% silico aluminates and 12% jarosites).
                  The concept of enhancing gold and silver recovery from the tailings focused on firstly decomposing the jarosite minerals by alkaline pre-treatment and then secondly leaching with cyanide solution. These two steps ensured that free gold and silver found in the zinc refinery residue and in the jarosite minerals could be leached simultaneously. The composite tailings were treated with Ca(OH)2 solutions and then heated to 90°C for 2h to decompose the silver-bearing mineral (Ag,PbFe3(SO4)2(OH)6). The alkaline pre-treated tailings were then subjected to cyanide leach tests at different NaCN dosages (2.5–10kg/t) and particle size (96–200μm). Without an alkaline pre-treatment stage, leach efficiencies achieved were 41% and 25% for gold and silver, respectively at 40°C and 8h mixing time. But, better leach efficiencies (55% for Au, 81% for Ag) were achieved after the feed was pre-treated with Ca(OH)2. The leaching mechanism of gold was explained by the shrinking sphere model denoted by surface chemical reaction.Presently, about 80% of zinc produced globally is extracted by roasting sphalerite concentrates followed by leaching the calcine in dilute sulphuric acid solution and eventually recovering zinc by electrowinning. However, roasting of sphalerite concentrates at high temperatures leads to conversion of haematite minerals (Fe Owing to low grades and fine structure of the gold/silver/zinc residue, recovery of metals by leaching presents many advantages over physical beneficiation or pyrometallurgy. It was reported ( According to Mineralogical data, quartz was identified as main component (44.83%) in the sample with minor amounts of anglesite and magnetite. Jarosite phase accounts for 12.21% of the weight of the lead/silver residues ( Eqs. In practice, the effective leaching of gold minerals requires sufficient agitation and concentrations of oxygen and cyanide. Several researchers ( In this preliminary study of leaching gold minerals from tailings, excess cyanide solutions were used in the reactor. The oxygen supply line was kept at 1 Several authors have described initial leaching kinetics of precious metals at different temperature by using the shrinking sphere model denoting surface chemical reaction ( A plot of Residual solids containing (lead/silver/iron) were drilled out of the tailings dam at specific locations and placed in plastic bags. Analytical grade NaCN solution was used as lixiviant. The composition of the tailings samples, as determined by X-ray diffraction, yielded the following results: 44% quartz, 17% silico aluminates and 12% jarosites. The rest are traces of zinc, gold and silver minerals. Batchwise leach tests were performed in 1-l-baffled glass vessel equipped with five-glass necked ports to hold the pH electrode, DO probe, thermometer and sampling points or reagent addition. To keep a constant leach temperature, the glass reactor was placed in a thermostated bath. At the beginning of each test, the reactor was charged with about 1000-ml-distilled water. The reactor was then brought to a desired temperature after which a calculated weight of a sample was introduced to a desired % solids level. Predetermined mass of alkaline solution (lime) was added and agitation was initiated. After 2 During cyanidation, the reactor temperature was controlled at 40 Throughout the cyanidation process, dissolved oxygen levels varied between 5.5 and 8.5 The samples from the tailings dam were screened to determine the size distribution.   Researchers ( Several pre-treatment tests were conducted at different lime dosages while temperature and percent solids remained constant (90   Alkaline digestion prior to cyanide leaching yielded better leaching results than direct cyanidation process. Gold recovery averaged 68.17% and silver recovery was 89.80% with alkaline pre-treatment ( The lead/silver residual tailings contained about elemental sulphur (6.5%), lead and silver salts and precipitated iron oxide species, including basic iron sulphates and jarosites. Sulphide minerals act as preg-robbing agents. Sulphur may dissolve in cyanide solution to form thiocyanate or may react with oxygen to form sulphide and sulphate. Small amounts of sulphide ions, i.e., 0.5 The principles of leaching gold in the presence of copper, nickel, iron and zinc minerals in cyanide media are well-known from literature ( With regards to Fe and Pb impurities in the feed solids, it was found that the level of Fe and Pb in the leach solution was too low to affect gold and silver leaching in cyanide media as shown in  The kinetic models applied in this study have been applied extensively by researchers in their efforts to interpret leach data ( The linear dependence of the rate constant on the inverse particle radius supports the surface reaction-controlled shrinking core model. In the case of silver extraction, re-sizing the particles below 75 The effect of cyanide [CN At 5 This study demonstrated that recovery of gold and silver from a complex tailings material consisting of zinc refinery residue, zinc flotation tailings and calcine leach residue is possible after pre-treating the feed with alkaline solution (Ca(OH) This project was concluded with a recommendation to Zincor and Exxaro management to set up a pilot leach plant for gold and silver recovery from mine tailings. A commercial plant for reprocessing gold tailings will yield excellent returns on capital investment at the current gold price. We are thankful to Exxaro technology R&D (Nanne Vegter) for their technical support and project evaluation. We also want to express our appreciation to Dr. Sabine of Pretoria University for analysing our solid samples by XRD analysis and to Mr. Japie Oberholzer for his analytical work on solutions using the ICP.