Most complex humeral head fractures are associated with a longitudinal tear of the rotator cuff. Reconstruction of this tear is frequently omitted from surgical reduction and fixation procedures. In 48 patients treated by surgery or by conservative means, we investigated the relationship between rotator cuff integrity and the functional results. The rotator cuff was assessed by ultrasonography, the functional results by the Constant Score. Common signs of rotator cuff alterations were partial or complete atrophy. In all patients affected, a longitudinal defect located at the rotator interval was detected. A classification of rotator cuff alterations resulting from humeral head fractures was introduced, yielding three categories: none, moderate, or severe. In three patients, sonographic results were confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Rotator cuff alterations were often associated with displaced consolidation results. Furthermore, the integrity of the rotator cuff significantly correlated with the function achieved. The results support the need for a careful rotator cuff repair in order to optimise treatment results.Humeral head fractures are frequently associated with unsatisfactory treatment outcome Also, follow-up procedures are often restricted to radiological and functional evaluation. Although, Neer Complex humeral head fractures, in particular, those with displaced tuberosities, are frequently associated with a longitudinal tear of the rotator cuff within the rotator interval which represents a ligamentous area between the supraspinatus tendon and the subscapularis tendon in front of the coracoid process The objective of this study was to assess the contribution of the rotator cuff to the functional results. Sonography has advanced to becoming one of the most powerful instruments for the assessment of rotator cuff alterations, is easy to perform, has low technical expenses, and is not dangerous for the patient. Alternatively, MRI provides the advantage of serial images, but has the disadvantage of high technical requirements and expenses. A humeral head fracture follow-up protocol was designed to assess the fracture type, treatment strategies, and follow-up results 6 months subsequent to the injury. For fracture typing the AO (ASIF) classification was used The treatment strategy was arbitrarily designed. If closed reduction was successful, patients were closely monitored by X-ray examination; if unsuccessful, patients were prepared for surgery. Surgical fixation was achieved by the use of a plate, screws, K-wires, or tension bands. In two patients, a humeral head prosthesis was employed. For fixation the AO instrumentarium (Synthes, Umkirch, Germany) was used and for a humeral head replacement a global shoulder prosthesis (Depuy, Sulzbach, Germany). For access, a deltopectoral approach was used. Exposure of the rotator interval was not part of the standard procedure. For the follow-up examination, patients received a written invitation. Follow-up consisted of a functional survey, an X-ray examination, and rotator cuff sonography. The shoulder function was monitored by use of the Constant Score For radiology, the standard planes in the AP position and the transthoracic or the transaxillary position were used. For sonography, a 7.5 In three patients, sonographic results were confirmed by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) after 39, 41, and 44 months.The two-tailed pairless Students’ Forty-eight consecutive patients were entered in the study, out of them 43 responded to their written invitation and 39 of them were available for re-examination. In two patients, the re-evaluation data was incomplete. The ratio of men and women was 11:28. The mean age was 60.1±15.2 years, the median age was 60 years with a range of 29–90 years. The distribution of fracture types was dominated by the more complex fractures of type B and C ( Six patients were treated only by conservative means, of which three had fractures with minimal displacement and three had satisfactory closed reduction results. The remaining 33 patients were treated by surgical means. Surgery was employed between day 0 and 99. Four patients were operated immediately for emergency reasons. One patient with a comminuted cephalic fracture was initially treated by conservative means in another hospital, but received a humeral head prosthesis for bad subjective and functional results on day 99. Another patient was operated on for a secondary displacement of a single fracture of the greater tuberosity on day 26. The remaining 27 patients treated by surgery were operated on between day 1 and 13. Surgical treatment consisted of screws combined with a tension wire in three patients, a plate in 15 patients, K-wires combined with a tension wire in 13 patients, and a humeral head prosthesis in two patients. In two patients, both with a single fracture of the greater tuberosity, a longitudinal tear of the rotator cuff was repaired. At the time of re-investigation, 16 patients had had their metal implants removed. The radiological results were assessed as no displacement, displaced consolidation with displacement of major fragments of more than 1 Only in a few patients, could consolidation in an almost anatomical position be achieved. A lateral displacement of the head fragment was recorded in one patient. A superiorly and posteriorly displaced greater tuberosity was recorded in six patients, and a medial displacement of the lesser tuberosity was recorded in three patients. In one patient with a fracture of type B2, radiology revealed a central perforation of several K-wires, which was associated with a downward migration of the humeral head. Signs of humeral head necrosis were recorded in five patients. In one patient with a fracture of type B2, only the greater tuberosity was affected, but in four patients, all with a displaced articular fracture of type C, the humeral head as a whole was involved. Periarticular calcifications occurred in two patients. Sonography was employed to reveal the performance of single rotator cuff tendons as well as the rotator cuff as a whole. Moderate or severe alterations were detected in single tendons, while others were intact. Interestingly, in all patients with sonographic signs of rotator cuff alterations two major common features, trophic alterations of the supraspinatus tendon, and a ventral rotator cuff defect in the transverse plane in extreme internal rotation attributable to the rotator interval were detected. A classification of sonographic rotator cuff alterations resulting from humeral head fractures was developed ( Sonography at re-examination revealed an intact rotator cuff in 11 patients, moderate alterations in 18 patients, and severe alterations in eight. Sonographic results correlated with the fracture type ( An intact rotator cuff was recorded in three out of six patients treated by conservative means, while in the remaining three, the rotator cuff was moderately altered. An intact rotator cuff was also recorded in two patients, in whom a longitudinal rotator cuff tear was repaired, both with a single fracture of the greater tuberosity. Rotator cuff alterations were recorded in four out of five patients with a displaced consolidation of the greater tuberosity (three times moderate, and once severe), and in all three patients with a displaced consolidation of the lesser tuberosity (all severe). Functional results significantly correlated with the type of fracture and with the integrity of the rotator cuff. At the time of re-evaluation, the mean Constant Score was 79% in patients with a fracture of type A, 69% in patients with a fracture of type B, and 47% in patients with a fracture of type C. Compared with the sonographic results, the Constant Score was 86% in patients with an intact rotator cuff, 64% in patients with a moderately altered, and 41% in patients with a severely altered rotator cuff ( A subtype analysis reveals, that even in simple fracture types the functional results correlated with the integrity of the rotator cuff. In patients with a displaced articular fracture type C2, for example, some achieved satisfactory treatment results with a Constant Score above 60%. In all of these, an intact or only moderately altered rotator cuff was recorded. Severe rotator cuff alterations, however, were exclusively associated with bad treatment results and a Constant Score below 40% (not shown). Poor functional results were recorded in patients suffering from humeral head necrosis. The Constant Score was 50% in a woman with necrosis of the greater tuberosity, subsequent to a bifocal extra-articular fracture of the type B2, which was associated with sonographic wasting of the supraspinatus tendon and a defect located to the rotator interval. In four patients with complete necrosis of the humeral head, all with a dislocated articular fracture, the Constant Score was 49, 40, 38, and 32%, yielding a mean of 39.8%. In all of these four patients, severe rotator cuff alterations were recorded. The Constant Score in a 70-year-old woman with central K-wire perforations subsequent to a bifocal extra-articular fracture of the type B2 was 60%. A significant radiological downward migration was associated with strong hypoechogenicity of the rotator cuff, probably resulting from a consecutive inactivity. Three patients were asked for a second re-examination to confirm sonographic results by MRI. The first patient was a 59-year-old woman with a bifocal extra-articular fracture of the type B2, treated by open reduction and internal fixation using K-wires and a tension wire. The metal implants were removed after 6 months. Sonography, 41 months subsequent to the injury, revealed a normotrophic supraspinatus tendon with a small bulge but a preserved continuity, located to the rotator interval. MRI confirmed a normotrophic supraspinatus tendon and a preserved continuity of the rotator cuff. Her Constant Score at this time was 95%, compared to 76% at the time of the first re-examination after 8 months. The second patient was a 59-year-old woman with a varus-impacted articular fracture of the type C2, treated by open reduction and internal fixation using K-wires and tension banding. The metal implants were removed after 7 months. Sonography, 39 months subsequent to the injury, revealed a wasted supraspinatus tendon and a gap located to the rotator interval. MRI reproduced the sonographic results with a wasted supraspinatus tendon and a gap located to the rotator interval ( The third patient was a 72-year-old woman with a displaced articular fracture of the type C2, treated by open reduction and internal fixation using a plate. Sonography, 44 months subsequent to the injury, revealed a complete atrophy of the supraspinatus tendon combined with a wide gap located to the rotator interval. MRI revealed identical results with an uncovered humeral head. Her Constant Score at this time was 41%, compared to 39% at the time of the first re-examination after 6 months. Therefore, MRI confirmed the sonographic results in three patients, presenting with an intact, moderately altered, or severely altered rotator cuff. Humeral head fractures may result in a variety of alterations to the architecture of the rotator cuff. Thanner and Cofield In this study, sonography provided a powerful tool to visualise rotator cuff alterations resulting from humeral head fractures with surprising frequency and extent. Interestingly, in all patients, affected signs of a longitudinal defect to the rotator interval could be detected. Also, hypo- or atrophic alterations, in particular, of the supraspinatus tendon, were involved in all of them, most likely resulting from inactivity or proprioceptive incongruities. In three typical patients, MRI confirmed our sonographic results. Rotator cuff alterations significantly correlated with the functional results achieved. This may be in part explained by the fracture type, which contributed to the extent of rotator cuff alterations and to the functional results. The frequent association of rotator cuff alterations with a displaced consolidation, however, demand a repair of the rotator cuff in order to secure the articular architecture as a whole. Neer Rotator cuff alterations were even recorded in three out of six patients, subsequent to a simple fracture of the greater tuberosity. Rotator cuff repair may secure the tuberosities in the correct position. A further benefit may be the prevention of trophic alterations. Normotrophic conditions are considered to be required for an adequate blood supply through the rotator cuff to both tuberosities. In all four patients with complete humeral head necrosis, severe rotator cuff alterations were detected. In a further patient with an isolated necrosis of the greater tuberosity, the supraspinatus tendon was hypotrophic and hyperechogenic, indicating scarring alterations. Therefore, the restoration of the rotator cuff may also reduce the risk of humeral head necrosis. Transverse tears, which typically result from chronic degenerative processes, are rare in humeral head fractures. However, as in these, sonography proved to be an accurate tool to identify rotator cuff alterations and to determine their significance for the functional outcome. A careful reconstruction of the rotator cuff may help to optimise fragment reduction, to avoid re-displacement, and to prevent humeral head necrosis. We would like to thank Almut Einert from our Department of Radiology for helpful discussion of the MRI images.