A comprehensive understanding of mineralogical associations and gold deportment is important for identification of the causes of gold losses to tailings and in development of re-treatment procedures to recover this value. Recent advances in the QEMSCAN® system to enhance false positive identification have increased the speed and accuracy of gold particle determination. This increased capability has been combined with a suite of complementary diagnostic chemical techniques to provide a complete methodology for accurate and economic analysis of tailings material.
                  Through this methodology the advantages of combining automated mineralogical techniques with more traditional diagnostic chemical assay have been demonstrated through a case study examining the flotation tailings stream of a Cu–Au operation in North Queensland, Australia. Outcomes of the case study indicated that a significant portion of gold losses were attributable to coarse free gold present in the flotation tailings.The mining industry is facing a sustained super-cycle of growth and demand is rapidly outstripping supply for many commodities. With the gold price showing continuous growth it is clear that as a commodity, gold is at the forefront of this strength. For this reason it is becoming imperative to gain and maintain a clear understanding of gold deportment, especially in tailings streams where identification of the cause for gold losses is vital for process optimisation. The comprehensive determination of mineralogy, mineral associations and gold deportment is increasingly being recognised as an integral part of any gold evaluation project. Whether looking at pre-feasibility, feasibility or process optimisation it has been demonstrated in a number of studies that a greater understanding of the mineralogy of the sample along with gold deportment information can enhance the applicability of the results ( Historically, gold deportment characterisation has been used extensively in process definition and optimisation. Development of most new deposits, especially where complex mineralogy or refractory behaviour to cyanidation has been identified, involves some form of gold deportment study. Gold deportment analysis as we understand it now was pioneered in the late 1980s and early 1990s by process mineralogists such as When used appropriately this allows the process engineer to quickly and reliably identify potential recovery problems at an early stage and adjust the process flowsheet to overcome them. The same concept can be applied to troubleshooting and optimisation of existing process flowsheets. Gold deportment analysis can be especially useful in determination of the cause of gold losses to tailings and has been used effectively in many instances to increase total plant recovery simply by an in depth examination of the process tailings stream. Historically, the use of automated mineralogical techniques in the identification of gold has been complicated by sampling issues and required extensive manual interaction by the operator for validation of results. The sampling theory of Pierre Gy ( A number of studies have been presented using a variety of automated techniques in identification of gold grains.  QEMSCAN Identification of gold and platinum group elements (PGE’s) using the QEMSCAN Historically, a number of factors have complicated the process of bright phase searching. The most critical of these are the inefficiencies in analysis presented by location of ‘false positive’ grains, or bright grains not containing the trace phase of interest. An excellent example of this is the location of galena particles in gold bearing material and the subsequent wasted analysis time in X-ray mapping of these particles. A significant recent breakthrough for the QEMSCAN The increasing scarcity of high grade gold deposits and increased capacity to extract all the gold value from material due to higher metal prices has led to an ever increasing desire to understand the cause for gold losses in processing operations. This places additional strain on the capability for gold deportment characterisation as there is an additional requirement to obtain representative and meaningful results from very low grade material, typically in the range from 0.2 The successful characterisation of gold distribution within tailings material relies on the ability to examine gold within complex associations. Typically, gold reports to the tailings stream because it is unliberated, refractory to the recovery process undertaken or has undergone passivation through weathering or processing conditions. Consequently the accurate determination of gold deportment is an important step if additional gold value is to be recovered. The chief difficulty in tailings material characterisation is obtaining results that can be considered representative of the gold populations present. It is important that proper processes are utilised to pre-concentrate gold grains prior to any image analysis process and that this is supported by comprehensive analysis of the bulk gold distribution through chemical assay. The methodology, demonstrated in this study and referred to as GoldSCAN, has been specifically designed to simplify the process of gold deportment characterisation and maintain its reproducibility. GoldSCAN is a complete methodology for the initial characterisation of mineralogy, gold deportment and some metallurgical aspects of a gold bearing material. The method is a flexible process that can be readily adapted to suit the type of material under investigation or stage within the process life cycle. The process has been designed as an accessible method designed to introduce useful mineralogical data to the metallurgist and increase the effectiveness of data utilization through simplification of reporting processing and internal identification of potentially detrimental mineralogical and metallurgical anomalies. The core of the methodology revolves around effective use of the QEMSCAN This method ensures that all aspects of potential metallurgical problems are examined in a structured way that accounts for Locking of gold particles. Deleterious elements. Other detrimental effects (i.e. oxidation layers, rimming etc.). The nature of gold as a trace metal heterogeneously distributed in material means that direct analysis of samples by QEMSCAN Pre-concentration methods may be defined by the type of sample under investigation. For samples containing predominantly coarse free gold methods such as the shaking Wilfley table or a modified version of the Gravity Gold Recovery (GRG) test proposed by The outcomes of undertaking a comprehensive gold deportment evaluation are Gold deportment. [∘] QEMSCAN [∘] Diagnostic chemical techniques – mineral groups. Mineral associations of gold. Sulphide mineral and gold liberation. Modal mineralogy. [∘] By size and density fractions. Multi-elemental distribution. Basic cyanide leach recovery. A decision tree based model was used to develop the most effective characterisation procedure specific to the material under investigation. The model ensures that potentially detrimental metallurgical problems are not overlooked early in the characterisation procedure and gives the metallurgist confidence that the mineralogical affects on processing are well understood. As a whole, the methodology was divided into a series of evaluation stages where sufficient data is obtained to identify the most applicable route for the subsequent stage. In each evaluation stage, flags are raised to identify the metallurgical effect of varying elemental and mineralogical composition, with these flags determining the most appropriate course for the subsequent evaluation stage. These stages comprise of a series of analytical flowsheets that define the analytical path to be followed. The general evaluation stages employed include: Geological and historic data collection. Sample selection and preparation. Basic mineralogical and elemental characterisation. Detailed mineralogical and gold deportment evaluation. Reporting and basic interpretation of data. To demonstrate the versatility of the process methodology proposed a case study examining the flotation tailing stream from a copper–gold mine located in North Queensland, Australia has been performed. A quarterly composite collected from the flotation tailings process stream was examined using the full GoldSCAN methodology. The chief aim of this investigation was to complement a program of copper mineralogical analysis on the tailings stream, providing information on gold deportment and potential routes for recovery of additional gold value. This case study was chosen to demonstrate the versatility of the GoldSCAN methodology through application to a sample where the gold grade was at the lower end of applicability for gold deportment investigation. Historical and geological information can be an invaluable tool in defining the most appropriate analytical path for a characterisation test program to take. Samples were sourced from the standard mill quarterly composites for the first quarter of 2007 and are described in A total of 10 The third stage was designed to give an overview of the modal mineralogy and general elemental composition of the case study sample. The information gained in this stage was used to flag potentially deleterious aspects of the sample for which appropriate analytical techniques could be applied in subsequent stages. The elemental composition of the sample has been presented in The key results derived from Mineralogy can be as much a driver in gold deportment characterisation as the elemental composition. To give an initial evaluation of gold deportment, based on broad mineral groups, a simplified version of the diagnostic leaching method described by The residue was split and one portion assayed by standard aqua regia digestion to determine sulphide, carbonate and oxide mineral associated gold. Another portion was assayed by fire assay to determine total gold content and by difference the proportion of gold locked in refractory minerals, such as silicate minerals. It was apparent from preliminary investigation of the sample that there is significant coarse gold present and that unliberated gold occurs distributed between sulphide and silicate minerals. The presence of pyrrhotite may also lead to increased consumption of oxygen and cyanide during cyanide leaching. The final stage of analysis provides an in-depth investigation of the mineralogy and gold deportment. The nature of the analytical requirements for this stage was defined by the flags raised during the previous stage of analysis. This allowed greater focus to be placed on specifically identified issues. To maximise the efficiency of searching for gold using QEMSCAN The cumulative assayed gold distribution by size fraction has been shown in The normalised cumulative gold distribution presented in Investigation of gold distribution identified causes of gold losses as deportment to coarse size fractions. This was supported by the examination of gold distribution by size and density. This has been presented in Examination of the gold distribution by size and density fraction indicated that the major gold host was the coarse fractions of float material from heavy liquid separation. To determine the effect of gold association on recovery by cyanidation a series of simple diagnostic leach tests were performed on each size and density fraction. The results of this analysis can be seen in The key points from this study are summarised below: Significant Cu present may lead to high cyanide consumption and increased WAD cyanide in discharge. Major mineral occurrences were Fe oxides, quartz, feldspars and pyrite. The presence of pyrrhotite may lead to increased consumption of oxygen and cyanide during cyanide leaching. Gold occurred predominantly in +150 Opportunity for 86.1% recovery of gold was achieved by direct cyanidation, with even distribution of remaining gold between sulphide and silicate minerals. Significant pyrite and the low presence of carbonates may result in material becoming “acid producing” for the purposes of Acid Mine Drainage (AMD) monitoring. Gold deportment suggests that opportunity exists to recover up to 86.1% of gold losses through cyanide leaching of flotation tailings. The potential exists to increase this through re-grinding of material to liberate gold disseminated in coarse mineral grains. It is important for any analytical project to ensure valid and representative results can be obtained by the methodology utilised. This is especially important for gold deportment analysis, where sampling is difficult due to the discrete and trace nature of gold. For validation of the case study presented an additional study was completed on a separate composite from the same flotation tailings material. The reproducibility of key results has been presented in It can be seen in Through implementation of the GoldSCAN methodology more efficient gold deportment analysis that can provide results for operators that are useable in troubleshooting situations has been examined. It was possible to demonstrate a streamlined approach to gold deportment analysis using a decision tree approach with supporting knowledge base to identify potential analytical and metallurgical problems early in the analysis protocol. The use of automated mineralogy, in the form of the QEMSCAN The case study presented, showed how the methodology could be applied to efficiently identify potential areas for increased recovery from a flotation tailings stream. Through use of diagnostic assays to determine gold distribution based on recovery efficiency it was possible to identify the potential for increased gold recovery, with 86.1% of Au in tailings recoverable by direct cyanidation. This could be further enhanced with the application of mineralogical and additional chemical analysis, showing 33% of gold occurring in the coarse (+150 Overall, the implementation of the GoldSCAN methodology to make better use of automated mineralogy in gold deportment studies was successful. This should lead to more accessible mineralogical information in the gold industry, an area that will rapidly become more important as increasingly complex deposits are evaluated and exploited. The authors would like to acknowledge the mine operator who provided samples for the case study undertaken and the consulting team at Intellection Pty Ltd., for all their help in completing this project.