The flotation of magnesite and dolomite were investigated with the presence of single dodecylamine (DDA) and combined mixtures of DDA and monohydric alcohols, respectively. The adsorption behavior of DDA, butanol, hexanol and octanol on the surface of the two minerals were shown by molecular dynamics simulation, and the results were corresponding with the analysis of zeta potential, measurements of the contact angle and adsorption. Flotation results indicated that part of DDA could be replaced by the three alcohols (butanol, hexanol, octanol) to get better flotation results. Molecular dynamics simulation and the results of zeta potential and contact angle measurements indicated that adsorption of DDA on mineral surfaces could be strengthened by monohydric alcohols.Surfactants were widely used in many fields, such as the synthesis of medicament Magnesite (MgCO Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations had been widely applied to discuss the adsorption behavior and interaction energy of surfactants at the liquid/gas and liquid/solid interfaces In present work, in order to study the surfactant adsorption behaviors and the intensify DDA adsorption by monohydric alcohols, parts of DDA were substituted by different kinds of monohydric alcohols for the flotation of magnesite and dolomite. The intensified adsorption of DDA on magnesite and dolomite surface was discussed by molecular dynamics simulations with the addition of zeta potential, contact angle measurements and adsorption measurement. Magnesite and dolomite used for this work were obtained from Haicheng of Liaoning Province, China. Both single mineral samples were hand-sorted and ground to −0.074 + 0.015 mm by porcelain ball mill. The chemical compositions of magnesite included 48.53% MgO, 0.44% CaO, 0.15% SiO Flotation experiments were carried out in a 30 mL flotation cell by adding into 2.0 g minerals samples and 30 ml deionized water. Flotation cell was suspended on laboratory XFG self-aeration flotation machine (Jilin Exploration Machinery Plant, China) operating at 1620 r/min. NaOH and HCl were prepared for adjusting the slurry pH. Then surfactant DDA and combined collectors of DDA and different monohydric alcohols were used as the collectors in flotation, respectively. Finally, the concentrates and the tailings were filtered, dried, weighed and analyzed. Each experiment was performed at least three times for getting the average result and the standard deviations were also presented. It was reminded that the pH values, surfactant concentration and type for different experiments were changed, but other parameters, including impeller speed, test temperature, and air flow rate were kept constant during the experiments. The flotation flow sheet was shown in Zeta potential measurements were carried out using a Nano-ZS90 zeta potential analyzer (Malvern Instruments Ltd, Britain). 0.5 g mineral samples were suspended in 50 ml KCl solution which was used as background electrolyte (0.001 mol·L Sessile drop method was used to measure the contact angles of the mineral surfaces before and after treated by collectors. Mineral samples were immersed in collector suspensions for 10 min to be conditioned with different of surfactants under the optimal flotation concentration. Finally, the affected samples were washed and dried in a vacuum oven. After that, the dried powder was pressed into tables. The measurements were conducted on a JC200A Contact Angle Goniometer (Shanghai Powereach Digital Technology Equipment Co. LTD, China). The images of contact at the gas-solid-liquid interface were captured by high-speed amplifier camera. The contact angles were obtained by the average of three repeats and the standard deviations were also presented. The quantity of surfactants adsorption on the surface of magnesite and dolomite was measured by an Ultraviolet Spectrophotometry UV1901PC (Shanghai Science Instrument Co. LTD, China). The absorption spectroscopies of single reagent was measured to get the calibration curve in advance. Then, 2 g magnesite and dolomite samples were suspended in 100 ml given concentration reagent solutions at the optimal pH value of flotation, respectively. Suspensions were stirred for 10 min and then were kept standing for 2 h. The supernatants were separated from the solid by a centrifuge. The supernatant solution was determined for the final reagent concentration, referring to the calibration curve. For the accuracy, the parallel tests under each condition were carried at least three times and reported along with the standard deviation. The amount of the adsorbed reagents on the mineral surfaces was calculated as the following: Here, Crystal cells of magnesite and dolomite were exported from structure database of Materials Studio 7.0. Based on the literature, magnesite (1 0 1) and dolomite (1 0 1) surface, which were chosen as cleavage planes for interaction models construction, were the perfect cleavage planes of the two minerals Geometry optimization was first conducted to preliminarily optimize the adsorption models. Then, dynamics simulation was performed at 298 K. Mineral surface models were subjected to 1 ps dynamic with steps of 1 fs at constant mole number, volume, and temperature (NVT ensemble) to get initial velocities by Velocity Scale thermostat. Then, 50,000 dynamics steps of 1 fs at constant mole number, volume, and energy (NVE ensemble) were carried out to eliminate the impact of temperature, followed by another dynamic simulation of 5 ns with steps of 1 fs at NVT ensemble. The trajectories collected at last 1 ns stage were used for data analysis. And Nose thermostat was used to control system temperature All simulations were performed using the Forcite module with COMPASS force field At last, configurations with the lowest energy were chosen as the final adsorption configurations. Based on the final configuration, interaction energy was calculated as following where Δ Radial distribution function (RDF) indicated the extent to which molecules of atoms or groups deviate from complete randomness where At the natural pH, which was 7.82 for magnesite and 8.23 for dolomite, the flotation behaviors of the two minerals as a function of DDA concentration were explored. As shown in At the optimal pH shown in In summary, monohydric alcohols could be substituted for DDA within a certain amount for the better flotation of magnesite and dolomite. The flotation recovery increased as the carbon chain of the surfactants increased. Among the three monohydric alcohols investigated in the flotation tests, octanol played the best performance. In order to achieve persuasive and representative analysis for further effects exploration, octanol was selected to analyze zeta potential, contact angle and molecular dynamics simulations.  Meanwhile, as shown in Because contact angle could be the reflection of the surface hydrophobicity of minerals, it was also investigated The contact angles of dolomite were measured and displayed in In conclusion, surfactant DDA could increase the hydrophobic of both magnesite and dolomite. Octanol did not matter with the hydrophobic of minerals alone, but it could promote the adsorption of DDA on the surface of minerals. All the contact angle results corresponded with the flotation results. Adsorption quantity of surfactants on the mineral surfaces could reflect the flotation efficiency directly.  In conclusion, the presence of octanol could intensify the adsorption of DDA on the surface of magnesite and dolomite. The adsorption quantity of surfactants on dolomite was more than that of on magnesite, which could explain the reason that the flotation of dolomite was much better than that of magnesite by DDA. The mean interaction energies between mineral surfaces and different reagent solutions were calculated based on the equilibrium adsorption models collected from the last 1 ns dynamics simulations and it was shown in As for mineral surfaces treated with combined reagent solutions, interaction energy decreased with the increasing carbon chain of alcohol. The most negative energy was found in the DDA and octanol solution, which indicated that combined reagents of DDA and octanol had the strongest interaction with magnesite and dolomite. Moreover, interaction energy of combined reagents was more negative than that of single DDA solution. It illustrated that combined regents worked well on surfaces of magnesite and dolomite. Hence, flotation by combined regents could get better results. Meanwhile, interaction energy of dolomite with different regents was lower than the corresponding energy of magnesite. It matched well with flotation results that both DDA and combined reagent of DDA had better collecting ability on dolomite than magnesite.  In order to quantify the adsorption probability of combined reagents, the radial distribution function of DDA and octanol was calculated based on the optimum adsorption models and was presented in In this work, the flotation of magnesite and dolomite were conducted using surfactants DDA and monohydric alcohols as the collectors. The flotation indexes were improved as part of DDA was replaced by three alcohols (butanol, hexanol, octanol). Zeta potential measurements showed that DDA could enhance the positive of magnesite and dolomite. Monohydric alcohols could not change the surface electrical of two minerals, but they could intensify the adsorption of DDA on minerals. As the contact angle measurements showed, the monohydric alcohols mixed with DDA could achieve the best hydrophobicity of magnesite and dolomite compared with using DDA alone. The results of adsorption measurements showed that the presence of octanol could intensify the adsorption of DDA on the surface of both magnesite and dolomite. Molecular dynamics simulation showed the adsorption behaviors of different kinds of surfactants on the mineral surfaces. As it showed, the adsorption of DDA could be more closed on the mineral surfaces with the presence of monohydric alcohols. So this work demonstrated that it is possible for the substitution of monohydric alcohols for DDA, for the purpose of cost reduction in the flotation of magnesite and dolomite. This work was supported by the