The existing laboratory methods have limitations that make it very difficult to select the most suitable method for obtaining precise permeability measurements for evaluating reservoir formation damage. To date, there has been no research critically addressing this issue. In this study, the permeabilities of core or cuttings samples taken from No.15 Reservoir in the Qinshui Basin before and after damage caused by drilling and fracturing fluids were randomly measured using six general laboratory methods. Their average permeability values, as well as the extent of absolute and relative formation damage, were calculated and analyzed using a simple ranking method, statistical screening algorithm, and theoretical method. The results show that, first, there is a regular distribution of absolute reservoir damage measured by the laboratory methods; and second, the application priority of permeability measurement methods for formation damage evaluation in coal bed methane reservoirs is as follows: cuttings pulse decay method > constant flow rate method > nuclear magnetic resonance method > plunger pulse decay method = pressure oscillation method = constant pressure method. The cuttings pulse decay method is therefore recommended for measuring core matrix damage, while the constant flow rate method is suggested for measuring overall damage to core samples.Coal bed methane (CBM) reservoirs provide high-quality unconventional natural gas and have accordingly become one of the major energy sources of increasing interests with commercially recoverable reserves Researchers recently classified the methods for determining the permeability of coal formations in coal bed methane reservoirs into core measuring method in laboratories Given the scarcity of research on the operating principles, advantages, and limitations of the existing laboratory methods of measuring permeability Thirty core samples from No. 15 Reservoir in the Qinshui Basin, each with a diameter of 2.50 cm and a length of 4.90 cm, were prepared in order to measure their permeability using the constant pressure method, constant flow rate method, plunger pulse decay method, pressure oscillation method, and nuclear magnetic resonance method (i.e., except cuttings pulse decay method). The reservoir depth and pressure for sampling are respectively 800 m and 10 MPa. The ratio of the length to the diameter of the selected core samples was 1.96, which conforms to China’s industry standards (SY/T 5358–2010) for formation damage experiments. Coal particles (cuttings) between 20 and 40 mesh obtained by crushing coal rocks from the same CBM reservoir were used as samples for testing the cuttings pulse decay method. The formation water was prepared according to the quality control standards of coal seam water in the Qinshui Basin to saturate rock samples The statistical screening algorithm was developed by analogically transforming the world university evaluation ranking (Fig. B1) into the reservoir formation damage evaluation ranking (Fig. B2) based on similarity. The credibility of most world university ranking institutions has always been questionable. This is because the rankings of universities vary as a result of the differences in the institutions’ scoring criteria and the number of universities the institutions evaluate As shown in Step 1: Calculate and record the values of absolute and relative reservoir formation damage by substituting the measured permeability values before and after the formation damage into the absolute and relative reservoir formation damage formulas, respectively. Perform this calculation separately for drilling fluid and for fracturing fluid. Step 2: Classify the values obtained in Step 1 into a ranking order by assigning the lowest rank (that is, Rank 1) to the method with the highest value of absolute and relative reservoir formation damage, again analyzing drilling fluid and fracturing fluid separately. Step 3: Repeat Steps 1 and 2 for the other sets of core/cuttings samples (for n Step 4: Count the number of the same rankings for drilling and fracturing fluid damage, combine and obtain the final statistics of identical ranking. The permeability values before and after damaged by drilling and fracturing fluids, measured using the various experimental methods, are presented in The experimental results in As As The calculated absolute and relative reservoir damage values for each experimental method were grouped separately. The difference between them and their absolute values for drilling and fracturing fluids were calculated to obtain the simple ranking results shown in As  The simple ranking analysis shows that among the laboratory methods used to measure the degree of formation damage caused by drilling and fracturing fluids, the cuttings pulse decay method and constant flow rate method are the most precise. This outcome suggests that the simple ranking method cannot clearly prioritize the methods and thus does not fully resolve the selection problem. This is because the simple ranking analysis was fully based on the limited six experimental results. To find the unique method with a minimal measurement error, it is necessary to use the statistical screening algorithm to do further analysis. Doing so can mitigate the selection error caused by the limitations of the simple ranking analysis. The results of the formation damage experiment for 36 samples were separately run through the algorithm seen in As   When measuring the degree of formation damage caused by working fluids, it is necessary to measure the permeability before and after the formation damage. If the true value of the permeability before fluid damage is represented by In these equations, where the measured value of the absolute reservoir formation damage is equal to the true value of the absolute reservoir formation damage. Similarly, if the measured value of relative reservoir formation damage ( Equating the measured and true values of the relative formation damage formula in Equation Simplifying Equation Since Further, based on the ratio theorem, we have If the measured values of absolute and relative reservoir formation damage are expected equal to their true values, physical quantities such as Therefore, we have It can be deduced from Equation The constant pressure and constant flow rate steady-state methods involve the injection of fluids into core samples respectively at a constant pressure difference and flow rate. The outlet flow rate of each phase is measured when the observed pressure drop is steady. The outlet flow rate is then substituted into Darcy’s law to obtain the effective permeability. In a constant flow rate experiment, a constant flow rate is maintained before and after the damage caused by the fluids and the pressure difference across the rock samples is constant. If the fluids cause substantial damage to the permeability of the core samples, the outlet flow rate when measured for the first time (i.e., the flow rate before the damage caused by the fluids) at a constant pressure drop will be higher than the flow rate measured the second time. As the flow rate increases, the cleats of some weakly cemented surfaces in the core samples will greatly expand. The entire experiment takes a long time because the sensitivity of coal to pressure or stress tends to be high. These limitations make it difficult to apply the constant pressure method to coal samples over a long period, rendering the constant flow rate method the more reliable steady-state method. The nuclear magnetic resonance method and mercury injection method are indirect methods of measuring permeability in the laboratory (Fig. A1). The mercury injection method destroys the core samples during the experiment, while the nuclear magnetic resonance method does not destroy the core samples (this is why the mercury injection method was not used in this study). The nuclear magnetic resonance method estimates permeability based on a porosity measurement using a data manipulation of some permeability models that are based on theoretical and empirical analyses. The Schlumberger Doll Research (SDR) model and Timur-Coates (TC) model are commonly used with the nuclear magnetic resonance method Unsteady-state methods include the pulse decay method and the pressure oscillation method (Fig. A1). The pulse decay method can be broken down into the cuttings pulse decay method and the plunger pulse decay method. The permeability values measured by these methods are often within the same interval due to the similarities in their operating principles and data interpretation methods. In a pulse decay experiment, the core is subjected to pulse or pressure waves, and the permeability is measured by applying the dynamic pressure difference between the two ends of the core sample. The experimental error caused by these two methods thus can be considered to be consistent (Equation The accurate prediction of the permeability of coal bed methane reservoirs is important for the optimal exploration of unconventional natural gas resources and subsequent field development. This study provides a reliable basis for selecting an optimal laboratory method for evaluating working fluid damage in coal bed methane reservoirs. The following points have been covered: Six general laboratory methods were used to obtain the permeability of coal samples: the constant pressure method, constant flow rate method, nuclear magnetic resonance method, cuttings pulse decay method, plunger pulse decay method, and pressure oscillation method. The measured permeability values obtained using these methods varied significantly due to differences in experimental set-up, operating principles, and data interpretation techniques. There is a regular distribution of absolute reservoir damage, as measured by the laboratory methods. The results of the constant pressure method and the constant flow rate method were relatively higher, and those of the cuttings pulse decay method, the plunger pulse decay method and the pressure oscillation method were relatively lower. The results of the nuclear magnetic resonance method were consistently moderate. However, there is no regular distribution of relative reservoir damage, as measured by the laboratory methods. Based on the statistical screening algorithm, the order of precision for measuring permeability in the laboratory is as follows: cuttings pulse decay method > constant flow rate method > nuclear magnetic resonance method > plunger pulse decay method = pressure oscillation method = constant pressure method. Combining the results of the statistical screening algorithm and an analysis of the operating principles of each method suggests that the cuttings pulse decay method is the most suitable method for evaluating coal matrix damage. However, to evaluate the overall damage to core samples (including the effects of cracks and interconnected pores), the constant flow rate method is most suitable. Therefore, it is recommended that these two methods are used simultaneously. While the constant flow rate method measures overall permeability, the cuttings pulse decay method should be used to measure matrix permeability.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors thank the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: