Hydrocyclones are devices used in many chemical and mineral based process industries for separation of fine particles. To enhance the performance efficiency of hydrocyclone with optimum pressure drop several configuration of hydrocyclone is designed and developed. A new hydrocyclone with spiral rib was designed. In the present study, the effects of spiral rib on pressure drop and separation efficiency are investigated experimentally and effect of vortex finder depth of a ribbed hydrocyclone was analyzed. The experimental results showed that the spiral rib has a significant effect on pressure drop and separation efficiency. It is interesting to note that by using a rib in the cylindrical part of the hydrocyclone resulted in lower pressure drop and improved separation efficiency. The pressure drop decreases by 17.5% and total efficiency increases by 10.5% at a feed velocity of 5 m/s and at a vortex finder depth of 7.6 cm. Pressure drop and separation efficiency also affected by the vortex finder depth. In this study, four ribbed hydrocyclones with 6 cm, 7.6 cm, 9.8 cm and 12.5 cm vortex finder depth have been taken for the analysis. Separation efficiency is maximum for the vortex finder depth of 7.6 cm.Hydrocyclones are widely used in mineral and allied process industries because of its advantages such as easy to install, no moving parts, high separation efficiency, operational reliability and economically viable. It is also used in food process industry ( The vortex finder depth was considered as a design parameter because many authors have reported that the vortex finder could affect the separation efficiency. Many modifications have been done to improve the performance, but little information is available on the effect of ribs on the separation performance and flow behavior of hydrocyclone. The schematic diagram of the experiment setup is shown in Separation of particles in a hydrocyclone is based on size, shape and density of particles as far as solid material is concerned. Preparation of slurry for the experimental purpose is a significant part of this work. Sand particles having density 2500 kg/m Where η is the total efficiency, Literature survey reveals that little study on hydrocyclone with internals has been carried out. In this study an attempt has been made to study the performance of a hydrocyclone with internal spiral ribs. A Spiral rib has been designed and fabricated of stainless steel and inserted into the cylindrical part of the hydrocyclone. The spiral rib was fixed to the wall of the hydrocyclone with a thin joint in such a way that the flow field inside the hydrocyclone affects less. The width and thickness of the strip of the ribs were 0.8 cm and 0.2 cm respectively. Eight turns spiral rib as shown in Similar procedure as mentioned above was done by inserting the helical ribs inside the hydrocyclone. Pressure drop and separation efficiency were calculated for both the hydrocyclone i.e. without any internals and also with internal spiral ribs. Separation performance of the hydrocyclone could be enhanced by using the internal spiral ribs. The continuity and momentum equations at steady state can be expressed as The particle motion is described by Experiments have been conducted for different feed velocity, vortex finder depth and hydrocyclones without ribs and with ribs to characterize the separation performance. Slurry was prepared using sand particle and water. The particle size distribution of the sand particles is shown in The pressure drop is the total pressure difference that is the difference between the inlet pressure and outlet pressure. Pressure drop inside the hydrocyclones are investigated, and the results are shown in Where The pressure drops of a ribbed and conventional hydrocyclone at five different velocities are shown in The aim of insertion of vortex finder is of dual purpose, first is to avoid the short circuit flow generated at the top of the hydrocyclone, which is close to feed inlet and secondly, to avoid the re-entrainment of particles in overflow stream. The particles are guided by the outside wall due to the presence of vortex finder. Pressure drop for four different vortex finder depths are compared in The effect of feed velocity on separation efficiency has been presented in Performance efficiency results in The separation efficiency of a hydrocyclone depends on the vortex finder depth as the particles are guided by the outside wall in the presence of the vortex finder. Total efficiency of a ribbed hydrocyclone at four different vortex finder depths are shown in The results of this work demonstrate that the hydrodynamic behavior has been improved significantly by the introduction of a rib inside the cylindrical part of the hydrocyclone. The experimental result shows that the pressure drop of a ribbed hydrocyclone was lower than 17.5% than the conventional hydrocyclone at a velocity of 5 m/s at a vortex finder depth of 7.6 cm under the same geometrical and operational conditions. Pressure drop in a ribbed hydrocyclone increases with increase in feed velocity. Pressure drop increases slowly at low feed velocity, but it increases significantly at high feed velocity. The separation efficiency of a ribbed hydrocyclone was better than that of a conventional hydrocyclone. It was observed that the total efficiency of hydrocyclone increases with increase in feed velocity. The efficiency of a ribbed hydrocyclone was greatly affected by the depth of the vortex finder. The total efficiency was maximum 89% at the vortex finder depth of 7.6 cm (12% of the total height of the cyclone). Hydrocyclone with spiral rib can be used for industrial operations dealing with slurry for efficient removal of the slurry except acidic slurries, because the spiral rib may be corroded by acidic slurry. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at  hydrocyclone length (cm) hydrocyclone diameter (cm) hydrocyclone underflow diameter (cm) hydrocyclone overflow diameter (cm) feed velocity (m/s) pressure drop (kPa fluid density (kg/m included cone angle of the hydrocyclone separation efficiency