This work forms part of the studies presently ongoing at Nuclear and Energy Research Institute – IPEN/CNEN-SP investigating the feasibility of powdering ductile U-10wt%Mo alloy by hydriding–milling–dehydriding of the gamma phase (HMD). Hydriding was conducted at room temperature in a Sievert apparatus following heat treatment activation. Hydrided pieces were fragile enough to be hand milled to the desired particle size range. Hydrogen was removed by heating the samples under high vacuum. X-ray diffraction analysis of the hydrided material showed an amorphous-like pattern that is completely reversed following dehydriding. The hydrogen content of the hydrided samples corresponds to a trihydride, i.e. (U,Mo)H3. SEM analysis of HMD powder particles revealed equiaxial powder particles together with some plate-like particles. A hypothesis for the amorphous hydride phase formation is suggested.For the last 30 Powdering U–Mo alloys is a major concern when fuel fabrication is based on the dispersion technology. There are at least three main process routes by which ductile (and tough) gamma U–Mo alloys can be powdered: atomization (mainly centrifugal atomization) by the rotating disk method Previous reports on mechanical grinding Following the hydriding route, the U–Mo alloy pieces are embrittled by hydrogen (hydriding stage) and can then be ground mechanically with the aid of a low impact mill (rod or knife mill) or manually with the aid of a hand mortar, producing powder particles that are first sieved and finally dehydrided (dehydriding stage). This route has at least two approaches that can be indicated, depending on what phases are present during the adsorption of hydrogen: hydriding gamma U–Mo alloy containing some alpha phase at grain boundaries and hydriding gamma phase alone (massive hydriding). The first approach, named HD, is based on an easier process, in which strong hydrogen intake by the alpha Uranium phase (orthorrombic) occurs, forming UH The second approach was named HMD and combines hydriding–dehydriding with a milling process. Gamma U–Mo alloys are directly hydrided, with no gamma to alpha phase transformation, but powder can only be produced by interposing a milling operation before dehydriding. To achieve the gamma phase hydriding, a prior heat treatment is necessary to activate the material. Pasqualini et al. More recently, Chen et al. (2010) verified that after a heating to 600 In a previous study, our group obtained U10Mo powder by hydrogenation–milling–dehydrogenation (HMD). We adopted the term “hydrogenation”, since there was no evidence of the formation of a hydride phase. High-energy ball-milling was used in order to achieve comminution of the hydrogenated material Ingots of U–Mo alloy with 10 The solid material was a cylindrical piece measuring close to 40 Small pieces (4–5 Activation consisted of heating the sample under pressurized hydrogen (0.8 Following this activation procedure, the sample was allowed to cool at room temperature, always under a high vacuum (0.01 X-ray diffraction was conducted on heat-treated ingot samples (before hydriding), as well as hydrided and dehydrided particles using Cu Kα radiation. HMD powder particles were also characterized by SEM analysis.  At room temperature, the dehydrided sample started to absorb hydrogen at 0.160 An accurate measurement of the hydrogen absorbed by the sample at room temperature was achieved by performing a blank experiment (with no sample) conducted under the same conditions, i.e. hydrogen flow rate and temperature. We then subtracted this data from the hydriding sample curve (pressurization stage). The resultant curve (sample – blank) is presented in Following this procedure and expressing the quantity of hydrogen as a molar fraction, we determined a value of 71.2%, corresponding to a H/M ratio of X-ray diffraction patterns from as heat-treated (before hydriding), hydrided and dehydrided samples are presented in Concerning the amorphous-like pattern, we initially believed that no hydride was formed, as previously reported However, thermodynamic calculations of the maximum hydrogen content that could be dissolved in a U-10 Alpha uranium has a orthorhombic lattice (oC4 or A20) and a density of 19.04 Something different should occur in the hydriding gamma U–Mo alloy (BCC, We assume that hydriding a gamma U–Mo alloy will produce equivalent hydride allotropes to those observed when hydriding metallic uranium. Since here the hydriding operation was performed at room temperature, a mixture of alpha and beta (U,Mo)H  We were able to produce U-Mo powder with appropriate granulometry by simple manual grinding. Hydriding gamma U-10 The authors are grateful to FAPESP and CNPq for the research grants (2007/50018-2, 2007/07769-7, 2011/13849-9, 471008/2011-7, 470363/2012-6 and 481079/2008-4) provided for this work. The authors would also like to thank Dr. E. E. Pasqualini for his cooperative and encouraging discussions and MSc. R.B. Falcão and E.D.C.C. Dammann for their assistance with the Sieverts apparatus and data collection.