Three clinkers and a blast furnace slag, ground separately, were combined to produce 27 cements. Each cement consisted of 35% fine (∼6000cm2/g), 25% intermediate (∼4000cm2/g), and 40% coarse (∼2500cm2/g) particles. Slag made up the fine or intermediate particles in the blended cements, clinkers making up the remainder. Compressive strength was measured up to 28d on mortars and heat evolution was investigated up to 48h using isothermal calorimetry. Portland cements with different rates of strength gain and heat evolution could be obtained by mixing different clinkers. By combining clinkers, cements with lower early heat but higher strength could be prepared. The fine particles in the cements are responsible for strength gain up to 3d, but the intermediate fraction is crucial for 28-d strength. Slag increasingly contributes to hydration after the 3–7d period. Fine slag particles decrease early strength but allow high later-age strengths while intermediate slag particles allow smaller drops in early strength but yield lower 28-d strengths. Similarly, replacement of fine clinker particles with slag decreases 12-h heat more than replacement of intermediate particles but the difference diminishes beyond about 24h. A strong linear relation exists between the 24-h and 48-h heats of the cements and could be useful for modelling the hydration rate of Portland or blended cements. Moderate relations exist between 12–48-h heat, and 1–7-d strength. A strong linear relation is observed between strength and heat measurements made at the same age. Strengths of the cement mortars are mostly within 20% of that estimated by the developed relation.Efforts to reduce the environmental impact of concrete are ever increasing. Blended cements containing one or more of ground granulated blast furnace slag, natural pozzolans, fly ash, silica fume, and limestone in different proportions, currently make up nearly 75% of all cement produced in Europe It is generally accepted that supplementary cementing materials (SCMs) reduce early heat evolution due to the dilution effect. Strength is lowered at early ages, particularly at high cement-replacement levels, and even up to 28 Careful selection of SCM and clinker particle size distribution (PSD) are being investigated for separately-ground blended cements in an effort to deliver “tailor-made” cements that meet the market requirements Blended cements were prepared by combining a granulated blast furnace slag (S), three different clinkers (A, B, C), and gypsum (G), in various proportions. Portland cements containing only clinker and gypsum were also made, using either a single clinker or all three. Each cement contained 35% “fine”, 25% “intermediate”, and 40% “coarse” particles. Fine, intermediate, and coarse particles had target Blaine finenesses of about 6000 The particular finenesses of the fine, intermediate, and coarse fractions of the cements were chosen based on work by Zhang et al. Blaine fineness vs. grinding time curves drawn for each clinker and the slag gave an idea about the relative resistances of the original materials to comminution. As expected, the slag was the hardest material taking ∼240 While the PSD data indicates that different ground clinkers and slag in a given supposedly identical size group are mostly similar in size, there are some cases where a difference is marked, such as the D A total of 27 cements were prepared by combining the clinkers, the slag, and the gypsum. The naming scheme for the Portland, and blended cements can be explained as follows: If X represents any one clinker (either A, or B, or C) in a cement, Y represents a second (different) clinker in the same cement, Z represents a possible third clinker in the same cement, and S represents slag, then three single-clinker cements (XXX), six three-clinker mixtures (XYZ), and eighteen slag-containing cements (nine SXX/SXY, and nine XSX/XSY) were prepared. The first, second, and third letters in each cement name represents the material used as the fine, intermediate, or coarse particles, respectively. The combination of clinker and slag to produce the cements is summarized in Then, for example, cement ABC contains 35% of fine particles of clinker A, 25% intermediate particles of clinker B, and 40% coarse particles of clinker C, and no slag. SBC contains 35% fine slag particles. 5% gypsum by mass of its clinker content was added to each cement. Hence, the gypsum content was highest for the Portland cements (XXX) and lowest for the blended cements with slag as its fine portion (SXX/SXY). The term “clinker-only” is used to refer to cements without any slag (XXX/XYZ). These cements do contain gypsum. The term “blended” is used to refer to the slag-containing cements. 50-mm mortar cubes were cast and cured similar to ASTM C 109 The influence, on hydration, of combining different clinkers to produce a cement and replacement of different size fractions of cement with ground slag was investigated by comparing the compressive strength development of mortars and the heat evolution of pastes prepared using each cement. The strength development of the various mortars up to 28 It is clear from The 28-day strength of AAA is greater than that of BBB, itself greater than that of CCC. This trend also carries to SAA Slag-containing mortars are expected to develop less of their ultimate strengths at early ages, for example during the first few days of hydration, and more of their strength afterwards. Referring to f Ordinarily, for the rather high slag contents used (25% or 35%), one may expect that clinker-only cements have higher strengths up to 28 The influence of the replacement of different size fractions of the clinker with slag can be investigated by comparing the two strengths of mortars from each group at early and late ages. For example, SAA is compared with ASA, SBC is compared with SCB, etc. It is seen that XSX/XSY mostly has higher 1-day strength than SXX/SXY, but not always. Three of the nine mortar pairs (e.g. XSX vs. SXX) are exceptions. For the single-clinker cement mortars, replacing the fine portion of the cement with slag significantly decreases 1-day strength. Replacing the intermediate portion of the cement with slag also decreases the 1-day strength of the single-clinker cements but less so. SXX/SXY have noticeably lower f The 3-day strengths of XSX/XSY are again mostly higher than those of SXX/SXY with three exceptions out of nine mortar pairs. In all three the exceptions, clinker B makes up the fine portion and the fine fraction of clinker B has the lowest Blaine of the three clinkers and slag. Replacing the fine portion of the single-clinker cements with slag always decreases the 3-day strength as does replacing the intermediate portion. Strengths of these two groups are closer at 3 In summary, observations based on strength development suggest that the fine particle fraction appears to be responsible for early strength gain (1-day and 3-day) but the intermediate fraction is crucial for 28-day strength. Thus, placing slag in the fine fraction decreases early strength but allows high 28-day strengths to be reached. Placing slag in the intermediate fraction allows smaller drops in early strength to be achieved but yields lower 28-day strengths.  Looking at the rate of heat evolution peaks at ∼8–12 Like for strength development, it could be expected that slag incorporation would lower the heats of hydration of the cement pastes, and the use of slag in the fine portion of the cement would give lower heat than its use in the intermediate size portion. This is the case for the clinker-only cements which have higher heat of hydration than slag-containing cements at all times up to 48 As a group, SXX/SXY have ∼30%, 26%, and 24% lower heat at 12 The relations, judged by comparing values of coefficient of determination, r Another interesting relation to investigate is that between heat of hydration and compressive strength of the mortars. If these relations were better understood, the estimation of later-age strength from early-age heat measurements (or even model-predicted heat) could be possible. The relations in Many recent studies The relation for all cements at all ages (12 Cements were prepared by combining fine-, intermediate-, and coarse-ground size fractions of clinkers, slag and gypsum. Strength development and heat evolution of mortars and pastes were compared and the following conclusions were reached: Multiple clinkers can be combined to produce Portland cements with lower heat and higher strength at early ages. Slag addition decreases 1-d and 3-d strengths of mortars. Replacement of fine clinker particles decreases early strength and heat more than replacing intermediate-sized particles. Contribution of slag to strength is noticeable after ∼3–7 Slag addition suppresses heat evolution rate, more with increasing slag content. The main peak shifts to earlier ages and its height decreases similar to the decrease in the clinker content, indicating dilution. Most slag-blended pastes also show shoulder peaks. Cumulative heats of hydration of slag-containing pastes are lower than the average for the clinker-only pastes up to 48 Relations between 12-h, 24-h, and 48-h heat appear to be strong when all cements are considered, but not so much when clinker-only and slag-containing cements are considered separately. 12-h heat does not represent the long-term behavior of the pastes very well, whereas the 24-h heat to 48-h heat relation is much stronger. 1-d heat of hydration is found to be related moderately to 1-, 3-, and 7-d strength, but not to 28-d strength. A strong linear relation exists between heat of hydration and strength measured at the same age. Development of such relations can be useful for estimation of late-age mortar strengths using early-age heat measurements.