In this work we investigated the influence of planetary ball milling and vertical stirred ball milling on the leaching of a copper ore containing copper sulfate and covellite. We used a mixed experimental-simulation approach to correlate the kinetic parameters of leaching to the collision energy during grinding. The effect of milling was studied by scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS). Results showed that both high-intensity grinding techniques resulted into a dramatic decrease of particle size. Furthermore, under specific grinding conditions, the planetary ball milling determined also the partial amorphization of covellite. The collision energies corresponding to specific grinding conditions in terms of rotational speed and number of grinding media were assessed by DEM simulations and were related to the specific surface area after grinding. The specific surface area of grinded samples was found to be directly proportional to the collision energy in grinding. The leaching of the ore occurred through three subsequent steps: (i) dissolution of copper sulfate, (ii) dissolution of amorphousized covellite and (iii) dissolution of residual crystalline covellite. The results of kinetic fitting highlighted an increase of the rate constants for the leaching of amorphous and crystalline covellite by intensifying the milling conditions. By correlating the collision energies from DEM simulation with the leaching rate constants, we confirmed that the rate constants for the leaching of covellite increased due to an occurred mechanochemical reaction. The mechanochemical reaction that determined the partial amorphization of covellite occurred above 0.25 J/s·g. On the other hand, the rate constants for the leaching of the residual crystalline covellite constantly and progressively increased with the collision energy, thus highlighting an improvement of leaching due to an increase of surface area.Copper is one of the most important metals, having a wide range of applications, from the electronic industry to the medical field Since the effectiveness of hydrometallurgical processes strongly depends on the amount of copper that can be leached out from the ore, having efficient leaching operations is crucial. The leaching of refractory sulfide ores such as chalcopyrite and covellite has been widely studied by using different leaching agents. Among them, hydrochloric Aiming to recover metal copper by elctrowinning, the sulfate media is more suitable than the chloride one As alternative to the addition of chemicals, the leaching performances could be improved by mechanochemical activation Although recent researches proved the effectiveness of high-intensity grinding methods for the activation of refractory minerals, the mechanism of mechanochemical activation still needs to be elucidated. Moreover, a method to elucidate whether the activation occurs due to generation of new surface area or due to mechanochemical reaction still needs to be developed. In this study, we investigated the mechanochemical activation of a covellite-based copper ore by a mixed experimental-simulation approach. By means of discrete element method (DEM) simulations The copper ore used in this research was a raw ore from Chile while the sulfuric acid used for the leaching experiments was an analytical grade reagent by Kanto Kagaku (JAPAN). The solid samples used in the high-intensity milling experiments were previously crushed roughly by a jaw crusher (Furukawa Industrial Machinery Systems Co., Ltd, JAPAN) and sieved in the range 75–3000 μm by wire sieves (Tokyo Screen Company Limited, JAPAN). After sieving, 30 g of samples were grinded for 1 h, either by a planetary ball mill (High G, Kurimoto ltd., JAPAN), or by a vertical stirred ball mill (Powder Lab, Nippon Coke & Engineering Co., Ltd, JAPAN), both equipped with 10 mm zirconia balls as grinding media. In the planetary ball mill, rotation to revolution speed ratio was set at 0.497 while the direction of rotation was inverse. All milling conditions are summarized in The mineralogical composition of the copper ore was determined by mineral liberation analysis (MLA, QUANTA FEG450, FEI, United States) while the chemical composition was assessed through X-ray fluorescence (XRF, ZSX Primus2, Rigaku Corporation, JAPAN) and inductively-coupled plasma spectrometry (ICP-AES, SPS7800, Seiko Instruments Inc., JAPAN) after digestion in aqua regia. ICP-AES was also used in order to determine the concentration of dissolved copper in the leaching experiments. The phase composition of grinded samples was determined by XRD (Smart Lab, Rigaku Corporation, JAPAN) with Co Kɑ radiation (λ = 1.789 Å) operated at 40 kV and 40 mA emission condition. The Cu K-edge X-ray absorption data were obtained by X-ray adsorption fine structure (XAFS) analysis applying the BL5S1 beamline of the Aichi Synchrotron Radiation Center (Aichi Science and Technology Foundation, Japan). The particle size distribution of the ore samples before and after grinding was analysed by FE-SEM (S-4500S, Hitachi High-Technologies Corporation, JAPAN) and image analysis of SEM micrographs as described elsewhere In the leaching experiments, 5 g of finely grinded samples were suspended with 1 dm In this research, the three-dimensional motion of particles and media balls during milling was simulated by DEM. In this study, conventional DEM simulation was conducted with Voigt model as collision model without any breakage The intensity of collisions between the different elements in the mills (particles, media balls and wall of the mill), was calculated based on the masses and the relative velocities of the colliding elements, as in Eq. The total collision energy per unit of time and unit of mass (J/s The mineralogical and chemical compositions of the copper ore sample used in this study are shown in XAFS results and fitting results from the analysis of near edge area of the XAFS spectra (XANES) revealed the presence in the ore of copper as covellite (CuS) and copper sulfate (CuSO In order to investigate the change of particle size due to milling, the samples grinded by planetary ball milling and vertical stirred ball milling were analysed by FE-SEM. The SEM micrographs of the products obtained under different milling conditions are shown respectively in In order to investigate the change of crystal structure due to high-intensity grinding, we conducted XRD analysis of samples before and after milling. Results are shown in The copper extraction yields from the ore samples grinded by planetary ball milling and vertical stirred ball milling are shown respectively in In this study, the kinetic fitting to determine the rate constants for the dissolution of copper from the different minerals after planetary ball milling and vertical stirred ball milling was performed based on Eq. The kinetic parameters for the leaching of ore samples grinded by planetary ball mill and vertical stirred media mill are listed in Results of fitting clearly showed as the rate constant for the dissolution of amorphous covellite did not change significantly by increasing the rotational speed of the planetary ball mill in the range 110–349 min Whereas the rate constants for the leaching of the amorphous covellite increased only beyond a certain value of rotational speed, the rate constants for the dissolution of the crystalline covellite ( Up to this point, we related the changes of surface area, crystal structure and leaching rate constants to the grinding conditions in terms of rotational speed and number of grinding media. However, because the grinding performance of a media mill does not depend merely on the rotational speed of the mill and/or the number of media balls, but it depends on the interactions between the different elements in the mills, a more representative physical quantity shall be taken into account for the correlations. As a matter of fact, the size reduction of particles in ball milling occurs upon transfer of energy due to collisions particle-article, particle-grinding media and particle-mill walls. For this reason, the size reduction depends on the specific milling technology and on the mill scale and it does not improve constantly and continuously with the rotational speed of the mill. On the other hand, the collision energy provides a more representative quantity to describe the grinding performance of a media mill as it contains already the information related to the intensity of the collisions. Furthermore, the collision energy is a quantity that allows for a direct comparison between different milling technologies/grinding conditions. After all, all changes in grinding occur due to a transfer of collision energy to the particles, regardless of the technology/condition. In other words, different technologies, conditions or scales resulting into the same collision energy are expected to produce the same effect on the particles. For this reason, we performed DEM simulations to determine the collision energy based on operating parameters such as the initial size and mass of particles, the grinding media and the rotational speed of the mill. Following this process, we related the leaching rate constants to the collision energy. Among the few available researches focusing on the simulation of grinding in ball mills, we could find only one that described the relationship between collision energy and kinetic constants In this study, as a first approach, we performed the same operation. For both planetary ball milling and vertical stirred ball milling, the relationships between leaching rate constants and collision energy are reported in Finally, by following the same approach, the relationship between the initial concentrations of amorphous and crystalline covellite ( In this work we used a mixed experimental-computational approach to investigate the influence of planetary ball milling and vertical stirred ball milling on the leaching of a copper ore containing copper sulfate and covellite. The leaching occurred through three subsequent steps: (i). dissolution of the easily dissolvable copper from CuSO The obtained results also proved the effectiveness of the mixed experimental-DEM simulation approach towards the elucidation of the leaching enhancement mechanism. They also pointed out the importance of including the collision of particles in the simulations. Finally, we would like to provide a suggestion for future studies. In this work, we confirmed the enhancement of the leaching of covellite due to a partial amorphization when the collision energy accounted for 0.25 J/s Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 