Unusual partially crystalline ordered mesoporous zirconosilicate doughnuts with Si/Zr ratio as low as 1.5 were synthesized from the aqueous polymerisation of a single source molecular precursor Zr[OSi(Ot-BuO)3]4 without the use of any templating agent. A radial homogenous mesoporosity (4nm) was observed inside these very regular sub-micrometric (600nm) doughnuts. These structures were partially crystallized in hydrothermal conditions (100°C) into an analogous zircon (ZrSiO4) framework. The formation mechanism has been investigated. It is evidenced that chlorine anions Cl− concentration and pH value are essential to achieve the process, even if their role is still a matter of investigations. The obtained materials demonstrated even higher catalytic activity, selectivity and stability in the liquid oxidative dehydrogenation of hydroquinone to 1,4-benzoquinone compared to TS-1 zeolite catalysts and amorphous highly ordered mesoporous zirconosilicate materials.For the two last decades, considerable works have been performed to confer growing catalytic activity to highly ordered mesoporous materials This method is expected to prevent the formation of stable zirconium cationic species in acidic media and to favour the heterocondensation reactions between inorganic sources via the rising of the synthesis pH during polymerisation process. Unfortunately, important modification of the pH value of the synthetic media does not allow optimized interaction between the templating agent and the inorganic phase. In the case of cooperative assembly based pathway, this method requires to select between a chemically homogeneous incorporation of Zr This promising strategy In this paper, we report that, in specific synthetic conditions, unprecedented partially crystallized ordered mesoporous zirconosilicate doughnuts with Si/Zr close to 1.5 were obtained from a simple hydrothermal procedure. Accurate acidic conditions (pH The powdery single molecular source Zr[OSi(O Transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) experiments were performed on a Tecnai G2 Twin, FEI at an acceleration voltage of 200 To assess the efficiency of Zr–Si–D material as redox catalysts, liquid phase oxidative dehydrogenation of hydroquinone (Aldrich, 99%) into quinone was performed as a probe reaction. The reaction was performed in a 50 N The SEM images of the Zr–Si–D particles are presented in A SEM-based 3D schematic modelling of an idealized sub-micrometric doughnut is exhibited in The high resolution TEM pictures of Zr–Si–D particles are displayed in Semi-quantitative EDX analysis performed on the sub-micrometric doughnuts give systematically low Si/Zr The powdery X-ray pattern of material Zr–Si–D is shown in This is certainly the consequence of the lamellar shape of the mesostructure, combined with a highly curved structure (doughnut, In addition to sub-micrometric doughnuts, the presence of some very rare residual and irregular particles among these numerous regular sub-micrometric doughnuts have been observed by SEM ( This hypothesis is confirmed by EDX analysis in  Nevertheless, In precise highly acidic conditions (pH This work was realized in the frame of the Belgian Federal Government Belspo PAI-IAP Project (INANOMAT, P6/17), Belgium–Viet Nam bilateral cooperation Project (BL/13/V11) and in the framework of “Redugaz”, an Interreg IV (France–Wallonia) Project funded by the European Union and the Walloon community. A. Lemaire thanks the FNRS (Fonds National de la Recherche Scientifique in Belgium) for an “Aspirant” doctoral research position. B.L. Su thanks the Chinese central government for an “Expert of the state” position in the frame of the program of “Thousands Talents” and the Ministry of Education of China for the “Changjiang scholar” position at Wuhan University of Technology. Catherine Henrist from ULg and Simon Kervyn de Merendrée from FUNDP are respectively gratefully thanked for TEM analysis and GC-MS counselling. Philippe Lemaire is bigheartedly acknowledged for the doughnut 3D schematic modelling. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 