A protocol for predicting recovery of platinum group minerals (GRPGM) is adapted from the protocol for gravity recoverable gold. This paper introduces the methodology to characterize the content of GRPGM in samples using the 3-in. (7.5cm) laboratory Knelson concentrator. Results for two ore samples are presented, as well as some mineralogical analysis of the gravity concentrates. The methodology can also be used for sample preconcentration to aid mineralogical analysis.Unlike gold, which occurs in a fairly small number of minerals, there are 109 platinum group mineral (PGM) species recognized by the International Mineralogical Association (IMA). They range from sulphides (e.g., braggite, (Pt, Pd)S) to tellurides (e.g., maslovite, PtBiTe), antimonides (e.g., sudburyite, PdSb), arsenides (e.g., sperrylite, PtAs Generally, PGMs formed with sulphides, arsenides and alloys can be recovered by gravity. However, PGMs formed with tellurides and oxides do not respond well to gravity concentration due to low density and generally fine grain size distribution. Pentlandite and chalcopyrite are usually readily recovered, as are associated (as blebs or in solid solution) platinum group elements (PGEs). PGEs present in pyrrhotite may not be recovered; for example, in milling Sudbury area ores, pyrrhotite is now largely rejected to meet environmental targets. Mineralogical characterization of feed stocks can help design recovery systems. However, there is a problem characterizing PGMs in an ore because of the low grade (often less than 1–2 There has been renewed interest in the use of gravity methods to recover PGMs reflecting both their economic and strategic importance and the new/improved gravity concentration devices becoming available ( GRPGM, by analogy with gravity recoverable gold (GRG), refers to the portion of platinum group minerals in a sample that can be recovered by gravity at a low yield (<1%). It includes PGMs that are fully liberated and PGMs in high-density locked particles. These species typically have a specific gravity greater than that of the densest sulphides (e.g., galena, 7.5). It excludes liberated PGMs that are too fine to be recovered. Also excluded are discrete PGMs occurring as blebs and in solid solution in carriers that are too low in density, such as copper or nickel sulphides. Information on GRPGM can be used to optimize gravity concentration if it is already practiced, and otherwise to judge whether a gravity concentration circuit should be considered. The objective is to determine if the gravity recoverable gold (GRG) protocol developed at McGill University can be adapted to GRPGM. Compared to gold, platinum group minerals offer the challenge of complex mineralogy, finer grain size distribution and somewhat unfavorable grinding and classification behavior, owing to the fact that some minerals are brittle (e.g., sperrylite) and others have a much lower density than native gold (  The rationale for the transfer of the GRG protocol to GRPGM is based on the similar specific gravity range to gold of many platinum group minerals (between 10 and 22). However, as PGMs tend to report to finer size classes ( The GRG standard test was developed at the beginning of the 1990s ( For mineralogical analysis both polished sections (Raglan) and direct observation of particles (Clarabelle) was performed. The JOEL 8604 scanning electron microscope and a variable pressure S3000N VP-SEM available in the department were employed. Ore samples from various areas in Canada have been tested. The results on mill feed samples from the Raglan (Xstrata Nickel, Quebec) and Clarabelle concentrators (Vale Inco, Ontario) are presented. The Raglan deposit is located in northern Quebec, Canada. In this case the sample was characterized for gravity recoverable platinum group minerals content using the standard GRG test procedure (i.e., no fourth stage). Gravity recoverable platinum (GRPt) and gravity recoverable palladium (GRPd) were quantified. The sample assayed 0.77    A sub-sample of a concentrate, stage 2 −25 The analysis showed particle A contained mainly Pt, Te with some As and Fe. Analyzing different sites on particle A gave similar results indicating that the particle is probably a single phase. Based on the image, this particle is considered to be liberated. The spectra for particles B, C and D show that these particles mainly contain Fe, Ni and S elements, the constituents of pentlandite. The image of particles B, C, and D is darker than that of particle A due to lower average atomic number. Another PGM particle, E, in the same sub-sample is shown in From analysis of the 37–53 In conclusion, mineralogical analysis revealed the finely distributed nature of the gravity recoverable platinum and palladium minerals confirming that Raglan ore is a poor candidate for gravity recovery. The ore to Clarabelle mill typically contains 1.1% Cu, mostly as chalcopyrite, and 1.2% Ni, mainly as pentlandite, with up to 25% pyrrhotite ( The four stage recoveries, in order, were 43%, 38%, 23%, and 25%. The fourth stage was operated at 355     Test results show an exceptional degree of liberation for the main Pt-bearer, identified as sperrylite ( Despite these drawbacks, the potential for additional recovery is there because the GRPt content is high with respect to current Pt recovery. Other precious metals are likely to benefit also, the test here yielding a GRG content of 44%, and a GRPd content of 35%. The poorest performer was silver, which had a gravity recoverable content of only 6%, despite a head grade of 7 Twenty particles from the concentrates of the +600 The right side image in In the 38–53 The reason for the higher content of GRPt and GRPd compared to the Raglan sample is that more platinum group minerals are distributed and liberated in the coarse size classes, although the Pt and Pd feed grades of the Raglan ore are higher than the Clarabelle ore. The modified GRG protocol for GRPGM has yet to be fully evaluated. For determination of the fineness of grind for stages 1, 2 and 3, mineralogical analysis could be performed to estimate grain size and occurrence of PGMs. Early determination of whether the PGMs were in sulphides or alloys and whether there is the presence or absence of bismuth, tellurium or arsenic-bearing PGMs will guide the test (and future flowsheet design to recover PGMs). However, as noted, on ore samples this will be difficult (and thus expensive) because of the low PGM grades. As for gold, there are options for the processing of primary gravity concentrates. Generally, shaking table is used to process the primary concentrate in the gold room ( The sulphide content of the ore can affect overall recovery for both gold and platinum group minerals. Gold ores suitable for gravity recovery generally have low sulphide content with little impact on the overall recovery ( Prevention of PGM loss is also an important factor in justification of a gravity circuit. Fines may not be gravity recoverable. For example, The gravity recoverable gold (GRG) protocol has been adapted to determine gravity recoverable platinum group minerals (GRPGMs). A fourth stage employing higher bowl rotating speed was tested but had a modest impact. The methodology is effective to quantify the GRPGM content of ore samples. The results of two case studies showed a GRPt of 5% for a sample of Raglan ore and over 80% GRPt for a sample of Clarabelle ore. The combination of GRPGM content and size distribution can be used as factors in deciding whether gravity concentration is an option. Mineralogical examination indicated that the low GRPt of Raglan sample is due to the fine size distribution of Pt-bearing minerals. Combined with the small density difference between Pt-carriers and gangue, the Raglan ore becomes a poor candidate for gravity recovery. The major platinum group mineral found in the gravity concentrates of the Clarabelle ore sample is sperrylite (PtAs The authors wish to thank Vale Inco and Xstrata Nickel for permission to publish this work. The work would not have been possible without the help of the analytical labs at the Clarabelle mill and the former Falconbridge Technology Center. Funding under an NSERC Discovery Grant is also gratefully acknowledged. This paper is also in memory of Professor André Laplante who passed away, March 2006.