Statement of Problem. Previous studies in complete denture wearers evaluated the relationship between diet and measures of chewing, yet only isolated nutrient intake was considered. This limited information makes the assessment of overall diet quality and the planning of interventions difficult. Purpose. This study investigated the relationship of complete denture quality to masticatory performance, perceived ability to chew, and diet quality as measured by the Healthy Eating Index (HEI), an overall diet quality index. Material and Methods. The study population comprised 54 complete denture wearers. Data were obtained from clinical examinations, masticatory performance measurements, and 2 non-consecutive 24-hour dietary recalls. (Masticatory performance data were not collected for 9 subjects because of time constraints, patient fatigue, or patient refusal. Statistical analysis showed no significant effect of their absence on the reported findings.) Based on a composite rating scale, subjects were divided into 3 denture quality groups described as good, medium, and poor. The outcome variables were the HEI and its components, plus selected nutrient and non-nutrient intake. Explanatory variables were quality of complete dentures, masticatory performance, and reported chewing ability. Data were analyzed with Kruskal-Wallis tests, Mann-Whitney U-tests, and Fisher exact tests. Because a large number of dietary components were examined, results were considered significant at α=.01. Results. Masticatory performance and perceived ability to chew were unrelated to diet quality. The good quality denture group had significantly better masticatory performance than the medium and poor quality groups, but the median HEI scores and dietary intakes were not significantly different among these 3 groups. Milk, vegetable, fruit, and grain intake scores were mainly responsible for the low overall HEI scores. Conclusion. In the population evaluated, complete denture quality, food comminution capacity, and perceived chewing ability were not related to diet quality. The majority of subjects had deficient diets regardless of the technical quality of their dentures. (J Prosthet Dent 2002;87:490-8.) Clinical Implications The results of this study suggest that the provision of technically perfect dentures is not of primary importance to diet quality. This outcome underscores the need for individualized nutritional assessment and counseling to improve the diet quality of patients with complete dentures. An interdisciplinary approach with referrals to a nutritionist and/or physician should be considered. Improving health by restoring function is one of the main goals of the oral rehabilitation of edentulous patients. Denture wearers have lower masticatory performance compared to dentate subjects, It still is not clear whether technically poor complete dentures can impact diet quality either through decreased ability to comminute food or perceived ability to chew. Studies in denture wearers show poor correlation between self-assessed chewing ability and objectively measured masticatory performance. These previous studies focusing on diet, chewing, and quality of dentures evaluated food choices and the intake of specific nutrients. In the present study, an overall diet quality index was used. The Healthy Eating Index (HEI) combines information on the amount and variety of foods in the diet and compliance with specific dietary recommendations. This study investigated the relationship of the technical quality of dentures, in terms of retention, stability, and tooth wear, to overall diet quality in complete denture wearers. It was hypothesized that poor quality of complete dentures is related to decreased masticatory performance, perceived difficulties in ability to chew, and poor diet quality as measured by the HEI. The subjects were a subsample of the Oral Health: San Antonio Longitudinal Study of Aging (OH:SALSA) conducted in San Antonio, Texas, from July 1994 to May 1998. The OH:SALSA sample is a community-based cohort of elderly and younger adults and was established by sampling 2 subsets of the San Antonio Heart Study (SAHS) cohort. Calibrated examiners collected data during comprehensive medical and dental examination sessions. Assessments of denture quality, masticatory performance, and diet were completed by different examiners who were unaware of the subjects' performance on the other variables. Masticatory performance (MP) data were not collected for 9 subjects because of time constraints, patient fatigue, or patient refusal. Statistical testing to compare the 45 subjects with MP to the 9 without MP showed no significant differences for all other variables included in this study. It is therefore unlikely that the missing masticatory performance data materially affected the findings reported. All subjects gave written informed consent for their participation, and the University's Institutional Review Board approved the protocol. Maxillary and mandibular denture quality was evaluated with 3 technical criteria (retention, stability, and tooth wear on posterior artificial teeth) rated on a 2-point scale (0 = no problem; 1 = problem). Lack of retention was recorded if the denture dislodged when the patient opened his/her mouth moderately wide without strain. Lack of stability was recorded when there was a displacement greater than 2 mm with unilateral and lateral force. Excessive tooth wear on posterior artificial teeth was recorded when at least half of the posterior artificial teeth lacked occlusal anatomy or were chipped. The retention, stability, and tooth wear scores for maxillary and mandibular dentures were combined in a composite rating of denture quality ranging from 0 to 6. On the basis of this composite rating, the subjects were classified into 3 quality categories: good (scores 0-1), medium (scores 2-3), and poor (scores 4-6). The modified Mastication Performance Index was adopted to measure masticatory performance. Self-perceived masticatory ability was assessed through 3 key statements about chewing to which subjects responded yes or no: (1) I have trouble biting or chewing hard foods such as apples, carrots, peanuts, or hard breads; (2) I am careful about what I eat because I have trouble biting, chewing, or swallowing; and (3) Foods get caught underneath my dentures when I eat. For each question, subjects who responded “yes” were compared to subjects who answered “no.” Each question was analyzed separately. Dietary and nutritional data were obtained by trained interviewers or registered dietitians who collected 2 non-consecutive 24-hour dietary recalls from each subject. Probing questions and recall aids (food models, measuring cups, and rulers) were used to help subjects recall types and amounts of foods consumed. The uses, limitations, reliability, and validity of this method were reported and discussed previously. The dietary data were converted to the HEI, the primary outcome measure. The HEI is based on the US Department of Agriculture Food Guide Pyramid and Dietary Guidelines for Americans In addition to the HEI, intake of 40 specific nutrients was assessed. Because the emphasis of this study was on overall diet quality, selected nutrients and non-nutrients intakes are commented on only to compare the present results to those of previous studies. Collected data were analyzed with the Kruskal-Wallis 1-way analysis of variance, Mann-Whitney U-tests, and Fisher exact tests, as implemented in Systat 8.03 (SPSS Inc, Chicago, Ill.). Because a large number of dietary components were examined, results were considered significant at α=.01. The outcome variables of interest were the HEI and its components, plus selected nutrient and non-nutrient daily intakes. Explanatory variables were quality of dentures, masticatory performance, and reported chewing ability. The median daily HEI, HEI components, and selected nutrient and non-nutrient intakes for the 3 denture quality groups (good, medium, and poor) and for the overall sample are shown in Table II. Mean masticatory performance as a function of composite quality of dentures ranged from 24.4% to 43.5% (Fig. 2, Figure 3 illustrates the distribution of overall diet quality in relation to masticatory performance. Perceived chewing ability was not significantly associated with masticatory performance or denture quality ( Chewing and diet are both complex. Chewing depends upon several anatomical structures of the stomatognathic system, sensorimotor control, perception, and food characteristics. Diet, in turn, reflects all the factors that lead to food choices and intake, including personal preferences and resource availability. It has been suggested that impaired chewing because of complete dentures may restrict dietary selection and nutrient intake. The assessment of overall diet quality in relation to oral function is a new approach. Previous studies concentrated exclusively on intake of isolated nutrients, most often measured as percentages of Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDA). The use of RDAs has 2 major limitations. In this investigation of complete denture wearers, overall diet quality (HEI) was not related to quality of dentures so far as lack of retention, stability, and wear of artificial teeth were concerned. The consumption of HEI components and other selected nutrients and non-nutrients (such as energy, protein, and dietary fiber) also was not significantly different in subjects with good and compromised dentures. This finding is in agreement with Neill and Phillips, It is interesting to examine the diet quality of subjects with good- and poor-quality dentures. HEI scores can be grouped into 3 categories: good (>80), needs improvement (51 to 80), and poor (<51). Masticatory performance was higher for subjects in the good quality denture group than for those in the medium and poor groups. Isolated technical problems with the dentures, however, were not related to low oral function in terms of ability to comminute food, except for the stability of mandibular dentures. It is possible that the stability of the mandibular denture by itself was not the reason for diminished masticatory performance, but that the significant difference in comminution ability resulted from interactions of poor stability and the other variables. This issue is controversial in the literature. For example, in the present study, neither worn teeth nor lack of retention were good indicators of masticatory performance. This result agrees with previous studies in which improvements in retention, stability, and occlusion of poor complete dentures did not impact masticatory performance. Self-perceived chewing ability did not differ in subjects with good, medium, and poor quality dentures. Lack of retention, stability, and artificial tooth wear were not related to reported difficulties in chewing certain foods or concerns about comfort. These results support the interpretation that many subjects adapt well to poor-quality dentures. Moreover, the expected relationship between perceived chewing ability and overall diet quality or specific foods consumption was not confirmed. This is contrary to previous studies on the intake of particular nutrients A distinction must be made between food choices and quality of diet. Complete denture wearers who express dissatisfaction with their ability to eat difficult-to-chew foods may adopt coping mechanisms, such as new forms of food preparation, that permit intake of the same food. They also may eat other foods with the same nutrient content as substitutes for more difficult-to-chew foods. As a result, a nutritious diet still could be consumed. Another point to be considered is that quality of diet may not directly relate to quality of life. For instance, although the differences were not significant, subjects with poor and medium quality dentures consumed higher quantities of milk than subjects with good quality dentures. These results suggest that the former subjects may have chosen a diet with more liquid content to supply intake of protein and vitamins. In doing so, they may have attempted to achieve an equivalent diet in terms of nutrient content and variety despite a restriction in their food choices. Such coping strategies for chewing have been addressed in the literature. Within the limitations of this study, no significant differences were found in the diet quality of subjects with dentures of good and poor technical quality. This does not mean that oral rehabilitation is not important for improving chewing or allowing the complete denture wearer to eat certain types of food. However, the results of this study suggest that people with good quality dentures are not necessarily more likely to have better diets than people with poorly fitting or worn dentures.  We thank Dr Helen Hazuda (Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio), Semilla Mestiza Rivera, and John Goetz for their assistance in the management of the data.