Large sodium chloride particles are known to be brittle when contacted at the micron scale, depending on the presence of crack initiating defects, whereas sub-micron particles behave plastically because there is insufficient elastic energy to drive a crack through a small particle. This paper shows that, as the particles are reduced to the nanometre scale, they again become brittle because there are then insufficient atoms to propagate plastic deformations through nanoparticles. A molecular dynamics model was established to simulate the individual ionic motions in a sodium chloride particle making and breaking contact with a clean NaCl flat surface. The geometry was arranged to model an atomic force microscopy (AFM) probe tip brought into contact with a flat surface at 300 K. Both cubic and pyramidal tips were investigated. It was demonstrated that the pyramid steps tended to cause plastic deformations, but below 0.5 nm, reversible brittle fracture occurred.Particles deform under compression and shear forces, but the nature of the deformation depends very much on particle size. Comminution is an example for large sized particles, being widely used to produce colloidal dispersions by fracturing material in a ball mill. Large particles which require grinding contain defects and flaws. Consequently they break down by cracking under the impact forces of the milling balls to generate 1 micrometre size fragments. However, there is a limit to this process because the small particles behave plastically and cannot be broken below a certain critical diameter, even though they may contain defects or cracks The question is what happens as particles are made much smaller than 1 μm, tending towards nanoparticles or even atomic size particles. Here we show that there is another size effect as the plastic sub-micron particles are reduced to less than 1 nanometre in diameter. The defects which trigger the plastic deformation in larger particles are not available in the perfect atomic structures of the finest sub-nanometre particles. Therefore plastic deformation becomes impossible and the particles fracture in a brittle fashion once again. Thus there are two transitions in deformation behaviour as particles are reduced in size. This principle has been demonstrated by Molecular Dynamics (MD) modelling. Sodium chloride was chosen for this study because it had been studied extensively in previous papers and had well defined crystal characteristics Simulation work The clean NaCl surface consisted of a slab of (28 Detailed set up models and simulation procedures have already been described elsewhere, but will be described here briefly. The layers of NaCl atoms were classified into three different groups as shown in The DL_POLY Where To make contact between the probe and the plane, the rigid layer of atoms in the probe was moved towards the surface over a successive integral distance of 0.005 nm, in the z-direction. After each movement, the whole system was allowed to equilibrate for 2000 time steps (1 ps), followed by data sampling and averaging over a further 1000 time steps. This procedure was equivalent to a probe velocity of 3.33 ms  As the particle contact was made smaller, the plastic deformation became less pronounced, until at a 4 These results showed that small NaCl pyramidal shaped particles, with (2 Particles show two transitions in deformation behaviour as they are made smaller. Large particles of NaCl are brittle and cracks propagate easily from flaws, but around 1 μm particles cannot contain enough elastic energy to propagate a crack and so deform plastically. This is the well-known brittle-ductile transition defined in 1978. The present paper has shown that another transition in deformation behaviour must occur as particles are smaller than 1 μm because plastic flow becomes increasingly difficult as the number of atoms in the particle becomes too small to generate plasticity. Nanoparticles of NaCl revert to brittle behaviour and this defines a plastic-brittle transition for the smallest particles.