Objectives
                  Food particles are intra-orally locked up between antagonistic posterior teeth, during each chewing cycle. Food locking up (FL) may enhance selection of particles for subsequent breakage, hence chewing efficiency (CE). The two aims were to determine FL, and to examine the relationship between FL and CE.
               
                  Design
                  A spherical gum bolus (volume: 1.3 cm3) that undergoes plastic deformation rather than breakage, was used to determine FL in 20 young adults. Chewing such a bolus with initially a width-length ratio of 1, decreases this ratio, the more locking up elongates the bolus to a greater extent by pressing from the tongue, teeth, and a cheek. Before and after chewing randomly for 2–6 cycles (3 trials each), the bolus was scanned and its width-length ratio was determined using imaging. The number of chewing cycles needed to attain a width-length ratio of 0.5, N(0.5 W-L ratio) was a measure of FL. CE corresponded with the number of cycles needed to halve the initial particle size, N(1/2-Xo), when chewing samples of 2 half cubes (9.6 × 9.6 × 4.8 mm; sample volume: 0.88 cm3) of a solid artificial model food.
               
                  Conclusions
                  
                     N(0.5 W-L ratio) and N(1/2-Xo) were on average 3.21 cycles (SD 1.14) and 4.04 cycles (SD 1.87) respectively. Whereas a relationship between CE and FL was lacking for subjects whose CE was worse than the median, a pronounced quadratic U-shaped relationship (R2 = 0.75; p < 0.01) occurred for subjects whose CE was better. This relationship might reflect an interaction between two tongue functions: transport and subsequently FL of particles.Food comminution during chewing is the composite result of two processes: selection and breakage ( The present study will focus upon food locking up (FL) function of the oral system. Apart from the effectiveness of transporting particles to the teeth, keeping them there will cause a larger chance of being selected for breakage. Such an event may favour chewing efficiency (CE). Apart from being located between antagonistic teeth as such, FL of particles will facilitate piling of small particles by which these particles are able to compete with large ones for the breakage sites on the teeth ( In order to measure FL function, an initially spherical gum bolus was used as an artificial ‘food’ item that is always selected, and undergoes plastic deformation rather than breakage. The resistance of a gum bolus is small with respect to maximal bite force and tongue force. By its plastic deformation, an initially spherical bolus will reveal the shape of the area in approximately the occlusal plane, which is involved in FL function when food is engaged between antagonistic teeth. The FL function of a cheek, antagonistic teeth and the tongue will be differentiated by considering the ratio between width (W) and length (L) of the bolus following some chewing. The W-L ratio is 1 for a spherical bolus. If this bolus were solely compressed by antagonistic teeth, the bolus would expand in all horizontal directions, in particular when the orientation of the round bolus would vary between chewing cycles. The bolus would then evolve to a flat round shape of which the W-L ratio still approaches the value of 1. If together with teeth, only a cheek were pressing against the bolus and the bolus orientation would vary between cycles, the bolus would also evolve to a flat round shape with a W-L ratio of 1, due to averaging out the result of pressing from the cheek. If the bolus orientation would not change much between subsequent cycles, its shape may become half of a round shape, with a straight side parallel to the cheek, hence with a W-L ratio of 0.5. Since apart from a cheek and antagonistic teeth, the tongue is commonly also pressing against the bolus, the bolus will become narrow and elongated as it will be dispersed along a tooth row between resisting tissues from four sides. Hence, the essential contribution of the tongue to a FL that yields a narrow elongated bolus, will be revealed by a W-L ratio that becomes smaller than 0.5. The number of chewing cycles needed to half the initial width/length ratio of 1 of a sphere, hence to attain a width-length ratio of 0.5, The study was carried out in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration, and approved by the University Ethics Committee (Ref. no. 2018050801), being part of a larger study on the relationship between CE and physiological variables. Twenty students (10 males and 10 females; mean age 23.7 years, SD 1.1) from the School of Food Science and Biotechnology, Zhejiang Gongshang University, gave informed consent, and volunteered. The included subjects had a good general health, a full natural dentition (allowing missing third molars), and a normal class I occlusion. Subjects were excluded who had: jaw muscle pain or pain in the temporomandibular joint, anamnestic report of parafunctional habits such as bruxism or grinding, abnormal tooth wear, a recent orthodontic treatment (< 3 years), orthognathic surgery, or a history of a disturbance of intra-oral or peri-oral sensory function, for example, due to an accident or a third molar extraction. In order to avoid a heavy chewing load and sweetener load of the subject, a bolus from 3 pellets of chewing gum (pellet size: 11.3 × 19.3 × 7.1 mm; Stride, Mondelēz International, Inc., Shanghai, China) was prepared using a mortar (inner diameter: 67 mm) and pestle. Following the addition of 50 ml water of 44 °C, the pellets were grinded for 70 s after which the water was refreshed. The mortar and pestle procedure was carried out three times, after which the white cover layer of the pellets was dissolved and the cores were merged. Following pre-chewing for 20 cycles (after which the gum bolus had a mean weight of 1.80 g; 57.4% less than the mean weight of 4.22 g of the three initial pellets), a bolus was obtained which was soft but sufficiently stiff for enabling transport and manipulation using small spoons. Five boluses were successively compressed between two stopping ends, as a flat sheet with a thickness of 5 mm (width 20 mm, length > 20 mm) to test hardness, using a Texture Analyser TA. XT Plus (Stable Micro Systems Ltd, Surrey, UK), at a room temperature of 24 ± 0.5 °C. The gum sheet was penetrated by a 2 mm diameter cylinder stainless steel probe, at a test-speed of 1 mm/s and across a distance of 2 mm. The maximum deformation force (hardness) was 0.363 N (SD 0.011, n = 5 boluses; stress: 115 kPa/cm Regarding the chewing experiments: following pre-chewing for 20 cycles of a processed bolus (mortar and pestle procedure) by the subject, an assistant manually modelled the bolus to approximately a sphere. This bolus was scanned, together with an aluminium rectangle of 20 x 30 mm for size-calibration. A tray with a raised edge (height: 15 mm), of which the inside was covered with black velvet paper, served as a roof for the scanner (CanoScan 9000 F MarkII, Canon (China) Co., Ltd., Beijing, China). The scanning resolution was 0.086 mm/pixel, and the mean bolus diameter was 13.5 mm (SD 0.9, n = 20 subjects; mean volume: 1.3 cm The spherical bolus was chewed for 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 cycles respectively, with 3 trials each. The 15 trials in total were randomized. The subject was sitting upright in a chair and the bolus was placed on the centre of the tongue from a spoon. The observer instructed the subject to start and to stop habitual chewing, while using a chin marker and a cycle counter ( Immediately after chewing, the bolus was removed by an assistant, rinsed in 35 °C water in a petri-dish (diameter 13 cm, 150 ml water) whereby the bolus was carefully manipulated using a tiny spoon. Thereafter the bolus was dried on filter paper, scanned, remodelled to a sphere and scanned again. In order to speed up testing, two assistants and three nearly identical spherical boluses were available. Hence, while a chewed bolus was available for scanning, another bolus was available for chewing. With 15 trials in total, each bolus served successively 5 times for chewing. Control experiments were carried out in two subjects, where an interaction between tongue and bolus was excluded. A spherical bolus was first placed on the tongue from a spoon, after which the subject carefully transferred the bolus to a habitual location between antagonistic posterior teeth, while the lower jaw remained opened. The subject kept the tongue then away from the jaw side with the bolus by gently pressing the tongue tip against the opposite palate rim. Like in the abovementioned test with habitual chewing, the bolus was chewed for 2–6 cycles with 15 randomized trials in total. During some The minimal and the maximal Feret-diameter of a scanned bolus (measures for bolus width and length) were determined using the program Image pro plus 7.0 IPP (Media Cybernetics Inc, Rockville, MD, USA). The ratio values between these diameters were determined in a custom-made spreadsheet in Excel®. The relationship between W-L ratio and number of chewing cycles, Chewing efficiency (CE) is the number of chewing cycles needed to attain a particular stage of food comminution during chewing. For a solid test food, CE is expressed as the number of cycles needed to half the initial particle size, Samples of two half-cubes (9.6 × 9.6 x 4.8 mm; sample volume: 0.88 cm The relationship between median particle size, Starting and ending of habitual chewing on two half-cubes was indicated by the observer. Following chewing, the particles were expectorated in a large coffee filter which was supported by a household sieve on top of a container. The subjects were blinded for the labelling on the containers and coffee-filters, and they were also blinded for the content of a coffee-filter, which was temporarily screened by a stiff sheet of paper. Following expectorating, the chewed particles were washed, dried and sieved. Values of Chewing rate was examined for both test foods to reinforce the rationale that a possible relationship between FL function (determined using a coherent gum bolus) and CE (determined using a solid artificial model food, which forms a loose aggregation of particles) is meaningful ( Statistical analysis was performed using Excel 2010® (Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, WA, USA). A Student’s   The mean value of Averaged across 14 cycles, the chewing rate was 1.46 cycles/s (SD 0.21, n = 20 subjects) for gum and similar, 1.51 cycles/s (SD 0.27) for the solid artificial model food Optosil. Chewing rate between both test foods was largely correlated (Pearson’s r: 0.909; p < 0001). The tongue plays an essential role in FL function for attaining an elongated gum bolus along a tooth row because (1) the length-width ratio becomes smaller than 0.5 when a natural functioning of the tongue is involved, and (2) this ratio remains nearly one when interaction between tongue and bolus is avoided. With action of a cheek alone, the bolus ratio may become 0.5 when the cheek presses predominantly against a single bolus side while the bolus is fixed between antagonistic posterior teeth during closing the jaw but not smaller. The finding that the bolus ratio remaines close to 1 without tongue action suggests that not only the tongue action is avoided but a coordinated neuromuscular control of cheek musle activity might also have been eliminated. Furthermore, the mean circular end shape suggests that the bolus may have different orientations between the teeth during subsequent chewing cycles by rotation of a round bolus. When the cheek would still press against the bolus from various sides during subsequent cycles, the shape modulation would be averaged out. The hypothesis of a varying bolus orientation is supported by findings on the orientation of wax wafers of different shape following transport by the tongue and a single chew ( The tongue is acting without visual feedback, and closely to antagonistic teeth which are approaching each other under control of strong jaw closing muscles. In order to avoid the risk of biting on the tongue, the shape and movement of the tongue must therefore be largely stereotyped during a later phase of jaw closing in which the tongue contribute to FL. Similarity in FL function between different test foods is therefore likely, the more because following food transport, the tongue rim is always moving towards the palate, closely along the tooth rows where food is located ( The present study shows a pronounced U-shaped relationship which explains 75% of the variation in CE by the factor FL, in subjects whose CE is better than the group median. The U-shape might be related to an interplay between two functions of the tongue regarding manipulation of food particles during chewing, The present study has tested FL function in young adults with a complete natural dentition. It would be interesting to test FL function in full denture wearers, more so because if chewing is started on a rectangular pellet of gum, the bolus becomes round, anyhow not elongated following 20 chewing cycles ( Food is locked up between antagonistic posterior teeth, a cheek and the tongue during the closing phase of each chewing cycle. Measuring the width-length ratio of an initially spherical gum bolus has revealed that the tongue plays an essential role in dispersing the food along the tooth row during food locking up function of the oral system. The relationship between chewing efficiency and food locking up function is complex which might be related to a double function of the tongue with respect to intra-oral manipulation of food particles (collection and transport, and subsequently food locking up), and to an interaction with factors other than food locking up on chewing efficiency. This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Zhejiang Gongshang University, Hangzhou, China (ref. no. 2018050801). The authors report no conflict of interest. The authors acknowledge the financial support provided by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China, The National Key Research and Development Plan (2017YFD0400101), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 31871885, 31801637). The authors are grateful to Mr. Wei Chen, Xingqun Wang and Bo Yuan for their assistance, and to the subjects for their kind cooperation in this study. This study was financially supported by the