In coherent studies three different processes of hydrometallurgical, alkaline extraction of aluminum from bauxite residue (BR) are examined and benchmarked regarding their efficiency on aluminum recovery. The employed processes include a direct second caustic pressure leaching, a caustic pressure leaching of the slag produced by reductive smelting of BR with simultaneous pig iron recovery (adapted “Pedersen-process”) and leaching of BR after a sintering stage with sodium carbonate and further additives including lime and coke. In order to ensure a direct comparability, all experiments are conducted using the same homogenized BR from an old industrial landfill. After detailed characterization of the used BR using XRF chemical analysis, XRD phase analysis, SEM optical analysis and Qemscan® phase analysis/distribution, occurring phase formations during the employed processes are also calculated and predicted by FactSage® simulation software. The actual phase formation and leachability of the formed aluminum phases are verified during experiments and a special focus is set on the dissolution of silicon as major impurity in all processes. It can be shown that aluminum extraction efficiencies of 90% are still possible but interlinked with massive silicon dissolution due to the almost complete dissolution of aluminum silicates.Based on published literature this study examines the effects of different (pre-) treatments of BR on the recovery yield of aluminum with special focus on phase formation and phase transitions occurring along the treatment. It is the first time in literature that different processes are compared based on one and the same homogenized industrial BR, in this case taken from the old “red mud” landfill in Lünen, Germany. The benchmark is set on the extraction efficiency of Bayer-process under common industrial conditions of high temperature digestion as best available technology (BAT) without special pre-treatment. The first step of improving is pushing the classical Bayer-process towards its limits by raising process temperature and concentration of sodium hydroxide solution up to 280 In advance of all experiments, however, thermochemical modelling is done using the software FactSage®, version 6.4 and 7.0. Especially the smelting process is simulated regarding the process temperature and viscosity. The occurring phases in thermodynamic equilibrium of soda sintering process with addition of CaO and cooled slag from Pedersen-process are also calculated. “Red mud” is the residue from the alkaline leaching of bauxite ore, which is the weathering product of aluminum silicates and clay minerals. In order to extract aluminum from bauxite Bayer-process employs the alkaline (pressure) leaching at temperatures of 100–260 The process parameters in the leaching step are determined by the mineralogy of the processed bauxite. Gibbsite can be dissolved under mild conditions of 120–150 Bauxite also contains silica, either as quartz or as a part of aluminum silicates and clay minerals like kaolinite and halloysite (Al  The actual solubility in equilibrium is due to slow precipitation kinetics impossible to measure in experiments and is calculated from the extrapolation of kinetic functions. Moreover, in industrial Bayer-liquors interactions occur in presence of accompanying elements and influence the equilibrium solubility. Adamson ( Following Eq. Sodalite has the composition n Common practice in Bayer-process is the addition of lime in order to lower the concentration of dissolved silicon and precipitate undesired compounds like organic compounds (e.g. oxalates), carbonate ions (caustification), phosphates and fluorides ( Various processes have been developed to extract aluminum under alkaline conditions. The most important processes are described and summarized in Since much aluminum in bauxite residue (“BR”) is still entrapped in undissolved aluminum hydroxides (e.g. un-attacked core of particles), the easiest way for a recovery is a second leaching via Bayer-process in combination with an intensified lime treatment, all the while benefitting from the advantageous properties of calcium to replace sodium and bind silicon (see chapter 2.1). The process requires very high temperatures and forms a “brown mud” low in aluminum and sodium ( Another idea to push the Bayer-process to higher aluminum extractions is the use of concentrated sodium hydroxide solution. At Bayer-process conditions of < Higher concentrations of sodium hydroxide and additions of lime lead to the formation of calcium aluminum silicates and thus to lower extraction efficiencies. These high sodium concentrations increase the solubility of aluminum to values which hinder the crystallization of aluminum hydroxide and require the precipitation of sodium aluminate ( Pure lime as reactant for the digestion of aluminates is used in the “Pedersen-process”. The chemical mechanism is similar to the reactions of lime in addition to the Bayer-process and should lead to the formation of inert calcium silicates and calcium aluminates which can be easily washed out with diluted sodium solutions. A variety of compounds are formed and only two desired reactions are exemplarily shown in The “Pedersen-process” takes place in completely liquid state at temperatures >>1500 The soda sintering process can even decompose minerals which are hardly digestible by Bayer-process at temperatures of 800–1200 The formed sodium compounds are in general water-soluble. This property is desired in case of NaAlO  The chemical equilibrium is dependent on the activities of educts and products. Even in the soda sintering process the aluminum extraction can be improved by the addition of lime. This procedure is known as “lime-soda-sintering-process” or “Déville-Pechiney-process”. The desired chemical reactions can be summarized in The addition of sodium carbonate and lime is again based on the formation of sodium-aluminate and di‑calcium-silicate ( The results of different authors with respect to the effect of the lime addition on the recovery of aluminum are displayed in comparison in  The effect of the addition of reductants to the lime soda sintering process was examined by Throughout the experiments the quantitative analysis of solid materials is carried out using the instrument “Axios” made by “PANanlytical”(XRF-WDX) or, in case of metal phase analysis, using the spark spectrometer “MAXx” made by “Spectro”. Liquids were analyzed by “Ciros Vision” manufactured by “Spectro” (ICP-OES). For phase analysis the powder diffractometers “STADI P” and “STADI MP” made by “Stoe&Cie” were used, equipped with copper anode (“STADI P” 40 Quantitative chemical and semi-quantitative phase analysis of BR from Lünen landfill are given in Original BR contains 30.5 wt.-% moisture. Qemscan® analysis ( It can be seen that the aluminum content with 27 wt.-% is high and worth being recovered. Most of the aluminum is still present as aluminum hydroxide and only a minority is entrapped in DSP-minerals (see chapter 2.1). As the particle size is very small and the BR is weathered through the years of storage, even a mild second leaching using standard Bayer-process should be sufficient to recover high amounts of the remaining aluminum. The achieved aluminum recoveries are calculated on the basis of the chemical (ICP) analysis of the leachate according to Eq. The calculation of the aluminum recovery via chemical composition of the leaching residue can also be made by a concentration factor “C” without a mass balance, shown in Eq. The direct leaching experiments are conducted in a stainless steel (316L) autoclave equipped with a titanium vessel for better corrosion resistance and an operating volume of 1 For the experiments wet (original) red mud (BR) from landfill Lünen was dispersed in de-ionized water and heated up 25–30 The experiments were conducted in two steps. The smelting was done by using an AC electric arc furnace equipped with a single solid graphite top electrode of 50 The chemicals used for the experiments were 100 The results show increasing aluminum recoveries with increasing temperature. While already 47% of the aluminum content can be extracted at 150 The process can be further enhanced by the addition of lime powder. In general, the more lime is added the higher is the aluminum recovery. However, the curve progression is asymptotic. While the increase of aluminum recovery is strong (from 55% to 68%) between molar ratios of CaO/SiO While aluminum recoveries remain almost constant in the range from 100 Kinetic investigations show that most of the soluble aluminum is extracted even before reaching the process temperature of 280 XRD analyses still confirm the presence of sodalite, cancrinite and hematite if original BR is treated and especially katoite, if lime is added to a molar ratio CaO/SiO As a result of thermochemical calculations, it is basically possible to reduce the iron oxides selectively to a metal phase up to a remaining concentration of 0.5 wt.-% FeO in slag phase, requiring 72 Thus, a process temperature of 1550 The occurring phases are calculated with FactSage® 7 and shown in Without lime addition, even corundum phases form. Higher lime additions result in the formation of additional perovskite, yoshiokaite, gehlenite, while brookite and corundum phases disappear. The generated slags are shown in their compositions in The detected mineral phases in the generated BR slag are mostly insoluble or require aggressive conditions and longer leaching times of 30–60 By reducing caustic concentrations to 400 Phase analyses of leaching residues show high amounts of sodalite, nepheline and natisite (probably leached titania from titanium vessel) in case of slag with CaO/SiO Thermochemical equilibrium calculations were done to forecast the stable compounds during the lime soda sintering process. The resulting Gibbs free energies are plotted in the diagram shown in It becomes obvious that in case of soda addition all sodium-ferrites, -aluminates, -titanates and -silicates have the lowest Gibbs free energy and are thus most stable and preferred to form. Moreover it is expected that Na The results generally show an increasing aluminum extraction in the leaching step at higher sintering temperatures, but a complete melting has to be avoided. Temperatures above 600 Further addition of lime scarcely increases the aluminum recovery, but the effect is especially noticeable at lower sintering temperatures of 800–900 The “digestion” takes place during the sintering stage by the formation of water-soluble sodium aluminate, which can be washed out with water within 5–10 The maximum achieved aluminum recoveries are shown in comparison with the accompanied process parameters in However, the selectivity is strongly decreased due to very aggressive conditions, which cause problems concerning plant corrosion, desilicification, crystallization of aluminum hydroxide and so on. As a consequence it is recommended to trade high recoveries for process simplicity and high selectivity by using the proven Bayer-process a second time expecting aluminum recoveries of about 50% under very mild conditions (100 The project upon which this publication is based is funded by the