Volcán de Fuego is a stratovolcano in Guatemala that has produced over 50 VEI ≥ 2 eruptions since 1524. After two decades of quiescence, in 1999 Fuego entered a new period of eruptive activity that continues until the present day, characterized by persistent Strombolian activity interspersed with occasional “paroxysmal” eruptions of greater magnitude, the most recent of which occurred in 2018. The land surrounding Fuego accommodates tens of thousands of people, so greater understanding of its eruptive behaviour has important implications for hazard assessment. Nevertheless, there is relatively little literature that studies recent (since 1999) activity of Fuego in detail.
                  Using time-series analysis of remote sensing thermal data during the period 2000–2018 combined with recent bulletin reports, we present evidence for a new eruptive regime beginning in 2015. We find that this regime is defined by a greater frequency of paroxysmal eruptions than in previous years and is characterized by the following sequence of events: (i) effusion of lava flows and increase in summit explosive activity, followed by (ii) an intense eruptive phase lasting 24–48 h, producing a sustained eruptive column, continuous explosions, and occasional pyroclastic flows, followed by (iii) decrease in explosive activity. We discuss various models that explain this increase in paroxysmal frequency, and consider its implications for hazard assessment at Fuego. We advocate the pairing of remote sensing data with monitoring reports for understanding long-term changes in behaviour of poorly-instrumented volcanoes. The results that we present here provide a standard for informed assessment of future episodes of unrest and paroxysmal eruptions of Fuego.Volcán de Fuego (3763 m asl; 14.47°N, 90.88°W), a prominent stratovolcano in southern Guatemala, produced a large eruption on 3rd June 2018 that generated pyroclastic flows and caused extensive damage and death in nearby communities. Despite being highly active, there is a paucity of recent literature on the volcano. To provide context for this and other recent eruptions, we present an overview of the eruptive history of Fuego gathered from available academic literature. We also present new evidence, derived from long-term seismic and thermal databases, that points to the onset of a new cyclical eruptive regime. “Volcán de Fuego” translates from Spanish as “Volcano of Fire”. One of the first documented eruptions of Fuego exists in the letters of the In this paper, we use volcano radiative power (VRP) values from the Middle InfraRed Observation of Volcanic Activity (MIROVA) database ( Paroxysmal eruptions at Fuego have been documented in previous literature, which has discussed various models that may trigger these events (e.g. Forecasting the effects of future eruptions is inevitably informed by an understanding of past eruptions. This understanding includes a brief introduction to Fuego's tectonic setting, which has implications for the characteristics of volcanism observed. The majority of academic literature on Fuego's eruptive behaviour can be classified into one of three categories: prehistoric (before records began in 1524), historic (16th–20th century), or recent (1999–present). A full summary of notable eruptive events at Fuego during the historic and recent categories can be found in supplementary material ( Forecasting the effects of future eruptions is inevitably informed by an understanding of past eruptions. This understanding includes a brief introduction to Fuego's tectonic setting, which has implications for the characteristics of volcanism observed. The majority of academic literature on Fuego's eruptive behaviour can be classified into one of three categories: prehistoric (before records began in 1524), historic (16th–20th century), or recent (1999–present). A full summary of notable eruptive events at Fuego during the historic and recent categories can be found in supplementary material (Appendix A). Fuego is located close to the triple junction of the North American, Cocos, and Caribbean tectonic plates ( Fuego is the currently most active volcanic centre of the Fuego-Acatenango massif and has an upper age limit of 30,000 years ( Extremely little stratigraphic data exist for prehistoric eruptive activity at Fuego. This is in part because Fuego does not typically produce deposits that are sufficiently unique to be easily dated and thus constrain stratigraphic evolution. Some evidence for previous eruptions producing pyroclastic flows exists in the form of flow deposits that have been estimated by radiocarbon dating at 5370 ± 50, 3560 ± 70, 2170 ± 30, 1375 ± 45, 1050 ± 70, and 980 ± 50 years old ( The volume of information on Volcán de Fuego's eruptive activity improved greatly with the beginning of modern record-keeping that arrived with the Spanish in 1524. Records of a volcano's historic eruptive activity are rarely fully comprehensive, and those of Fuego are no exception. However, the greater the magnitude the eruption, the more certain the information ( Records of the 1717 eruption are well-preserved and give a decent chronology of the activity. The main phase of the eruption lasted between 27th and 29th August when locals heard rumbles and explosions from Fuego's summit. People reported glowing clouds and fiery phenomena, assumed to be pyroclastic flows ( An important account of the January 1932 eruption comes from Fuego was particularly active in the 1970s. Eruptions in September 1971 and February 1973 were comparable in size to each of the individual eruptions composing the sub-Plinian eruptive episode of 1974 ( The 1971 and 1973 eruptions likely awakened both local and academic interest in Fuego's activity ( The sub-Plinian eruption in 1974 was followed by several small eruptions of Fuego between 1975 and 1978 ( Volcán de Fuego erupted again on 21st May 1999 with a VEI 2 eruption that produced pyroclastic flows and tephra fall ( Some of Fuego's paroxysms have caused significant disruption to surrounding communities. For instance, between January and August 2003, several communities were evacuated due to eruptive activity of Fuego, activity that included a paroxysmal eruption in January ( Some of Fuego's paroxysms have caused significant disruption to surrounding communities. For instance, between January and August 2003, several communities were evacuated due to eruptive activity of Fuego, activity that included a paroxysmal eruption in January ( One of Fuego's largest eruptions in the period 1999–present occurred on 13th September 2012 ( More recently, a large paroxysmal eruption of Fuego occurred on 3rd June 2018. The eruption began at 06:00 local time with powerful incandescent fountaining and a tall eruptive column. During the morning hours, pyroclastic flows descended the W flanks of Fuego. The eruption in its initial progress appeared to be a “typical” paroxysm ( Thermal activity of Volcán de Fuego has been obtained by using MIROVA, an automatic volcanic-hotspot detection system based on the analysis of MODIS infrared data ( The Following the methods of In agreement with  A time-series of MIROVA A comparison of VRP values between (1) 2000–2018 and (2) 2015–2018 illustrates in further detail the increase both in frequency and in relative amplitude of large-magnitude VRP values beginning in January 2015 ( A guiding study by The most informative and consistent data stream available against which to compare MIROVA values is the archive of special bulletins produced by INSIVUMEH during elevated activity. In the case of Volcán de Fuego, special bulletins are generated to report on the progress of a paroxysmal eruption, of lava effusion, or on descent of pyroclastic flows or of lahars. The correlation between large-magnitude VRP values and INSIVUMEH bulletins that report on paroxysmal eruptions is extremely strong (   From The appearance of short-lived, high-energy thermal peaks in the MIROVA night-time database of 2015–2018 can clearly be found in various other datasets that trace eruptive activity at Volcán de Fuego. For instance, frequent peaks in RSAM correlate closely with paroxysmal eruptions ( There are few examples of paroxysmal eruptions consistently following lava effusion at other basaltic volcanoes. However, eruptions of Llaima volcano in Chile during an eruptive cycle that lasted between 2007 and 2009 show similar behaviour to post-2014 eruptions at Fuego ( Sustained lava effusion preceding explosive paroxysm has been observed on multiple occasions at Stromboli (  As complementary basaltic arc volcanoes, and for producing explosive paroxysms after sustained periods of lava flow effusion, there is merit in considering Stromboli, Etna, and Llaima as analogues with which to aid analysis of Fuego's behaviour. However, the paroxysmal eruptions that have occurred at Fuego since 2015 are extraordinary for both their consistency and their frequency. Furthermore, the crystal-poor magma produced by the Strombolian eruptions of 2002–2003 and 2007 is dissimilar to the strikingly crystal-rich of Fuego magmas (up to 40–50% phenocrysts in bombs erupted in 2017–18 pyroclastic flows (Hannah Moore, pers. comm.)). Nevertheless, there may be merit in applying the methods that produced the above models to Fuego's system. The installation of several broadband seismometers and an infrasound array at Fuego since the 3rd June 2018 eruption means that application of such methods is now possible.  As with observations from 2005 to 2007, Fuego's activity since 2015 has consistently included lava effusion prior to paroxysm. Detection of VRP values >200 MW clearly indicates the presence of hot magma at the surface, which may anticipate a period of sustained lava effusion, elevated explosive activity at the summit, or both. However, lava effusion does not guarantee that a paroxysm is imminent. Episodes of elevated activity in 27th September 2015, 16th April and 12th–21st May 2018 generated lava flows but did not accelerate towards paroxysm. Compared to episodes of lava effusion that did culminate in paroxysm, these episodes are notable in producing lava flows of relatively minor length. Furthermore, effusion rates during these periods were relatively low: in May 2018, the lava flow grew 500 m in 48 h (12th–14th May), but effusion slowed with time, reaching 600 m on 18th May, and 700–800 m on 21st May. In comparison, episodes of lava flows culminating in paroxysm typically grow several kilometres in length within 48 h of first appearance; for example, the paroxysm of 28th–30th July 2016, where between 06:00 local time on 28th July and 14:30 on 29th July lava flows in Barrancas Santa Teresa and Las Lajas grew from 500 m and 1000 m to 3000 m each (see As with observations from 2005 to 2007, Fuego's activity since 2015 has consistently included lava effusion prior to paroxysm. Detection of VRP values >200 MW clearly indicates the presence of hot magma at the surface, which may anticipate a period of sustained lava effusion, elevated explosive activity at the summit, or both. However, lava effusion does not guarantee that a paroxysm is imminent. Episodes of elevated activity in 27th September 2015, 16th April and 12th–21st May 2018 generated lava flows but did not accelerate towards paroxysm. Compared to episodes of lava effusion that did culminate in paroxysm, these episodes are notable in producing lava flows of relatively minor length. Furthermore, effusion rates during these periods were relatively low: in May 2018, the lava flow grew 500 m in 48 h (12th–14th May), but effusion slowed with time, reaching 600 m on 18th May, and 700–800 m on 21st May. In comparison, episodes of lava flows culminating in paroxysm typically grow several kilometres in length within 48 h of first appearance; for example, the paroxysm of 28th–30th July 2016, where between 06:00 local time on 28th July and 14:30 on 29th July lava flows in Barrancas Santa Teresa and Las Lajas grew from 500 m and 1000 m to 3000 m each (see Appendix B for further information). This represents a significant increase in output from the paroxysms observed between 2005 and 2007, where similar flow lengths were achieved across months. It is also illustrated by the increase in cumulative energy seen in What triggers a paroxysm at Volcán de Fuego? Petrographic analysis of eruptive products has provided the primary source of data to inform conceptual models of magma transport and evolution that may drive paroxysmal eruptions. The earliest of these models presented a system fed by a discrete pair of magma chambers: a small, dike-like chamber at several kilometres' depth, and a deeper chamber of greater volume ( There are several factors to consider regarding the methods used to study the accelerating cycle of explosive paroxysms observed at Fuego since 2015. Several of the largest paroxysms of this period (for example: 5th May 2017, 3rd June 2018) were associated with relatively small VRP values. Both paroxysms generated eruptive columns >6000 m asl and extensive pyroclastic flows, and the 5th May 2017 paroxysm produced extensive lava flows, yet neither was associated with a VRP value of >500 MW. A possible explanation may be attenuation of thermal anomalies tracked by MIROVA. The presence of meteorological clouds or volcanic plumes may cause partial or complete attenuation, as may the azimuth and zenith of the acquiring satellite relative to the source of thermal anomaly. These factors are difficult to quantify and must be evaluated on an image-by-image basis. Some of the bias caused by these factors may be removed by introducing a minimum threshold below which VRP values may be excluded, assuming they represent values taken under cloudy conditions or at extreme acquisition geometries ( Although the flanks of Volcán de Fuego were populated when the 1974 eruptive episode occurred, academic literature contains few references to the impacts of the episode on these populations. Nevertheless, the tephra and pyroclastic flow material generated likely had impacts similar to those caused by the large-magnitude eruptions in 1971 and 1973, elaborated on by The most severe and immediate hazard of Volcán de Fuego, in the case of a large-magnitude explosive paroxysm, is pyroclastic flows; and the regions most obviously vulnerable to pyroclastic flow hazard are those located close to Fuego's barrancas. Communities such as Sangre de Cristo (located at OVFGO2 in Airborne ash and ash fall from eruptions of Volcán de Fuego have persistently affected both local and distant populations in Guatemala. Due to the hazard airborne ash presents to planes, air traffic corridor R644, which runs close to the volcano and was primarily used for traffic to Mexico, is now permanently closed, resulting in rerouting of flights (Ivan Velasquez, pers. comm.). This is a direct result of the increase in explosive paroxysms since 2015. Eruptions smaller than those of 1974 have produced tephra that has had significant impact; the eruption of 13th September 2012 forced the closure of La Aurora International Airport in Guatemala City for three days, costing the country millions of dollars in revenue. An increase in paroxysmal frequency could have similar or greater economic impact. Meanwhile, tephra fallout will be the principal far-reaching hazard of a future paroxysm, potentially severely impacting Guatemala City (40 km E of Fuego), or Quetzaltenango (80 km NW), i.e. one of the two largest Guatemalan cities. Closer to Fuego, the negative impact of regular ash fall caused by frequent paroxysms on crop productivity is unstudied but potentially significant. An intense annual rainy season in Guatemala, combined with the large volume of pyroclastic material deposited on Fuego's flanks, ensure that lahars from the volcano are frequent and powerful. Lahars may reach extraordinary dimensions of over 40 m width and 4 m depth and speeds >8 m/s ( If the current magmatic conditions at Fuego persist, one would expect that the frequent paroxysmal eruptions seen in 2015–2018 would continue throughout 2018 and beyond. Indeed, paroxysmal eruptions occurring on 12th October and 18th November suggest this is the case. However, the eruption of June 3rd, 2018 was of a different character from other paroxysms in this period: preceded by a greater period of quiescence, and possibly not preceded by lava effusion. Volcán de Fuego's frequent activity and geographical situation renders it an ideal subject for synchronous study of eruptive activity and volcanic hazard. The sub-Plinian eruptive episode of October 1974 has allowed analyses of the subsurface magmatic system of Fuego, while eruptions between 1971 and 1974 have highlighted the possibility of multiple large-magnitude eruptions occurring in sequential years at Fuego. A new eruptive regime beginning in January 2015 and characterized by regular paroxysmal eruptions consistently preceded by lava effusion can be traced in satellite remote sensing data and corroborated by seismic and visual observations. Tracing the details of the new eruptive regime allows for consideration of various models to explain the triggering cause for paroxysm. While further study is required to elucidate trigger(s) of paroxysm at Fuego, there may be merit in considering recent models based on behaviour of Stromboli, where paroxysm is triggered by decompression of the shallow conduit by lava effusion. We propose that the MIROVA database is an effective tool for comprehending long-term changes in eruptive activity at Volcán de Fuego, and may significantly improve volcano monitoring capacity at Fuego, and possibly at other open-vent systems. The eruption of 3rd June 2018 killed hundreds of people in San Miguel Los Lotes and destroyed La Reunion resort, and tragically showed the potential of these paroxysmal eruptions to cause great damage. INSIVUMEH and CONRED are acting with the international volcanological community and local communities to prepare for another such paroxysm, by increasing hazard monitoring and forecasting for Fuego, and producing a series of hazard assessments. Mitigation of risks associated with persistent activity of Fuego will require continued co-operation between these groups. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The project was conceived by IMW and AKN. REW provided data and contributed significantly both to the Discussion and general direction of the manuscript. HET contributed significantly to the Discussion. DC provided MIROVA data and contributed to analysis. GC and CCQ provided RSAM data and INSIVUMEH bulletins and contributed to discussion of timelines. All authors listed have made a substantial and intellectual contribution to the work and approved it for publication. The authors have no competing interests to declare. This work was supported by the