A two-dimensional transient heat transfer model is developed using finite element method for the study of temperature rise during continuous drag-cutting. The simulation results such as temperature built-up with time and maximum stabilized pick–rock interface temperature are compared with experimental results for various input parameters. The effect of frictional force and cutting speed on the temperature developed at the pick–rock interface is also studied and compared with the experimental observations.All the rock cutting operations involve rock fracturing and subsequent removal of the broken rock chips from the tool–rock interface and drag–picks are one of the many types of cutting tools used for cutting rocks in rock excavation engineering. They are versatile cutting tools and have proved to be more efficient and desirable for cutting soft rock formations. However, there is a continuous effort to extend their applications to all types of rock formations. The forces responsible for rock fracture under the action of a drag-cutter can be resolved into two mutually perpendicular directions viz., thrust (normal) force A major part of the total energy spent during drag-cutting is lost as frictional heat. The temperature rise at the pick–rock interface due to this frictional heat has a significant effect on the wear rate of the cutting tool. Analytical modelling for predicting the temperature during rock cutting requires major simplification of the problem and this may not be able to provide accurate results for the complicated real life situation of drag-cutting. Therefore, a numerical modelling technique viz., the finite element method is used in the current study to develop a two dimensional transient heat transfer model to solve for the temperature profile in the pick–rock system. The present paper discusses the development of this transient heat transfer model and its experimental validation. Prior to the finite element solution of the problem, theoretical analysis has been done to evaluate input parameters for the finite element program. These parameters include velocity field in the pick–rock system, forces acting on the rake and flank face of the drag-cutter and the heat generated due to the interfacial friction while cutting. For simplicity, the drag-cutting process is simulated as the pick remaining stationary against the rock moving past the cutter at a cutting velocity Though the researchers in the past have postulated linear ( From the velocity diagram ( Uncut rock The forces acting on an orthogonal drag-cutter are represented diagrammatically in If Heat generation during drag-cutting is mainly caused by friction at the interface between the pick and the rock (at flank and rake faces) as the cutter is dragged against the rock surface at a certain cutting velocity. It requires large or repeated plastic deformations to result in heat generation as in the case of metal cutting. Though elasto-plastic deformations take place in certain rock types before their failure and the formation of chips, such deformations are not large enough in rocks to result in the generation of heat. Therefore, for the purpose of estimating the heat generation during drag-cutting, the rock chipping can be assumed to be caused by brittle failure and the heat generation limited to frictional heating. The total quantity of heat generated at the rake and flank faces is given by The velocity at which rock slides along the rake face of the tool ( Since a simple orthogonal cutting tool is considered, heat transfer in the pick–rock system is treated as a two-dimensional problem by ignoring the end effects. The whole domain has been discretized and analyzed in a two-dimensional Cartesian coordinate system. In the finite element solution of the problem, the domain is discretized into four-noded isoparametric elements as shown in Galerkin’s approach has been used for converting the thermal energy equation (Eq. Let To solve Eq. Using Eqs. The nodal temperatures at time 0 s, { The tool–rock interface, where active heat generation takes place, is the wear land of the flank face of the tool. The average temperature on this interface is determined by taking a weighted area average of the interfacial nodal temperatures at the flank face of the tool as given below The cutting action was simulated using laboratory scale micro-picks and the rotary drag-cutting was carried out against an applied vertical thrust force. The applied thrust levels ( A pre-calibrated milli-voltmeter of the range 0.1–1000 mV was used to record the difference of voltage across the thermocouple. Torque generated at the pick–rock interface is measured using a spoked wheel dynamometer ( In all these experiments, the drag–pick cutter was held stationary between the plates of the dynamometer and the rock core samples were held in a holder. The rock sample holder is designed to hold samples at one end, while the other end is provided with a taper, which fits into the drill shank. With this arrangement, rock core sample rotates against the stationary drag–pick during the cutting process. The pick-holder and rock-holder are shown in The numerical model developed in the current study has the ability to predict the pick–rock interfacial temperature and the temperature profiles in the pick–rock system. The main input parameters, which influence the temperature development at the pick–rock interface, are the cutting speed and the interfacial friction at the flank face of the pick. Eq. All the simulation runs indicated that after 6 minute of pick–rock contact time, the temperature through out the domain stabilizes. Pick-rock interface temperature is defined as the average interface temperature observed along the flank face of the tool and is evaluated using Eq. The temperature profiles obtained by FEM analysis for a thrust force of 350 N, cutting velocity of 0.16 m/s and at a 4-mm depth of cut in sand stone are presented in The stabilized pick–rock interface temperature at the end of 6 min of continuous cutting is termed as the stabilized interface temperature for that particular simulation or experiment. The variation of the stabilized pick–rock interface temperature has been studied against some of the input parameters, which directly influence the temperature such as the cutting speed and the frictional force. Other parameters like depth of cut, rake angle, etc. influence the frictional force at the interface and therefore, have only indirect effect on the temperature developed.  The other parameter, which directly influences the heat generation at the pick–rock interface, is the frictional force at the flank face of the pick and therefore, it has been plotted against the pick rock interface temperature for numerical and experimental results ( In general, from all the temperature prediction runs, the numerical results showed a higher temperature values (up to approximately 25%) compared to their experimental counterparts. In the numerical model it has been assumed that all of the frictional heat generated at the flank face of the tool has been converted into frictional heat which may be the reason for an over estimation. However, the errors incurred in the experimental drag-cutting and also during observation using thermo-couple type of temperature measurement system cannot totally be ignored.  A general purpose finite element program has been developed to study the temperature attained during pick–rock interaction. The model has been used for the prediction of pick–rock interface temperatures as well as temperature profile of the whole pick–rock system. The transient heat transfer modelling showed that the temperature builds up steeply during the onset of cutting and stabilizes within a few minutes of continuous pick–rock contact. This trend has been validated from experimental observations. The results obtained from the numerical model proves direct effect of the rock cutting parameters viz., frictional force and cutting velocity on the temperature rise at the pick–rock interface. This has been validated by linearly increasing trends observed between the stabilized interface temperature and the rock cutting parameters. The current study has dealt with continuous drag-cutting, both numerically and experimentally. However, the transient finite element program developed can be modified to predict the temperature rise in the pick during intermittent cutting, which mostly occurs in real life cutter picks used in road headers and shearers. With the prior knowledge of frictional forces acting in the pick–rock system during intermittent cutting, this modification can be done by suppressing the heat generation terms and adding convective heat transfer terms at the pick–rock interface nodes when the pick leaves the contact with the rock; and by initialization of rock domain temperatures and re-introduction of heat generation terms during re-contact. Since the experimental setup used in the current study was not designed for intermittent cutting, experimental data could not be obtained for validation and therefore, intermittent cutting was not dealt in this paper. Further, it may require a more detailed three-dimensional modelling to reduce the errors and to get the results closer to the realistic temperature values.