Background
                  Capitellar fractures result from shearing and wedging forces transmitted to the elbow that create complex injury patterns that are difficult to stabilize. The fracture often extends into the trochlea and is associated with posterior comminution of the humerus and soft tissue injury. Diverse fixation techniques are required to restore the anatomy perfectly to ensure elbow function is regained.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  This study presents the results of treatment of 26 patients followed up prospectively and treated within a week of injury. Clinical and radiographic evaluations were done annually by an independent reviewer, and the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI) was calculated.
               
                  Results
                  Results were excellent in 9 patients, good in 9, and fair in 8 when assessed at an average of 46 months (range, 19-94 months) postoperatively using the MEPI, which averaged 81.3 (range 65-100). The poorer results occurred in patients with severe injuries associated with posterior comminution of the humerus and who required more extensive reconstructive procedures. All pain scores improved significantly and activities of daily living were restored in all groups, All returned to employment within 6 months, but 6 (3 type 2 and 3 type 3) had altered their roles from manual to administrative work.
               
                  Conclusion
                  This series reflects the challenges in reconstructing precisely this cartilage-covered sphere, especially when there are multiple fragments. Modern techniques of fracture stabilization that concentrate on restoring a circular structure may require a different approach and engineering solutions.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level 4; Case series, treatment study.The capitellum is a portion of a sphere that projects forwards and downwards. The axis of flexion-extension of the elbow joint passes through it at a tight locus, Capitellar fractures lead to a loss in sphericity, reducing the arc of motions that the arm can describe. There is a paucity of literature to help direct treatments, because most studies have looked at only one method of fixing quite diverse patterns of fractures. Ellowitz et al This study was assigned Study Registration No 1225 by the Queens Hospital Audit Department. Between 1997 and 2007, 26 consecutive patients presented to the senior author (N.A.) with transarticular shear fractures of the lateral distal humerus predominantly involving the capitellum. Information was collected prospectively to determine what factors might influence the outcome, looking at the fracture pattern and the methods of stabilization in these diverse fractures. Some similarities in the outcomes were noted with the work of Dubberley et al, Therefore the fractures were retrospectively categorized into the 6 subgroups described in this article by a colleague who had not been involved in the data collection or analysis based on the classification used by Dubberley et al All patients received operative treatment within 7 days of the injury, and the mean follow-up was 46 months (range, 19-94 months). There were 13 men and 13 women, with an average age of 39.4 years (range, 22-76 years). All injuries affected the dominant limb, with 18 involving right-hand dominant patients and 8 involving the left. Seventeen patients were in full-time work and 6 were in part-time work, with 11 considering themselves as being employed in manual jobs. The circumstances of the injury did not delay the procedure nor did it change the treatment plan. The injury in 21 patients occurred after a fall, and 5 occurred in road traffic accidents. Seven patients had a complex lateral ligamentous injury that was diagnosed intraoperatively. Two also had ipsilateral fractures of the distal radius, and 2 patients had coronoid fractures. Four elbow dislocations occurred, and unstable medial collateral ligament avulsion injuries were detected in these patients intraoperatively, as will be outlined later. Ten lateral ligamentous injuries required reconstruction. The mechanism of injury was documented and assessed from the patient's history. Examination included an assessment of bruising and localized tenderness over the distal radioulnar joint, interosseous membrane, and medial collateral ligament. Plain radiographs were performed. In 20 patients the fracture patterns involved more than single fragments of capitellum and a computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained. Associated injuries, such as the coronoid process fractures, a dislocation or injury to the radial head, or associated epicondylar avulsion fractures were sought. The patient was given a general anesthetic and placed into a lateral position with a tourniquet on the upper arm. A global operative approach was used. Medial collateral ligament stability was assessed by placing a valgus force on the elbow and assessing the distance between the radial neck and capitellum after stabilization, taking care not to disrupt the fracture fixation. The forearm is placed in pronation with the elbow at 30° of flexion. Narrowing of the capitellar-radial neck distance is indicative of a disruption of the anterior band of the medial collateral ligament. If the elbow is also unstable in the extended position, it indicates that the anterior and posterior capsule is also torn. The medial side of the elbow was exposed for the 3 patients with type III coronoid process fractures and in the 4 patients with evidence of medial collateral ligament instability. The cubital retinaculum was released to allow mobilization of the ulnar nerve. The flexor carpi ulnaris was released from the subcutaneous border of the ulna by dividing the deep fascia approximately 2 mm from its insertion into the ulna. Elevation of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle provided exposure to the coronoid process and medial collateral ligament complex. The medial collateral ligament was usually disrupted as a sheet from the medial epicondyle and was simply repaired with suture anchors. Fixation of the coronoid process was obtained by passing a braided nonabsorbable suture through the anterior capsule as its inserted into the coronoid process. The suture was passed through the proximal ulna in preparation for ligation on its subcutaneous border. Olecranon osteotomy was required in the 13 patients where visualization was limited due to multiple fragments of the capitellum combined with a substantial trochlear fragment. At the end of the operation the osteotomy was stabilized by tension band and Kirschner wires. The fixation techniques used depended on the fracture extent identified by evaluation of plain radiographs or CT images ( In addition, the presence of posterior comminution led to instability of the fracture fixation and a plate was required for adequate buttressing of the humeral comminution in 11 cases. The 6 fractures that involved the capitellum alone without a portion of the trochlear fractures were treated using cannulated variable pitch headless compression screws ( Patients were placed in a splint for 2 weeks at 90° of elbow flexion. Cast braces were used in those who required a medial or lateral collateral ligament repair. Passive and strengthening exercises were commenced on removal of the splint. Patients were also prescribed indomethacin for 6 weeks to minimize the risk of heterotopic bone formation. All patients were identified prospectively and were independently assessed at least 1 year after surgery using a standardized questionnaire, objective assessment, and radiographic analysis. In particular, the development of incongruence, fragmentation, or progressive arthritic change was recorded and compared with radiographs of the normal elbow. Visual analog scales were used to record pain and satisfaction levels. Any limitation to the patient's activities of daily living was noted, and the range of motion of both elbows was determined using a goniometer. The stability of the elbow was assessed by clinical examination. These measurements enabled calculation of the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (MEPI). Fracture subgroup analysis was performed with the use of the The patients' results were analyzed depending on the classification previously described after the outcomes were determined because we believed that the observations of Dubberley et al Nineteen patients reported little or no pain at rest or during activity and 5 described an ache on activity over the lateral aspect of the elbow. The last 2 individuals described pain at rest requiring analgesia on occasion. Most patients noted considerable improvement in pain scores 1 year after surgical intervention compared with the first 3 months. All of the 17 employed patients returned to full duties at work. Six of the manual workers, 2 with type 2B and 4 with 3B injuries, were unable to continue their physically demanding jobs and had been given administrative jobs with the same employer. Three patients, 2 with type 2B and 1 with 3B, changed their hand dominance as a consequence of the injury. At the last follow-up, range of motion measurements as detailed in Grip strength was also found to be on average reduced to 19.5 kg on the side of injury compared with 24.7 kg for the nondominant contralateral limb. All patients noted an improvement in function from preoperative levels but reported some restriction in activities of daily living; in particular, dressing, rising from a chair, and washing under the opposite arm were difficult. Patient percentage satisfaction rates averaged 78, with the best seen in the 1A group with a score of 95 and the worst at 60 in 3B in a patient who required multiple surgeries and had the largest flexion contracture at 32°. All 23 patients returned to employment within 6 months but 6 (3 type 2 and 3 type 3) had altered their roles from manual to administrative work. Also, 5 of the 17 who had been in full-time employment had reduced their hours to part-time as a consequence of the injury. Poorer results were obtained in those with posterior comminution for all measures, with the scores averaging 71.3 for posterior comminution and 91.3 without. The MEPI scores varied, depending on the number of articular fragments, being significantly better if only 1 (90.8) or 2 fragments (94.3) were found at the time of surgery, compared with scores of 70 for 3 and 73.1 for 4 fragments. There were 8 postoperative complications relating to the injury or surgery. A regional sympathetic mediated pain syndrome developed ipsilaterally in the upper limb of 2 patients, and ulna nerve neuropathies developed in 2, all of which resolved by 7 months. There were also 4 superficial wound infections that responded to oral antibiotics. Finally, 2 patients had injuries in the same limb that limited their ability to rehabilitate easily. Six subsequent surgical interventions were required in those with the lowest scores (2 type 1A, 2 type 2B, and 2 type 3B) to remove hardware causing impingement and to release contractures causing a mean flexion contracture of 20.7° (range, 16°-26°) and restricting the range of flexion to an average of 119.8° (range, 112°-128°). The scores were taken at this point to reflect the outcome of the initial operation and are the scores presented in The independent reviewer noted radiographic incongruency of the articulation of the radial head with the capitellum in 10 patients. Comparisons were made with the contralateral limb where restriction and loss of function was noted. In these cases, loss of sphericity was evident of the capitellum with joint incongruity developing. Minimal joint narrowing, joint surface irregularity, and osteophyte formation was documented in 7 patients (2 type IB, 2 type 2A, 2 type 2B, 1 type 3A), and 3 were graded as having moderate changes (3 type 3B). No heterotopic ossification or osteonecrosis developed after surgery. No reaction was seen to the bioabsorbable rods. Radiographs showed changes in the position of the fixation devices in 9 patients, with 3 appearing to have screws mechanically interfering with joint motion. All of these were removed and capsulotomies were performed. In this series we have identified a number of factors that are associated with poor prognosis, including significant capitellar articular injury and injury to the supporting bony architecture. Poorer results are associated with posterior comminution of the lateral condyle, multiple articular fragments, and the need for further surgery or a dorsal plate. It is difficult to separate out the effects of surgery from the injury. Articular fragmentation and separation of osteochondral segments in capitellar fractures have been thought historically not to affect the outcome. There are series that report conservative treatment with closed reduction techniques and immobilization. Surgery is difficult, and in the past, before the advent and availability of modern headless screws and bioabsorbable implants, excision was considered a reasonable option to remove any obstructing fragments. Dubberley et al Preexisting ipsilateral pathologies affected the outcome detrimentally and this may relate to a reduction in the individual's ability to rehabilitate or compensate any elbow disability. In this series of complex elbow injuries with complex capitellar and trochlear fractures, a staged approach to the management of these injuries was used. The principal aim was to provide stability of the fracture and of the elbow and then allow early active mobilization. In no patients in the series was there any evidence of instability even though restricted mobilization programs were not used. Biomechanical studies have demonstrated that the medial collateral ligament is the primary restraint against a valgus force. The integrity of the radiocapitellar articulation is important for secondary stabilization and is thought to be less important. By performing an acute repair of the medial collateral ligament complex, the surgeon can be confident that earlier mobilization can be instituted. Laterally, where possible, the approach was in front of the lateral ulnar collateral ligament, and in 10 cases, repair was required as part of the procedure to ensure sufficient stability to facilitate early mobilization. The results in this series for type 1 fractures compare favorably with other studies looking at isolated capitellar fractures treated by screw stabilization. Type 2 fractures that extend into the trochlear groove A buttress plate was used posteriorly to support the lateral column for the type B subclass of injuries, but unlike the group from Dubberley et al, None of the patients in this series has yet required arthroplasty, but contractures and impingement necessitated the need for further surgery in 6 of 26 patients with the more extensive injuries to achieve function. Further development of arthritic change over time, however, may lead to this outcome being required. In conclusion, this series supports the observations of previous authors and validates the concept of posterior comminution and articular fragmentation as an important determinant of outcome after capitellar and trochlear fractures. The poorer results occurred in patients with severe injuries associated with posterior comminution of the humerus and who required more extensive reconstructive procedures. Screw fixation and the use of bioabsorbable rods to achieve stable fixation and early mobilization for the isolated capitellar fractures is the technique of choice. In their series, Dubberley et al The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.