Conventional ion exchange resins with different functional groups were evaluated for their potential application in separating uranium U(VI) and thorium Th(IV) from rare earth elements RE(III). The resins studied comprised strong- and weak-base anion exchange resins, and strong- and weak-acid cation exchange resins. The selectivity of these resins to adsorb U(VI) and Th(IV) in the presence of selected RE(III) was examined in sulfuric acid media of varying concentrations. It was evident that the adsorption performance of the resins was acid concentration-dependent. Most candidate resins had potentially feasible selective adsorption at or below 0.1mol/L H2SO4 (pH≥0.7). Within the group of anion exchange resins, both the strong- and weak-base resins exhibited a similar selectivity with U(VI) adsorbed in preference to RE(III). The difference between them was their adsorption of Th(IV). The weak-base resin with primary amine functional group demonstrated superior separation of Th(IV) from RE(III). For this resin, 78% of U(VI) and 68% of Th(IV) were adsorbed while RE(III) co-adsorption was <5% at 0.0005mol/L H2SO4 (pH3). In the case of the strong-acid cation exchange resins, Th(IV) and RE(III) were adsorbed in preference to U(VI), i.e., RE(III)>Th(IV)>>U(VI). The weak-acid cation exchange resins, on the other hand, displayed limited adsorption of all elements.The separation of uranium and thorium from rare earths is one of the most important tasks in the hydrometallurgical production of these elements. This is because U(VI) and Th(IV) invariably coexist with the two most abundant rare earth minerals, A literature review into the separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from rare earths shows that extensive work has been conducted to separate U(VI) and Th(IV) using liquid or solvent extractants. This is considered a convenient and efficient method to purify the rare earths because of its simplicity and ease of operation ( The objective of this study was to evaluate the adsorption affinity of various IX resins with different physicochemical properties for U(VI) and Th(IV) in sulfuric acid media containing selected light, medium, and heavy RE(III), The first part of this study is reported in this present paper, and focuses on conventional anion and cation exchange resins. It is interesting that the majority of IX studies on the extraction of U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III) only involve strong-acid cation and strong-base anion exchange resins, with few studies on weak-acid cation exchange resins ( The ion exchange resins used in this study were selected from commercially-available resins supplied by resin manufacturing companies. Their physicochemical properties, as reported in their product data sheets, are tabulated in Schematics of the functional groups belonging to the various ion exchange resins used in this study are shown in Before testing, pre-treatment was applied to ensure that all resins were converted to sodium form for cation exchange resins and sulfate form for anion exchange resins. The pre-treatment method was adapted from the work reported by Concentrated stock solution was prepared by dissolving appropriate amounts of Th(SO The adsorption experiments were carried out in a batch setup to examine the adsorption of U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III) in H To investigate the effect of acidity, 100 The adsorption percentage of each metal ion was calculated according to Eq. The distribution coefficient Nine anion exchange resins were tested for their adsorption affinity for U(VI) and Th(IV) in acidic sulfate solution containing RE(III). The primary amine functionalised AnIXR 1 is a weak-base anion exchange resin. AnIXR 2 and AnIXR 3, containing a mixture of tertiary and quaternary amino groups, are classified as intermediate-base anion exchange resins. The remaining resins with quaternary ammonium functionality are strong-base anion exchange resins. Their adsorption of U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III) after contact times of 2 The anion exchange resins in The results in It is also significant to point out that the strong-base anion exchange resins from different manufacturers are made with certain different physicochemical properties. The results, however, did not show any significant variation between strong-base anion exchange resins with different physicochemical properties, but all strong-base anion exchange resins exhibited similar adsorption patterns. Rather, significant variation was observed between anion exchange resins with different functional groups, There do not appear to be any report in the literature comparing the adsorption of U(VI) and Th(IV) by weak- and strong-base anion exchange resins in H In explaining the adsorption performance of the weak-base anion exchange resin, it should be noted that its primary amino group can undergo coordination bonding with heavy metal ions such as U(VI) due to the Lewis-base behaviour of the amino group ( The effect of acidity on IX adsorption is illustrated in The dissociation constants for the first and second steps are 1.0 Another observation of the results is that Th(IV) is consistently adsorbed to a much lesser extent than U(VI) on anion exchange resins in H None of the anion exchange resins exhibit any significant adsorption affinity for RE(III) at any acid concentration. The results demonstrate that the adsorption affinity for RE(III) remains low regardless of the acidity. This lack of adsorption of RE(III) on anion exchange resins from pure aqueous H There is therefore a potential application of anion exchange resin in the separation of U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in H Four cation exchange resins were tested for their adsorption affinity for U(VI) and Th(IV) in acidic sulfate solution containing RE(III). The sulfonic acid functionalised CatIXR 1 and CatIXR 2 are strong-acid cation exchange resins, while the carboxylic acid functionalised CatIXR 3 and CatIXR 4 are weak-acid cation exchange resins. Their adsorption of U(VI), Th(IV) and RE(III) at contact times of 2 The strong-acid cation exchange resins in The low adsorption affinity that strong-acid cation exchange resins exhibit towards U(VI) is because U(VI), in H The observation that RE(III) is adsorbed in preference to Th(IV) on strong-acid cation exchange resins in H In the case of metal cations with the same charge, the affinity of the strong-acid cation exchange resins is towards the cation with the greater ionic radii ( Based on these results, strong-acid cation exchange resins are not suitable for separating U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in H The weak-acid cation exchange resins in The results in However,  On the other hand, a typical macroporous weak-acid cation exchange resin that allows free diffusion of cations of all sizes would exhibit the following order of selectivity: Th(IV) Conventional ion exchange resins with different physicochemical properties were evaluated for their ability to separate U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in sulfuric acid media. The resins are grouped into two broad categories according to their functional groups, namely, (i) strong- and weak-base anion exchange resins, and (ii) strong- and weak-acid cation exchange resins. Their adsorption of U(VI), Th(IV) in the presence of selected elements of RE(III) at different acidities was investigated. It was evident from the results that the adsorption performance of the resins was acid concentration-dependent. Most candidate resins showed potentially feasible selective adsorption at or below 0.1 Specifically, the strong-base anion exchange resins did not effectively separate Th(IV) from RE(III) but were found to be effective in separating U(VI) from RE(III), and potentially also U(VI) from Th(IV). Approximately 90% of U(VI) was adsorbed at 0.1 On the other hand, both the strong- and the weak-acid cation exchange resins were ineffective in separating U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III). In the case of the strong-acid cation exchange resins, Th(IV) and RE(III) were adsorbed in preference to U(VI), In summary, among these conventional ion exchange resins, the weak-base anion exchange resin with primary amine functional group showed the best potential for effective application in separating U(VI) and Th(IV) from RE(III) in acidic sulfate media. This highlights the opportunity for the application of conventional ion exchange resins in the hydrometallurgical processing of RE(III) to remove U(VI) and Th(IV) impurities from the rare earths liquors. The authors are grateful for financial support by the