The performance of many advanced materials is determined by the arrangement of their nanostructure which requires ever more precise characterization. In this respect, X-ray computed tomography (CT) is a powerful technique to investigate material properties as it provides non-destructive direct access to three-dimensional morphology with nanoscale resolution. However, challenges remain in clearly understanding physical mechanisms involved during their processing in real time and real conditions. So far, beam and sample stabilities, effective spatial resolution and tomography scan time have hindered the development of nanoscale in situ 4D imaging (3D plus time), and especially at high temperatures. Here, we report on the development of fast X-ray nanotomography at temperatures up to 700°C with an unprecedented combination of nanometer pixel size and acquisition times of a few tens of seconds. The great potential of the method is demonstrated by following the early stages of two thermally driven phenomena: neck curvature evolution in sintering and nucleation of liquid droplets in light alloys. The reported real time observations will benefit the fundamental understanding of the underlying physics and provide useful data to build new models. The novel aspects of this synchrotron based technique offer a powerful imaging tool for a wide variety of heterogeneous nanoscale dynamics in materials and open new perspectives for the investigation of advanced materials under realistic conditions.X-ray computed tomography (CT) is an effective imaging tool that has found broad applications in medicine, biology but also in materials science and nanoscience Despite these notable achievements and the development of new set-ups such as nanoscale zoom tomography by Mokso et al.  The set-up allows high temperature CT scans to be performed in 20 The understanding and modeling of the sintering stages of metals and ceramic/glass materials is crucial to process defect-free bulk systems or structures with controlled porosity Spherical soda-lime glass particles were isothermally treated at 670°C, and a total of 90 tomography scans (33 Light metal alloys, such as magnesium or aluminum based alloys, respond to the major challenge of lighter and stronger materials for transportation and energy saving applications. Whereas alloy solidification has been extensively studied, the development of new additive manufacturing techniques involving powder melting, like SLM or EBM In conclusion, we have developed fast We are grateful to the invaluable support from technical services of the ESRF. In particular, Cyril Guilloud and Roberto Homs for their useful help. We also thank the ESRF for the beamtime allocated. GMC thanks the partial financial support from CSIC through the project 201660I001. We would like to thank Franck Pelloux, Xavier Bataillon and Charles Josserond for their technical support. For the sintering experiment, soda-lime glass spherical particles (composition 72.5 For the liquid droplet nucleation experiment, an Al–Cu alloy of composition 2.6 Data processing consisted in a single distance phase retrieval calculation and 3D reconstruction. The phase retrieval calculation based on a Paganin-like The segmentation of glass particles was performed using the ImageJ software following established procedures Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: