Intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus pose a significant treatment challenge for the orthopedic surgeon. In elderly patients, osteopenia and severe comminution make internal fixation difficult or perhaps impossible. In select instances, primary total elbow arthroplasty (TEA) may be the best option for fracture treatment. This chapter discusses technical considerations, complications and outcomes of TEA for treatment of distal humerus fractures.Intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus pose a significant treatment challenge for the orthopedic surgeon. In young patients, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with plates and screws remains the gold standard. Outcomes are related to the severity of injury and degree of articular involvement. Distal humerus fractures occur predominantly in a bimodal age distribution. During the second decade of life, there is a high incidence of distal humerus fractures. These tend to be high-energy injuries related to motor vehicle collisions and falls from a height. A second peak in fracture occurrence is seen in elderly women during the seventh decade of life. Multiple fracture classifications exist to describe distal humerus fractures. Initial classifications were descriptive in nature and divided distal humerus fractures into categories by the location of the horizontal fracture component and the presence of extension into the trochlea. Modern TEA developed in response to failure of other procedures to treat the arthritic elbow. Interposition of material within the ulnohumeral joint has been reported as far back as 1893 by Schuller Before 1990, the use of elbow arthroplasty for the treatment of fractures was primarily a salvage procedure for painful nonunions and malunions. In 1994, Kraay et al. published the first article reporting on the use of TEA for the treatment of acute fractures. The first case series reporting the treatment of acute distal humerus fractures in elderly patients with TEA was by Cobb and Morrey in 1997. Half of their patients had a fracture and pre-existing rheumatoid arthritis and the other half had no pre-existing rheumatoid arthritis. At a minimum of 2-year follow-up, they had revised only 1 patient for complications and 15 of 20 described there elbow as “excellent.” Treatment of distal humerus fractures is complex, and selecting the appropriate treatment is based on surgeon-, fracture-, and patient-related factors. Assuming a surgeon is comfortable with the surgical technique, most would agree that TEA should be reserved for patients with severe articular comminution and low intercondylar fractures that have a high propensity for nonunion. Patient-related factors include age, medical comorbidities, reliance on upper extremities for weight bearing, presence of pre-existing elbow arthrosis, and ability to comply with postoperative restrictions. In most instances, ORIF is the preferred method of treatment secondary to the life-long restrictions placed upon TEA patients. Nevertheless, determining which patients will benefit most from acute TEA is difficult and should be determined on a case-by-case basis. Acute TEA for treatment of distal humerus fractures offers several advantages. Fixation is immediate and allows for early active motion after wound healing. Patients obtain pain relief and recover motion sooner after TEA when compared with ORIF. The biggest disadvantage after TEA is the lifetime 5-lb weight restriction that stems from the significant forces placed across the implant–bone interface with dynamic loading of the joint. Elderly patients frequently require assistive aids for ambulation; therefore, they may not be compliant with their postoperative restrictions. Fortunately, elderly patients have fewer lifting demands and are good candidates if they do not require an assistive device. Other disadvantages of TEA for the treatment of acute distal humerus fractures include implant loosening, deep infection, wound-healing problems, polyethylene wear, and periprosthetic fracture. In reported series on TEA for the treatment of fracture, there is a low revision rate within the first few years of surgery, but concern for implant longevity exists. McKee et al. reported 3 revisions out of 25 patients who underwent acute TEA for fracture. In cases of distal humerus fracture, the olecranon and radial head cartilage frequently remain uninjured. Ideally, isolated replacement of the distal humeral articular surface would be performed. Distal humerus hemiarthroplasty (DHH) has been utilized Most TEA systems provide the benefit of component linkage. Stability is no longer obtained from the native ligamentous structure; thus, ligament reconstruction and condyle preservation are not necessary to achieve an acceptable outcome. TEAs come in various designs based on the degree of constraint and whether or not the components are linked. These two concepts are not synonymous. It is possible to create a highly constrained unlinked device and, similarly, a less constrained linked device. Most current designs are semiconstrained and offer a linked or convertible articulation. Approximately 7–10° of varus-valgus motion is allowed before articulating at the limit maximum. When implants are correctly inserted, this freedom helps to reduce polyethylene wear and stress at the implant–bone interface. Conversely, with small errors during insertion or incomplete contracture release, the elbow may constantly articulate at the maximum limit, leading to edge loading of the bearing surface and increased force transmission at the implant–bone interface. There are currently several TEA designs on the market; however, no data exist directly comparing survivorship of the different implants. The Coonrad-Morrey prosthesis has the most significant body of literature supporting its use and success in the treatment of fractures, with revision rates range from 0% to 10% at 2- to 7-year follow-up. Every evaluation of the injured elbow should begin with a thorough history to include age, mechanism of injury, hand dominance, pre-existing arthritic conditions, A detailed physical examination should be performed to assess level of trauma sustained, presence of concomitant injuries, and degree of dysfunction of the injured extremity. The soft-tissue envelope about the elbow should be evaluated for ecchymoses, open wounds, abrasions, and presence of skin tenting. Closed injuries and Gustillo grade I open fractures can usually be treated primarily with arthroplasty. However, for Gustillo grade II or III open fractures, or if there are significant soft-tissue abrasions/contusions, definitive treatment should be delayed until the soft-tissue envelope has been stabilized. A complete baseline neurovascular examination of the affected extremity should be performed and documented. Distal radial and ulnar pulses should be palpated and compared to the uninjured arm. A thorough motor and sensory evaluation should be performed, particularly the ulnar nerve, because the injury or eventual treatment has shown increased rates of ulnar neuropraxia. The ability to perform active elbow extension should be evaluated to ensure a competent triceps mechanism. The ipsilateral shoulder and hand should be examined for associated injuries because the mechanism of injury often occurs on an outstretched upper extremity. The radiographic assessment should begin with standard plain radiographs of the elbow, including anteroposterior (AP), oblique, and lateral views ( If there is significant comminution that extends proximally, then obtaining comparison contralateral humerus radiographs can be obtained to help determine shortening and bone loss. Hughes et al. have shown that humeral shortening up to 2 Despite careful preoperative assessment and planning, intraoperative findings may reveal more comminution and articular cartilage disruption than could be appreciated from the imaging studies. In addition, significant osteopenia and poor bone quality may not be fully appreciated preoperatively and may preclude successful ORIF. Therefore, the decision to perform an arthroplasty might need to be made intraoperatively, particularly if the preoperative plan is for internal fixation. For example, McKee et al. had to intraoperatively convert 25% of their patients randomized for ORIF to TEA because stable fixation could not be achieved. The patient can be positioned in either the supine or lateral decubitus position for the surgical procedure. If using the supine position, then a bump should be placed under the ipsilateral scapula to facilitate bringing the arm across the chest. The arm is allowed to rest over a bolster with the elbow in flexion. The surgeon stands on the side of the injured extremity. If the lateral decubitus position is utilized, then the arm is draped over a post connected to the operating table. This position minimizes the need for another assistant, but it is less maneuverable than the supine position. The authors prefer to position patients in the lateral decubitus position with the arm draped free over a post ( The standard approach to the elbow for TEA is through a midline posterior skin incision. There have been various techniques described to manage the triceps mechanism. Bryan and Morrey described the triceps-reflecting approach, in which the triceps is reflected as a unit from medial to lateral off of the olecranon in continuity with the ulnar periosteum and forearm fascia. All bony prominences should be well padded throughout the case. The entire operative extremity to include the shoulder girdle should be prepped and draped, with a tourniquet placed high on the arm, facilitating proximal exposure if necessary. A standard 15- to 20-cm midline posterior incision is utilized, curved either medially or laterally to avoid placing the incision directly over the tip of the olecranon ( The skin and subcutaneous tissue are sharply dissected to the triceps fascia and then reflected medially and laterally as full-thickness flaps. The triceps tendon is exposed, as well as its distal extensor expansion as it blends into the forearm fascia. The ulnar nerve is identified, released, and mobilized from the cubital tunnel to a resting position anteriorly. A vessel loop is placed around the nerve for easier identification ( Medial and lateral fascial incisions are next made along the triceps border, and the triceps is elevated from the posterior humerus. Once the distal humerus is exposed, the fractured condyles are excised and the remaining soft-tissue constraints on the distal humerus are released to include the extensor/supinator and flexor/pronator complexes ( The loss of one or both condyles should not compromise fixation or function; however, their absence can make determining proper rotation and height of the humeral component difficult. Typically, no bone cuts are required on the humerus; however, the humeral cutting block can help ensure coplanar alignment. The humeral canal is next broached with increasingly larger rasps until a snug fit is obtained. The authors prefer to use the largest humeral component that will fit the canal. The anterior flange of the humeral component can assist with rotational alignment because it should sit flush with the anterior humeral cortex when the final implant is inserted. The first step in ulnar preparation is to remove the tip of the olecranon, which can be done with a microsagittal saw. The intramedullary canal is then entered at the base of the coronoid using a high-speed burr ( The trial rasp is then introduced and checked to ensure proper orientation. The rasp handle can typically be used to assess the orientation of the ulnar component. This step can be particularly difficult with this approach because the intact triceps can interfere with instrumentation. We utilize the largest rasp that fully sits as the size of the final implant. Final ulnar preparation is performed according to the specific implant manufacturer’s technique guide. Trial implants corresponding to the final rasp used are then inserted into the humerus and ulna in the appropriate orientation for a trial reduction. If present, then the olecranon fossa and humeral columns are useful for assessing proper humeral component seating. However, in some cases, substantial humeral bone loss may obliterate normal anatomic landmarks. In this situation, it is helpful to perform a trial reduction of the implants, allowing the soft tissue to reapproximate over the humerus and ulna. The elbow should be flexed to 90° and gentle axial traction applied in line with the humerus. This will provide a reasonable estimate of the correct depth to seat the humeral component, which can be marked on the humerus as a reference for final implantation. Remember that the humerus can be shortened up to 2 Once proper positioning is achieved and impingement-free motion is obtained, the final implants can be inserted. The canals are lavaged and dried while the cement is prepared. The authors add 2.4 Cement is next pressurized down the humeral canal while a bone graft is prepared from excised fracture fragments. This graft is placed between the anterior flange and anterior cortex of the humerus while the component is tapped down to the correct height. Once cement has cured, the components are coupled and the elbow is brought through a full range of motion to ensure that no impingement is present ( The tourniquet is deflated and adequate hemostasis is ensured. The ulnar nerve is transposed anteriorly into a subcutaneous soft-tissue envelope. A nonabsorbable suture is used to reapproximate the proximal flexors and extensors to the triceps expansion medially and laterally. The remainder of the wound is closed in standard fashion. Use of a drain is optional, but the authors do not routinely use them. The arm is then placed into a well-padded anterior splint in full extension. The arm is postoperatively kept in strict elevation for 24 Once the sutures have been removed, the patient is educated on gentle passive and active range-of-motion exercises to be performed each day. No restrictions on active elbow extension are necessary because the triceps was not detached. The extension splint is worn at night for approximately the first 4 Several studies have been performed over the past 15 In 1997, Cobb and Morrey were the first to report outcomes of TEA for treatment of acute distal humeral fractures in the elderly. They retrospectively reviewed 20 patients with a mean age of 72 In a follow-up study, Kamineni and Morrey reported their outcomes on a cohort of 48 patients with acute distal humerus fractures treated with TEA. With a mean patient age of 69 In a retrospective case series of 16 elderly patients treated with TEA for complex distal humeral fractures, Garcia et al. reported encouraging results for TEA when poor bone quality precluded stable ORIF. With a mean follow-up of 3 The authors’ institution published the first study to specifically compare the outcomes of ORIF and semiconstrained TEA for the treatment of complex intra-articular distal humerus fractures in women older than 65 McKee et al. has performed the only prospective randomized controlled trial to date evaluating outcomes of ORIF versus TEA for treatment of intra-articular distal humeral fractures in elderly patients. Twenty patients were randomized to TEA and 20 patients to ORIF; however, 5 patients randomized to receive ORIF had to be converted intraoperatively to TEA because of an inability to obtain stable fixation. At 2 Despite the encouraging results for TEA seen in these studies, enthusiasm should be tempered by the lack of long-term follow-up data for this treatment modality. ORIF should always be performed in the young population. It should also be considered Complications after treatment of distal humerus fractures are common regardless of treatment strategy. Complications do differ slightly between internal fixation and TEA. In the only randomized trial, McKee et al. found that 10 of 25 patients treated with TEA had at least 1 complication, and 3 of 25 patients required reoperation for their complication. Wound complications can occur secondary to a traumatized soft-tissue envelope, the subcutaneous nature of the prosthesis, and/or the initiation of early motion after surgery. In all cases, immobilization in extension for a period of time is recommended to allow the soft-tissue envelope to heal. Priority should be given to tissue healing over motion because most patients will regain motion after TEA despite prolonged immobilization. Elevation of the limb in the early postoperative period can also help to reduce swelling and wound breakdown. The use of drains can be helpful to prevent tensile stress on the wound from postoperative hematoma. Minor wound breakdown can be conservatively managed with dressing changes and close follow-up. Motion should be discouraged until the wound is healed. Significant wound breakdown should be treated as analogous to early deep infection. The soft-tissue envelope should be opened, components washed, and the wound reclosed. By far, the most common neurologic complication associated with TEA is ulnar neuropraxia. Morrey et al. reported a 6% rate of ulnar nerve symptoms, with complete resolution occurring in all cases by 3 All patients should undergo ulnar nerve transposition during TEA. Unfortunately, significant soft-tissue scarring and HO can lead to recurrent nerve compression in Stiffness occurs secondary to significant injury to the surrounding soft-tissue envelope. When compared with ORIF, TEA is not immune to development of stiffness and contracture. In McKee’s randomized trial, stiffness requiring re-intervention occurred nearly equally in the ORIF and TEA groups. HO is another cause for postoperative motion loss after any intervention for the treatment of distal humerus fractures. Development of HO is also related to soft-tissue injury related to the initial trauma. HO has been reported to occur in 16% of patients who undergo TEA for distal humerus fractures. Infection communicating with prosthetic components is a troublesome problem after any arthroplasty. Management is similar to that for other prosthetic infections. If the infection is thought to be acute in nature, then treatment is focused on surgical debridement with component retention. Most authors advocate for retention of components if the patient has had symptoms for fewer than 2 In cases in which prosthetic loosening is present, implant resection is warranted. Patients can be treated with one-stage reimplantation or with staged reconstruction with antibiotic spacer placement followed by reimplantation. There is relatively little literature on appropriate treatment of chronic TEA infections, and choice of treatment should be left to the surgeon’s discretion on the basis of microbiology findings, infection severity, patient comorbidities, and soft-tissue envelope. After TEA for treatment of fracture, some patients have demonstrated early prosthetic loosening without infection. Reoperations have revealed significant bushing wear and metallic staining of the soft-tissue envelope. This is likely due to asymmetric loading at the implant linkage. Difficulty in judging rotational alignment after condylar resection and possibly the loss of secondary support from the forearm muscular sleeve as it inserts on the condyles may contribute to early bushing wear. There is a paucity of literature studying the concept of early bushing wear; however, condylar resection is commonly advocated. McKee et al. demonstrated no increase in weakness after condylar resection, but they did not address the late effects on implant survival. Aseptic loosening should be treated with revision of loose components. In cases in which a malrotation of components exist, this should be corrected during revision surgery. Humeral loosening should be addressed with the use of a revision length stem and increased length flange to ensure that rotational stability can be obtained. The cement mantle alone is not adequate to provide rotational stability to the humeral component. Increasing stem length, flange length, bone grafting behind the flange, and the addition of cerclage cables can enhance the strength of a revision construct. In cases of significant bone loss, structural allografts can also be used to regain osseous support of the implant. Occult infection should be ruled out with tissue specimen and culture in all cases of presumed aseptic loosening. Ulnar-sided loosening occurs more frequently, and it commonly results in periprosthetic fracture. In cases of ulnar loosening, stem length should be appropriately increased and the use of structural allograft struts and cerclage cables can be used to help augment the rigidity of the reconstruction.  Patient factors such as age, previous elbow disease, and expected postoperative activity level play an important role in deciding the most appropriate treatment plan. When possible, ORIF should be the treatment of choice. In cases of severe osteopenia, extensive comminution, or low transcondylar fractures, TEA is a suitable treatment alternative.  Avoid releasing the triceps. Various surgical approaches allow for the integrity of the triceps to be maintained. Excision of the condyle fragments provides ample room for prosthetic insertion. Medially, a small portion of the triceps may be released to help with ulnar exposure. Alternatively, a small longitudinal split in the distal triceps can be created to prepare and insert the ulnar component. This may allow increased ease in judging appropriate ulnar orientation. In cases with condylar loss, the cutting guide can be used to help define the appropriate orientation of the humeral component. Alternatively, the posterior cortical line of the humerus can be used to estimate the correct flexion–extension axis of the humerus.  Healing of the soft-tissue envelope is of utmost importance after TEA for fracture. Immobilize patients until adequate healing of the soft-tissue envelope occurs. The authors routinely immobilize patients for 2 Pay attention to rotation and depth during component insertion. Trialing implants and providing an axial distraction force to the arm can help estimate the depth of insertion to recreate appropriate soft-tissue tension. Repair flexor and extensor musculature to bone when possible and to soft tissue when not. Make sure to secure the anterior flange with a bone graft. This is important in resisting rotatory forces on the humerus over the life of the prosthesis. TEA design has changed little over the last several decades. No designs currently exist to specifically address fracture-specific concerns. An ideal component would allow for stability with loss of the condyles, ease in recreating appropriate tension and alignment, improved bushing durability, and improved attachment to host bone. Current devices are offering cross-linked polyethylene components in an effort to reduce polyethylene wear. It is unclear whether this will have a significant effect on implant survivorship at this time. Recreating the normal anatomic center of the elbow likely plays a significant role in implant survival. In primary TEA, computer navigation has shown to significantly reduce malalignment errors during component implantation. Component fixation is another area in which significant improvement may occur over time. Hip and shoulder implants have evolved over time with the development of successful press-fit in-growth designs. Current elbow systems require prosthetic cementation for fixation. Although polymethyl methacrylate remains the most predictable method of securing an implant to bone, it is subject to fatigue failure over time. Development of in-growth stems may help prevent implant loosening from cement mantle fatigue. Currently, hemiarthroplasty has shown inferior results to linked TEA, even when epicondyles are retained. In certain fracture patterns, such as the low transcondylar pattern, a hemiarthroplasty prosthesis may be ideal. Instability and native ulnar wear currently are the two biggest obstacles to the routine use of hemiarthroplasty. The rate of ulnar erosion may be decreased if ulnohumeral congruency could be increased. This may be possible by increasing the various sizes and shapes of the trochlear prosthetic. The most complete and thorough encyclopedia on the elbow, distal humeral fractures, and elbow arthroplasty can be found in Morrey’s