 Surgery is indicated for any displaced Bennett fracture because the nature of these injuries is to displace during cast immobilization. Pinning can be considered for reducible fracture-dislocations. Injuries that are not reducible by closed means will require open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF).  Surgery is indicated for fractures with unacceptable angulation, malrotation, or shortening. Indications for thumb metacarpal fixation are reviewed in Pinning can be considered for reducible fractures; irreducible injuries will require ORIF.  Swelling and tenderness are present on the proximal part of the thumb metacarpal ( The thumb may appear shortened due to subluxation or dislocation of the carpometacarpal (CMC) joint, or due to fracture comminution.  Posteroanterior (Roberts view), lateral, and oblique radiographs are needed ( Computed tomography may help with the assessment of fracture comminution and joint congruity in complex cases.  The distal branches of the superficial radial nerve are at risk for injury from percutaneous insertion of Kirschner wires (K-wires).  Bennett fractures are intraarticular fractures of the base of the thumb metacarpal, where the thumb metacarpal subluxates or dislocates away from the ulnar fragment that is kept in place by the anterior oblique ligament. The anterior oblique ligament, first intermetacarpal ligament, and posterior oblique ligament insert at the ulnar base of the thumb metacarpal ( The thumb metacarpal separates from the volar-ulnar proximal fracture fragment due to the pull of both intrinsic and extrinsic tendons. The deforming forces applied by these tendons make this an unstable injury. Traditional dogma holds that dorsal subluxation and proximal displacement are caused by the abductor pollicis longus, whereas adduction and flexion displacement are caused by the adductor pollicis. Several additional tendons have been implicated by other authors, including the flexor pollicis longus (FPL), flexor pollicis brevis (FPB), extensor pollicis longus (EPL), and extensor pollicis brevis (EPB) (  Historically, Deforming forces may cause similar displacement of these fractures, based on the attachments of tendons and ligaments.  The thumb metacarpal is pronated, radially abducted, and longitudinally pulled with direct pressure on the radial side of metacarpal base ( If the dorsal ligament complex of the trapeziometacarpal joint remains intact, maximum pronation alone may reduce the fracture by the “screw-home-torque” reduction technique. This reduction is conducted by pronation of the thumb to make the tip of the thumb opposite to the tips of the other digits ( This reduction is checked under radiographic control. If the fracture-dislocation cannot be reduced by this way, open reduction must be considered. Congruency of the articular surface should be carefully checked in various planes under fluoroscopy.  Typically, 0.045-inch (1.1-mm) K-wires are used. Two or more wires are required for stable fixation. The most important goal is to maintain the reduction of the trapeziometacarpal joint; at least one K-wire should be placed transarticularly to maintain this reduction ( The “Bennett fragment,” if large enough, may then be captured by an additional wire placed across the fracture line ( In cases where the fragment is very small, it will be difficult to capture with a percutaneous wire. In these cases, maintaining solid joint reduction with two transarticular K-wires, by pinning the thumb metacarpal to either the stable index metacarpal or the trapezium, achieves enough stability for fracture healing, provided the closed reduction is accurate ( If stable fixation is not achieved with these techniques, additional K-wire fixation can be applied to help avoid the risk of collapse or subluxation. The additional K-wire is advanced from the radial side of the thumb metacarpal to the index metacarpal for added stability (  Injury to the superficial radial nerve branches may lead to longstanding neuropathy. Consider a “miniopen” approach to K-wire fixation, with small incisions and blunt dissection through the subcutaneous tissue at the K-wire insertion points. This may help avoid a nerve injury. The transarticular K-wire(s) should not protrude into the scaphotrapeziotrapezoid joint.  After K-wire fixation, fracture reduction and K-wire position are rechecked under fluoroscopic guidance. The K-wires are cut, bent, and capped as indicated. Because these wires are typically left in place only 4 to 6 weeks, they are not buried under the skin in most cases. The thumb and wrist are immobilized in a thumb spica splint.  Abduction, pronation, and longitudinal traction are performed on the thumb under fluoroscopic guidance to reduce the fracture ( This reduction relies on ligamentotaxis/capsuloligamentotaxis to reduce small articular fragments. If the fracture is not reduced by this procedure, open reduction and internal fixation must be considered.  Due to increased comminution, Rolando fractures are innately unstable; therefore, multiple K-wires are usually required. In most cases, these K-wires are driven from the thumb metacarpal into the index metacarpal, which provides stability against forces that would otherwise displace and/or shorten the fractured metacarpal. If possible, the articular fragments should be reduced first, and secured with at least one K-wire ( Additional K-wires are used to help maintain the length of the metacarpal and resist collapse; these should be driven into the index metacarpal as well (  After K-wire fixation, fracture reduction and K-wire position are rechecked under fluoroscopic guidance. The K-wires are cut, bent, and capped as indicated. The fracture is immobilized with a thumb spica splint.  Radiographic examination is performed 1 week after surgery to confirm the reduction is maintained ( The patients are maintained in a full-time splint or thumb spica cast for 4 to 6 weeks. Motion at the interphalangeal (IP) joint may be encouraged to avoid tendon adhesions. K-wires are removed 4 to 6 weeks after the operation. After pin removal, gentle mobilization of CMC joint is started under the supervision of a hand therapist. Reduction with residual displacement of less than 1 mm leads to good radiographic and clinical outcomes in Bennett fractures ( Even in complex Rolando fractures, maintaining a good reduction (articular step-off <1 mm) can result in good outcomes ( Delaying pin removal over 6 weeks is not generally recommended, especially if pins are interfering with motion of the IP or metacarpophalangeal joints. This will result in joint contractures that may be impossible to improve, even with appropriate hand therapy.  