Selection of a building stone appropriate for the intended use is of great concern to the practitioners in the construction industry. The specifications, or product requirements, that a particular natural stone has to meet for use in a specific application are generally related with its resistance to external loads (uniaxial compressive strength, modulus of rupture, flexural strength), abrasion (resistance of stone subjected to foot traffic), and durability under various atmospheric conditions (frost resistance, salt attack, water absorption, etc.). However, it is important to note that the acceptable values of these specifications vary according to the type of stone (i.e. granite, marble, limestone, travertine, slate) as well as the adopted standard, such as the ones provided by American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) and European Committee for Standardization (CEN). Mechanical strength tests and petrographic analysis are mandatory in the characterization of natural building stones. Determination of the mechanical strength properties of natural building stones is of prime importance when deciding their suitability for use under various loads Granites are the widely used structural engineering materials due to their unique characteristics such as high load bearing capacity, resistance to foot traffic, resistance to weathering and other environmental influences, aesthetic properties and ability to take highly polished finish. Investigation of the relations between petrographic properties and various mechanical strength parameters of granites has been the subject of a number of investigations. The results of these investigations have indicated that the mechanical strength of granites are generally a function of wide range of petrographic parameters including grain size A review of the preceding literature reveals that although there have been many studies concentrated on correlating the petrographic variables of granites with uniaxial compressive strength and/or Young’s modulus, investigation of the relations between petrographic variables and indirect tensile strength properties (3-point bending strength and Brazilian tensile strength) have not received the same degree of attention. In this respect, to be able to contribute to the subject, the present work was primarily focused on correlating the indirect tensile strength properties of different granite types with their quantitative petrographic variables. However, uniaxial compressive strength was also included in the analyses as it is one of the most quoted strength properties when specifications building stones are given. For the execution of the study, commercially available different types of true granites, varying in their petrographic characteristics and mechanical strengths, were selected as the test samples. Thin sections of the samples were microscopically analyzed for the determination of modal composition and grain size distribution of the individual minerals, as well as other textural characteristics. Mechanical strength tests were performed on the prepared specimens, and the determined values of mechanical strength parameters were then correlated with the petrographic variables by using regression models. Finally, interpretation and discussion of the main findings were made. For the execution of this study, different types of granites quarried from various granite producing countries (Spain, Italy, Brazil, Turkey, Ukraine and Finland) were selected from a major stone processing plant. Here, it may be important to note that the term ‘granite’ as used throughout this study is from the scientific standpoint, and thus, does not cover the non-quartz bearing so-called commercial granites such as gneiss, gabbro, dolerite and syenite. True granites, in the scientific sense, are essentially composed of quartz, plagioclase feldspar, orthoclase feldspar, lesser amounts of biotite and other accessory minerals. In the commercial sense, however, even though their mineralogical and petrographic properties are quite different than those of the true granites, some hard and crystalline igneous rocks are also referred as granites. In this respect, the commercial definition covers all hard igneous rocks capable of taking good polish. The detailed scientific and commercial definitions of granites are provided by the ASTM In the planning stage of the study, care was taken to select granite blocks that were large enough to obtain all of the test specimens of a given granite type from the same piece. Using a bridge-cutter, the selected granites were precisely dimensioned in the stone processing plant and stored in the laboratory to be used in the mechanical strength tests. All samples were free from visible anisotropic features, cracks and indications of weathering. To accomplish statistically meaningful results, petrographic analyses and mechanical strength tests were performed on 12 different granites, varying in their mineral modal compositions and grain sizes. To characterize the studied rocks, each rock was analyzed to determine its petrographic and mechanical properties. Micro-structural characteristics, such as the preferred orientation of pre-existing microcracks, known to cause mechanical anisotropy Petrographic examination mainly included the determination of modal composition and grain-size distribution of the rock samples. For this purpose, thin sections were prepared from each rock sample and then examined using the Nikon Eclipse LV100POL polarized microscope ( The tested rock samples belonged to monzonite, monzo-granite, alkali granite, calc-alkali granite, granodiorite and porphiroid granite families—showing different textural characteristics in terms of degree of crystallinity, granularity and shape of grains ( For the determination of uniaxial compressive strength ( For the execution of flexural strength (three-point bending strength) tests, 10 prismatic test specimens 75×150×25 Splitting tensile strength The results of the mechanical strength tests are given in It may be argued that the coarse-grained samples presently used in the mechanical strength tests do not fully meet the dimensional requirements suggested in the above-mentioned stone testing standards. For example; the standards suggest that specimen thickness for the flexural strength test should be “at least two times the maximum grain size”, while the specimen diameter for the splitting tensile strength should be “at least ten times greater than the maximum grain size”. Considering these suggestions made in the relevant standards, for sample To be able to determine the influence of petrographic variables on the mechanical properties of the studied granites, the following quantitative petrographic variables were considered in the statistical analyses: Average grain size of individual rock forming-minerals; volume-weighted average grain size of individual rock-forming minerals; average grain size of cleavage minerals (K-feldspar, plagioclase and biotite); percentage ratio of quartz to feldspar minerals (K-feldspar and plagioclase); and average grain size of main rock-forming minerals. To examine the relations between petrographic variables and mechanical strength parameters, correlation and regression analyses were made ( It can be followed from As seen from the statistical evaluation shown in Strength reduction effect of mineral grain size on  So far as the authors are aware, biotite grain size does not seem to appear as a direct input parameter in any of the previously established correlations between individual rock forming minerals and Brazilian tensile strength. Therefore, it is not readily possible to verify this presently made observation with the results of any other previous work in the literature. However, it may be useful to provide an analytical explanation of this experimentally reached result with the help of some findings reported by other authors who have studied in the general field of rock fracture mechanics. Chen et al. It appears that there is some disagreement among different authors regarding the influence of individual textural parameters on Brazilian tensile strength, This study has dealt with the correlations between a single parameter of rock texture (percentage mineral content and grain size) and mechanical properties of various granites. Although significant in the statistical sense, the moderate correlations found between the considered textural parameters and mechanical properties indicate that other textural factors that were not considered in this study might have contributed to the relatively low correlations. In this respect, it is suggested that consideration of other textural parameters such as flaws and microcracks which can exist within the minerals Relations between quantitative petrographic variables and mechanical properties of 12 different granites belonging to the common building and decorative stones were investigated. The general conclusion from the presently conducted experimental study is that statistically significant correlations exist between some quantitative petrographic variables and mechanical strength properties of the studied granite types. In all cases, the best fitted relations were found to be represented by straight-line curves, presented as formulae together with their related test statistics. It is emphasized that the main intent of the present investigation was to establish the most significant textural parameters influencing the mechanical properties, rather than establishing prediction equations. Based on the analyses made, the following main conclusions were drawn: (a) Generally, different mechanical strength parameters seem to be influenced by different textural parameters. Negative correlations with varying degrees of statistical significance were observed between uniaxial compressive strength and K-feldspar content, maximum grain size of K-feldspar, average grain size of the main rock-forming minerals and quartz average grain size. However, the correlation between percentage volume of K-feldspar and uniaxial compressive strength is more significant ( (b) Statistical analyses of the experimental data indicate that the tensile strengths of the studied granites determined by two different methods (Flexural test and the Brazilian test) are influenced by different petrographic variables. Since both the average grain size of the cleavage minerals and K-feldspar content are seen to be correlated with flexural strength, it is possible to suggest that this mechanical property is more dependent on the abundance of easily cleavable minerals. Brazilian tensile strength of the studied rocks was found to be governed mainly by the spatial distribution of biotite. This observation is in good agreement with the results of a numerical simulation Considering the preceding evaluations, it is reasonable to suggest that the petrographic characteristics of granites can be a guiding tool when assessing their suitability for a particular application as a construction material. In this respect, it will be rewarding if the presently arrived findings are verified by further studies for other granites in the same category. The authors are most grateful to Granitaş A.Ş stone processing company for supporting this research by kindly providing dimensioned granite samples for the mechanical strength tests.