A measurement system has been developed for the testing of cyanobacteria in water, and it consists of three main stages: the odour sampling system, an electronic nose (e-nose) and a CellFacts instrument that analyses liquid samples. The e-nose system, which employs an array of six commercial odour sensors, has been used to monitor not only different strains but also the growth phase of cyanobacteria (i.e. blue-green algae) in water over a 40-day period. Principal components analysis (PCA), multi-layer perceptron (MLP), learning vector quantisation (LVQ) and Fuzzy ARTMAP were used to analyse the response of the sensors. The optimal MLP network was found to classify correctly 97.1% of the unknown nontoxic and 100% of the unknown toxic cyanobacteria. The optimal LVQ and Fuzzy ARTMAP algorithms were able to classify 100% of both strains of cyanobacteria samples. The accuracy of MLP, LVQ and Fuzzy ARTMAP in terms of predicting four different growth phases of toxic cyanobacteria was 92.3%, 95.1% and 92.3%, respectively. These results show the potential application of neural network based e-noses to test the quality of potable water as an alternative to instruments, such as liquid chromatography or optical microscopy.The diversity of cyanobacteria species is becoming both a severe problem in the quality of potable water and a common source of odour pollution in freshwater reservoirs and local environmental water We have constructed a measurement system for the testing of the cyanobacteria over a period of 40 days. The system consisted of three main parts: the odour sampling unit, the Warwick-modified Fox 2000 unit (Alpha MOS, France) and a CellFacts I instrument (Microbial System, Coventry). The number of cells and cell size are sensitive indicators of the physiological status of algal cells: they change as cells go through the different stages of growth. Cell size and numbers can be used to determine optimum culture conditions and growth phase. Small samples of liquid were extracted and analysed using a commercial CellFacts instrument, which measures the size and distribution of the bacteria. An e-nose based on an early Fox 2000 instrument (comprising an array of six commercial odour sensors) has been used to monitor not only different strains, but also the growth phase of the different strains of cyanobacteria. A series of experiments were carried out to analyse the nature of two closely related cyanobacteria, Several data pre-processing techniques were investigated, having been selected following the results from earlier work   The cyanobacteria data set was divided into three test folds containing 48 measurements each (12 measurements per phase category) and each neural network was trained using 144 vectors for each fold. Each network has six inputs and four outputs since a one-of-four code was used to code the four different phases (labelled I to IV). The classification rates of MLP, LVQ and Fuzzy ARTMAP were similar (92.3%, 95.1% and 92.4%, respectively), but Fuzzy ARTMAP was the fastest and judged to perform best because it self-organises and selects its own “ hidden neurones”. A six-element metal oxide based e-nose system has been used for the continuous monitoring of the growth of cyanobacteria over a period of 40 days. Several pre-processing techniques were explored in order to remove the variation associated with growing the bacteria at ambient temperature and running the e-nose in ambient air. The normalised fractional difference method gave the best PCA result. There is some overlap of the response vectors in each PCA plot, corresponding to the transition periods of the cyanobacteria cultures. Three supervised neural networks, MLP, LVQ and Fuzzy ARTMAP, were used and compared for the classification of both two strains and four different growth phases of cyanobacteria (lag, growth, stationary and late stationary). Our best results showed that the toxic strain of cyanobacteria grown in laboratory conditions was correctly predicted with an accuracy of 100% using MLP, LVQ and Fuzzy ARTMAP. The growth phase of the toxic cyanobacteria was correctly predicted for 95.1% of all unknown samples using LVQ. The LVQ was shown to perform a few percentage points better than MLP and Fuzzy ARTMAP, but the training iterations of Fuzzy ARTMAP was found to be typically more than an order of magnitude less than those for the MLP and the LVQ network. This work shows the potential application of an e-nose for monitoring the quality of potable water. The authors thank Dr. Eduard Llobet, Mr. Frank Courtney, Dr. Uthaya Swoboda and Mrs. Jenny Flint for their help. Thanks are also due to Alpha MOS (France) for the supply of the odour sensors, and the British Embassy and LG Corporate Institute of Technology in Seoul for the UK–Korea Science and Technology Collaboration Fund.