Waste mud from the waste water treatment plant of an iron and steel factory has been investigated due to the recovery possibility of the magnetic materials. Mud samples was firstly expired due to the its chemical content with an XRF spectrometric method. Due to the XRF spectrometric analyses the mud sample had 30.72% magnetic content. This result motivated the experimental study. Dried mud sample grinded and sieved to define the particulate size and it is determined that about 66.67% of has the grain size lower than 50 µm. To gain the magnetic content efficiently, Jones type magnetic separation has been done under 17,000 Gauss on four different mud samples. It is determined that 69.59% of the mud sample compost of magnetic materials and 51.83% of this rate is simply iron base due to the XRF spectrometric analyses. As a result, 36.06% of the mud is the iron, 33.53% magnetic content out of iron and 30.41% is nonmagnetic composition. Economic value of the wasted potential is about 969,292.8 $ annually. The payback period estimated approximately about 10 months, by the investment of a separation units these are costs about 750,000 $ and annual electricity consumption is 64,751.8 $.Recovery of wasted materials in the industry could contribute the energy saving and end-product cost positively. Especially, in the production processes recovery of wastes has considerable amount of economic value. Also, recovery of bulk products lowers the production costs. Similar approximations with this scope of paper have been discussed in the studies were given in this part of the paper. Similar considerations have been discussed in the following given papers from literature. Yu et al. investigated magnetic separation, which is used to separate and recover iron from a low-grade carbonate-bearing iron ore. Grinding fineness around 85 wt% below 38 μm for roasted sample. They expired that Under the optimum parameters, the iron grade and recovery of magnetic iron concentrate was 65.4 wt. % and 92.6 wt. %, respectively Waste water treatment unit of the iron and steel production plants purifies the usage water of production units, and so eliminates the profusion of water by the refined water obtaining and avoids the contamination of fresh water sources by waste water charge from the plant. Waste water treatment plant separation process illustrated in In this paper recovery potential of magnetic materials from waste mud of an iron and steel facility waste water treatment plant was studied experimentally. Waste mud that is the product of waste treatment plant were processed to evaluate the economic recovery potential of it and an order of preliminary work on mud samples were done. Reinvigorate the idea of this experimental study is the results of the XRF spectrometric elemental analyses of waste mud samples. Due to the analyses results of the study, it is seen that the economically valuable rate of magnetic materials is in the wasted potential. In this respect argued that to recovery this potential into economy. XRF spectrometric elemental analyses was done on the 0.5 g mud, 6.9 g Li Due to the results were given in 1 kg of mud sample was expired with a moisture analyser and the moisture content is determined as 52% and sample firstly dehumidified at a Nuve FN 400 device. Then sample was milled in a ball type mechanical miller to the particulate sizes about 6–18 mm. After that milled mud sample imposed to the magnetic separation and obtained magnetic content was sieved mechanically to classify due to the particulate sizing. Particulate sizes of sieved magnetic content were shown in In literature, dry and wet type magnetic separation was discussed. Oberteuffer (1974) clarified that dry separators may be used to treat particles as small as 100 µm. The performance of this separators less for lower grade particulate size mixtures. Wet type Jones magnetic separation has advantages clearly that the magnetic force is significantly higher than the competing forces for even a 10 µm particle of iron Magnetic separation devices operational process based on the dipolar magnetic forces. A general impression of the magnetic force on magnetic particulates could be expressed as in Eq. Jones Whims Permos magnetic separator has been used to this process and technical details of the device is given in the Four different mud sample were taken from the bulk mass. Bulk mass typologically shared 4 different regions and each sample taken from four different regions of the bulk mass. As discussed in the sampling method in “TS ISO 11648-2 – Statistical aspects of sampling from bulk materials – Part 2: Sampling of particulate materials”. Mud samples were diluted with about 15 kg water before the separation processes. Dilutions were met with magnetic balls sufficiently. Magnetic separation process was done by Jones type magnetic separation under the 17,000 Gauss. Magnetic content separation rating is shown in In four different magnetic separation experiments different but overlapping amount of magnetic content separated with the rates are about 61.66%, 74.4%, 69.33%, 73% as in At the steel production plant, daily about 50 tonnes waste mud was derived and this mud annihilated by an intermediary firm. Also, valuable magnetic content of the mud was wasted by annihilation. By the investment of an iron recovery unit at the iron and steel plant where the mud samples taken possible economical gaining potential by the less mass of annihilation of valuable magnetic content and recovery into economy could be estimated as in Due to the  Each 50 tonnes mud should be diluted with 150 tonnes of water to obtain 200 tonnes suspension. Investment of the 30 magnetic separation units. Each unit has 0.5 tons/h suspension separation capacity and unit price is 25,000 $. This value is used to calculate cost and payback period of the possible investment to earn the wasted potential into economy in Due to the In this study, aimed to investigate the possibility of the wasted magnetic content of the iron and steel production plants. In the sector, it is known that due to the chemical analysis that is done in different time periods waste mud of the production process involves approximately about 20–45% magnetic content. At the beginning of this study we analysed the mud samples and determined approximately about 30.72% magnetic content. Particulate size and rate in the samples stated that about 66.67% of the content is lower than 50 µm grain size. Jones type wet magnetic separation is chosen for experiments due to the suggestions in the literature. Wet magnetic separation was done under 17,000 Gauss on four different samples. Magnetic content separation success rate was determined about 61.66%, 74.4%, 69.33%, 73% from the mud samples which have approximately about 69.59% magnetic matter. Separated magnetic composition expired with XRF spectrometric method and seen that 51.83% of the composition is iron base. Due to the results, it could be assessed that approximately about 36.06% of the mud consists of iron, 33.53% of the magnetic content is not the iron base and 30.41% of the mud is nonmagnetic composition. Wasted potential is about 969,292.8 $ annually and this value could be earned into economy by the investment of a separation unit. The payback period estimated approximately about 10 months, with a separation unit which require about 750,000 $ investment and annual electricity consumption is 64,751.8 $. Raising awareness about the size of the wasted magnetic content and economical recoverability potential of the production waste between the experts who are studying in the iron and steel industry is the specialty of this study.