Several methods are available to measure particle size. The majority of them, such as sieving, are off-stream techniques where samples must first be separated from the main stream for analysis.
                  Therefore, the search for on-line particle size analysis systems has provided the impetus for the introduction of image-based particle size analysers to the mineral industry in the past three decades. Generally, the estimation of particle size distribution on the basis of image analysis depends on measuring a single parameter of particle profile. For example the equivalent area diameter (d
                     A) or mean Feret's diameter (d
                     F) distributions, then transforming this data to the equivalent size distribution. However, due to the irregularity of particles being analysed, it is believed that this kind of analysis may increase the error in estimation of particle size distribution since profiles of irregular particles carry more information than can be represented by a single parameter.
                  In this paper, a proposed technique which measures two parameters, equivalent area diameter (d
                     A) and mean Feret's diameter (d
                     F), for each particle profile has been developed. The accuracy of the technique has then been investigated in the laboratory by successfully estimating (unfolding) the size distribution, where size refers to sieve size, of three samples of different particle shapes with known size distribution.Most mineral processing operations rely on the measurement of size distributions as this is a key factor in improving process efficiencies One of the oldest and most popular methods of size analysis is sieving or screening. Here, particles are classified according to their passage through an aperture of known size, having either circular or square shape, with the particle size being defined as the diameter or the side dimension of this aperture. It is fairly widely recognised that the popularity of sieving stems from its simplicity and relatively low cost. However the process can be tedious and time-consuming particularly when handling large amounts of fine particles According to Vernon Acquisition of raw images from the scene, digitising them and improving their quality through image enhancement techniques such as filtration and histogram equalisation. Application of image-processing techniques such as mathematical morphology Extraction of size related data from particle profiles, e.g., Feret's diameter, mean chord length (Martin's diameter) and equivalent area diameter. Transformation of the measured data to the required particle size distribution (number distribution), and then further transformation to equivalent volumetric (weight) distribution. Finally, data correction to remove bias which might manifest itself in the final results. However, when applying these steps it is important to take account of a number of aspects. Firstly, the imaging system may only capture the top layer of the particle population giving biased results not necessarily representing the whole particle population. Measures to minimise this effect need to be applied either before or after acquiring raw images It is considered that using a combination of size–shape analysis may improve these results. A number of researchers have adopted this approach; Cruis Orive Extracting information from the outline of particles forms the basis of this paper but the authors consider that by using more than one parameter of a particle profile, the estimation of particle size distribution might be improved. The technique proposed is to identity the area equivalent diameter ( In developing the model, five different materials are used, a UK coal, iron ore, pyrite, limestone and garden pebbles. Finally, the accuracy of the technique is investigated by successfully estimating (unfolding) the size distribution of three samples of coal and pyrite particles of known sieve size distributions. Consider a homogenous particle system consisting of spherical particles of different size. The projection of such a system produces uniform circular profiles where their sizes are solely represented by their diameters. Furthermore, the volumetric size distribution (sphere size distribution) of such a homothetic system can be predicted analytically by utilising the uniform geometry of spheres. Underwood However, identifying the spatial size distribution of the system becomes more difficult if it consists of other uniform particles, such as cubes or ellipses, and although it is still possible to predict the particle size analytically, the projected profiles are no longer uniform but have different shapes and sizes. The worst case scenario is when the system consists of irregular-shaped particles. In this case the projected profiles are not uniform and an analytical solution is not possible. Also, difficulties arise from representing the irregular particles by a single parameter. This can be solved by using equivalent diameters, which are the diameters of spheres that behave like the particles under the same conditions As mentioned earlier, the projection of a system consisting of a population of irregular particles will produce particle profiles of random shape and size. Therefore the theory of probability can be used to infer particle size distribution from data extracted from those profiles. The work of Barbery Profiles of particles can be identified by a different number of parameters such as their area, perimeter, etc. Here the profiles will be identified by their mean Feret's diameter ( Samples of five different minerals were prepared. These were a UK coal from a North Nottinghamshire colliery, Australian pyrite and iron ore, limestone from a Nottinghamshire quarry and rounded stone pebbles used for garden decoration. Each sample was sieved using a Pascal Inclyno mechanical shaker for 20 min and the fraction less than 3.35 mm discarded. The results are shown in The retained particles were spread on a light box to provide sufficient contrast between the profiles and the background. Images were captured using a Nikon D100 SLR digital camera with a 6 mega pixels resolution and transferred to image processing software for analysis ( Since the raw images were noisy and particle boundaries not fully attenuated, further image processing was required to produce noise free images where particle features could be measured without distortion. Therefore, the first priority was to remove the image distortions caused by non-uniform distribution of light due to the nature of particle surface as well as to remove the irrelevant image details. Low-pass filters such as the mean and median were used to solve this problem The second priority was the A range of filters are available (e.g., Gaussian, Sobel, Canny, and Laplacian), with the majority of them utilising the theory of gradient in the image pixels since edge discontinuity can be predicted by the magnitude and direction of the first or second derivative. Furthermore, mathematical morphology, where the theory of sets is applied on image pixels, can be used to develop edge detection algorithms. Watershed is a rigorous and well-known method belonging to this category. It assumes that if two regions (particles) overlap then there is a wedge of pixels between them. If the location of this wedge is determined then the two particles can be separated. To determine the wedge location, consider two particles as two adjacent catchments, which are gradually filled with water. The water will rise until it merges. Hence if a dam is built at the water's contact line the two regions will be separated. However, choosing a filter for image processing is not a simple task; unsuitable filters may cause a loss in useful data or leave undesirable noise in the image. Therefore on choosing a filter two criteria were considered: The efficiency and simplicity of the filter. The suitability of the filter to the task and the limitations on computer resources. Image processing operations applied here, as shown in  After delineation of particle profiles, OPTIMAS 5.2, an image processing software developed by Optimas Three different approaches were used to analyse this data. Firstly, particle size distribution was estimated from the distribution of equivalent area diameters ( To analyse the particle profile Feret's diameter distribution, the following events were defined: Applying the probability principles gave the following working equation. However to solve Eq.  King Mathematical derivation or simulation which is viable if particle shape can be easily described mathematically (e.g., sphere). Measurements on samples of known particle size. Mathematical derivation from experimentally determined particle shape parameters. Here the second approach was adopted where the data extracted from known particle sizes were investigated. Data analysis revealed that the probability density distribution of the mean Feret's diameter ( The lognormal distribution is a two-parameter function, geometric mean ( One of its advantages is its ability to be transformed to the well-known bell-shaped normal distribution by using the natural logarithm of the random variable ( While Our analysis also revealed a linear relationship between the geometric mean ( In comparison, the geometric standard deviation Following a similar approach to that used above for Feret's diameter analysis, the following events were defined: Applying the probability principles gave the following working equation. Profile analysis showed that there was a linear relation between It was also found that the geometric standard deviation, In both of the previous mean Feret's and equivalent area diameter analyses, only one parameter was measured in determining particle profile identity. However, irregular particle profiles carry more information than can be represented by a single parameter and it was the authors' opinion that identifying particle profiles by two parameters, instead of one, could improve the estimation of particle size distribution. Our approach was to identity each particle profile by measuring both its equivalent area and mean Feret's diameter and applying the laws of probability as shown in the previous sections to estimate particle size distribution from those measurements. Applying the same principles used to derive Eqs. However to calculate the joint conditional probability above, the following approaches could be used. Firstly, after transformation of the mean Feret's and equivalent area diameter density distribution functions to normal distributions as shown previously, the new probability density function could be regarded as the marginal probability distribution functions of the bivariate normal distribution given by the following equation The second approach is to use the discrete version of Eqs. In order to experimentally validate this technique two samples of coal and one of pyrite with known particle size distributions ( After applying image processing routines, profile equivalent area and mean Feret's diameters were measured and extracted to a spreadsheet for further analysis. In order to calculate the conditional probabilities, Eqs.  As mentioned previously, the direct approach to calculate the transformation matrix for the joint analysis was adopted. Here the required matrix was the result of the multiplication of the equivalent area and mean Feret's diameter's transformation matrices. Different methods can be used to solve the transformation equation for the size distribution vector. The simplest method is to rewrite it in the following form However, direct inversion is an ill-posed problem where small errors in the transformation matrix magnify in the size distribution vector and sometimes produce negative values, which are physically meaningless. Therefore, searching for a special method to overcome the ill-posed problem was essential to get satisfactory values for the vector Lin et al. However, a more powerful approach that might overcome the ill-condition problem is the EM (Expectation Maximisation) method. This is an iterative method based on computing the maximum likelihood of parameters when the observed data are incomplete The iteration was carried out using Eq. To apply this method to our data, a visual basic code was written and run in a spreadsheet (Microsoft EXCEL). The previous results showed that determining particle sieve size distribution from the analysis of data extracted from their profiles could yield good results. Particle size estimation improved when the mean Feret and equivalent area diameters of particle profiles were measured, simultaneously. The authors believe that the reason for this improvement was the random position of particles when their profiles were extracted causing profile size to appear larger or smaller than its actual size. Therefore determining the identity of a profile by two parameters reduced the possibility of assigning the profile to the wrong size range. A possible application of this proposed method would be to improve the approach used to control mineral processing plants by measuring particle size distributions in real time. A new approach to estimate particle sieve size distribution by measuring some of the parameters of a particle's profile was developed. In contrast to traditional methods which measure only one profile parameter, this approach was based on measuring two profile parameters, equivalent area and mean Feret's diameter. The proposed method was validated using non-overlapped distributions of two minerals, coal and pyrite. However, although the results showed some improvements when applying this approach to non-overlapped particles, more work is required on issues relating to particle overlap and the movement of particles on conveyor belts. The authors would like to thank the University of Nottingham and Al-Hussien Bin Talal University in Jordan for supporting this work.