The removal of Cd(II) from phosphoric acid solutions by precipitation of CdS with Na2S is investigated. The precipitate obtained was yellow and identified by X-ray powder diffraction as being mainly cubic CdS. The precipitation efficiency decreases both with the increase of the acidity level (i.e., with the increase of H3PO4 concentration and/or addition of H2SO4) and the increase of temperature. The efficiency of cadmium precipitation increases when the amount of Na2S added is increased (i.e., when the Na2S/Cd(II) molar ratio is increased). Thus, the removal of cadmium from H3PO4 solutions by precipitation of CdS is achievable, but the driving force for precipitation is not very strong and a large excess of S2− ions (or H2S) is needed. Furthermore, at high H3PO4 concentrations and/or moderate excess of S2− ions, the kinetics of CdS precipitation is slow as a result of the supersaturation phenomenon and/or the existence of colloidal forms of CdS.Because it is manufactured from impure minerals, wet-phosphoric acid (WPA) contains a variety of impurities, including heavy metals. It is for this reason that wet-phosphoric acid has, historically, been precluded from use in the food and detergent industries and in other industries where a high-purity acid is necessary. Only phosphoric acid produced by the thermal route, which has a much higher purity, is used for such purposes. However, because of the large quantities of energy that are required to manufacture thermal phosphoric acid, its cost has risen considerably and separation techniques have been developed to purify wet-phosphoric acid so that it can be used to replace thermal phosphoric acid. Among the heavy metals present in wet-phosphoric acid, cadmium has attracted much attention and various techniques have been considered for its removal, including crystallization The aim of the present work was to better understand the physico-chemistry of CdS precipitation from phosphoric acid solutions and, thus, to evaluate the actual potentiality of this technique for eliminating cadmium(II) from WPA. In all the experiments, the S Phosphoric acid (85%) [Riedel-de-Haën], sulphuric acid (97%), cadmium sulphate (3CdSO The reaction of precipitation was performed in a thermostated cell, hermetically closed and equipped with capillary tubing for addition of the Na The effects of H The results show that the removal of cadmium from phosphoric acid by precipitation of CdS is achievable, but that a large excess of S For the sake of simplicity, only the precipitation of cadmium(II) from pure H As pointed out by Concerning the acido-basic properties of H H In addition to the formation of CdS(s), Cd(II) is also capable of reacting with HS Regardless of the presence of S The following values have been reported for the formation constants of the Cd(HS) Obviously, In For computing [Cd(II)] The results reported in this work show that the removal of cadmium from H