This paper presents the results of the forensic analysis of failure in a block of buildings declared in ruins in 1998 in the city of Oviedo (Spain). Works were carried out in the same year in the vicinity of the block to build an underground car park. We analyze if the observed damage is the result of the actual deterioration of the building itself, or it depends on the construction of the car park.
                  An interesting aspect of this analysis is that of presenting a working method for analyzing foundations resting on gypsiferous materials, in which the geotechnical study must extend beyond the vicinity of the constructed area due to the possible effect of settlement phenomena derived from changes in the water table level of the subsoil.
                  It is concluded that the damage the failure of the buildings is fundamentally due to a process of settlement and consolidation of the ground. It cannot be stated that the excavation carried out for the underground car park was the cause of the deterioration of the buildings. This conclusion was included in the sentence of the High Court of Justice of Asturias in 2005, which rules that “there exists no necessary causal link between the construction of the car park and the damage to the apartment buildings”.The gradual urban renovation of our cities is improving the redevelopment of degraded areas, with new buildings taking the place of pre-existing constructions. In many cases, these new buildings must be carefully designed so as not to alter the foundations of adjacent buildings The concept of adjacent buildings must extend beyond the mere surroundings of the new building, in the sense that much of the excavation work may produce damage in areas relatively distant from the site itself. A typical example is constituted by works in ground where settlement effects are produced due to alteration of the water table that may affect relatively extensive areas. This paper presents the results obtained from a forensic geotechnical analysis of an area built on relatively extensive gypsiferous ground. The problem arose when building an underground car park in an area that is relatively distant (around 100 The paper is structured in the following way. Section The area under study is located in the city of Oviedo (Northern Spain), in an area known as the District of Ventanielles. It constituted one of the poor areas outside the city walls until the setting up of the De la Vega Arms Factory converted the area into the city’s first truly working class industrial district. The need for housing after the Civil War led to the neighborhood becoming an area of expansion, taking the structural form of residential developments and housing estates. The district was progressively built up and in 1954 numerous subsidized housing developments were built (see This block of building is formed by a large building along the street Río Cares (Building A), which practically surrounds the other, smaller U-shaped building near the street Río Sella (Building B). The buildings have a masonry ground floor and three or four floors of apartments with continuous stem wall foundations. Since their inauguration, the quality of the materials with which these buildings were made has produced numerous problems in the apartment blocks. The complaints of residents were related to dampness in the apartments and garages, occasional detachment of materials and the gradual deterioration of the building due to aluminosis. These problems increased substantially with the construction of several civil works in the vicinity (see In the 1962 with the construction of the A-66 Highway to the north. The building of the Sports Center opened in 1975. At the beginning of the 1990s, a new main sewer was built. This passed under the highway and between Building A and the Sports Center, where it links up with the old masonry sewer built in the 1940s which runs along the street Rıo Sella. At the end of the 1990s, numerous constructions were built whose pilings were driven into the gypsum and two floors were excavated as basements in the block situated to the west of the underground car park and to the south of the block in ruins. Oviedo City Council sponsored the construction of an underground car park with 500 parking spaces in 1998 in a lot measuring 45 In August 1998, it was necessary to declare the block formed by Buildings A and B in ruins. A major crack appeared in buildings number 9 and 11 situated on the southern corner between the two buildings. In all, 362 apartments were affected and declared in ruins, with the consequential social and economic impact. Some 300 families had to be rehoused and the corresponding compensation established. The excavation of the car park and the appearance of drain water added fuel to the controversy in the media. Not only were problems of aluminous cement in the buildings discussed, but also problems in the subsoil and possible negligence on the part of the City Council and of the company building the car park as a result of not having conducted an in-depth study of the works. Faced with the alarm that this caused among the public, the Regional Government of Asturias presented an appeal before the High Court of Justice of Asturias in which it sued the company building the car park and the City Council for 20 million Euros for being “financially responsible for the damage produced in the apartments of the Ventanielles building estate”. All the above justified the carrying out of this forensic study into the causes that resulted in the failure of the buildings. We shall therefore start by giving a brief description of the faults produced and establish the working hypotheses. Forensic analysis of damage to buildings must be based on detailed knowledge of all the aspects that might have influenced or triggered the failure of the buildings. An inventory was drawn up of the most important cracks and structural faults in Buildings A and B. The following work was undertaken to monitor these cracks: Data sampling of pre-existing or new cracks, including a photographic inventory of the most relevant, plus follow-up of their evolution over time. Tacheometry and monitoring of movements with a precision of 1 Plaster marker monitoring of the evolution of the cracks over time.  The studied cracks were classified in two major types. The first type of failure corresponds to cracks describing approximately a 45° angle, related to vertical facing and vertices of doors and windows ( The second type of cracks corresponds to large-size vertical cracks that practically section the facade of the buildings (see Of all these cracks, the most striking is a large vertical crack produced in Building B (see On the basis of the observed damage, three working hypotheses were established as the possible cause of the failure of the block of buildings:    The failure due to aluminosis is out of the scope of this paper. In this paper, we elucidate the cause of the geotechnical failure of the buildings (consolidation or subsidence). For this forensic analysis, a geological and hydrogeological survey of the area was planned, as well as laboratory testing of the ground on which the block of buildings stands. To carry out the geological description of the area under study, the following work was undertaken: Geological survey of the area of excavation of the underground car parks. Digging of trenches. Geotechnical boreholes for stratigraphic characterization. Registers in the boreholes of natural radiation, electrical resistivity and density. Geological mapping and stratigraphic cross-sections of the Cretaceous-Eocene borders of the area and in the vicinity of the underground car park. We shall briefly describe the boreholes and the work of inspection undertaken and then go on to present the lithologic features of the area under study, indicating the thicknesses of each of the materials found. Initially, the talus walls of the car park cavity were inspected with the aim of identifying the lithologies of the area, basically finding three types of materials: Quaternary in the upper level, some Tertiary marls in the intermediate level, and a gypsiferous formation also from the Tertiary period in the lower level. On the basis of these data, a borehole survey was designed to study the geological configuration of the area on which the block of buildings stands. In all, 17 boreholes were drilled, the locations of which are shown in The decision was taken to drill two boreholes at each of the points labeled NP on the plan: a short one to study the Quaternary materials (less than 12 Geophysical testing was carried out in all the boreholes using Natural Gamma Ray and Density probes and, in some cases, Spontaneous Potential and Single Point Resistance probes. On the basis of the data obtained at each borehole, the values were extrapolated and interpolated to obtain thickness isopach mappings of the materials. Geo-statistical techniques based on “kriging” were used for this purpose. All the maps were represented by means of isopleths on the plan of the block of buildings in order to analyze the spatial distribution of the represented values in each case. We shall analyze the thickness isopach maps so obtained in the following section. The area is made up of materials ranging from the Upper Cretaceous, to the Tertiary and Quaternary Periods The Cretaceous system was obtained at boreholes NP11 and SG5, where it appears represented by wackestone to packstone carbonate rock. The Tertiary system rests discordantly on the Cretaceous and is made up from bottom to top by the following materials:     In the Quaternary system, an important lateral change in the facies was observed, enabling us to speak of two types of Quaternary systems:   The clayey Quaternary material presents a large amount of organic material forming sink-holes in some areas. A representation was therefore also carried out of the distribution of the thickness of the organic matter that appears in the clayey Quaternary system (see Above the Quaternary system is to be found a layer of man-made fills. The greatest thickness of fillings is to be found in the street Río Cares, to the North of Building A. These are related to a major extent with the filling material used as foundations for the A-66 highway. The hydrology of the area was studied, differentiating between aquifers and impermeable levels. A series of tests were carried out: Monitoring of the piezometric level of the boreholes carried out with piezometers and carrying out of pumping tests. Installation of a hydrolab probe to monitor the pressure of the water, the electrical conductivity and temperature in the lower gypsiferous aquifer. Monitoring of the pumping system in the underground car park building work. Water sampling for chemical analysis. Survey of the state of the main sewer and the masonry sewer. Permeability tests and obtaining of the characteristic parameters of aquifers. The short and long boreholes were waterproofed to avoid communication between the different water tables existing in the area, which were identified via the preliminary study carried out in the car park cavity. A hydrolab probe was employed to monitor the variations in the piezometric level and the quality of the water in borehole NP10, which is very close to the car park cavity. Subsequently, this probe was installed in borehole SG2 to monitor the water in the area close to Building B. Based on the measurements carried out, we may speak of two aquifers, one deep in the Cretaceous and Tertiary materials and another surface aquifer in the Quaternary system. The Cretaceous aquifer may be considered to be karstic with an approximate thickness of around 30 The conglomerates of the Tertiary system formed by calcareous sandstone with a variable thickness of 1–5 The marlacious gypsums of the Tertiary system constitute a confined karstic aquifer in which cavities of up to 120 This karstic aquifer is of the “non-functional aquifer” type Marsaud In the upper part of the Tertiary system, the marls constitute an impermeable level that confines the gypsum aquifer and isolates it from the Quaternary system above and from the rest of the Cretaceous system materials below. Two zones may be differentiated in the Quaternary aquifer, one sandy and the other clayey, presenting different levels of permeability. This aquifer is composed of courses presenting a channeled morphology, excavated in the Tertiary marls with medium grain sands with siliceous boulders originating from the Cretaceous detritic series. In the Quaternary aquifer, the piezometric level is controlled by the sewer built in the 1940s in the street Río Sella. This sewer functions from a hydrogeological perspective as a river That is, when the water level is low, the Quaternary system feeds the “river” and when the water level is high, the “river” feeds the Quaternary system. As regards the Quaternary aquifer, this sewer acts like a variable load limit, making the circulation of water on the right and left sides independent. That is, the effect of the car park on the Quaternary level will not traverse the limit of the sewer of the street Río Sella. To analyze the effect of the car park on the water table level, the volume of water pumped out of the car park cavity and the piezometric level of the boreholes that were drilled were monitored from August 1998 onwards. As the boreholes became stabilized, their piezometric levels were measured, daily at first and then twice a week.  From the values obtained, the conclusion was reached that the construction of the car park cavity provoked a depression in the water of the karstified gypsum aquifer. The pulse of decompression reached several meters in extent and was very quickly transmitted by the water in the karstic conduits that exist in the gypsum, on account of this being a confined aquifer. The consequences may range from an elastic descent of the roof of the gypsum if this is intact and in a good state to a local collapse in the case of being a place where the gypsum is already highly fractured. However, this depression has not affected the Quaternary aquifer. Although pumping of the underground car park was suspended in October, significant changes were not observed in the Quaternary aquifer. These changes are justified by the rainfall conditions in this period. As the Quaternary system is not directly in contact with the gypsum, the piezometric levels of the short boreholes, which monitor the Quaternary system, did not react when the rise in the water level occurred as a result of the lack of pumping. Chemical analyses were carried out of the water that drained into the car park cavity, as well as of the water from the boreholes, determining: conductivities, pH, sulphates, nitrates, phosphates, total coliforms and fecal coliforms. The ultimate goal of all these analyses was to determine whether the two aquifers in the area under study were connected or not. The results obtained from the analysis of sulphates and from the analysis of coliforms were especially useful for this purpose. The survey results indicate that the two aquifers are not connected. In order to determine the causes that led to the failure of the buildings, a geotechnical study was carried out on the materials on which the foundations were built. Specifically, the material on which the footing of Buildings A and B rest is made up of muddy clays and Quaternary marls. Accordingly, a series of geotechnical tests were carried out, both in situ as well as in the laboratory. The in situ tests comprised SPT penetration tests to determine the load bearing capacity of the ground, and pressiometric tests to determine the stress-deformation curve of the ground. The laboratory soil tests included those of soil identification (moisture, granulometry, Atterberg limits, contents in organic matter, sulphates and carbonates, apparent density, dry density and solid particle density). Simple compression strength tests and direct shear tests were performed on the soil to obtain the values of cohesion and friction. Finally, edometric tests were conducted to determine the compressibility index, which enables us to define the settlements as a function of time and the edometric modulus. The tests carried out on rock focused on determining the strength characteristics of the gypsum present in the area. For this purpose, a series of simple compression strength and traction tests were performed. Some of the compression tests were carried out using extensometric gages to obtain the longitudinal and transversal deformation moduli, as well as the Poisson modulus. In addition, triaxial and direct shear tests were performed with the aim of obtaining the cohesion and friction values. From a geotechnical viewpoint and on the basis of the geological information available described above in Section      Although some tests were carried out on man-made fills (identification, direct shear and a pressiometric test), it is so heterogeneous that it cannot be characterized in a general way, except for the fact that it is not apt as a base for foundations. In the quaternary clays and marls, the direct shear tests present minimum values for cohesion and friction in the specimen of borehole SG1′ (5 The load bearing capacity obtained from the cohesion and friction is represented in The information obtained via laboratory tests was completed with the in situ tests performed. Thus, the result of two SPT tests carried out at borehole SG1 at a depth of 4.3 and 7.2 An important conclusion is that the clayey-marlacious Quaternary materials on which Building B rests are very different to those found in the surroundings, and that their strength properties are very low. As regards the clayey sands of the Quaternary system, it should be noted that a limited number of tests was carried out on this material due to the difficulty of obtaining test samples. The liquid limit varies between 20.5 at SG2 and 29.75 at SG4. The plastic limit barely presents any variation (between 19.3 and 21.4) (see Maximum cohesion and friction (0.73 The tests carried out on the gypsums show that the compressive strength of these materials varied between 84.76 and 230.57 Until now, the data in Ventanielles have been reported from a geological, hydrogeological and geotechnical point of view. Based on all this information, the present section will analyze the possible causes that originated the serious deterioration of the buildings in the area. Basically, calculations were performed taking three aspects into consideration: Consolidation of the clays and compaction of the sands. Collapse of the foundations. Depression in the water table and collapse of caves. We have considered two phenomenons:   Settlement by consolidation depends on the compressibility indexes of the ground (obtained by means of edometric tests) and on the time that has passed from its loading. Settlement by compaction depends on the deformation modulus of the sands ( The total settlements suffered due to both phenomenons were calculated throughout the area under study, interpolating the results obtained at each of the points defined by the boreholes. When the transmitted load is considered to be 2 Another type of settlement that may have been produced is as a result of drainage of the sandy layers, above all in the summer when the water table level may decrease up to several meters. This fact is corroborated by the data gathered during the visit to the sewer under the street Río Sella, where the variations in the water table level may reach 3 In the most unfavorable case, when The foundations of the affected buildings are of the continuous concrete stem wall or footing type. These foundations rest on highly heterogeneous ground generally Quaternary clays and marls. On the basis of the laboratory tests, The surroundings of the boreholes SG1′ and NP2 constitute a valley of low bearing capacity. This area corresponds precisely to the location of Building B, which suffered failure due to the vertical crack. In some points has a load bearing capacity of below 0.5 The possible effect of the excavation of the underground car park was also estimated. The settlements corresponding to a decrease in the water table level of 8 Observing the settlements in the vicinity of the damaged area and bearing in mind that stratification is more or less horizontal in the area, any variation in the water table level should affect the entire surrounding area. However, the settlements are fundamentally concentrated in the area of boreholes SG1 and SG1′. It therefore seems clear that it can be due to a local subsidence of the caves of the ground. These phenomena may arise due to several effects, such as: decrease in water pressure, dissolution, etc. It should be noted that the sunken area rests above a zone of gypsum and marls with many cavities, which may possibly collapse. The aim of the proposed modeling is to determine the surface settlements when a cavity exists below one of the continuous footings, whether in the marls (Model 1) or in the gypsum (Model 2). We have determined the differential settlement that would be produced by the collapse of these caves due to a decrease in water pressure. In the Model 1 the cavity is assumed to be in contact with the layer of marls and the portion of gypsum surrounding it is assumed to have disappeared due to the action of erosion (see We assume the existence of a quasi-elliptical cavity with a horizontal axis of 3.5 The lithology of the ground is made up of an upper layer of clays of 4 The settlements were calculated using the physical properties found for all the materials, which are shown in The presence of underground water is also taken into consideration. In both models, initially the cavity is assumed to be filled with water and the water table level is assumed to be situated 10.2 The recorded stress-deformation status was determined during the calculation of the absolute and differential settlements that are produced in the foundations. The method used was Lagrangian Analysis of Continuous Media using explicit finite difference formulation implemented in FLAC2D v. 3.30 code (Itasca Consulting Group). The elastoplastic model for the materials was constituted by the Mohr-Coulomb plasticity criterion.  It should be noted that any possible cavity in the marls with these characteristics is unstable, i.e. it would have collapsed in the past. The subsidence resulting from this phenomenon is clearly manifest on the surface. In the Model 2, the cavity is not immersed in the marl layer but is situated 10 In this model with a internal water pressure within the cavity of 1.02 When the water pressure inside the cavity is decreased to 0.22 The settlement under the footing is then 80.6 These two models allow us to state that a cavity of the aforementioned characteristics, immediately below the marls, could not have existed, since it would even have collapsed due to the initial pressure of confinement of the water. Likewise, in the unlikely case of a cavity existing in the gypsum, the maximum differential settlement is 11 The following conclusions were reached on this forensic study: The materials found in the area under study are: karstified gypsum and gypsiferous marls; impermeable marls; muddy–clayey sands and gravel; and muddy clays containing organic matter and man-made fills. There are two aquifers in the area between the car park cavity, the Sports Center and the block made up of Buildings A and B: a lower aquifer confined in karstified Tertiary gypsum/limestone and an upper Quaternary aquifer, separated by a formation of marls that keeps them hydrodynamically independent. The Quaternary system is hydrodynamically connected with the masonry sewer under the street Rio Sella. This sewer acts as a frontier that makes the two parts of the Quaternary aquifer independent. All this means that the pumping of the water undertaken at the underground car park did not affect the foundations of the block of buildings declared in ruin. The mechanism of consolidation in the clays produces maximum settlements ranging between 78 and 98 Modeling of the karstified cavities allow us to state that a large size cavity could not have existed under the gypsum that subsequently collapsed, since it would even have collapsed with the initial pressure of confinement of the water. The presence of cavities generates differential settlements in the order to 11 Therefore, the failure of the buildings is fundamentally due to a process of settlement and consolidation of the ground. However, it cannot be stated that the excavation carried out for the underground car park was the cause of the deterioration of the buildings. Finally, it is worth noting that on February 8, 2005 the First Section of the Chamber for Contentious Administrative Proceedings of the High Court of Justice of Asturias rejected the demand lodged by the Regional Government of Asturias against Oviedo City Council and against the company building the car park. In the sentence, the ruling concludes that “there exists no necessary causal link between the construction of the car park and the damage to the apartment buildings”. The Dr. Celestino González-Nicieza work directly as expert witnesses in this court case The authors gratefully acknowledge the assistance of Paul Barnes in the preparation of this paper in English.