The mining sector in Chile is facing a steady increase of energy consumption, which is mainly explained by the lower grades, the increase in rock hardness, and deeper mines. Although much of the mining activity in Chile is located in the Atacama Desert, where the solar radiation is high, the integration of solar energy in mining remains elusive. This work explores, through simulation, the use of a solar photovoltaic energy system (PV) and a battery energy storage system (BESS), combined with energy from the grid, to operate a semi-autogenous grinding mill (SAG). For this, a novel mixed-integer linear programming model was developed to optimize the operational costs of the joint SAG-PV-BESS operation, after which the best sizes of PV and BESS components are found through scenario inspection. Further, the implementation of a demand side management (DSM) option is considered by a proper sequencing of the SAG feed to make a more efficient use of the solar energy. The results show an interdependent behavior of the SAG-PV-BESS system and a strong influence of DSM. The use of both PV and BESS allows reducing the contracted power for the SAG, without incurring into overconsumption penalties. If DSM is implemented, the system allocates the higher consumption, associated to harder ore, during daytime to use the available PV energy. Overall, the combined effect of PV and BESS operation of SAG mills allows reducing the energy-associated operational costs. This effect is exacerbated when DSM is implemented.Cost savings of over 0.2%/MWPV can be achieved in all scenarios. A PV plant of 100 MW can achieve a 20% of savings. (Contracted power sensitivities are not considered.) DSM has an important influence on cost reduction potential. (BESS sensitivities are not considered.) (PV size sensitivities are not considered.) Contracted power can be reduced with DSM from 41.2 to 40.7 MW. DSM shows a cost reduction potential of about 10%. BESS has no important role under large power contracts, while it helps avoiding fines under smaller contracts. Larger BESS energy capacities do not contribute to further savings due to the limited PV size (of this scenario). A larger BESS energy capacity allows for smaller power contracts. (DSM is not considered.) For a contracted power of 41.5 and 40.5 MW, the resulting energy capacities are 4.4 and 30.2 MWh. Larger BESS power capacities do not contribute to further savings due to the limited PV size (of this scenario). There is a minimum BESS power capacity needed to avoid fines associated with each power contract. (DSM was not considered) For a contracted power of 41.5 MW, the resulting BESS is 0.45 MW. The Chilean copper mining sector is facing several challenges. From an energy perspective, a steady increase of energy consumption is observed, explained by the lower mineral grades, increase in rock hardness and deeper mines ( In Chile, comminution is responsible –in average– for almost 50% of the electrical energy consumption of the entire copper mining process ( The aforementioned variability and uncertainty might be exacerbated when a PV system is added to the copper production. In other industries, battery energy storage systems (BESS) are a frequent solution to these issues. Nowadays, there are many different BESS technologies, each with characteristic power and energy capacities, reaction times, lifetimes and costs ( Finding the optimal size and type of BESS in the context of integration of variable renewable energy systems has been object of research since the 90's. Initially, the approaches were based on a simple energy balance ( The main cause of the SAG energy fluctuation is the variability of the rock hardness ( This work aims to explore the synergies that can occur through the implementation of a combined SAG-PV-BESS system. Using an optimization based simulation, we will explore how the variability of the SAG mill power consumption can be reduced and stabilized by using a PV-BESS system. This should lead to a cost reduction when considering the total costs (investment, operation and replacement). The DSM is also modeled, showing the impact it has on the combined system and its integration potential. This paper makes the following contributions: i) it develops a novel mixed-integer linear programming model to optimize the operational costs of a PV-BESS-SAG system and determines through scenario inspection, the best sizes of the PV-BESS system components (including the BESS cycling costs); ii) it models and assesses the impact of a novel DSM option when planning such a combined system based on the sequencing of the SAG feed; and iii) it proposes a heuristic to reduce the resulting computing times. The working hypothesis of this paper is that BESS can provide multiple services in the context of PV integration into a SAG mill operation, such as energy balance and planning power contracts. For this, a novel optimization model is proposed that minimizes the operational costs of the system composed by SAG mills, PV and BESS (SAG-PV-BESS), including costs for battery replacement due to cycling. This corresponds to a mixed-integer linear programming model, which was implemented using the function Optimizing the size of power plants together with their operation is computationally expensive, which is why simplifications have to be made. In the literature it can be seen that when focus is put on the operational detail, hybrid formulations are a frequent choice. These, rather than formulating a global optimization for investment and operation of the system, minimize only the operational costs and find, via scenario inspection, alternative system sizes ( In summary, two model approaches are proposed and tested in a case study with sensitivity analysis: Model I without DSM, and Model II with DSM. In both models, the decision variables are the BESS and PV operation, and the grid imported and exported energy. For Model II, an additional decision variable is they way DSM is fulfilled. The nomenclature used in shown in The model considers a SAG mill operation connected to the grid, a PV power plant and a BESS ( Sizing the PV and BESS, as well as the power capacity contracts, is not considered endogenously in the optimization. Instead, for these parameters, scenario inspection is used in order to find cost optimal dimensions. The objective function and the constraints of the optimization model are explained below. The objective function minimizes the total energy operational cost ( The first term is the contracted power capacity cost. Both  Equation Equations  The maximum imported power variable, Equation  In Equation  Equation The models are applied to a theoretical case study. Four cases, in addition to the base case, are studied using the models proposed earlier. The variables subjected to sensitivity are the size of PV plant in C1, the contracted capacity in C2, the BESS energy capacity in C3, and the BESS power capacity in C4. As what refers to the inputs, a SAG mill power consumption data and actual PV generation curves located on the Atacama Desert in Chile are used. A data set with a 15-min time resolution was used for a simulation period of one day. The SAG data corresponds to the operation of three mills over six months, from which a typical day was selected through fuzzy c-means clustering. The total production for this typical day was 192,000 tons for the three SAG mills, with a maximum and minimum SAG mill power consumption of 42.17 MW and 40.77 MW, respectively. The average consumption for the day was 41.58 MW. The price of selling and purchasing energy is 70 US$/MWh and 85 US$/MWh, respectively, whereas the price of contracted power (converted to the daily time horizon) is 40 US$/MW and overpower consumption is 15 kUS$/MW. These values are highly variable in time and are case-specific. The model is general enough to consider any type of batteries. In the case study the storage system consists of flooded lead acid batteries with a fixed energy-to-power ratio of 5 MWh per MW for the BC, C1, and C2, and with a variable ratio for C3 and C4. A lifespan of 1500 cycles at 70% of depth of discharge ( The annuities of the investment costs are calculated considering a lifetime of 30-years and a 10% discount rate. The considered investment costs are 110 kUS$/MWh for the BESS and 1770 kUS$/MW for the PV system ( The simulations were run in a computer with a 3.5 GHz octa-core processor and 16 GB of RAM using the optimization toolbox from MATLAB To reduce the computing times of Model II, a heuristic was implemented. It is based on prescribing a smart starting point for the DSM: harder minerals should be processed during daylight time (when PV power is available). For this, the SAG demand vector is rearranged as a function of the PV generation curve prior to the optimization as it is seen in The model was run for different cases. The base case (BC) defines the base contribution that can be obtained by using a constant PV and BESS system, considering the investment costs. Case 1 (C1) studies the impact of changing the size of the PV plant. In this case, the DSM is justified by showing different total costs curves, which include operational and investment cost. The contracted power capacity variation in Case 2 (C2) allows seeing the effect of decreasing the contracted power capacity before incurring into consumption above the contracted capacity, showing the point of possible power consumption stabilization. In cases 3 and 4 (C3 & C4), the BESS energy capacity and power variation show what battery size will be needed to manage different power contracts that allow further costs reduction. In the base case, the results for Model I and II are quite similar ( The simulations for C1 show the different behaviors of the system in response to PV plant sizes. Larger PV sizes contribute to operational savings, in the order of 0.78%/MW As the cycling of the BESS is costly, its usage is limited when the contracted power is higher than the maximum SAG power consumption, which is 42.17 MW. In fact, the imported energy matches demand during the night, the PV plant provides the supplement during the day, and the BESS shows no activity. Also, the DSM at low PV generation does not contribute towards lower costs. There is no value in managing energy if there is no energy excess to be managed. On the other hand, when the generated PV energy is higher than the maximum consumption during daytime, the system prefers to export the energy rather than managing it with the BESS and incurring into cycling. At this point the total cost curve stops being linear and starts progressively increasing its slope. The change in slope is explained by the difference between selling and purchasing price of energy to and from the grid. Approximately, the total cost saving decreases to 0.20%/MW The total costs for different load curves (but with the same energy demand) illustrate the effect of allocating the maximum consumption during daytime ( Results of C2 show that the DSM has an important role when making a decision on the contracted power capacity. Especially, for lower contracted power capacities, not managing the feed leads to important penalty costs. For this case, the difference of operation with and without DSM is depicted. It can be observed that a higher power consumption occurs during daytime as seen in  When the contracted power capacity is high, the BESS shows no activity, as in the BC. However, for lower contracted power capacities, the model prefers to use the BESS than incurring into overconsumption fines. Noteworthy is that the optimized curve generated by the DSM of a contracted power equal or less than 40.7 MW is the optimum consumption curve for every case. The ones generated over this value, are local optima for their value and higher contracted power capacities. A lower contracted power means that the imported energy from the grid can be stabilized to that point complementing the remaining power from the sun, through PV generation. As the PV-BESS parameters are fixed in this case, the constant cost gap occurring on lower contracted power represents the overconsumption penalties. C3 analyzes the importance of the BESS energy capacity. As it can be seen in To the left of the minimum, the costs increase due to power consumption above the contracted capacity. For larger BESS energy capacities, the cost starts raising due to higher investment/replacement costs of the BESS. This shows the optimum BESS needed to manage energy to prevent overconsumption and take account of all other variabilities. Results for C4 show that increasing the BESS power capacity produces savings that depend on the contracted power, as seen in There is a maximum effective BESS power capacity size after which no further cost reduction is observed. This value depends on the contracted power. In C4, for contracted powers of 41.2 and 41.0 MW, the maximum effective BESS power is 0.7 MW. On the other hand, if the contracted power is 41.5 MW, a BESS with power capacity of 0.45 MW is enough. In general, an increase of the BESS power capacity allows lowering the contracted power. However, since in C4 the PV plant size is constant, a decrease in the contracted power at some point cannot be overcome by an increase in BESS capacity, and overconsumption may occur because of a deficit in the energy balance. This can be inferred from the cost gap between contracted powers of 41.2 and 41.0 MW, for BESS power higher than 0.7 MW in The DSM has a great impact on how the solar energy can be used and on the investment that has to be made in BESS and the PV system. Although the overall SAG mill energy consumption does not change with DSM, its implementation allows a deeper integration of solar energy into the process. The DSM allocates harder ores (higher energy consumption) during daytime and softer ores during the night, resulting in a smoother net load. This in turn, allows for smaller capacity contracts without incurring into overconsumption fines. For a constant capacity contract and PV plant power capacities, DSM displaces the need for larger BESS (energy and power capacity) implying that lower investments are needed to accomplish better results. The costs related to DSM were not assessed in this study. DSM also impacts the solving times (Model II requires on average 3 h), which is why a heuristic was developed. Inspired on the above results, where it can be observed that the highest demand is assigned during the day and the lowest during the night (see The results show that problems distant from overconsumption (when the plant or contract are oversized) have short processing times, compared to those where exceeding the contract is at stake. A summary of the main results is presented on In this paper, a novel short-term optimization for the joint operation of a semi-autogenous grinding mill, photovoltaic power plant and a battery energy storage system (SAG-PV-BESS) is presented. Further, a demand side management (DSM) option, based on sorting the rocks' hardness, is modeled and assessed. Finally, a heuristic to reduce the solving times of the model (with DSM) was implemented. The results show that when the contracted power capacity is above SAG maximum load, the BESS plays a minor role. Here, PV excesses are exported to the grid instead of being stored, to avoid the cycling costs of the batteries. The BESS, therefore, will only be used to avoid overconsumption. For a given contracted power capacity and PV plant size, the simulations allow finding the optimal BESS size. For BESS smaller than that optimum, the cost increases due to overconsumption; and for those larger than the optimum due to higher investment costs of the batteries. Overall, the results show that a PV-BESS system is already an economically attractive solution for copper mining operations in Atacama. DSM show an additional saving potential of about 10%. If DSM implemented, the system allocates the harder ores when PV energy is available (daytime). Moreover, the implementation of DSM together with the BESS can contribute to safely reducing the contracted power capacity. Finally, the DSM proves to have a great impact on the PV and BESS sizes. By implementing DSM, a larger integration of solar energy into the process can be achieved. The proposed heuristic (finding a good initial solution for the model with DSM) allows reducing the involved solving times by over 50%. Developing further speed-up techniques are envisioned for solving stochastic frameworks. This work was supported by the