Purpose
                  This study investigated changes in agglomeration and the mechanism of dispersibility decrease of salmeterol xinafoate (SX) from SX–lactose mixtures for inhalation after storage at 75% RH for 3 months.
               
                  Methods
                  The dispersibility, PSD and in situ PSD of aerosol plumes of SX alone and SX–coarse lactose (CL) mixtures containing 0, 5, 10 and 20% micronized lactose (ML) before and after storage were determined by a Next Generation Impactor (NGI), a Mastersizer 2000 and a Spraytec, respectively.
               
                  Results
                  The PSD of ML increased after storage at 75% RH, but dispersibility of SX using the stored ML increased. After storage, the %SX of the mixture containing 20% ML (M20F) significantly increased (P
                     <0.05) in the throat and mouthpiece, preseparator and stage 1 of NGI, while it significantly decreased in the remaining stages (P
                     <0.05). In situ analysis of aerosol plumes of M20F supported this result with an increased presence of particles of 4–25μm and a decreased respirable particle distribution of <4μm after storage.
               
                  Conclusions
                  The decreased dispersibility of M20F after storage was due to the formation of less dispersible agglomerates, probably occurring through enhanced capillary interaction and/or solid bridging of ML, entrapping and preventing the release of SX particles.Changes in dispersibility of dry powder inhalers during storage at high relative humidity (RH) are often encountered by pharmaceutical manufacturers ( Many investigations on the effect of storage RH on dispersibility ( A recent extended study on different types of dry powder formulations ( The purpose of this study was to identify the mechanism of dispersibility change during storage at high RH of an SX formulation containing Inhalac 120 as the coarse lactose carrier and micronized lactose monohydrate as the fine added excipient. The study used a combination of particle sizing approaches to achieve the outcome. Inhalation grade micronized salmeterol xinafoate (SX) (batch no., B068803, Glaxo SmithKline, Ware, UK) was used as model drug. Coarse α-lactose monohydrate, CL (Inhalac SX (2.5%)–CL mixtures containing 0, 5, 10 and 20% micronized lactose (M0F, M5F, M10F and M20F) were prepared according to a previously validated mixing method ( The homogeneity of mixtures was determined to ensure that the mixing procedure produced homogenous and consistent powder mixtures that approached target SX content with low variability. Twenty samples (20 A saturated solution of sodium chloride (NaCl) (BDH laboratories, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia) was used to produce 75% RH in sealed containers (  The amount of drug recovered from all stages of NGI, preseparator, throat, device and capsule was defined as the recovered dose (RD). The emitted dose (ED) was the percent of recovered dose that was collected from all sections except device and capsule. The amount of SX in each stage was then calculated as a percent of RD. The % fraction of RD that was collected in stage 3 to MOC was regarded as FPF.  The percentage of total dose that deposited in the inhaler, stage 1 (S SX recovered by twin stage impinger (TSI) and Next Generation Impactor was analysed by HPLC using a C The particle size of the powders was determined by laser scattering using the dry dispersion technique in a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments Limited, Worcestershire, UK). A Scirocco cell and Scirocco 2000 dry powder feeder were used. Particle measurement was carried out at four different pressures (0.5 Powder was sprinkled and glued on metal sample plates. Using an electrical potential of 2.0  All data were subjected to One Way Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) (SPSS, Version 15.0, Chicago, IL, USA). Probability ( The particle size distributions of salmeterol xinafoate (SX), micronized lactose (ML) and coarse lactose (CL) were determined using a laser diffraction method with a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. The average of at least three replicates at each pressure was calculated. At 0.5 A monomodal distribution around 100 Inhalation grade SX particles usually form agglomerates ( The SX content ranged from 99.5 to 100.7% and the coefficient of variation (CV) was below 1.9%. The results indicated that the homogeneity of powder mixtures was excellent, being well within the specifications applied in this study ( In order to examine the dispersibility changes, five SX formulations: SX alone (D) and SX–CL mixtures containing 0%, 5%, 10% and 20% micronized lactose (M0F, M5F, M10F and M20F, respectively), before and after storage at 75% RH for 3 months, were dispersed in triplicate at an airflow of 60 Before storage, the emitted dose (ED) of SX alone formulation (D) was 43.5 No significant differences ( The volume mean diameter (VMD) of SX was 1.9 In order to determine if any of the components of the mixture interacted to produce a permanent change in particle sizes, after storage at 75% RH for 3 months, the PSD of the stored samples of SX, CL and ML were determined using a laser diffraction method with a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. For each sample (SX, CL or ML), the PSDs obtained before and after storage were compared. The average of at least three replicates at each pressure was determined. At 1.0 However, the PSD of ML increased after storage and the volume mean diameter (VMD) of ML increased from 2.4 Previous studies showed that the dispersibility of SX is dependent on the particle size of added micronized lactose ( This mixture was prepared using ML stored at 75% RH for 3 months but using CL and SX which were not stored at high RH. The FPF was determined using a twin stage impinger (TSI). The FPF of M20F before storage was 11.3 The increased FPF of freshly prepared M20F using stored ML was consistent with that observed earlier by The PSD of the mixtures containing micronized lactose (M5F, M10F and M20F) before and after storage at 75% RH for 3 months were determined using a laser diffraction method with a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 using a dry dispersion technique. The average of at least three replicates conducted at 1.0 Each SX–CL mixture containing additional ML (M5F, M10F and M20F) showed tri-modal distributions. The PSD of M5F and M10F are shown in In the mixture containing 20% ML, SX and ML particles formed agglomerates with a greater propensity of ML–ML contact. The formation of stronger agglomerates, due to strong cohesion and/or solid bridging at ML–ML contact during storage at 75% RH ( In order to understand the deagglomeration pattern that would be encountered during inhalation, particle size measurements of the aerosol clouds of all five formulations (D, M0F, M5F, M10F and M20F) before and after storage at 75% RH for 3 months were conducted using an All mixtures produced a bi-modal distribution of powders in the aerosol plume ( No change was observed in the PSD of SX alone and SX mixtures after storage containing 0% and 5% micronized lactose. The mixture containing 10% ML showed some evidence of the reduced rate of deagglomeration of smaller agglomerates after storage. A clear difference was observed for the mixture containing 20% ML ( This study has identified the mechanism by which mixtures of SX containing high concentrations of micronized lactose (i.e. 20%) decrease The %SX of an SX mixture containing 20% micronized lactose significantly increased in the throat and mouthpiece, preseparator and stage 1 of the NGI ( Particle size data of both the SX mixtures at various shear pressures and of the aerosol plume after dispersion from a model device showed an increased presence of agglomerates in the range 4–25 This study is important as it addressed a practical industrial problem encountered by the dry powder inhaler formulation industry. The study has revealed the mechanism of dispersibility change during storage and thus this body of knowledge provides guidance and direction to mixture design and formulation strategies. A laboratory scale mixing process was employed using small batches (5 Shyamal Das would like to acknowledge the scholarship support through the Faculty of Pharmacy, Monash University. Shyamal Das also acknowledges Dr Handoko Adi and Dr Herbert Chiou for their support during the use of NGI and Mastersizer 2000, and Dr Joseph A Nicolazzo for his help in statistical analysis.