Fluid injection into the subsurface and its resulting effects have become a widespread subject in various fields of geosciences. Examples are carbon dioxide injection for the greenhouse gas sequestration, The reactivation potential of fractures and faults, also known as slip tendency, requires geomechanical assessment that incorporates stress and pore pressure conditions. When no recovered rock core samples are available for direct measurements, the next best thing would be an indirect estimation based on whatever may indicate the frictional property. Although various aspects of fracture conditions such as asperity, infilling material and fracture plane alterations can affect the frictional property, The frictional property is also shown to be affected by a wide range of host rock physical characteristics, especially in sedimentary rocks. As described above, the frictional property of a discontinuity should be affected primarily by infilling material. If infillings are not present, the friction may be affected significantly by host rock properties. Even in the case where infillings are present, the understanding the effect of host rock properties on friction may provide some guideline to assess the frictional coefficient (for example, by giving some limiting value), especially for sedimentary rocks where the fracture infillings tend to originate largely from host rock material. In this context, we attempt to find any proxies that can be used to estimate indirectly frictional coefficients of fractures in sandstones. Possible such proxies could be basic petrophysical properties of rocks surrounding fractures, which are relatively easily measurable using geophysical logging. To that end, we carry out a series of laboratory direct shear tests in various types of sandstones with different known properties, and we look for some relations between frictional coefficient and the petrophysical properties. Further, we apply the obtained relations to a wellbore drilled in sandstone formations to estimate frictional coefficients there. The present study may provide a practical way of estimating frictional coefficients in sandstones when direct measurements are not available. The rocks used in the present study are sandstone cores (diameter: 47–65 We measured several petrophysical properties of the sandstones recovered from various depths, including density, porosity, P-wave velocity, and clay content, which are often considered to reflect consolidation and cementation characteristics of sedimentary rocks. We focus on frictional property of fractures that do not contain infillings to avoid any complexity associated with the presence of the infilling material. Thus, fractures we test are the discontinuous planes between two sandstone blocks with known petrophysical properties. We generated a saw-cut fracture plane perpendicular to the core axis for direct shear tests. Thus, the fracture planes in our experiments are circular-shaped. Using flat saw-cut fractures has some implications in scale effect (or alternatively fracture roughness effect) on shear strength. Because fractures tested in the laboratory have a limited dimension considerably smaller than that normally encountered in situ, frictional characteristics determined from the laboratory tests might not represent that in the field, mainly due to scale effect. The sandstone core containing a saw-cut fracture was fixed in the shear box of the direct shear testing apparatus using casting cement ( A total of 38 specimens were tested, the results of which are summarized in The examples in In our study, we focus on frictional coefficient at slip initiation ( In order to explore relationships between A noteworthy aspect in Eqs. The decreasing trend of Depending on types of clay tested, however, slightly different friction behaviors can be observed. In order to more clearly visualize the distinct effect of clay types on friction, we plot linear relations that best-fit individual results for different clay types in Another pronounced difference in In general, it is thus recommended to calibrate the relation between frictional coefficient and clay content for specific rock types. When cores are not available for calibration, some friction experiments on clean cuttings may provide an important calibration point for the reference frictional coefficient at Given the simplified relationships between The results shown in After shear experiment, a multitude of microcracks and microfractures are intensively developed within the host rocks, which reach to multiple grain size distance (3–4 In the deep sample ( Overall, the microscopic observations suggest that even though a pre-existing fracture exists that could accommodate slip, the actual slip and friction processes are accommodated within a localized zone in the host rocks, which supports our argument that friction is affected by properties of host rocks. To check feasibility of the proposed method, we attempt to estimate frictional coefficients of fractures that might be present in the borehole where the tested cores were recovered. Unfortunately, we did not conduct geophysical logging for velocity and porosity in the borehole. The only available geophysical log in this borehole that can be utilized for the estimation of frictional coefficients is natural gamma ray log ( This specific application of our results to estimate frictional coefficient is convincing since we use the empirical relations derived from the cores retrieved from the borehole of interest. As we already mentioned earlier, some calibrations of the empirical equations are recommended for applications to other types of sandstones in other boreholes in that uncertainty in friction coefficient can be as high as ±0.2 as shown in As we discussed above, an accurate estimation of the frictional coefficient of fractures and faults has an important implication for geomechanical risk assessment of reactivation of such structures. For CO However, we recommend a calibration of the empirical relations between frictional coefficient and petrophysical properties using some direct measurements, because the relationships are purely empirical and may vary depending on intrinsic nature of rock formation. Also, there is always uncertainty in whether or not lab-measured frictional coefficient would represent that in situ. Finally, we would like to demonstrate the sensitivity of the frictional coefficient in an assessment of critical reservoir pore pressure that would trigger slip reactivation along faults. We calculate the critical pressures for varying conditions of in situ stress and frictional coefficient, using the simple cohesionless Coulomb friction criterion for defining stress conditions for slip along a fault: The calculated Δ We investigated effects of host rock properties on frictional characteristics of fracture encompassed by the host rock, with an emphasis on feasibility of using host rock petrophysical properties to estimate frictional coefficient of fracture. By comparing frictional coefficients measured from a series of direct shear tests and petrophysical properties (porosity, P-wave velocity, and clay content), we found that frictional coefficient tends to decrease with increasing porosity, decreasing P-wave velocity and increasing clay content. Microscopic observations also indicate that slip process occurs not only along an existing fracture, but also within the host rocks encompassing the fracture, similarly to fault damage zone, which suggests that host rock property can affect the frictional behavior. Empirical equations between frictional coefficient and other petrophysical properties, if calibrated preferentially, enable estimating indirectly the frictional coefficient of fracture when properties of host rock are known, for instance, through geophysical logging. Use of reliable estimates of frictional coefficient is especially important for geomechanical risk assessment in fluid injection projects such as CO This work was supported by the Energy Efficiency & Resources of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the