A conventional cement grinding circuit is composed of a two compartment tube mill, a mill filter which collects the fine material inside the mill and a dynamic air separator where final product with required fineness is collected. In general the material fed to the circuit has a top size of 50mm which is very coarse for the ball mill. For this purpose, later in 1980s, high pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) has found applications as a pregrinder which increased throughput of the grinding circuit at the same fineness.
                  In early applications, HPGR was operated in open circuit. But later as the operating principle of the equipment based on the compression, some portion of the HPGR discharge recycled back to improve efficiency of the mill or operated closed circuit with classifiers. Within this study effect of open and closed circuit HPGR applications on dry grinding circuit performance was examined. For this purpose sampling studies around three different cement grinding circuit were completed. In the first study, a circuit including open circuit HPGR, ball mill and air separator was sampled and chosen as the basic condition. As the final product size distribution is important for grinding circuit, model structure of each equipment was developed. The second and third surveys were carried out around closed circuit HPGR operation with V and VSK separator to develop models for the separators. Finally the separator models were used in basic condition to simulate closed circuit HPGR application.
                  It was understood from the studies that closed circuit HPGR operation improved the overall circuit efficiency at the same final product fineness by reducing the specific energy consumption.Cement manufacturing is an energy intense process that totally consumes 120–150 Conventional cement grinding circuit includes a tumbling mill, mill filter (or static air separator) and dynamic air separator. Tumbling mills were developed to supply demand of mineral industry and cement industry where fine milling was required. In 1890s tumbling mills were started to be used in cement industry. Due to its large and heavy design they were evolved to ball mill and tube mills (long tumbling mills). After the development, cement making process were composed of a short mill operated in closed circuit with an air separator or long mill operated in open circuit. Then, the short mills and tube mills were combined with a division head separating into two compartments. In the 1920s and 1930s, many combinations were tried for multiple compartment mills in cement grinding ( The studies showed that the effect of a good design versus a bad design was considerable which also indicated that specific energy consumption saving of 5–10% being achievable ( Air classification is a process of separating particles into coarse and fine fractions according to their size, shape and the specific gravity. That process is characterized by cut size which determines the portion of the fractions. Particles finer than the cut size reports to the overflow while coarser particles reports to the underflow stream ( Nowadays high efficiency air classifiers are preferred in final separation because of their efficiency. Static air separator were also placed in cement grinding process after the ball mills and their main uses are to improve the mill ventilation and do a separation at mill discharge so that material with a required fineness is sent to the final product stream. Thus overgrinding is prevented. Ventilation is crucial for a ball mill in order to improve material transportation and keeping temperature in a constant level. For this purpose, filters (bag filters, electrostatic precipitators) or static air separators are used. In a cement circuit the fan level of filter and static separator is recommended to be at its highest. So during the design stage, fan is selected to supply air velocity of 1–1.5 Equipments found applications in cement grinding circuit are listed above. With a conventional circuit, optimization can be achieved by changing the design and operating conditions of those equipments such as mill intermediate diaphragm design, ball size distribution, ventilation improvements and homogeneous feeding to a limited extend. Energy efficiency is the main concern of many industries. For this purpose circuits are optimized as mentioned above or energy efficient equipments are adopted to the existing circuit. HPGR was one of the new concepts. It was developed by HPGR may cope with a material has a top size of 50 After the invention of HPGR’s various configurations have been tried. Those configurations have resulted decrease in specific energy consumption by 10–50% when compared with closed circuit ball milling ( Open circuit HPGR – closed circuit ball milling. Open circuit HPHR with partial recycling – closed circuit ball milling. Hybrid grinding. Closed circuit HPGR closed circuit ball milling. Semi-finish grinding. As can be seen from the figures, in closed circuit HPGR applications either classifiers or splitters are used (recycling). Classification at HPGR discharge is needed due to the edge effect which means the particle in feed stream to be appeared in the product stream. Recycling load is another application. It is expected that increasing the recycling load resulted to have finer size distributions compared to open circuit. The reason is recirculated material decreases the voids in material bed which improves energy transfer efficiency of the rollers. In addition to those figures, new technologies were developed for classification purposes. V and VSK separators were developed to disagglomerate the flakes at HPGR discharge and to increase the throughput of the circuit ( The V-separator is fed by gravity ( V-separators perform four functions. Separation of fines. Drying or cooling of material. Deagglomeration of cake. Mixing of fresh and recycled material. Following the development of V-separators, manufacturers tried to combine dynamic air classifier and V-separator in an equipment. VSK separators were developed for this purpose ( In this study open circuit HPGR application was turned into closed circuit with V and VSK separator with the aid of simulation techniques. In the following sections, studies are presented in detail. As the aim of the study is to investigate the effects of closed circuit HPGR application, sampling campaign around three different cement plants were arranged. In the first study, a circuit including open circuit HPGR, ball mill and air separator was sampled and chosen as the basic condition ( As soon as the samples were collected around circuit, they were characterized by laboratory studies. Characterization studies includes determination of particle size distribution down to 1.8 After mass balancing studies efficiency of each equipment was taken into the consideration. Separator efficiency was evaluated by Whiten’s efficiency curve approach. Whiten’s approach (Eq. In this paper ball mill model was developed by using perfect mixing approach ( The model for steady state operations includes two sets of model parameters, i.e. the breakage function The ball mill model is calibrated by determining the HPGR performance was evaluated in terms of reduction ratio, specific energy consumption basis. In this section balance results are presented ( The results of the sampling campaign (size distributions and performance parameters) around HPGR are illustrated in In order to carry out simulation studies, model structures for ball mill and air separator were developed. In Ball mill exist in the grinding circuit has installed power of 2200 When power draws of each equipment were taken into consideration, this circuit consumed 32.98 Following mass balancing studies ( In mass balancing studies VSK separator was separated into V-Sep and dynamic separator in order to evaluate their performance individually. In Performance of V-separator and dynamic separator are significantly different which are shown in In simulation studies, model structures developed by Hacettepe University Comminution Group were used. In HPGR modelling, over 50 sets of industrial data collected around different cement grinding circuits were used ( Before starting the simulations of closed circuit HPGR applications, model of the basic condition (grinding circuit with open circuit HPGR) was validated ( In the first simulation study, closed circuit HPGR with V-separator was tested. V-separator discharge was splitted into two products, one of them was sent to HPGR again while the other stream was sent to ball mill. As the capacity of HPGR was 300 Simulation results showed that throughput of the circuit was increased from 71 Energy consumptions were compared in It is illustrated in In the last simulation, HPGR operated with VSK separator was tested. It is known that VSK operated circuits are operated in higher circulating loads. As the capacities of the equipments exist in the basic condition were not sufficient it was assumed that new equipments were installed. In this configuration HPGR with capacity of 300 The simulation results are illustrated in Within the study, effect of open and closed circuit HPGR application on cement grinding circuit was tried to be examined. For this purpose sampling campaigns were carried out at three different cement plants. Cement grinding plant including open circuit HPGR were sampled at first then extra sampling campaigns were arranged in order to develop classifier models (V and VSK). Finally simulation studies were completed. Studies carried out at the same final product size distributions showed that in closed circuit HPGR application with V-Sep, overall circuit throughput was increased by 25%. But in general it is expected that throughput improvement may be higher than 25%. But design of HPGR (300 HPGR with VSK separator simulations were accomplished with the assumption of installing equipments with sufficient capacity. Studies showed this application increased capacity by 223%. Authors want to thank Hacettepe Comminution Group for their great contribution.