Polycrystalline fine powder of YAlO3 (YAP) was synthesized by the modified polymeric precursor method. A preliminary gradual pyrolytic decomposition under nitrogen flux was crucial in the removal process of organic residues to avoid the formation of molecular level inhomogeneities. YAP single phase was crystallized at temperatures between 950°C and 1000°C using chemically homogeneous ball-milled amorphous particles and very fast heating rates, corresponding to the lowest synthesis temperature of pure YAP nanopowder by soft chemistry routes.YAP (YAlO Synthesis of YAP powder has been performed by solid-state reaction synthesis, The metal precursors used in this study were yttrium nitrate (Y(NO Two different thermal treatments were then used to remove the organic components of the primary precursor powder during the mineralization process. First, a calcination route consisting of an annealing at 400 To improve the homogeneity and reactivity of these amorphous powders, they were ball milled using yttria-stabilized zirconia spheres (YSZ, Tosoh Co.). The process was accomplished in a homemade ball milling system. The best ball milling results were obtained from a two-stage process. The first one consisted of a dry ball milling for about 72 Phase analysis was carried out by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) technique using the Co Kα radiation of a Siemens D5000 diffractometer. Scanning electron micrographs (SEM) were recorded with a Jeol 940A electron microscope. Coupled differential thermal analysis and thermogravimetry (DTA–TG) were carried out in a Setaram (TAG 1600) equipment using alumina crucibles. The production of the amorphous precursor powder by the calcination route, under oxygen atmosphere, usually leads to the formation of large aggregates like that shown in Chemical inhomogeneities of amorphous precursor can favor the formation of the intermediate YAG and YAM stable phases during the synthesis of crystalline powder. This process intensifies with the use of large amorphous precursor particles and low heating rates due to the differences in the Al and Y ions mobility. Thus, intending to reduce the synthesis temperature, the entire organic residues removal process must be carefully accomplished, in such a way as to avoid the occurrence of uncontrolled combustion that leads to the formation of large aggregates and to inhomogeneous distribution of metal ions in the amorphous network. On the other hand, ball milling of amorphous precursor combined with very fast heating rates can minimize the generation of inhomogeneities during the crystallization stage. The advantages of this procedure are associated to the reduction of heat and mass diffusion length. In this work, high heating rates were achieved by placing the samples into the previously heated furnace at the final synthesis temperature, here designated as In this case, the direct combustion under oxygen atmosphere of the primary precursor powder was replaced by a gradual pyrolytic decomposition under nitrogen flux at 700 The DTA curve of the pyrolytic amorphous powder obtained at 700 On the other hand, the insert (b) of  This significant synthesis improvement, through the pyrolysis process that allows the preparation of reactive YAP fine powders at low temperatures, is crucial for the in progress preparation of ceramics by sintering. We have demonstrated that using this modified polymeric precursor method with a carefully controlled mineralization process, it is possible to prepare fine powders of pure YAP phase at temperatures as low as 1000 CAPES/COFECUB Brazil–France cooperation program (project 455/04/06) and CNPq.