The objective of this study is the introduction of an optimum model extent in discontinuous rock masses for tunnel inflow assessment using numerical models. Tunnel groundwater inflow is an important problem in tunneling, and numerical simulation is widely used for estimating the amount of tunnel inflow. An adequate size of the model domain is of very high importance when using such models. On the one hand, if the tunnel boundary is too close to the outer model boundary, the simulated inflow rate into the tunnel is significantly overestimated (which will be shown in the present study). On the other hand, if the model domain is very large, models may become “unhandy”, and simulations become very expensive with respect to computer memory and CPU. In this technical note, an approach is presented that derives an optimum model extent for numerical simulation of tunnel inflow in fractured rock. The approach uses the two-dimensional universal distinct element code (UDEC). The impact of different model parameters, such as tunnel radius, groundwater level, joint spacing, joint dip/dip direction and joint aperture on the optimum model extent has been evaluated. Based on the results, an optimum model extent chart is presented that allows modelers a quick determination of the optimum model extent as a function of the most significant parameters, which are the tunnel depth under the groundwater level, tunnel radius and joint spacing.Water inflow into tunnels is an important problem in tunneling in fractured rock masses. According to Estimating the amount of water inflow into a tunnel can be supported using numerical modeling methods such as Finite Element Method (FEM), Discrete Fracture Model (DFM), Discrete Element Method (DEM) and Finite Volume Method (FVM). The application of numerical methods is typically more complex and time consuming than the use of analytical equations that estimate tunnel inflow (e.g., A jointed rock mass is characterized by the presence of geological structures of different scales, such as faults and dykes, with a typical dimension of tens to hundreds of meters; or joints, bedding planes and foliations with typical dimensions ranging from a few centimeters to tens of meters ( In well-defined and connected rock fractures, the flow behavior of a jointed rock mass is controlled by the fracture characteristics. In numerical simulations however, also the extent of the model domain relative to the dimension of geological fractures and other geometric parameters can have a significant impact on calculated flow. In the case of small model dimension, the tunnel boundary may be too close to the outer model boundary. As a result, calculated groundwater flow into the tunnel is overestimated. The reason for this is that tunnel drainage causes a drawdown of the hydraulic head in the tunnel surroundings, which cannot be reproduced by a constant head boundary. Hence, the hydraulic head defined at this boundary is too high. When the model size is very large, numerical simulation requires more memory, strong CPU power and more time to implement, handle and run the model. Few publications have considered the effects of the model dimension on calculated tunnel inflow. In this work, we define the optimum model extent (ME) as the minimum dimension at which calculated groundwater inflow into the tunnel is not biased by the proximity of the outer model boundary condition. The aim of the study is to develop a chart that allows the modeler to quickly determine the optimum model extent dependent on used model parameters. Developing the optimum model extent required an identification of the most significant parameters that impact this extent. Therefore, parametric studies with various sizes of the model extent were performed in the present study to determine the optimum model extent. Among possible significant parameters are those determining groundwater flow in the tunnel surroundings, which are joint parameters (orientation, spacing and aperture), tunnel parameters (radius, depth) and hydraulic parameters (groundwater level) (e.g., The distinct element method (UDEC) was used in this study. It is based on a Lagrangian calculation scheme in which the rock mass is represented by a set of blocks interacting with each other only at the contact points; the behavior of the whole is governed by the characteristics of the contacts and block’s mechanical properties ( An intact rock block interacts with adjacent blocks through contacts that are located along two conjugate and equally spaced joint sets, and the tunnel is intersected by joints as shown in The parameters used for modeling are listed in The following boundary conditions were applied: A stress boundary condition is created along the top of boundary, with a fixed ratio, No pore pressure along the top boundary surface as the groundwater table coincides with the top boundary surface. Constant water pressure along the bottom boundary, and linearly increasing the fluid pressure along the left and right vertical surfaces.  Numerical simulations were carried out via a fully hydraulic-mechanical coupled approach. Only saturated flow was considered. At the tunnel boundary, at first a no-flow boundary condition was applied (condition before excavation). Subsequently (after tunnel excavation), a constant hydraulic head corresponding to zero pressure was applied. This disturbance creates a drainage process from the discrete fracture network into the tunnel, also leading to a water-table drawdown. The lateral extent of the model domain is given by the model extent The groundwater level above the tunnel can be varied by varying the hydraulic head assigned to the top and the vertical boundaries. By specifying a constant hydraulic head at these boundaries, drawdown of the groundwater table at these boundaries as a result of tunnel inflow cannot occur, because it is balanced by groundwater recharge in the models. Hence, water inflow into the tunnel is influenced by the distance of the tunnel from the outer model boundaries. In this study, the groundwater flow into the tunnel is considered to be steady flow. In addition, in order to assess the impact of different model parameters on the calculated water inflow and the optimum model extent, a parametric study was performed. At first, it is shown that tunnel inflow causes a drawdown of the hydraulic head at the location of the out model boundaries, and that the amount of this drawdown is related to the model extent. In the parametric study, each of the individual parameters was increased between 10 and 20% while the others were kept constant. Subsequently, the impact of that change in the rate of water inflow was analyzed ( Considering the effective parameters on groundwater flow in a discontinuous rock mass, the water inflow rate into tunnel relative to the model extent (expressed as As it can be seen in  It is noteworthy to mention that the joint aperture is one of the most important parameters in determining the amount of flow into the tunnel (  Reliability of numerical simulations is more important in practice. Therefore, the tunnel inflow values obtained from discrete element analysis were compared to those derived from other standard analytical solutions; where For validation of the model, several sections were selected as samples of the whole numerical simulation taking into account various ranges of parameters ( Some interesting conclusions were made through comparison of the standard analytical method with the numerical analysis method, however, they are very different in their formulation. This is important since a global coherence can be seen in among results, irrespective of their relative difference. It is inferred that the framework developed for numerical simulation is methodologically correct and the results are reliable and consistent. Considering the main parameters affecting groundwater inflow to tunnel in fractured rock masses like tunnel radius, joint spacing and joint aperture as well as the various model dimensions in the numerical simulation process, the related model domain extent chart was developed ( Steady state flow with constant hydraulic head at the outer model boundaries; Blocks are assumed to be impermeable and the groundwater flows only through the fractures between the impermeable blocks; Joint spacing is regular; Laminar flow regime. The current analysis is limited to regular joint patterns. However, the presented approach could also be applied to irregular joint patterns. In addition, future work could evaluate the influence of the joint stiffness and the normal effective stress, which in our study was considered constant with depth. This study highlights the effects of the size of the model domain on calculated tunnel inflow in discontinuous rock masses using numerical models, and presents a chart to estimate the optimum model extent. To this end, a large number of numerical simulations were performed using different model parameters and model sizes. A parametric study analyzed the impact of the model parameters joint aperture, joint spacing, joint orientation, tunnel radius and hydraulic head on calculated tunnel inflow as well as on the optimum model extent. The analysis showed that the optimum model extend depends only on the parameters hydraulic head, tunnel radius and joint spacing. If these parameters are known, the presented chart can be readily used to determine the extent of the model domain that is optimal with respect to both accuracy of calculated tunnel inflow and computational costs. Thus, the presented study assists modelers in an accurate and efficient model development. The first author would like to thank Arash Nikvar Hassani for constructive discussion and valuable comments on the manuscript.