The leaching rate of alumina in the alumina digestion process is usually obtained via off-line analysis with a long time delay, leading to delayed control of the process and creating ongoing problems, such as a low leaching rate and wasted energy. Therefore, prediction of the online leaching rate is highly important. Based on mechanistic analysis of the double stream digestion process and the digestion kinetics of diaspore, a kinetics model established at the laboratory scale was scaled up to an industrial process. The unknown model parameters were estimated from the industrial data using a state transition algorithm (STA), which is a new and effective optimization algorithm. An error compensation model based on the kernel extreme learning machine (KELM) was subsequently built, and a prediction model for the leaching rate of alumina was established by parallel connection of the kinetics model with the compensation model. The validation results show that the model can predict the leaching rate of alumina for 90% of the samples with relative errors within ±2% compared with the actual industrial data. The developed model will be further evaluated for control in the corresponding industrial process.In the digestion portion of the Bayer process for alumina production, bauxite ore slurry and caustic solution are mixed and heated to react and leach Al On-line prediction of the product quality is desirable for optimal control in complex industrial processes that include the problem of off-line analysis ( The soft-sensing method based on process data is an effective approach to applying online measurement in complex industrial processes. The statistical multi-linear regression analysis method, artificial natural network method and adaptive-network based fuzzy inference system have been used to predict the Al The aim of this study is to develop a prediction model for the leaching rate of alumina that is suitable for implementation at the industrial scale to solve the online measurement problem. Based on analysis of the double-stream digestion process, a new model was developed based on the models proposed by Bao ( The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In In the industrial double-stream digestion process, as shown in In the industrial process, the leaching rate is determined by the chemical compositions in the outlet solution from the last digester. However, off-line analysis of the values takes approximately 1 The diasporic bauxite in China primarily consists of diaspore (AlO(OH)) and silica(SiO Although many reports exist on the kinetics models of the diasporic ore leaching process, there is no consensus on which is the best. The following models are the most commonly used in recent years. Gu ( The aforementioned models were all verified with experimental data only and cannot be directly applied to the continuous process. Based on the models proposed by Bao ( The mechanism function for diaspore dissolution in caustic solution given by Bao ( According to the thermal analysis kinetics ( Due to the complexity of the actual process, the reaction order is not the same as that obtained from the experiments. Additionally, the grain size of the ore and the concentration of the caustic solution both have an influence on the leaching rate. Therefore, based on Eq. Based on the reaction kinetics and mass balance, a model suitable for the continuous digestion process was developed. To keep the model simple yet effective, the following assumptions were invoked in the development of the model. The slurry and caustic solution are perfectly mixed, and the effect of agitation rate on leaching rate of alumina can be ignored. The volumetric hold-up in a digester is held constant. The digesters in the direct heating stage and the insulation stage can be treated as continuous stirred-tank reactors, and the indirect heating tube is similar to plugging the flow reactor. Therefore, at the direct heating stage, the mass balance of the dissolved alumina in a digester is expressed as, The digesters are sealed, and the solution volume remains almost constant. Therefore, replacing the superheated steam by an equivalent amount of water, the outlet flow rate of the first two digesters can be calculated as follows, The temperature of the first two digesters is expressed as: At the indirect heating stage, based on the mass balance and energy balance, the concentration of alumina and the temperature of the feed solution are expressed as: Eqs. The outlet concentration of the alumina and the outlet temperature of the indirect heating tube are calculated by Eq. In the insulation stage, the formula for calculation of alumina concentration in the digesters is the same as in Eq. The outlet concentration of alumina can be obtained according to Eqs. In the fitting procedure, a weighed least-squares error function is defined in Eq. Because the optimization problem in Eq. State transition algorithm is a new optimization method based on state transition ( The algorithm treats a solution of the optimization problem as a state and updating of a solution as a state transition process. Consider the following optimization problem: The following four special state transformation operators are designed in the algorithm to search for the optimal solution. Rotation transformation Translation transformation Expansion transformation Axesion transformation The main procedures of the state transition algorithm are outlined as follows. An introduction to the state transition algorithm and details on convergence analysis and validation can be found in Refs ( A total of 208 samples sets were collected from the industrial process during 18 All of the methods were run under the MATLAB (Version R2013a) software platform. The parameters were set to To validate the effectiveness of STA, 50 independent trials were run. Additionally, the gradient-descent, particle swarm optimization (PSO) and genetic algorithm (GA) were run for comparison. In PSO, The prediction results of the last digester using the validation data are shown in By using the kinetics model, the continuously changing curves of alumina concentration in the last digester under the four conditions (as shown in Because of the complex reaction mechanism of the high-pressure digestion process, many possible reasons exist for unsatisfactory prediction results using the kinetics model (as shown in A data-based model takes advantages of the rules implicated in the process data and is able to reflect many uncertainties in the process. Therefore, this type of model can supplement the shortcomings of the mechanistic model. In the rare-earth countercurrent extraction process, a component content error compensation model based on adaptive neural-fuzzy networks was built and realized for on-line measurement ( Due to the complexity of the industrial process, nonlinear regression methods have more wide application than the traditional linear methods ( The inputs of the model include the contents of TiO According to the theory of the kernel extreme learning machine, the output function of KELM is The kernel function is important to the performance of kernel methods. The common kernel functions for nonlinear problems are RBF, polynomial, multi-layer perceptron, and sigmoid. Thus far, no analytical or empirical study has conclusively established the superiority of one kernel over another; thus, the kernel is usually selected by experiment or experience. For different applications, different kernels have been found to be the most suitable, or sometimes several kernels show almost identical performance ( Ranges [1 10,000] and [0.1 1000] are initially used for The performance of the KELM model, multiple linear regression (MLR) and a SVM model which is also based on the kernel method are compared, as the results shown in The final alumina concentration is obtained using the KELM prediction model to supplement the error of the kinetics model, as shown in the calculation equation in Eq. Additionally, the leaching rate of the alumina is calculated via (25), The prediction results of the leaching rate are shown in The concentration of alumina in the process start-up procedure after acid cleaning can also be predicted using the integrated model. It is significant because it needs some time to make the process stable and the index is more frequently measured in the start-up process. On-line prediction can provide valuable guidance. The start-up process is a dynamic process. When the model is applied, the model structure does not need any modification. However, it is better to identify the model parameters to get accurate prediction results. The framework of this model can be used in any industrial hydrometallurgy process as well. If this model is used in a new hydrometallurgy process, the model parameters must be identified and determined using the corresponding process data. A prediction model for leaching rate of alumina based on mechanistic analysis of the digestion process and the leaching kinetics of diaspore was proposed and scaled to an industrial operation. The constant parameters of the model were identified from the industrial process data using the state transition algorithm method. A KELM compensation model for the kinetics model was subsequently developed. Finally, an integrated prediction model for the leaching rate of alumina was established by parallel connection of the kinetics model with the compensation model. Verification of the model using industrial data indicates that the integrated prediction model has high accuracy and can successfully predict the leaching rate and changing trend. This model serves as the foundation for optimization or control of product quality and costs. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the