Fluid bed granulation is a complex, multi-phase, multi-component unit operation often used in the pharmaceutical industry. Various attributes such as particle morphology, size, porosity, wettability, and binder viscosity play key roles in determining the overall size and composition of the granules that are produced. In this paper, we examine the interaction between binder addition and particle morphology and its impact on granule growth. A multi-dimensional population balance model that tracks the evolution of granule size and binder content distribution is used. A constant-number Monte Carlo algorithm that has been adapted to accommodate continuous processes such as the continuous addition of binder to a system is employed to solve the population balance. Simulation results are then compared with experimental results.Granulation is a common unit operation utilized across several industries including agricultural, food, mineral processing, pharmaceuticals, and specialty chemicals [ Wet granulation is the more common form of granulation in the pharmaceutical industry Population balance models have been applied to granulation quite broadly [ While many parameters can be considered for multi-dimensional analysis, 3-D models that track the evolution of solid, liquid, and gas within a granule are often utilized [ The work presented here also considers both size and binder composition to be key attributes that affect granulation The physical system that we model is a Wurster-style fluidized bed granulator We focus on a two-component population balance model that describes the granulation of a single powder with binder. To model the granulation, we modify the two-component form of the Smoluchowski equation given by Lushnikov The physics of the process is governed by the aggregation kernel, Here, To express the kernel in dimensionless form, we define a dimensionless diameter as The kernel is now written as Here, the We carefully examined the nature of In essence, binder–binder droplets were prohibited and the The success factor, The geometrical portion considers the probability that two granules will hit each other on a wet surface based on microscopic models for binder-granule dynamics [ The geometrical success factor accounts for the accessible binder fraction on a granule and is given by the equation The accessible fraction of binder is the fraction of a granule's surface area that is covered by binder and available for coagulation; it not only depends on the amount of binder, but also the surface roughness and wettability of the powder. Stepanek et al. provide the following correlation for this quantity The physical success factor takes into account a Stokes number analysis to determine the potential success of a collision It accounts for collisions of Type I and Type II, where the former refers to sticking that occurs before the particle surfaces come into contact, and the latter to sticking that takes place after the particle surfaces collide and begin to rebound. The Stokes number of colliding particles is The numerical solution of the population balance equation is accomplished via constant-number Monte Carlo Monte Carlo simulations stochastically track a discrete subset of particles within a simulation box as they undergo size transformations by coagulation or other processes. Particle attributes are captured in individual arrays that can contain any number of intrinsic properties, including but not limited to granule and binder mass. The behavior of these particles during the simulation is indicative of the behavior of the entire population. In constant-number Monte Carlo, randomly selected particles are chosen and replicated or deleted as necessary to maintain a constant number of particles in the system. With this technique, it is possible to simulate a long growth time with a finite number of simulation particles. In Monte Carlo, each process that affects the particle distribution is simulated as a stochastic event. For the purposes of this analysis, “particle” refers to binder drops, dry granules (primary particles) and binder-covered granules of any size. These are distinguished internally in the simulation by their composition, i.e., the percentage of mass due to binder and solid excipient. There are two such processes in this problem: agglomeration, which refers to the formation of a larger granule from two smaller ones, and binder flow, which adds binder “particles” into the granulator. The basic outline of the algorithm is as follows: Calculate the probability of each event (e.g., introduction of binder or aggregation). Choose the event to occur via a uniform random number generator. Implement the selected event as follows. If the event is agglomeration, two particles are selected and combined into a new granule. A randomly selected particle is then duplicated and added into the simulation box to keep the number constant. If the event is binder flow, a predetermined number of binder drops are introduced. An equal number of particles, chosen randomly, are deleted from the simulation box to keep the total number constant. Update all metrics (mass concentration, number concentration, time advancement, etc.) The probability of an event is calculated in proportion to the rate of the event by the equations The value of the characteristic concentration, The flow of binder is discretized by defining the “flow event” as the introduction of Events are implemented by the general constant-number algorithm [ Number and mass concentration are tracked during simulation and updated accordingly following the implementation of an event. The derivation of these expressions and their validation has been given previously [ Here, The mean dimensionless time that elapses between Monte Carlo events is given by The quantities used to formulate the problem in dimensionless form may be chosen arbitrarily. For the calculations shown here, the following characteristic variables are used: All simulations were conducted using FORTRAN and a computer with a 2.80 If the aggregation kernel is constant, the number and mass concentration of particles (including granules and binder drops) is given by the simplified equations An analytical solution for the average granule size as a function of time is determined from the solution of these equations. We conducted a final validation check by evaluating the case of a simplified KTGF kernel with only a geometric success factor. (The main difference between this case and the model we use to compare with experiments is the absence of a physical success factor here). Because no analytical solution exists for this case, we proceeded by comparing the granulation profiles of the rigorous discrete method and cNMC. As before, we consider the rigorous method to be accurate at early times; by increasing the maximum size, this accuracy extends to longer times. In The experiments that form the basis for assessing the current granulation model are those of Rajniak et al. The parameters used in the simulations are summarized in Experimental In the case of A-TAB, a relatively long lag time is present before the granules start to grow. This delay in the onset of growth is attributed to the rough surface of A-TAB particles; sufficient binder must first accumulate in the crevices of the particle before granule growth can commence. The simulation results capture this feature quite well ( The growth of the powder with an intermediate degree of surface roughness, Mannitol, is shown in  Though the simulation A benefit of 2-dimensional mathematical modeling in general, and cNMC in particular, is that we can obtain more information about a system than is obvious or easily gathered from experiment. One such example is the distribution of binder among the various size classes during granulation. In a 1-dimensional model that tracks only size, an assumption of uniform binder thickness across all size classes must be made. However, it has been shown that particle coating thickness is dependent on particle size In Granule growth occurs rapidly for the smoothest powder, Avicel. Even at a relatively early time of The opposite is true for the roughest powder, A-TAB; these powder particles require significant binder coating before coagulation can occur. Fifteen minutes into the granulation, granule growth is still virtually nonexistent (< Because the primary particle roughness of Mannitol lies between that of Avicel and A-TAB, the binder distribution profile also lies between that observed for Avicel and Mannitol. Overall, these results generally complement the work of others In The impact of the coarsening factor on simulation speed is shown in In The coarsening factor of choice for these simulations was determined to be 10 binder droplets per event. This value minimized the computation time while still maintaining the accuracy obtained by the use of smaller coarsening factors. The main governing factor in choosing this value is the relative rate of the competing events (i.e., coagulation and binder flow events). The ultimate goal is to have rates that are close in value such that the “delta We adapted a multi-dimensional population balance model to include the effect of particle morphology on granulation growth. We accomplished this task through the use of a semi-batch constant-number Monte Carlo method and the implementation of a physically based description for the impact of binder content on the coagulation kernel's collision success factor. cNMC simulations were fitted to experimental data; the binder distribution associated with each growth profile was explained by the degree of primary particle surface roughness. The current model has great potential despite the fact that it currently does not consider the impact of moisture on the granulation profile. Through the use of only one adjustable parameter, the agglomeration constant of the KTGF kernel for particle-particle collisions, simulations match well with experimental data for three very different growth profiles.  empirical correction parameter used in calculation of initial particle number concentration, 1/m particle number concentration, 1/m characteristic concentration = empirical correction parameter used in calculation of dimensionless particle mass concentration dimensionless particle number concentration diameter of particle characteristic diameter used to form dimensionless diameter, m population volume mean diameter, m number concentration of particles with total mass empirical correction parameter used in calculation of empirical correction parameter used in calculation of asperity (roughness) of the primary particle surface, m coagulation kernel between particles 1 and 2, m coagulation constant, m dimensionless part of coagulation kernel between particles 1 and 2 dimensionless ensemble average of kernels within the population number of particles in simulation box, dimensionless number of binder droplets added per Monte Carlo event, dimensionless probability of a Monte Carlo event, dimensionless binder droplet flow rate, 1/s dimensionless rate of a Monte Carlo event mean radius of gyration, m Stokes number used in calculation of physical portion of physical success factor, dimensionless critical Stokes number, dimensionless time, s characteristic time = mass of binder in particle velocity of particle collision, m/s total mass of particle characteristic volume of a monodisperse binder droplet with diameter reactor volume, m characteristic volume average dimensionless mass in simulation box dimensionless mass of a monodisperse binder droplet with diameter total dimensionless mass of particle change in dimensionless mass due to particulate event dimensionless diameter of particle dimensionless population volume mean diameter binder to solid ratio of particle portion of dimensionless coagulation kernel between particles 1 and 2 Agglomeration constant, 1/(m exponent, dimensionless accessible binder fraction of particle binder layer thickness between 2 colliding particles, m binder viscosity, kg/(ms) particle density, kg/m dimensionless time characteristic coagulation time, s characteristic binder flow stream time, s displaced binder volume of particle collision success factor, dimensionless geometric portion of collision success factor, dimensionless physical portion of collision success factor, dimensionless coagulation binder flow stream pre-Monte Carlo event value This study is based upon the work partially supported by the