The main challenge for copper smelters is to ensure product quality under the constant increase in impurities (As, Se, Mo, Co, Zn, Sb, and Pb) in copper ores that has occurred over the years. The presence of toxic elements, such as As(V), in acidic streams rich Cu(II) and Zn(II) (pH 2.0–2.5) limits the valorisation of both metals. In this study, a novel combination of the following two ion-exchange-based processes were proposed: i) membrane selectrodialysis (SED) for the selective separation of Zn(II)/Cu(II) from As(V) and ii) solvent-impregnated ion-exchange (IX) resins for the selective separation of Zn(II) from Cu(II). The selective separation of As(V), which is present in solution as H3AsO4/H2AsO4
                     –, is achieved using a combination of monocharge and non-monocharge selective cation-exchange membranes to avoid the co-precipitation of As(V) when IX resins are used for Cu(II)/Zn(II) recovery. This combination of processes represents the novelty of the present study since it could be used in hydrometallurgical industries to remove As(V) and, at the same time, to valorize two value-added metals [Cu(II) and Zn(II)]. At the moment, only single-stage processes have been proposed. Using SED, a Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich stream [97 ± 2% Cu(II) and 82 ± 3% Zn(II)] was obtained, and 60 ± 4% of As(V) was removed from the initial feed stream. Then, the separation of Zn(II) from Cu(II) was proposed using Lewatit VP OC 1026 resin at pH = 2.2 and 4.3, respectively. In this IX resin process, it was possible to recover 70 ± 3% of Zn(II) and 98 ± 2% of Cu(II) and to concentrate Zn(II) and Cu(II) around 30- and 23-times, respectively.Copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) are considered the most consumed non-ferrous metals obtained in the extractive metallurgy industry using either pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, or electrometallurgy processes. Pyrometallurgy is one of the most important processes, providing about 75–80% copper by flash smelting. On the other hand, zinc world output (90–95%) is obtained by means of hydrometallurgy processes Metallurgical process effluents are mainly composed of copper and zinc, which could be used as secondary resources for metal recovery, although current management options are complex Much attention has been devoted to novel membrane technology based on electrodialysis (ED), namely selectrodialysis (SED), which exhibits remarkable potential in oxyanion recovery, such as phosphate from wastewaters On the other hand, the most common processes for the removal of heavy metals from wastewaters are ion-exchange (IX) Finally, the retention of Zn(II) over Cu(II) at lower pH values provides the possibility of achieving separation of both metal ions by IX resins, and it provides single ion-rich streams that could be processed using electrowinning technologies Therefore, the aim of this work was to separate arsenic and recover copper and zinc from non-ferrous metallurgical industry streams by a new combination of technologies based on two ion-exchange processes: (i) SED and (ii) IX resins.  Anhydrous copper sulphate (CuSO Membranes used for SED experiments were supplied by Fujifilm Manufacturing Europe B.V (Netherlands). The following two ion-exchange resins were used for IX tests: (i) Purolite S960, which is a chelating resin composed of a bis-picolylamine group, purchased from Purolite, and (ii) Lewatit VP OC 1026, which is a solvent-impregnated resin containing the extractant agent D SED experiments were conducted using a conventional ED lab-scale set-up (ED 64-004) supplied by PCCell (Germany) whereas membranes were supplied by Fujifilm Manufacturing Europe B.V (Netherlands), with an active area of 64 cm The initial volume of each stream was 2 L, pumped at 15 L/h for the feed stream and the Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich and As(V)-rich products, while the electrode rinse solution was pumped at 90–100 L/h. A constant voltage of 7 V was applied at 25 °C for all experimental tests since this was the maximum allowed voltage with this membrane configuration. Samples collected during the experiments were analysed by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) to determine Cu(II), Zn(II), and As(V) concentrations in each stream during the operational time. Data are reported as the mean ± standard deviation of duplicate determinations. The separation efficiency of SED process was evaluated by using two concepts: (i) energy consumption and (ii) faradic yield On the other hand, the faradic yield for the product was calculated according to the following Eq. The following two types of configurations were used for the ion-exchange process with the resins: (i) a batch configuration to conduct kinetic and pH studies and (ii) a fixed-bed configuration to carry out individual separation of Cu(II) and Zn(II). Furthermore, two ion-exchange resins were used, Purolite S960 and Lewatit VP OC 1026. Batch kinetic experiments were performed in tubes with 0.5 g of each resin and 20 mL of Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich stream from the SED process, containing Cu(II) (1.55 ± 0.02 mM) and Zn(II) (0.61 ± 0.09 mM) at pH = 2.2. Experiments were done by shaking the samples at 200 rpm using a Heidolph Reax 2 overhead shaker (Germany) at room temperature (25 °C) for 30 min. Samples were withdrawn sequentially at certain time intervals, filtered and analysed by ICP to determine Cu(II) and Zn(II) concentrations in each sample over time. Data are reported as the mean ± standard deviation of duplicate determinations. Batch experiments were carried out at the same solid-to-liquid ratio (1:40 w/v) used in the kinetic study but with the ion-exchange time set at 2 h and the pH varied between the following values: −0.5, 0.0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, 4.0, 4.5, and 5.0. Two hours were enough to attain equilibrium because after 30 min of the kinetic study constant values were achieved. The pH was adjusted using 1 M NaOH or 1 M H Glass columns (1 cm diameter × 7 cm height) were packed with 2.75 g of resin. Then, the Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich stream from SED was pumped at 2 mL/min using a Miniplus 3 peristaltic pump (Gilson, USA) in an open-loop configuration to obtain Cu(II) and Zn(II) breakthrough curves at 25 °C. Samples were obtained over time using an FC 204 fraction collector (Gilson, USA), and metal concentrations were determined by ICP. The batch experiments determined the pH value that was used in the column experiments (maximum ion-exchange). After each ion-exchange process, the elution step was necessary to recover and concentrate the metals previously exchanged with the IX resins. The elution was carried out with 1 M H Data are reported as the mean ± standard deviation of duplicate determinations. The bed volume (BV) can be defined as the free volume in a fixed-bed column, described by the following Eq. On the other hand, the sorbed metal mass during the ion-exchange process was determined by integrating the area above the breakthrough curve for each metal. As C/C Therefore, resin sorption capacity ( where Regarding the elution process, the metal concentration in the elution stream is defined according to the following Eq. Consequently, the total percentage of metal recovery can be established by the relationship between sorption capacity and elution capacity of the resin. This parameter (metal recovery percentage, %) is calculated by the following Eq. ICP with optical emission spectrometry (OES) (Agilent 5100) or mass spectrometry (MS) (Agilent 7800) was used to determine element concentrations in mg/L or μg/L, respectively. Commercial metal standards were used to generate calibration curves. Once the initial feed solution, mainly composed of 1.65 mM Cu(II), 0.73 mM Zn(II), and 1.13 mM As(V) (from CuSO As shown in  All in all, it was proven that SED allowed for the separation of Cu(II) and Zn(II) (as a mixture of CuSO As plotted in Therefore, to determine the optimal time to stop the experiment, with low energy consumption and high Cu(II)/Zn(II) recovery, As seen in Finally, As seen in After the SED process, the Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich stream (containing 1.55 ± 0.02 mM Cu and 0.61 ± 0.09 mM Zn at pH = 2.2) was treated with resins to recover and separate Cu(II) and Zn(II). Afterwards, both ions could be reused in copper and zinc metallurgical industries, respectively. The kinetic profiles, represented as C/C  Under the acidity conditions of pH = 2.2, Cu(II) was not extracted and its kinetic performance was not reached (see From the kinetic studies, it can be concluded that Lewatit VP OC 2016 seems to be the most appropriate resin for Cu(II) and Zn(II) separation if using only one resin since both concentration curves [for Cu(II) and Zn(II)] during the ion-exchange process indicate different sorption capacities ( The metal retention dependence on equilibrium is shown in Considering that the aim was to maximize the recovery of one metal and not to alter the other, the optimum pH range for Cu(II) separation would be between 0.5 and 1.0. In this scenario, the highest recovery of Cu(II) is expected, while less than 6–10% of Zn(II) would be extracted. On the other hand, the pH effect on the metal retention capacity using the Lewatit VP OC 1026 resin is depicted in Taute et al. On the other hand, taking into account the regeneration step in Purolite S960, the regeneration of Cu(II) using an acid usually produces regeneration efficiencies of <60%, and complexing extractants with NH Therefore, the Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich stream from SED was treated in a fixed-bed configuration without changing the pH (around pH = 2.2) by the Lewatit VP OC 1026 resin, since at this pH the highest Zn(II) recovery was achieved ( The proposed experimental design is in accordance with work reported by Juang et al. The ion-exchange evolution of the Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich stream from the SED process by the selected resin is plotted in On the other hand, the concentration of Zn(II) remained constant in C/C The sorption capacities of the first column for Cu(II) and Zn(II) recovery were 3.3 ± 0.4 mg/g resin and 15.9 ± 2.7 mg/g resin, respectively. These values indicate that Zn(II) was more sorbed than Cu(II) with these operation conditions. Moreover, the Zn(II) sorption capacity by Lewatit VP OC 1026 obtained in this work is similar to that reported by Taute et al. Regarding the elution process ( On the other hand, The sorption capacities of the second column for Cu(II) and Zn(II) recovery were 4.2 ± 0.5 mg/g resin and 0.4 ± 0.1 mg/g resin, respectively. The complete elution of Cu(II) was carried out after 0.25 h, reaching a maximum value of 3500 mg/L and achieving a recovery percentage of 97.5 ± 2.5% with a concentration factor of 22.6 ± 1.5 ( Overall, the versatility of the Lewatit VP OC 1026 resin allowed for separation of zinc and copper. On the one hand, in the first ion-exchange step, this resin was used for the recovery of zinc from the Cu(II)/Zn(II)-rich stream from the SED process at pH = 2.2. Then, increasing the pH of the Cu(II)-rich stream [free of Zn(II)] up to 4.3, the Lewatit VP OC 1026 resin allowed, in a second ion-exchange step, the recovery of copper. Results showed that it was possible to separate metal cationic forms of Cu(II) and Zn(II) from As(V) oxyanions (H Therefore, the application of a new hybrid ion-exchange process based on SED-IX resins could be a potential process for arsenic separation and recovery of valuable non-ferrous metals (copper and zinc) from hydrometallurgical waters to achieve a circular economy strategy in these industries. This research was supported by the