A direct alkali-hydrothermal induced transformation process was adopted to prepare nepheline from raw kaolinite (shortened form RK in this paper) and NaOH solution in this paper. Structure and morphology characterizations of the synthetic product showed that the nepheline possessed high degree of crystallinity and uniform surface morphology. Specific surface area of nepheline is 18 m2/g, with a point of zero charge at around pH 5.0–5.5. The fluoride (F− ions) adsorption by the synthetic nepheline (shortened form SN in this paper) from aqueous solution was also investigated under different experimental conditions. The adsorption process well matched the Langmuir isotherm model with an amazing maximum adsorption capacity of 183 mg/g at 323 K. The thermodynamic parameters (ΔG0, ΔH0, and ΔS0) for adsorption on SN were also determined from the temperature dependence. The adsorption capacities of fluoride on SN increased with increasing of temperature and initial concentration. Initial pH value also had influence on adsorption process. Adsorption of fluoride was rapidly increased in 5–60 min and thereafter increased slowly to reach the equilibrium in about 90–180 min under all conditions. The adsorption followed a pseudo-second order rate law.Freundlich isotherm constants equilibrium fluoride concentration in solution (mg/L) initial adsorption rate (mg/(g·min)) equilibrium rate constant of pseudo-second order (g/(mg·min)) Freundlich isotherm constants (mg/g) Langmuir isotherm constants (L/mg) equilibrium constant Langmuir isotherm constants, the maximum adsorption capacity of adsorbent (mg/g) equilibrium amount of fluoride on adsorbent (mg/g) amount of fluoride on adsorbent at desired time (mg/g) universal gas constant, 8.314 (J/(mol·K)) correlation coefficient temperature in Kelvin (K) time (min) Nepheline, a kind of framework aluminosilicate with ideal chemical formula of Na Under laboratory condition, various zeolite crystals have been synthesized according to the reaction between alkaline solution (NaOH or KOH) with natural aluminosilicates minerals (such as kaolinite, montmorillonite, and illite) or sodium silicate and sodium aluminate solution at high temperature ( Fluoride is a common element in drinking water and poses a health risk when the amount of fluoride in water is above 1.5 mg/L ( Surface adsorption occupies an important place in defluoridation research and practice for its great accessibility and low cost ( A direct alkali-hydrothermal induced transformation process was adopted to prepare nepheline in this paper. The raw material and hydrothermal media were kaolinite and NaOH solution. Structure and morphology properties of synthetic product were characterized, and subsequently the adsorption property, thermodynamic and kinetic studies of nepheline for fluoride were investigated in detail. The RK sample used in the experiments was obtained from Queensland, Australia with mean diameter of 11.404 μm. Chemical composition of RK is presented in supplementary material ( Phase composition of solid samples were determined by X-ray diffraction using a Philips X′ Pert Pro Alpha diffract meter, with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å) at a tube current of 40 mA and a voltage of 35 kV. Data of those samples were collected over 2θ values from 3° to 70° at a scan speed of 1°/min. MIRA 3 XMU/XMH field emission scanning electron microscopy and NOVA NANOSEM 230 scanning electron microscope were used for morphological analysis. The 740 Fourier transform infrared spectrometer made by Nicolet was applied to determine the functional groups of RK. FTIR studies in the range 400–4000 cm Adsorption of fluoride on SN was investigated by batch experiments. 0.1 g of SN was mixed with 100 ml fluoride solution with certain concentration in 250 ml conical beaker. The conical beakers were then placed in a vapor-bathing constant temperature vibrator with oscillation frequency of 100 rpm for a certain period of time. After reaction, the adsorbent and solution were separated by centrifugal separation. The supernatant was chosen to determine the residual fluoride concentration. The concentration of fluoride adsorbed on the SN under certain condition was obtained by calculating the difference between initial concentration and final concentration of fluoride. All chemicals used in the experiments were of analytical reagent grade (used as received without further purification) and deionized water was used in the experiments. Fluoride concentration in solution was measured electrochemically by a fluoride ion-selective electrode method according to the B. Kemer ( The Langmuir and Freundlich adsorption isotherm models were used to describe the adsorption behavior of fluoride on SN under equilibrium state. The Langmuir and Freundlich absorption equations are expressed as the following Eqs. Thermodynamic parameters of fluoride adsorption are determined from different equations. Gibbs free energy (ΔG The effects of temperature, pH value and initial fluoride concentration on adsorption kinetics of fluoride on SN were investigated by batch experiments. Several conical flasks fitted with fluoride solution and SN were prepared for each time interval and only one flask was taken for desired time. In order to investigate the mechanism of adsorption, pseudo-second order model have been used at different experimental conditions for adsorption processes. Pseudo-second order reaction model is based on adsorption equilibrium capacity, of which the linear form is shown as Eq. XRD patterns of RK and SN are present in SEM photographs of RK and SN are presented in FTIR analysis of RK and SN is shown in The structure change of kaolinite to nepheline can be confirmed by analysis of changes of the bands in FTIR spectra identification ( The adsorption capacity of nepheline strongly depends on their porous structure. Nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms were measured to determine the specific surface area and the pore size distribution of RK and SN. The results are present in Zeta-potential of SN as a function of pH is present in Relationship between the amounts of fluoride absorbed per mass of SN (q Thermodynamic parameters (ΔG   Fluoride-adsorbent interactions especially for clays normally contains three essential steps ( Initial concentration determines the adsorption capacity of adsorbent with certain dosage. The effect of initial concentration (0.05 mol/L, 0.075 mol/L, 0.1 mol/L) was researched at temperature of 313 K and pH value of 7. The result is shown in In order to predict of adsorption kinetic models of fluoride, pseudo-second order kinetic model was applied to data (Eq. This paper presented an excellent adsorbent for fluoride with an amazing adsorption capacity. An alkali-hydrothermal synthesis from RK and NaOH solution was used to synthesize nepheline, and the thermodynamic and kinetic data for adsorption of fluoride from aqueous solution on SN were well presented. SN with high degree of crystallinity can be prepared by alkali-hydrothermal synthesis from kaolinite. It provides a novel and simple synthetic method for nepheline. The adsorption equilibrium process was well described by the Langmuir isotherm model with the maximum adsorption capacity of 183 mg/g at 323 K. The adsorption of fluoride on SN was found to be endothermic in nature by thermodynamic calculation. The pseudo-second order kinetic reaction model was used to fit the batch adsorption kinetics and found an excellent correlation with the adsorption of fluoride on SN. Finally, SN could be used as a potential good absorbent for removal of fluoride from aqueous solutions. This work was financially supported by the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at