The supply of minerals, ores and aggregates are crucial for the continuous development of today’s society. With a rising world population, growing urbanization, and increasing standards of living, the performance and efficiency of existing crushers must be improved in order to meet the escalating demand on these products. The current paper thus presents a comparative study between existing cone crushers and theoretically optimal crushing sequences.
                  Full scale experiments are conducted in order to examine the effects of Closed Side Setting (CSS), stroke, and eccentric speed on crusher output. The performance of the examined cone crusher is then compared against what is considered as theoretically optimal. The subsequent analysis shows that significant gains can be made in terms of both product yield and overall capacity by adjusting crusher operation depending on the conditions at hand, e.g. increasing the CSS while maintaining the same stroke or decreasing the eccentric speed. It is also shown that a mixture of breakages modes is more optimal than the sole application of one optimized breakage mode.The use of compression crushers, such as gyratory, cone, and jaw crushers, is common within the mining and aggregate industries. The raw material handling in these industries include drilling, blasting, and crushing, sometimes several times, before a final product or a product ready for the next stage of the process emerges. Considering that the European aggregates industry alone has an estimated annual production of 3 The performance of cone crushers has been studied by e.g. In terms of theoretical optimizations, The scope of the present paper is to examine the effect of crusher parameters on crusher performance and to compare the output from a real crusher with the theoretically optimal output. It simply seems unlikely that fixed variables would be optimal in all situations as well as applications. In contrast, it is believed that improvements of crusher performance are attainable through adjustments of the operating parameters. For instance, earlier work suggests that by decreasing the stroke or CSS of the crusher and/or lowering the eccentric speed, an increased product yield can be obtained if fines generation is to be considered as waste ( With the purpose of examining the performance and efficiency of existing cone crushers, a set of full scale experiments were conducted in the test facility of Sandvik SMC in Dalby, Southern Sweden. The facility, as shown in A parameter study of the eccentric speed, Closed Side Setting (i.e. CSS) and stroke (i.e. eccentric throw of a cone crusher) was conducted. The study was carried out through tests using a modified crushing chamber. The test material during the experiments consisted of a local gneiss of a 10–50 Cone crushers can be operated at different eccentric speeds. However, despite this possibility, most cone crushers are in fact operated at a fixed eccentric speed. The underlying reason for this can be found in the time-consuming step of changing belt pulleys, which is normally required in order to alter the setting. Nevertheless, the actual speed of the eccentric movement of the mantle in a cone crusher is dictated by this machine parameter. In the applied cone crusher, changes of the eccentric speed could be performed using a frequency inverter. The eccentric speed was therefore systematically altered during testing as to study its effects on the output of the crusher. The test settings included 1188 The Closed Side Setting, or CSS, of a cone crusher represents the smallest permitted distance between the mantle and the concave during crusher operation. This geometrical measure of the crushing chamber, which is shown in The CSS parameter can be adjusted by lowering or raising the mantle. The setting is increased if the mantle is moved downwards and decreased if the mantle is moved upwards ( The mantle of a cone crusher moves eccentrically during operation. The distance between the mantle and the concave thus varies horizontally as the mantle moves from its furthest position from the concave to its closest position from the concave. The distance between these two extreme positions is called the stroke Experiments with two different strokes were carried out during testing in order examine the effects on crusher output. More specifically, a smaller stroke of 29 More than 100 test samples were gathered throughout the experiments. The material samples were collected using belt cuts, and analyzed through traditional sieve analysis or optical size analysis in order to determine the resulting particle size distributions. In order to facilitate comparisons between the different crusher outputs, the data are presented in an alternative way in  The eccentric speed is shown to have bearing on the amount of oversized product in Also presented in The applied definition of product yield is given in Eq.  Another studied parameter in these full scale experiments was the effect of stroke on crusher output. The resulting particle size distributions, which are shown in Further analysis of In order to evaluate the performance and efficiency of the applied cone crusher, comparable reference values must be determined. Since the overall aim is to improve existing crushers, an appropriate reference would thus be a theoretically optimal particle size distribution. This theoretically optimal particle size distribution can be obtained by theoretical optimizations of compressive crushing, which can in turn be performed using mathematical models describing the breakage behavior of the material. Material passing through the crushing chamber of a cone crusher is subjected to a series of compressions due the eccentric movement of the mantle. This continuous crushing process can be modeled as discrete events, where the outgoing material from one compression serves as the ingoing feed to the next compression (see The resulting particle size distribution from a single compression can be predicted if the breakage characteristics for the material of interest are known. Mathematical models of the breakage behavior of a material are, in other words, crucial for performance predictions as well as theoretical optimizations. The test material in the performed full scale experiments consisted of a gneiss from Dalby in Southern Sweden. Coincidently, Theoretical optimizations were performed for a feed fraction of 10–50 Ten optimizations were performed. However, due to the fraction width of the feed fraction, theoretical optimizations could not be performed using the fitness function (i.e. evaluation function) in Eq. The applied fitness function is, as can be seen, quite simple and only aims at maximizing the amount of product. Nevertheless, the obtained optimization results can still be evaluated in comparison to the data from the full scale experiments. It is, however, important to bear in mind that since optimization is only performed for interparticle breakage, direct comparisons with real crusher outputs cannot be carried out. This is simply because of the mixture of single particle and interparticle breakage, which occurs inside the crushing chamber of a cone crusher ( The results from 10 interparticle optimizations aiming at maximizing the 2–8 Analysis shows that roughly 30% of 2–8 Full scale experiments have been conducted in order to examine the effects of eccentric speed, CSS, and stroke. In terms of eccentric speed, the results from the full scale experiments indicate that the product yield for the 2–16 The contradiction found for the product yield for the 2–8 Moreover, obtained results also show that the product yield for the 2–16 In contrast, full scale experiments with varying strokes surprisingly show that a better product yield is achieved with a larger stroke. This result is explained by the decreased amount of fines and the increased amount of circulating load, which is conveyed by the larger stroke. In conclusion, obtained results indicate that significant gains can be made in terms of both product yield and process capacity by the adjustments of cone crusher operation. For instance, the case study of the 2–16 The authors would like to thank Sandvik Mining and Construction, the Swedish Mineral Processing Research Association (MinFo), the Swedish National Research Program MinBaS, the Ellen, Walter and Lennart Hesselman’s Foundation for Scientific Research, and the Knutberg’s Foundation for their financial support. Nils-Åke Hallberg at Sandvik Mining and Construction is gratefully acknowledged for his invaluable assistance and help with the practical details surrounding the full scale experiments. Jonny Hansson and Lars Jacobsson, also at Sandvik Mining and Construction, are recognized for their assistance during the full scale experiments. Richard Bern at Sandvik Mining and Construction is also acknowledged for organizing and enabling the full scale experiments. Finally, special thanks go to Bengt-Olof Tjell and his immediate colleagues at Sandvik Mining and Construction for their help with the tedious work of sieving all the test samples.