Due to short timeframes over which small-scale talc mines operate (approximately 1 to 10 years), detailed characterization of their mineralogy and geochemistry in the peer-reviewed literature is limited. Investigation of sample 1497 of the Willow Creek Mine, Montana by scanning electron microscopy using back scatter detection (SEM-BSD) indicates a complex minor mineral assemblage. Hg-Se-S minerals are associated with graphite whereas Zn-Cr-Ni minerals and Th minerals are dispersed in the talc matrix. Notably, Hg, Se, Zn, Cr, and Ni are of human health concern. Minerals with these elements are ~ 20 to 0.4 µm in diameter, and all have examples in the PM10 or PM2.5 size fraction. These minerals would likely not be separated out during processing of talc ore and would be inhalable. Results indicate a need for detailed SEM-BSD investigations of historic talc products from the Willow Creek Mine and for investigating ore from similar settings in Montana.Talc products and talc sources have become of interest owing to extensive litigation of consumer products based on asbestos content ( Talc ore deposits are metamorphic rocks that are long recognized to commonly occur in two broad classes: (1) mafic and ultramafic protolith settings and (2) carbonate (marble) settings ( In the global history of talc production, many historic mines were operated and often over a limited or over variable window of time. Many of these mines do not have their mineralogy investigated in detail systematically in the peer-reviewed literature. Thus, comprehensive mineralogical data on such mines is lacking and this is critical for understanding the geologic and geochemical evolution of these deposits. This is also important for providing context for environmental properties of derived products. According to the USGS currently Montana is the leading talc producer in the U.S. ( Six samples of ore of the Willow Creek Mine were acquired from the geological repository of the Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology in October 2019 for study with the aid of Dr. Dick Berg who collected the samples in the 1970s. For the purpose of this study, one of the samples (1497 MBMG) has been characterized in detail via SEM. A Zeiss SUPRA 35VP Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FESEM) was used at Miami University's Center for Advanced Microscopy and Imaging (CAMI) to acquire backscattered electron (BSD/BSE) micrographs. The instrument has a Bruker Xflash 5010 Energy Dispersive X-Ray Spectroscopy (EDS) detector to collect elemental data with a detection limit of approximately 0.08 wt.% ( Visual inspection of the sample indicates that talc (~95%) and graphite (~3–5%) appear to be the primary minerals present ( Within the matrix a common subhedral to anhedral mineral phase approximately 10 to 0.6 µm in diameter with detectable Zn, Cr, and Ni occurs ( The majority of the sample is dominated by talc however there are other minerals present. Graphite hosts an unusual mineral (or minerals) with EDS spectra characterized by Hg-Se-S peaks but notably, no Hg-Se-S peak ratios observed in these phase(s) were similar. The association of graphite and Hg-Se-S mineral compositions appears to be a new mineralogical association, with no prior associations found in the literature or the mindat database. The exact identification of the Hg-Se-S minerals is unclear owing to the nature of their occurrence in the graphite and talc substrate, and the fact that the particles are too small to be picked and selected for single crystal and/or powder X-ray diffraction. Potential mineral candidates are tiemannite (HgSe) or hypothetical variants thereof. The mineral may likely be mixed with cinnabar which is a known mineral associated with tiemannite. A range of Hg-Se compositions are experimentally possible and can form over a wide temperature range from ~250 to ~800 °C ( The Zn, Cr, and Ni (±) Fe-bearing mineral may be a substituted variation of zincochromite ( SEM-EDS analysis enables the identification of elements present in spatial context however there are limitations of exact identification when considering the range of potential chemical compositions of targeted minerals as determined with unavoidable substrate signal which may or may not coincidentally have elements also inherent to the targeted minerals such as Si, or Fe. Nonetheless the unique chemical compositions and textures observed using BSD here provide new constraints on this deposit. The mineral assemblage of the Willow Creek Mine is more mineralogically diverse and complex than previously recognized and results indicate detailed bulk chemical study and transmission electron microscopy is warranted. There have been recent investigations of the Willow Creek Mine material with mineralogical and isotopic work ( The observation of Hg-Se-S minerals, the Zn-Cr-Ni minerals, and the thorianite (or thorite) in the talc ore is of health concern as these minerals may have been included in final talc product produced from Willow Creek. Examples of these minerals occur in PM Components of the Hg-Se-S minerals (Hg, Se), the Zn-Cr-Ni mineral (Zn, Cr, Ni), and the thorianite or thorite (Th) are well recognized as toxic ( This is the first detailed SEM-BSD-EDS study of minor minerals in the Willow Creek Mine. Hg-Se-S minerals, Zn-Cr-Ni minerals and Th minerals occur in PM Dr. Krekeler serves as an expert witness in talc and asbestos litigation for the Simmons Hanly Conroy, Kazan Law, and Motely Rice firms. These firms did not provide financial support for this study. The authors declare the following financial interests/personal relationships which may be considered as potential competing interests: I (Mark Krekeler) work as an expert witness in asbestos litigation cases in the United States. I specifically work for the Simmons Hanly Conroy, Kazan Law, and Motely Rice firms. These firms did not provide financial support for this study. To be clear, I travelled to Montana in October of 2019 to obtain research samples from Dr. Dick Berg and travel was supported by myself. We thank Dr. Dick Berg at the Montana Bureau of Mines and Geology for assistance in sample retrieval and helpful discussion. We thank Dr. Claire McLeod for helpful comments on an early version of this paper. We also thank those that reviewed this paper. Ethan Klein and Dr. Mark Krekeler were supported by an NSF GEOPATHS-EXTRA award (#1801424).