Wastewater produced during recycling of spent lithium primary battery was biologically treated with Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans to decrease the pH and metal concentration. Since the wastewater contains high concentrations of Cr, Ni, and Li, the effects of these metals on the bacterial activity in a 9K medium were also investigated. Samples of the medium with different metal concentrations were treated, and the oxidation ratio of Fe2+ ions was measured to examine the activity of bacteria. In the treatment of simulated wastewater, the presence of Cr and Ni ions with concentrations of 8000gm−3 and 13,000gm−3, respectively, did not inhibit the bacterial activity, whereas the oxidation ratio of Fe2+ ions was observed to be low in the medium when Li ion was present with a concentration at 5000gm−3. This observation suggested that at this concentration, Li ion suppressed the bacterial activity. In the case of treatment of real wastewater containing Cr, Ni, and Li, the oxidation ratio of Fe2+ to Fe3+ was observed to be low while the Fe concentration and pH decreased to 21,633gm−3 and 1.8, respectively. Thus, the wastewater produced during the recycling of spent lithium primary batteries can be effectively treated biologically for re-circulating in the recycling process.For over thirty years, lithium primary batteries have been known for their useful properties such as long shelf life, constant voltage output, wide operating temperature range, and low self-discharge ( A recycling process ( It is well known that The bacteria have been used to reduce Cr(VI) to Cr(III) in wastewater ( There have been a few reports on the effect of high levels of metal concentration on the activity of In the present study, the oxidation ratio of Fe A pure culture of The wastewater produced in the lithium primary battery recycling process was obtained from a pilot plant of Korea Recycling Company. The composition and pH of the wastewater are given in Two kinds of wastewater samples were prepared. Simulated wastewater samples were prepared by adding reagent-grade Cr The initial pH of all the wastewater samples was adjusted to 2 adding 1 After the 90 For measuring the pH, metal concentrations, and Fe The ferric sulphosalicylate method ( After the experiment was terminated, the precipitate formed was collected and dried at 105 As shown in     In the solutions containing Cr and Ni ions, the oxidation ratio of Fe As seen in  The stabilization test was performed on a lithium primary battery using the wastewater treated above to examine the possibility of circulating the treated wastewater. Generally, acidic wastewater with metal ions is treated by neutralization methods using a basic reagent such as NaOH. Because a low pH and a low metal concentration are required to re-circulate the wastewater in the process shown in Wastewater produced during a lithium primary battery recycling process is treated using This paper is based on the work supported by Resources Recycling R&D Center (Korea) under the project entitled “Development of technology for reclaiming valuable metals from primary and secondary spent batteries and their utilization.” The authors also wish to thank Mr. D.C. Tran for his kind help for the experiments.