Recent research on metal biosorption has been elucidating its mechanisms and principles. For effective metal removal/recovery the process design has to be optimized for every type of application. That is most effectively done based on computer simulations utilizing mathematical models of the process. The methodology is summarized here involving both the equilibrium and dynamic aspects of the sorption process. Often used sorption equilibrium isotherm relationships are listed for modeling one-metal and multimetal systems. Performance modeling of dynamic sorption column systems requires simultaneous consideration of sorption equilibria, sorbate solution chemistry, biosorption mechanism, mass transfer and fluid-flow which all determine the overall sorption performance and the shape of the column breakthrough curve. Computer simulation of a model continuous-flow uranium biosorption process serves as a brief illustration of a more sophisticated approach to describing and predicting performance of dynamic sorption systems.The mechanism and some intricacies of heavy metal biosorption on several kinds of biomass types have, to a certain degree, been elucidated by now. Investigations carried out so far on several bacterial, fungal and algal biomass have indicated that metal ions in solution are bound by the biomass active sites predominantly by ion exchange. The most extensive studies have been carried out with the ocean seaweed An advanced contemporary sorption process design would benefit a great deal from the capability of predicting the sorption column performance. A reasonably reliable performance prediction can only be based on a rather sophisticated combination of basic equilibrium sorption performance data; incorporation of information on the sorbate behavior in the solution; knowledge of the sorbate uptake mechanism; mass transfer characteristics of the sorbent; sorption column fluid flow characteristics. These inputs and their effects should all be reflected in a suitable mathematical model which, in turn, can serve for sorption performance prediction by using computer process simulations. Despite the fact that sorption processes have been in practical use for a long time, suitable process simulation techniques have not been developed which could feasibly be used for process design and optimization. While the computational power has been increasing at an exponential rate lately, mathematical process models used so far are both rather simplistic and/or too complicated to understand and apply. The quest is on for powerful enough, realistic and user friendly mathematical models to be employed in computer simulation and optimization of sorption processes. Metal biosorption is only one specific area of their application. The following attempts to present only a very brief state-of-the-art cross-section summary of the diverse and developing field. Biosorption has been studied with simplified sorption systems usually containing one heavy metal. This is quite appropriate simplification required for effective studies. There is no critical reason to use more complex models if two-parameter models such as the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms can fit the data reasonably well. However, these models are just “mathematical functions”, they hardly reflect the sorption mechanism. More structured types of models respecting the sorbate speciation in solution, pH and even electrostatic attraction were recently suggested by Schiewer and Volesky The most common sources of toxic metals, most conspicuous being acid mine drainage and electroplating effluents, contain a mixture of metals. For example, more than 30 different metals are dissolved in the Berkeley Pit in Montana, USA, threatening the nearby communities. For practical applications, a very judicious use is necessary of effective multimetal biosorption models for multimetal systems. So far there has been no attempt to describe ion-exchange adsorption equilibrium, such as may be the case in biosorption, by using the ideal absorbed solution theory (IAST). There are several authors The concept of the SCM model perhaps deserves a little more description. The SCM is based on the concept of surface charge generated from the amphoteric surface sites, which are capable of reacting with sorbing cationic or anionic species to form surface complexes. According to the SCM, three separate steps are involved in metal ion adsorption: surface ionization, complexation between ionized sites and ionic species, and the establishment of an electrical double layer (EDL) next to the adsorbent surface The most general model among SCMs is the two-pK triple-layer (TL) model Parameters appearing in the resulting equations, including the capacitance of electric double layer, equilibrium constants of surface reaction, surface area of sorbent and concentrations of functional groups can be obtained from a set of titration data. There are several computer algorithms designed for this purpose including FITEQL There are various ways of manipulating the TL model to simplified forms of SCMs. For example, the TL model can be simplified to the basic Stern (BS) model by merging the β-plane and the d-plane, which results in complexation taking place at the d-plane. At high ionic strength, the potential at the d-plane ( The SCM possesses distinct advantages in that it can offer equilibrium adsorption as a function of pH, ionic strength as well as the solute concentration. Furthermore, it also provides surface complexation constants, which are independent of varying solution conditions As opposed to sorption equilibrium studies, batch dynamics describes the behavior of the sorption system in time. It is necessary to recognize the difference between the (sorption) reaction kinetics and the time-based study of the sorption process, which invariably involves additional phenomena such as particle mass transfer and the fluid flow properties around the particle (mixing). While the mass transfer external to the particle (effect of mixing) can usually be neglected, intraparticle transfer most often is the rate-determining factor. While the model parameters, The average diffusion coefficients for uranium and cadmium were 5.5×10 Most separation and purification processes that employ sorption technology use continuous-flow columns. This operating mode ensures the highest possible concentration difference driving force. Starting at the inlet, the saturated solid sorbent zone gradually extends throughout the column, the sorbate eventually breaking through the column. The record of the breakthrough usually gives a typical s-shaped breakthrough curve whose shape and slope are the result of the equilibrium sorption isotherm relationship, the mass transfer to and throughout the sorbent in the column, and operation macroscopic fluid-flow parameters, such as axial mixing, affecting the deviation from the ideal plug flow. The breakthrough time represents the duration of ongoing sorption until a pre-defined exit threshold sorbate concentration is reached. Any optimized column system is based on the accurate prediction of the breakthrough time under given specific operating conditions. When the sorbate concentration in the effluent stream reaches a pre-defined level, the column operation is terminated. At this point the regeneration process may begin before activation for the next cycle of operation. The most important mass transfer resistance for sorption from aqueous solutions has been established to be the internal (intraparticle) diffusion The reaction time for sorption (i.e. binding to the functional group) is much shorter than that for diffusion of the ions through the biomass. Chip-like The quantity of bound metal is in equilibrium with the metal concentration of the aqueous phase as formulated in the Langmuir sorption isotherm relationship. During the biosorption process based on ion exchange the diffusion of metal ions into the biomass must be accompanied by the release of protons (or other ions) that diffuse into the bulk liquid. The diffusion coefficient for H The mass conservation equation in the macroscopic fluid is represented by: Film mass transfer by: Intraparticle diffusion by: The sorption isotherm by: The initial and boundary conditions for Since axial dispersion was neglected, the biosorbent at different axial positions within the column is exposed to the fluid at different times. Accordingly, the following relationship holds: Defining a new corrected time The definitions of new variables used in the above equations are as follows: It can be noted that a diffusion coefficient  The dimensionless PDEs of the continuous-flow sorption process model can be solved numerically by the Orthogonal Collocation (OC) method as described by Biosorption of uranium by A mass transfer model based on external and intraparticle diffusion was applied to quantitatively describe the operation of a continuous flow biosorption column. The intraparticle diffusion coefficient The proton concentration was incorporated into an explicit isotherm model as an independent variable by A new hydrolyzed ion exchange model (HIEM) was developed The fitting curve was close to the experimental one within an average deviation of 5%. The trend in residuals is presented in While the previous model simulation results can be applied to the biosorption process design and to optimize the operation of biosorption columns, it applies only to a single-metal system. To expand it to simulate the multimetal column operation is a very demanding task indeed. An example of the typical performance of a biosorption column with a multimetal feed (Cu+Cd+Zn) is shown in A laboratory-scale biosorption column with K- This is because the relative affinities of Zn and Cd are much closer to each other (Zn/K=1.965 and Cd/K=3.706) than to Cu (Cu/K=16.514). IMPACT program predicted breakthrough times (dimensionless time) for zinc and cadmium shifted ahead by approximately 20% when compared with the experimental data. While shifting it slightly ahead, IMPACT predicted 90% overshoot of Zn and 25% overshoot of Cd, which agrees very well with the experimental results. The latest Cu breakthrough time could not be judged properly since the simulation stopped prematurely due to simulation calculation problems. The lack of information on the experimental software temporarily prevented continuation of this work. However, it was encouraging to see that, to a certain degree, IMPACT could reasonably simulate the complex biosorption column performance within the limited scope of the work performed. While other mathematical models have been used for the same purpose, they are invariably only experimental and their computer versions are proprietary and difficult to use. For all practical purposes, the shape of the transition zone developed in the sorption column will determine the degree of the overall column utilization. This is the most important aspect when it comes to the economy of operating a column-based sorption process. There is no readily available sorption column performance simulation model, which would incorporate all aspects of sorption, including equilibrium sorption relationships, mass transfer and fluid flow characteristics—and all this for multicomponent sorption systems. A ready-to-use and sufficiently sophisticated process modeling software package would be extremely useful for biosorption performance estimation and process design. However, a suitable one is so far not available as yet.  Equilibrium sorption data provide a crucial input in predicting the performance of a continuous-flow sorption column. Different sorption isotherm relationships are available to adopt for this purpose. The role ion hydrolysis plays in some biosorption systems may be crucial. A new generation of equilibrium isotherm models for ion exchange based biosorption is being developed including also the effect of the process pH. When knowledge of biosorption rates is required, conventional approaches can be employed. Considering only one-dimensional intraparticle mass transfer for modeling purposes appears to be adequate in the case of biosorption using whole seaweed biomass. A methodology exists for determining the effective intraparticle diffusion coefficients with sufficient accuracy for modeling purposes. Reliable one-species mass transfer models including the biosorption isotherm, mass transfer diffusion coefficient and fluid flow conditions are available for assessment of continuous-flow biosorption column performance. Similarly sophisticated multispecies and structured mathematical models for computer simulation of biosorption processes are still lacking. specific surface area of biosorbent particle (cm Langmuir isotherm parameter Langmuir isotherm parameter equilibrium solute concentration in fluid metal concentration in the bulk fluid stream metal concentration in fluid of biosorbent pores molar concentration effective intraparticle diffusion coefficient (cm electron charge the sorption isotherm relationship intrinsic equilibrium constants (with subscripts) Freundlich isotherm constants Boltzmann constant particle film mass transfer coefficient  uptake (mg/g) uptake of single-component adsorbed phase concentration in equilibrium with Langmuir maximum uptake (mg/g) gas constant (or biosorbent particle radius (cm)) arbitrary position coordinate (cm) absolute temperature Dimensionless time (–) time (s) fluid superficial velocity ( solute concentration of valence of ion column axial coordinate (cm) Ionic charge of component separation factor between Polanyi scaling factor in Polanyi models column bed porosity; Polanyi's adsorption potential void factors of the fixed-bed column (–) intraparticle porosity (dimensionless) biosorbent density (g/cm charge density of d-plane charge density of o-plane charge density of β-plane time (s) Surface potential electric potential of d-plane electric potential of β-plane electric potential of o-plane