The evaluation of the depth of brittle failure around excavations is of major importance in order to optimize the design of underground excavations and ensure the safety of workers and equipment. The current proposed approaches to evaluate it are related to a single scale of study (intact rock or rock mass scale). Therefore, they are scale-dependent, and cannot be applied for all excavation diameter. In this paper, a generalized failure criterion including the scale effect for predicting stress-induced overbreak around excavations is developed. This failure criterion is based on the damage initiation relation (σ
                     
                        1
                      
                     = Aσ
                     
                        3
                      
                     + Bσ
                     
                        c
                     ). The scale effect is included into it through a relation proposed to evaluate the B parameter and depending on the scale of study. The fit parameters of the relation proposed have been defined considering a database at both rock mass and intact rock scales arising from a literature review. For intact rock scale, the B parameter is defined as a function of the diameter of the excavation, expressed following a potential form. For rock mass scale, the B parameter is defined equal to 0.35, regardless the diameter of the excavation. Based on the proposed B parameter relation, the depth and extension of the brittle failure around excavations can be evaluated for any scale of study.The scale effect is a significant characteristic in brittle and quasi-brittle media such as rock. The failure of underground openings in hard rocks depends on the stress state and the fracturing network. Deep mining and tunnelling share the challenge of dealing with intermediate to high both in-situ and induced stresses. These particular stresses conditions, combined to massive blocky rock mass conditions, lead to the initiation of brittle failure surrounding the excavation. To estimate the depth of the brittle failure, Martin et al. Zoback et al. Martin From the literature review, it is highlighted that the induced-stress failure around excavations has been widely investigated. However, the proposed approaches only focused on tunnels or boreholes cases, and they are scale-dependent. At intact rock scale, a scale effect is highlighted, which is not the case at the rock mass scale. In this paper, a new approach is proposed to incorporate the scale effect into a failure criterion for predicting the stress-induced overbreak around excavations. This failure criterion can be used for any scale of study. The influence of the scale effect is evaluated on both: (1) the depth of failure and (2) the extent of the failure. To do so, the Kirsch equations The method proposed by Martin et al. Martin et al. In  Different authors The ranges of the In rock mechanics and rock engineering, the Kirsch equations  The total major and minor principal stresses, The influence of sample size upon rock strength has been widely discussed in literature Hoek and Brown Different authors Martin et al. The relations proposed by Hoek and Brown, and by Martin et al. are presented in The scale effect is incorporated in a failure criterion through the To do so, a virtual database is created using the Excel software and its solver tool. Different parameters are defined as fixed components of the database: Then, two of the database parameters will vary to ensure different in-situ stress conditions of the excavations: Based on these parameters, the in-situ major and minor principal stresses are calculated. The horizontal stress The methodologies followed to evaluate the depth and the extent of failure are presented in the following parts. The angle First, using this procedure, the influence of the Then, the best fit with the measured cases considered by Martin et al. A low The extent of failure To evaluate The extent of failure is evaluated for different values of the First, the influence of the Then, following the methodology presented previously, the best fit with the measured cases compiled by Martin et al. This result is consistent to the relationship evaluated by Martin et al. The extent of the failure  In reference to Martin et al. The effect of size and stress gradients on the breakout strength around boreholes has been examined by many researchers using various physical models The proposed failure criterion, incorporating the scale effect for predicting stress-induced overbreak around excavations, combines the both rock mass and intact rock scales through a relation defining the   The best fit for the exponential model is evaluated by the following equation: The best fit for the potential model is evaluated by the following equation: Based on the previous observation, the general form of the The general relation of the Equation In this work, the Geological Strength Index (GSI) has been considered to evaluate the value of the The relation proposed to evaluate the The study of the extent of the failure around excavations has shown that, when considering the rock mass scale, ( A generalized failure criterion including the scale effect for predicting stress-induced overbreak around excavations has been developed. It is based on the damage initiation relation ( Based on the relation developed, the depth and extent of the brittle failure around excavations can be evaluated for any scale of study. The analysis made on the depth of failure highlighted that, at rock mass scale, the initiation of stress‐induced failure occurs when the ratio of the maximum tangential stress normalized to the laboratory uniaxial compressive strength, The analysis made on the failure's extent shows that the width of the brittle failure is higher at rock mass scale than at intact rock scale. It also highlights that the extent of the failure gets higher as the stress ratio It should be noted that the proposed relation is based on the fit of data available in the literature. Nevertheless, no data are available for excavations presenting a diameter between 110 mm and 3 m. These data could help to refine the proposed relation. Moreover, no data is available for excavation presenting a diameter smaller than 5 mm. Thus, the proposed relation is not valid for diameters smaller than 5 mm. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support of the