Adsorbed polymers show stabilization–flocculation properties of colloidal suspension and they are widely used in technological applications (chemical and pharmaceutical industries, food processing, drinking water purification and wastewater treatment). Thus, the influence of polyacrylic acid (PAA) addition on the stability of synthesized alumina suspension as a function of solution pH was studied. The changes of the examined systems stability in time were monitored using the turbidimetry method. It was shown that the alumina suspension without the polymer is the most stable at pH3 (electrostatic stabilization), whereas at the pH values 6 and 9 the systems are unstable (coagulation). The addition of PAA with the lowest molecular weight (i.e. 2000) at pH3 causes large deterioration of the system stability (destabilization by charge neutralization), whereas at the pH values 6 and 9 significant improvement of analogous system stability is observed (electrosteric stabilization). PAAs with higher molecular weights (100000 and 240000) cause stabilization of the alumina suspension in the whole range of studied pH. At pH3 it is rather steric stabilization. On the other hand, at the pH values 6 and 9 the steric mechanism of stabilization is combined with the electric one, leading to electrosteric interactions.The adsorption process of various substances (simple ions, organic compounds, natural and synthetic polymers) on the solid surface is very important due to both theoretical and practical aspects ( The polymeric stabilization/destabilization of colloidal systems is distinguished by several significant advantages over the electrostatic mechanism due to adsorption of simple electrolyte ions ( The steric mechanism plays an essential role in stabilization of particles in the biological systems. This is caused by two reasons. Firstly, the ionic strength of biological dispersion is relatively high, and that is why electrostatic stabilization in this case would be less effective. Secondly, aqueous solutions of polymers (especially polyelectrolytes) are commonly found in the nature. The practical use of the polymers as stabilizers or flocculants of colloidal suspensions requires basic investigations. The goal of these experiments is to define the adsorbed amounts of the polymer and conformation of its macromolecules on the surfaces of the solid particles. The structure and thickness of the polymeric adsorption layers determine the stability of such systems. The adsorption process of the macromolecular compounds on the solid surface is complex and depends on many factors, such as molecular weight and polydispersity of the polymer, pH and ionic strength of the solution, temperature, as well as purity of the polymeric and adsorbent samples. Even a small change in any of these parameters can have a large effect on the suspension stability in the polymer presence. Thus, the main aim of this work is to determine the changes in stability of the aluminum oxide (alumina) suspension in the presence of anionic polyacrylic acid (PAA). Due to the fact that conformation of PAA macromolecules depends on the solution pH and the polymer molecular weight, their influence was investigated. The alumina was synthesized in the Chuiko Institute of Surface Chemistry (Kalush, Ukraine). The similar studies were performed using commercial available powder alumina delivered by Merck. Their results have been published ( Polyacrylic acid belongs to the group of ionic polymers and is used as an effective stabilizer and flocculent of colloidal suspensions. It is applied in the production of cements, dispersants, auxiliaries for the fiber preparation, thickeners, as well as stabilizers of the latex rubber and various types of emulsions and suspensions ( The samples of aluminum oxide (alumina) were used in the study (pilot plant in the Chuiko Institute of Surface Chemistry, Kalush, Ukraine). The adsorbent was characterized by the BET surface area of 87 Polyacrylic acid (PAA, Fluka) with the weight average molecular weights of 2000, 100 All measurements were carried out in the presence of NaCl solution (1 The stability measurements of alumina suspensions without and with PAA were carried out using Turbiscan Lab The analyzed suspension in a glass vial (7 Based on the transmission and backscattering data the stability parameters were calculated. The stability parameters are: the rate of particle (aggregates, flocks) migration [μm/min], the particle (aggregates, flocks) diameters [μm], the thickness of formed sediment [mm] and the turbiscan stability index (TSI). These data were calculated using the programs TLab EXPERT 1.13 and Turbiscan Easy Soft. The migration rate was calculated using the multiple light scattering theory. The particle diameter calculation was based on the general law of sedimentation, that is Stokes' law extended to the concentrated dispersions ( The sample stability can be estimated and compared using the turbiscan stability index (TSI). This parameter takes into account all single measurements during experiments and the TSI value is obtained from their averaging. All processes taking place in the sample including sediment and clear layer formation as well as particle settling were summed up. This coefficient was calculated with the special computer program Turbiscan Easy Soft with the following formula: The TSI values change in the range from 0 to 100. The higher the TSI value is, the more unstable the system is. The schematic picture of the measuring vial containing the suspension with the marked sediment and clear layers on its different heights is presented in  Additionally,  Completely different situations occur for the alumina suspension without polymer at the pH values 6 and 9. Under these pH conditions the systems are unstable. The manifestations of their high instability are as follows: high transmission in the range of 80–90% ( As can be seen in In turn, at the pH values 6 and 9 the transmission is smaller (in the range 40–50%) and clarification of the suspension on the top is visible (presence of transmission peaks). Additionally, the thicknesses of sediments (about 0.5 The analysis of the transmission and backscattering curves in the Al The addition of polyacrylic acid with the molecular weight of 240 An interesting situation is observed in the case of the alumina suspension containing PAA 240 The explanation of the obtained changes in stability of the alumina suspension in the absence and presence of PAA requires the analysis of both polyacrylic acid carboxyl groups' ionization and adsorbent surface charge density as a function of solution pH. Each segment of PAA ([–CH The analysis of the data in Completely different behaviors are disclosed by the alumina systems at the pH values 6 and 9. Under such pH conditions the alumina suspension is highly unstable. It may be caused by the fact that the values of surface charge density (2.83 The addition of PAA 2000 at pH Such steric repulsion probably appears in the case of higher values of solution pH, at which the considerable improvement of the stability conditions of alumina suspension in the polymer presence is observed. The conformation of the adsorbing macromolecules is more extended due to their significant ionization (α The addition of polyacrylic acid with the molecular weight 100 The presence of PAA 100 One should note that such separation is possible only in the case of the highest applied molecular weight of polyacrylic acid (i.e. 240 Quite surprising behavior is disclosed by PAA 240 The effect of anionic polyacrylic acid addition to the alumina suspension as a function of solution pH and polymer molecular weight was studied. The turbidimetric results as a form of transmission and backscattering curves, as well as the calculated stability parameters (TSI, aggregate diameter, rate of migration, sediment layer thickness) indicate that the solid suspension without the polymer is highly unstable at the pH values 6 and 9 (coagulation, insufficient absolute values of zeta potential) whereas at pH The addition of PAA with the lowest molecular weight (i.e. 2000) at pH The research leading to these results has received funding from the