With painting operations as a major origin of environmental concerns in automotive industry, novel and effective technologies are required for treatment of automotive paint wastewater. In this experimental study, a continuous-flow electroflotation reactor with effective volume of 38.4 L and stainless-steel electrodes were designed and implemented for treatment of this industrial wastewater. The system performance, namely the total suspended solids removal, was investigated with operational parameters including the hydraulic retention time, current density and influent total solids concentration. The removal rate ranged between 57 ± 1% and 95 ± 7% under initial total solids concentration 3000 mg/L, current density 50 A/m2, retention time 4 min, and initial total solids concentration 500 mg/L, current density 100 A/m2, retention time 8 min conditions, respectively. It was found that the removal rate decreases with the increase of influent total solids concentration. The results revealed that the suspended solids removal rate is directly related to the applied current density and hydraulic retention time. The electroflotation system showed to be energy-efficient compared to the commercial systems. Further, an empirical equation for the total suspended solids removal rate was established with the R2 value of 92.74%. The independent variables were the retention time, influent suspended solids concentration and applied current density.Painting operations are a main source of environmental issues in vehicle manufacturing industry ( During the painting operation in auto paint spray booths, paint wastewater is generated which consists of overspray (the paint that does not deposit to the auto body surface), additives, rinsing chemicals and wasted paint resulted from equipment wash ( Air flotation is a water treatment technology that clarifies wastewater through separation of suspended solid or liquid particles. In the air flotation process, particles attach to air bubbles and the buoyancy, forces them to rise to the surface, and consequently, removed by skimming process. Air flotation has been first used as a separation method in mineral processing, with applications extended to wastewater treatment and other removal process such as separation of fats, rubber, clays, sugar, etc. ( Electroflotation is the utilization of gas bubbles produced by water electrolysis to remove suspended particles by flotation. The process consists of a treatment tank, cathode and anode placed at the bottom of the tank and small bubbles of hydrogen and oxygen gases generated by the applied direct electric current ( In the electrolysis of water, redox reactions occur at the anode and cathode ( At the cathode: And at the anode: The overall reaction can be obtained by doubling the reduction reaction at the cathode, Eq. The theoretical minimum voltage of pure water electrolysis is 2.06 V ( In recent years, the electroflotation process has been recommended for separation of various particles and pollutants, e.g. separation of edible oil from wastewater ( In this study, a series of continuous-flow bench-scale experiments on the electroflotation treatment of automotive paint wastewater is conducted. The effects of process variables on the system performance are investigated. The energy consumption of the process is measured. Also, the experimental data are analyzed through the statistical methods to find the effects of different process variables on the removal efficiency and introduce an empirical model describing the process. The experimental setup consisted of a feed tank and mixer, feeding pump, electroflotation tank, electrodes module and DC power supply. The schematic of the electroflotation system is presented in The electroflotation reactor was made of 12-mm-thick Plexiglass The cathodes and anodes were made of 3-mm-thick Stainless Steel (SS316) plates, which was suggested as a suitable material for electrochemical treatment ( The automotive paint wastewater was synthetically prepared in the laboratory. Preparation of the wastewater was according to the paint spray process in the paint booth of auto factories, and was a mixture of black paint, detackifier and tap water. An acrylic lacquer aerosol auto paint was used in this study. A mixer was used in the feed tank to keep the raw wastewater uniform and the particles, suspended. The feed was prepared by spraying the paint into the tap water to obtain the desired concentration. In addition, paint detackifier was added to the mixture, 8% of the paint concentration. Paint detackifier is a chemical for the disruption of paint drops by altering the qualities of the paint into non-adhering moving particles ( An EC Meter HI8733 (HANNA instruments) was used to measure the electrical conductivity of the wastewater samples. With four-ring probe, the conductivity readings were adjusted with Automatic Temperature Compensation (ATC). A VWR SYMPHONY SP90M5 is used to measure pH of the wastewater samples. The total solids (TS) and total suspended solids (TSS) were measured according to Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater ( The performance of electroflotation system in treatment of auto paint wastewater was studied by examining the following parameters: total solids (mg/L), total suspended solids (mg/L), pH and electrical conductivity, EC (μS/cm). The removal rate, Also, the specific energy consumption, In the electroflotation process, electrolysis occurs, and gas and other elements can be produced. Amount of mass generated at electrode can be calculated by Faraday's law of electrolysis ( The electroflotation is an intricate process and various factors affect the performance and removal efficiency of this treatment method. Among the different variables, initial concentration of the pollutant, applied current density (ratio of applied DC current to active surface area of electrodes) and treatment time are found as the most significant process variables ( Therefore, the effects of the following factors on the performance of the electroflotation process were studied in this research: Concentration of total solids (TS) in the influent (mg/L); which is a measure of total suspended solids and total dissolved solids (TSS = TSS + TDS). Applied current density, Hydraulic retention time (HRT) of the system, minutes; which is reactor volume, The system was studied under three influent total solids (TS) concentrations, as presented in The performance of the treatment system was evaluated based on the percent removal of total suspended solids, TSS, from the auto paint wastewater samples. The experimental plan was prepared to evaluate the significance of the process variables and to find the optimal operating conditions. Overall, with a full-factorial design (3 factors, 3 levels and all combinations of factors), 27 different test runs were conducted. The tests were performed in three replicates and the average values are presented in this study. The efficiency of electroflotation process in treatment of auto paint wastewater with the influent TS concentrations of 500, 1500 and 3000 mg/L was examined. The total suspended solids (TSS) concentration is one of the key parameters for performance assessment of wastewater treatment systems in paint spray booth of auto factories. Therefore, the TSS removal rate was used to evaluate the efficiency of the system in the separation and removal of TSS. Results of the %removal of TSS as functions of influent TS, applied current density and retention time are presented in The results showed that the highest TSS removal rate, 95 ± 7% was achieved in the experiment with the influent TS of 500 mg/L, at HRT 8 min and current density 100 A/m Based on the results of this study, it was concluded that the TSS removal rate and efficiency of electroflotation process were inversely related to the influent solid concentration. Similar trends have been reported by other authors as well. The optimal operating conditions of the electroflotation system for different influent TSS values were determined from the data in When the influent TS was 1500 mg/L, at the current density 100 A/m For the highest tested influent TS, 3000 mg/L, the TSS The applied current density, defined as the ratio of applied DC current to the active surface area of electrodes, is one of the key design parameters in an electroflotation process. In this study, the applied current densities were 50, 75 and 100 A/m With the influent TS = 500 mg/L, the removal percentages of TSS at HRT = 4 min were 78 ± 5, 86 ± 8 and 86 ± 3 percent under the current densities of 50, 75 and 100 A/m Comparable trends were observed in the experiments with other influent TS concentrations. For instance, with the influent TS 1500 mg/L, the removal rates of TSS at HRT 8 min were 81 ± 2, 87 ± 3 and 91 ± 1 percent under the current densities of 50, 75 and 100 A/m The experimental results showed that in general, the process performance and removal rates improved with the increase of applied current density. This has been reported in other studies. The efficiency improvements and increased removal rates of electroflotation systems with increase of applied current densities can be explained by Faraday's law. According to Faraday's law of electrolysis, Eq. The treatment of auto paint wastewater by continuous-flow electroflotation was studied under the hydraulic retention times of 4, 6 and 8 min. The hydraulic retention time is a significant design factor in treatment systems, which directly affects the dimensions and footprint of facility as well as the power consumption. It is defined as the time between the flow entering and exiting a reactor for a conservative impulse, with the theoretical value of the volume of reactor over the flowrate ( In this study, the intended HRTs were achieved by adjusting the flowrate in the electroflotation reactor. Results of these experiments are presented in The direct effects of HRT on TSS removals were observed through the experiments. For instance, for the influent TS = 500 mg/L and applied current density = 75 A/m With the influent TS 500 mg/L and current density 100 A/m It was noted that the treatment efficiencies increased with the increase of hydraulic retention time in the electroflotation process. This conclusion can be explained as follows: in electroflotation, suspended particles collide with gas bubbles, attachment occurs, and they slowly rise to the surface to be skimmed off. Each phase of this process is time-dependent, i.e. an adequate time allows the process to reach completion. Therefore, it is important to allow for adequate retention time for the collision and attachment of bubble-particle in the solid-water separation process. It was reported in the literature ( There are several factors affecting the pH of wastewater and how it changes during the electroflotation process, including the electrode material, electrolyte type and composition, applied voltage and electrical current and treatment time ( It was noticed that the pH slightly increased during the electroflotation process, which was in agreement with other studies. In electrochemical treatment of nitrite solution using stainless steel electrodes, increase of pH was observed, specially under higher electrical currents ( The pH increase can be explained by the Half-reactions occurring at the cathode and anode: The possible reduction reactions at the cathode: The possible oxidation reactions at the anode: Due to the presence of detackifier containing aluminium sulphate, the automotive paint solution is slightly acidic in the beginning. The available H At the anode, iron ions as well as oxygen bubbles (as observed in this study) and H In electroflotation, the energy requirements and power consumption are the major factors in terms of capital and operational costs. Hence engineers and decision-makers must consider these factors carefully when evaluating any proposed treatment method. In this study, the electroflotation reactor received the electrical energy from a DC power supply. The energy consumption is determined by the applied current and voltage per unit volume of the water treated. In water and wastewater treatment, another term is defined as the “specific energy consumption”; which takes the treatment time (HRT) and volume of treatment reactor into consideration. This term is defined in Eq. As it can be noticed, the specific energy consumption varied drastically with experimental conditions, ranging from 17.4 to 197.4 W h.m Referring to Eq. Similar results have been reported in the literature. In an analysis of the operating costs of electrocoagulation of textile dye wastewater by aluminum and iron electrodes, In order to acquire a better understanding of the energy consumption values presented in It was noted from comparison of the values in Response Surface Methodology and Multiple Linear Regression methods were used in this study to analyze the experimental data of the electroflotation of auto paint wastewater and the process variables. Response Surface Methodology (RSM) is a set of mathematical and statistical procedures suitable for creating, advancing and optimizing processes. In the industry, the RSM is mostly implemented where several variables potentially affect the system performance or the quality of products ( A custom response surface design was defined with the %removal of TSS,    The established full quadratic model is shown in Eq. It should be mentioned that this equation is only valid for the data-range in this study, i.e., (HRT: 4–8 min, Current Density: 50–100 Am/m2 and influent TSS: 175–1108 mg/L). Also, using Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) method, the interactions between the process predictors and the responses were established. The coefficient of determination (R-sq) evaluates the quality of the fit and the statistical significance is assessed by the p-value with 0.05 significance level. The results of ANOVA are presented in Although the R-sq value was 95.96%, it was shown in Empirical models are extensively implemented in engineering and the regression analysis provides the tools for selecting and fitting a good model and examining its inadequacies ( An empirical model, based on multiple linear regression, Eq.    Eq. It should be mentioned that this equation is only valid for the data range in this study, i.e. (HRT: 4–8 min, Current Density: 50–100 Am/m2 and influent TSS: 175–1108 mg/L). Results of ANOVA are summarized in The p-values for current density, HRT and influent TSS were 0.000, indicating the significance of these process variables and their effect on the efficiency of the electroflotation system. The performance of a continuous-flow electroflotation system equipped with the stainless steel electrodes was assessed in the treatment of auto paint wastewater, with respect to the important process variables, i.e., initial solids concentration, retention time and applied current density. The maximum removal rate of system was 95 ± 7%. The electroflotation method found to be effective and successful in treatment of this industrial wastewater with a competitive energy consumption, showing that it was a viable option compared with the current chemical treatment methods. The system efficiency in removal of TSS had direct relationship with the applied current and retention time, while it decreased with increasing initial solids concentration. Performing a series of full-factorial design experiments, the study was able to identify the optimal operating conditions and establish an empirical equation that can be used in practice. None. This study has been supported by the