Application of fractal theory to quantify the roughness of rock fractures has been well developed, and various methods have been presented to estimate the fractal dimension of roughness profiles, D. However, determination of D is still a challenging issue, and researchers have attributed different values to fractal dimensions of the standard profiles of rock fracture roughness. Two kinds of errors affect the estimated fractal dimension: stochastic errors and systematic errors. Both errors cannot be modeled by any explicit function, because of the complexity and the uncertainty in the relationship between the fractal dimension and the measurable variables. In this paper, a new method is presented to overcome these deficiencies. First, a large number of fractional Brownian profiles with different values of fractal parameters (D and standard deviation σ) were generated and their statistical features were extracted. Then, a hybrid algorithm consisting of two kinds of algorithms, particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm and multi-layer perceptron (MLP) neural network, was developed. The inputs of the system were the features of profile namely root mean square of profile and its first derivatives. In each iteration of the hybrid system, the PSO and MLP algorithms exchanged information with each other to optimize values of the fractal parameters. Finally, the system provided the best set of fractal parameters for a given profile. The effectiveness of this method was shown by estimating the fractal parameters of a testing set of profiles. Finally, the values of D and σ were estimated for Barton's standard roughness profiles and for the profiles extracted from digitized surfaces of natural rock fractures.Both the mechanical and hydraulic behaviors of rock masses depend on the surface roughness of fractures. In engineering practice, the joint roughness coefficient ( The fractal dimension, A number of methods have been suggested in the literature to estimate fractal parameters of rock fractures roughness Generally, the estimation of fractal dimension is affected by two kinds of errors: 1) stochastic errors caused by inherently unpredictable fluctuations of points on a profile, and 2) systematic errors, which push the estimate toward specific directions and vary with the value of However, the estimated fractal dimension based on only one measure is not significant and at least two fractal parameters are required to describe a fractal model In this paper, a new method is presented for accurate and simultaneous estimation of two fractal parameters of two-dimensional profiles. The idea is to transform the problem from estimation into classification. To do this, a large number of fractional Brownian profiles (self-affine profiles) were generated in various classes of fractal dimension, As a database for this study, a number of profiles with known values of fractal parameters were needed. Since the real values of fractal parameters of a natural profile are unknown, the fractional Brownian functions (FBPs), which are classical examples of self-affine profiles In this method, two points (points 1 and 2 in Then, at the second generation level, points 4 and 5 are generated according to the following equations The above procedure is repeated In this study, FBPs were generated in 19×21 classes of A large number of estimators of fractal dimension have been developed. The variogram All the computational methods involve the estimation of parameters of various statistical functions and data sampled over profiles. In each method, the final step of the procedure is the least-square estimation of the slope of a linear model fitted to the data of a double logarithmic diagram ( Imprecise results of the existing estimators are also related to various constraints occurring in theoretical approximations of different estimators. For example, the box-counting estimator causes characteristic jumps on the log–log plane In this study, the roughness–length method was also used in order that a better evaluation of the proposed method could be carried out. Hence, the roughness–length method is described below. For a self-affine fractal profile, it is possible to have a power law relation between the standard deviation of the profile height, If a linear curve can be fitted to the estimated data of Kulatilake and Um In the present study, the above points have been met in estimation of fractal dimension using the RL method. The idea is to convert the problem from estimation into classification. To do this, a large number of the FBPs were generated in different classes of Various statistical parameters were developed to characterize rock joint roughness In this research, one magnitude parameter namely, RMS of asperity amplitudes, and one texture parameter, namely RMS of asperity slopes, were considered as the features of profiles. RMS of asperity amplitude, which is also called Since the A neural network is a powerful data-modeling tool, which is able to capture and represent complex input/output relationships. The true power and advantage of neural networks lies in their ability to represent both linear and nonlinear relationships and in their ability to learn these relationships directly from the data being modeled The most common neural network model is the multi-layer perceptron shown in MLP has an input layer of source nodes and an output layer of neurons; these two layers connect the network to the outside world. In addition to these two layers, MLP has one or more layers of hidden neurons which are so called because these neurons are not directly accessible. The hidden neurons extract important features contained in the input data. The input layer distributes the inputs to subsequent layers. Each hidden and output unit node has its weight, threshold, and activation function. Hence, each signal feeding into a node in a subsequent layer has the original input multiplied by a weight with a threshold added and then is passed through an activation function which may be linear or nonlinear. This unit (neuron) is magnified in The MLP and many other neural networks learn using an algorithm called back-propagation The particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm introduced by Kennedy and Eberhart in 1995 is inspired by studying social and cognitive behavior Each particle Representing a possible solution to the optimization problem, each particle moves in the direction of its best solution and the global best position discovered by any particles in the swarm. Each particle calculates its own velocity and updates its position in each iteration. Let There are two key factors when using the PSO as an optimization algorithm: one is what to choose as particles of the PSO, another is how to define the fitness function which evaluates the goodness of a particle. The objective was to find a mapping from the statistical coordinates ( The database (described in In both the neural networks, only one hidden layer with five neurons was used and the transfer functions of hidden and output layer were respectively tan-sigmoid and purelin (a linear transfer function) for MLPs 1 and 2. The training function which updated weight and bias values was Levenberg–Marquardt back-propagation. The parameters In this paper, the accuracy of estimation is represented in terms of the normalized standard error which is defined as There is no way to control the accuracy of estimation of Barton and Choubey reported the results of a large number of direct shear tests on natural discontinuities and calculated In this section, the proposed fractal estimator was applied to the standard roughness profiles of rock fractures. To do this, the standard profiles were first digitized with the same resolution of the profiles generated in the database provided that the millimeter was chosen for the unit of length (i.e., the sampling interval was equal to 0.39 In order to apply the proposed estimator to real data, the 3D laser scanning technique was utilized to accurately digitize three natural rock fractures surfaces with different degrees of roughness ( Average values of the calculated 2D fractal parameters for each set of the multiple profiles are plotted along with Both the 2D fractal parameters in different directions have different values, implying that surface roughness of the natural fractures has an anisotropic property. The anisotropy degree of the fractal parameters is different for each surface and can be measured by the standard deviation of the obtained values of In this paper, a new model-free method was introduced to estimate two fractal parameters of roughness profiles simultaneously and accurately. A large number of FBPs with known values of The effectiveness of this method was evaluated in estimating the fractal parameters of a testing set of FBPs. The results demonstrate that the performance of the proposed method in estimation of both The proposed method could be applied to rock mechanics problems in a variety of ways such as roughness quantification, heterogeneity and anisotropy of the surface roughness, shear strength criteria, aperture analysis, and coupled hydro-mechanical behavior of rock fractures.