Transient Joule heating of graphene or nanowires, supported by substrates, is an important and complex heat transfer problem to be solved in the context of nanoscale electronic devices. We formulate here an analytical model that allows the examination of the effects of input power, heat transfer through substrate and the end contacts on the transient temperature evolution. An exact analytical solution is obtained here by the superposition of the Joule heating, the substrate heat transfer and the temperatures at the ends of contacts, within the Fourier formalism, through Laplace transformations. The transient solution explicitly relates temperature profile to the input power, size and the thermal properties of the element, and the heat transfer properties of the substrate. The transient solution naturally reduces to steady state solution. The solutions can be useful for the thermal design of devices made of graphene or nanowires or electrically heated filaments. Experimental steady-state temperature distribution data, obtained by 2D phonon band spectroscopy, are used to confirm the accuracy of the solution. It is found that the time to achieve steady-state temperatures in graphene is of the order of nanoseconds and is a strong function of substrate heat transfer. Further, the maximum temperature and the gradient in steady state profile temperature profile are greatly affected by heat transfer to the substrate.power dissipated per unit volume, W/m interface thermal conductance, W/(m current density, amp/m thermal conductivity, W/m half length of graphene, m summation variable Laplace transformation parameter power input, W resistivity, Ohm-m, perimeter, m Temperature, K end contact temperature, K substrate temperature, K maximum temperature, K steady-state temperature, K time, s transformed temperature variable Laplace transform of distance in graphene, m distance in end contact, m thermal diffusivity, m density, kg/m specific heat, J/(Kg cross-sectional area, m Joule heating of graphene or nanowire/nanotube elements in nanoscale devices under high current densities affects primarily the electronic transport properties A graphene element, especially that is supported by a substrate (typically oxidized Si), poses an interesting situation in the context of current-induced Joule heating because, first, the larger area of contact with the substrate leads to high heat transfer to the substrate. On the other hand, poor mechanical contact across interface, can limit the interface heat transfer to substrate. Additionally, the Joule heat is also dissipated through the leads or end contacts. Thus, the actual temperature distribution in graphene will also be simultaneously affected by the interface thermal conductance and thermal transport through the end contacts, in addition to the element parameters including input power, physical dimensions and thermal properties of graphene. The situation is also similar in Joule-heated nanowires or nanotubes, where heat is dissipated through contact with the substrate although contact area with the interface could be a highly variable parameter here. Another analogous situation is electrically heated filaments in lamps and thermionic devices, with the only difference being that the heat transfer through the surface of the filament is entirely radiative in nature. There are approximate expressions The objective of this work is to construct a transient 1D heat transfer model for graphene that is supported on a substrate and is in touch with end contacts and to obtain the exact analytical solution for the transient temperature evolution. In this work, it is shown that the solution can be obtained by the superposition of the Joule heating, the substrate heat transfer and the temperatures at the ends of contacts within the Fourier formalism through Laplace transformations. The steady state solution is then naturally deduced from the transient solution. The analytical expressions thus obtained have been shown to facilitate direct analysis of how the dimensions and thermal properties of graphene, interface thermal conductance, and, the temperature at the end contacts affect the transient/steady temperature evolution along the length of the graphene. We consider the 1D problem of current-induced Joule heating of a substrate-supported graphene element that dissipates heat by internal conduction and through graphene–substrate interface as well as through the end contacts ( The equation can be transformed to a solvable form by variable substitution as Eq. Initial temperature throughout the 1D element is zero, that is, Thermal gradient at the center of graphene at any time is zero, that is, The end or contact temperatures at − Here The solution for the temperature distribution in graphene can be obtained by Laplace transformation of Eq. The actual physical solution can be obtained by the inverse Laplace transformation of Eq. The above solution corresponds to Eq. Eq. For steady state condition ( The above equation relates the power dissipation, The transient temperature evolution as a function of time was calculated using Eq.  The time to reach steady state for a given Joule heating condition was evaluated using Eq. The present transient solution is also applicable to the case of transient Joule heating of filaments in incandescent lamps, a historical problem in which Langmuir  An exact analytical solution for the transient temperature development in Joule-heated graphene, where heat is also transferred to the underlying substrate and through the end contacts, has been derived using Laplace transforms. This solution can be useful for the thermal design of Joule-heated devices and filaments. The full solution allows the determination of the time required to reach steady state as influenced by heat transfer to substrate and through the end contacts. It is found that steady state conditions are attained in few nanoseconds in graphene for the power levels examined. The transient solution naturally reduced to a compact equation for steady-state condition relating the effects of graphene dimensions, interface thermal conductance, end contact temperatures and the Joule power on the maximum attained temperature of graphene. The steady-state equation agreed well with the experimental data of Joule-heated graphene made by 2D phonon band spectroscopy. The interface thermal conductance parameter strongly affects the time to reach steady state, the temperature distribution and its gradient along the length of graphene. A relatively higher thermal conductance establishes a relatively more uniform temperature distribution along the length of graphene quickly and vice versa. No conflicts of interest. The author thanks Dr. M. Freitag, IBM Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, for providing parameter values for the calculations made here. The calculations in Maple were performed by the research assistant, S. Rou.