Objectives
                  In this study we evaluate the treatment of displaced mid-shaft clavicle fractures or comminuted fractures with a third fragment using a superior anatomic plate.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A retrospective study was conducted on 34 patients operated on between January 2006 and June 2010 with this type of fracture. Mean follow-up was 25 months (6–54 months). By Robinson Classification, 12 cases were type 2B, 17 type 2B1 and 5 type 2B2. Clinical evaluation was performed with the VAS and Constant test. For the radiological evaluation, we used neutral AP projections, and another with 30° of cranio-caudal inclination.
               
                  Results
                  The mean pre-operative VAS was 6.5 (4–8) and the postoperative was 1 (0–2). The mean Constant test score was 85, with 30% good results and 70% excellent results. The mean consolidation time was 14 weeks.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Internal fixation of comminuted fractures with an anatomic plate, particularly those with a vertical third fragment and fracture types 2B, 2B1 and 2B2, provides a good treatment option, as it gives good functional results and minimises the incidence of non-union.Clavicular fractures make up approximately 4% of all fractures in adults, affecting the middle third of the clavicle in 80% of cases. The onset of pseudoarthrosis usually translates clinically into pain, distal neurological problems and, in consequence, a functional deficit of the upper limb. In this study, we attempt to assess the result obtained after the treatment of displaced comminute fractures ( Between January 2006 and June 2010, we conducted a retrospective study that included 34 patients undergoing surgical treatment and presenting a displaced fracture of the middle third of the clavicle ( All patients were operated on by the same surgeon. Placed in the deckchair position, the approach used followed the longitudinal axis of the clavicle. Once the ends of the fracture were located, a currettage was performed on the focus, releasing any interposed soft tissue and temporarily reducing the fragments with reduction clamps. The definitive fixation of the clavicle was done through a preshaped anatomical plate always placed on the upper face (Acumed, Hillsboro, OR All cases were immobilized with a Gilchrist brace for 10 days, after which rehabilitation treatment was started. Clinical assessment was performed using the analogue visual scale (AVS), with a range from 0 (no pain) to 10 (severe pain), and using the Constant test. The maximum score on this test is 100 and it includes 4 items: pain (15 points), activities of daily life (20), joint balance (40) and strength (25). As for radiological evaluation, all patients were subjected to AP projections, one neutral and the other with the X-ray beam angled 30° in a caudocranial direction. The reduction obtained, the degree of consolidation and the onset of complications were all assessed. X-rays were taken in the immediate post-operative phase, after three months, 6 months and at the end of the follow-up. The mean score on the AVS scale prior to surgery was 6.5 (4–8), and 1 (0–2) post-operatively. The Constant test was performed at the end of the follow-up and the mean score obtained was 85, with 30% of cases showing good results and 70% excellent. Among the complications, two cases (5.8%) presented a delay in consolidation. One of them ended up consolidating while the other developed pseudoarthrosis with loosening of the plate, requiring repeat surgery for the placement of a new plate and the provision of an autologous graft of iliac crest bone. These delayed consolidation and pseudoarthrosis cases coincided with patients who had been first operated on more than three weeks after sustaining the fracture. One patient presented discomfort with the plate when carrying out day-to-day activities and requested the removal of the osteosynthesis material. Another 7 patients had some discomfort in the scar area, although these disappeared completely by the end of the follow-up. The mean follow-up was 25 months (6–54 months). With regard to consolidation, this was achieved with a mean time of 14 weeks (8–42 weeks). For the radiological evaluation of fracture consolidation, the passage of bony bridges between the fracture fragments was observed ( The treatment of clavicular fractures has classically been conservative. However, there are numerous studies indicating the onset of complications with this approach. The most frequent of these are pseudoarthrosis, hypertrophic callus, functional impotence under stress, etc. Although there is still some controversy about whether the best osteosynthesis system for the clavicle is to use plates or endomedullary devices, The limitations of our study include the fact that some patients were given a bone graft while others were not, based solely on chronological criteria, and this could distort the results. Bone grafts were placed in comminute fractures or those with a third fragment of clavicle when more than three weeks had passed since the injury was sustained. Nonetheless, all patients who underwent surgery, with or without graft, achieved bone consolidation. In conclusion, we can state that internal fixation with an upper anatomical plate of comminute diaphyseal fractures of the clavicle, especially with a third vertical fragment, constitutes a very valid option in the fractures under study, i.e. Robinson types B, 2B1 and 2B2, as a good functional result is obtained and the incidence of pseudoarthrosis is minimized. Level of evidence: IV.    The authors have no conflict of interests to declare.