In this study, the effect of 24-Epibrassinolide (EBL) on antioxidant system in Arabidopsis thaliana were investigated under arsenate [As(V)] stress. The enzyme activity of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT), total antioxidant status, malondialdehyde (MDA) level and free proline content, as well as the expression levels of SOD isoforms (Cu-ZnSODs, FeSODs and MnSOD), CAT isoforms (CAT1, CAT2 and CAT3), some heat shock proteins (Hsp70-4 and Hsp90-1) and proline biosynthesis (P5CS1 and P5CS2) genes were determined in rosette leaves of eight-week old plants under exposure of 100 and 200 μM As(V) and/or 1 μM EBL treatments for 24 h. Total SOD and CAT enzyme activities increased as a result of 100 μM As(V) + EBL treatments compared to 100 μM As(V) treatment. Total antioxidant and proline levels increased in plants subjected to As(V), and the treatment of EBL together with stress caused further increase. As the MDA level increased in As-treated plants, 100 μM As(V) + EBL treatment decreased MDA level. Transcript levels of CSD1, CSD2, FSD1, FSD2, MSD1 and CAT2 genes increased as a result of combined treatment of EBL and As(V) compared to control and alone stress treatments (except CSD1 gene). Expression level of CSD3, CAT1 and CAT3 genes were downregulated in response to As(V) and/or EBL treatments. EBL application alone and in combination with As(V) elevated the expression level of P5CS1 gene dramatically. Treatment with 100 μM As(V) and EBL increased the transcript level of Hsp70-4 and Hsp90-1 genes in leaves compared to 100 μM As(V) treatment. To our best knowledge, this is the first detailed study to evaluate the improving effect of EBL on antioxidant defense system at biochemical and transcriptional level in A. thaliana plants under As(V) stress.The existence of heavy metals in water and soil has impacts on plant growth and productivity and threatens human health and food security in the world ( Several signaling pathways have been developed that include the use of molecules such as proteins, calcium ions, hormones, ROS, and nitric oxide for signaling to overcome toxicity caused by As in plants ( It has been demonstrated that As modulates gene expression in relation with defense, transporters and those involved in plant growth and development (  Frozen leaves (0.2 g) were crushed in 1 mL cold 0.2 M Na-phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) containing 2% polyvinylpyrrolidone-40 and 1 mM Na-EDTA. Samples were centrifuged at 14 000 rpm for 20 minutes (min) at 4 °C and activities of antioxidant enzymes and total antioxidant levels were determined by supernatants of samples. Superoxide dismutase (EC 1.15.1.1) and CAT (EC 1.11.1.6) enzyme activities are measured using Plant SOD Elisa kit (SunRed, China) and Plant CAT Elisa kit (SunRed, China), respectively, according to manufacturer's instructions. Double-antibody sandwich technique constitutes the basis for plant Elisa kits in order to detect plant super oxidase dismutase and catalase in the samples. Superoxide dismutase and CAT activity were expressed in ng mL Total antioxidant level (mmol L About 0.2 g of leaf samples were homogenized in 1 mL of 0.1% trichloroacetic acid (TCA) (w/v) and centrifuged at 10 000 rpm for 5 min. After centrifugation, 500 μL of the supernatants were transferred to the tubes and 2 mL 20% TCA (w/v) including 0.5% thiobarbituric acid (TBA) (w/v) was added. Tubes were incubated at 95 °C for 30 min and reaction was terminated by taking samples on ice. Samples were again centrifuged at 10 000 rpm for 15 min and the absorbance of supernatant was measured at 532 and 600 nm. Malondialdehyde level was detected according to the procedure of The free proline content of leaf samples was detected in accordance with the protocol by Total RNA was isolated from approximately 0.1 g of leaf tissue by use of Plant RNA Miniprep Kit (Zymo, USA) and the concentration and purity of RNA samples were detected using the Microplate Photometer (Thermo, Germany). Denaturing formaldehyde agarose gel electrophoresis was performed to check the integrity of RNA. Following DNaseI (Thermo, Gemany) treatment to RNA samples, cDNA synthesis was carried out on 1 μg total RNA with RevertAid Reverse Transcriptase Kit (Thermo, Germany) as recommended by the suppliers. The cDNA samples from all treatments were used as template for qRTPCR in CFX Connect real-time PCR Detection System (Bio-Rad, Germany). Sequence database of selected genes provided by National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) and primers were designed by primer designing tool Primer3 ( The parametric assumptions (data normality and homoscedasticity) were carried out utilizing Shapiro-Wilk's and Bartlett's tests for each data set. Data shown are means ± standard error (SE) (n = 6). Results were analysed by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a Duncan’s Multiple Range test at 0.05 level using SPSS software (Ver 17.0) to compare the difference between As(V) and/or EBL treatments and control group. Treatment with 100 and 200 μM As(V) for 24 h caused total SOD enzyme activity to increase by 31.59% and 46.38%, respectively compared to control ( In this study, qRTPCR was used to monitor expression patterns of all isoforms of SOD and CAT, proline synthase genes as well as some heat shock protein ( Transcript level of Arsenic stress is globally one of the greatest dangers and solutions are needed against rapid contamination ( Superoxide dismutase is found in several subcellular locations as O Catalase enzyme plays a large role in plants in different developmental stages, and unlike animals, various plants contain several CAT isoforms. Catalase assists the cell to remove H Damage due to oxidants can be considerably decreased by the antioxidants by neutralizing free radicals preventing them from attacking the cells and damaging macromolecules like lipids, proteins, enzymes, carbohydrates and DNA ( One of the criteria for determination of the effect of stress conditions is lipid peroxidation; final product of this reaction, MDA, is generally thought to be an oxidative stress signal ( Proline serves the osmolytes as well as the metal chelator, antioxidative defense molecule and signal molecule throughout the stress. The increasing content of proline in plants under stress conditions maintains osmotic balance, stabilizes membranes by preventing electrolyte leakage and increases stress tolerance by reducing ROS concentrations ( Stress in plants leads to activation of signal transduction cascades at cellular and molecular level and induces expression of stress specific genes ( Based on the results of the present study, it can be concluded that As(V) induced antioxidative regulations at biochemical and molecular level in