Using South Korean data for 2000–2015, we find that firms with less information asymmetry and larger issue size are more likely to choose rights issues over public offerings and that control considerations also affect the flotation choice. We also find that rights offerings are met with more negative announcement returns than public offerings, and that stockholders of rights issuing firms seem to be compensated for the initial adverse market reaction by large issue-day returns. We contribute to the literature with an intra-market analysis of the SEO method choice, which cannot be done in markets with a dominant flotation type.Researchers have extensively investigated the motivation of public firms in issuing additional equity, as well as the market’s reactions to seasoned equity offering (SEO) announcements. However, only a small number of studies document evidence regarding the intra-market flotation choice, because most markets have a certain dominant SEO method and comparing firms employing different flotation methods is difficult. South Korea provides a good setting for such analysis as there is vibrant activity in all types of SEOs (rights issues, public offers, and private placements) during our sample period of 2000–2015, in addition to being the 11th largest economy in the world. SEOs are typically classified into three categories: public offerings, rights issues, and private placements. In the United States, rights issues were once popular among industrial firms, but firm-commitment public offerings have become dominant since the 1980s ( Prior studies on SEOs have largely focused on public offers because they mainly use U.S. data. The information asymmetry model of Theoretical models have been developed to explain the choice of rights issues versus public offerings in the SEO process. Assuming asymmetric information between issuing firms and investors, The choice of rights issues versus public offerings can also be related to ownership structure and controlling shareholders’ incentives. As mentioned earlier, the flotation method choice in the SEO process varies across markets. Public offers are common in the U.S., Japan, and Canada, while rights issues are still dominant in many countries, such as Italy, India, and Australia. There is empirical evidence that the choice of rights issues versus public offerings reflects variations in institutional characteristics across countries. However, We incorporate the above-mentioned factors into our tests and investigate their effects on the flotation method choice and market reactions to it, in analyzing the SEO data of South Korean firms over the 2000–2015 period. Using univariate and multivariate tests, we find that firms with less information asymmetry and better financial positions are more likely to choose rights issues than public offerings. Firms with larger controlling shareholder ownership, firms affiliated with business groups, or those that issue larger amounts of equity (as a ratio to existing shares) also prefer the rights method, showing control considerations affect the flotation choice. It is also interesting to note that the traditional role of broker certification in the flotation method choice is not applicable, as SEOs in South Korea are typically not underwritten. In further tests, we find that the average cumulative abnormal return (CAR) for rights offering firms during a three-day window around the announcements is −8.9% and for public offering firms −3.9%. Taken alone, the announcement effects seem out of line with evidence based on the U.S. sample, and inconsistent with the information asymmetry-based argument that capital markets react more negatively to public offers. There are limitations to investigations of how firm managers choose between rights issues or public offers, due to data availability. We contribute to the literature by analyzing South Korean data, and show that firms with better prospects and financial health tend to choose rights issues over public offers in increasing equity capital. Our finding is consistent with the information asymmetry model of We add to the SEO literature in Asian markets where earlier evidence was mostly for Japan ( We review prior studies and develop our hypotheses in Section In the U.S., rights issues have almost disappeared ( More recently, private investment in public equity (PIPE) has become increasingly popular in the U.S. Outside the U.S., the SEO landscape varies from market to market. In the U.K., firms use placings (similar to U.S. firm commitments) to signal their quality and reduce ownership concentration ( In South Korea, there have been several regulation changes regarding SEOs. The Capital Market Act, effective as of February 2009, enabled issuers to freely decide on the level of discount in rights offerings (including public offers with shareholder primacy). Prior studies with South Korean data include There are ongoing attempts to explain the rights issues paradox, among the most notable being those by   The information asymmetry and agency theories both predict that on average, markets will react negatively to the announcements of firm-commitment public offerings. Empirical studies in the U.S. generally support these theories, documenting negative stock price reactions to SEO announcements (e.g., Evidence on rights issues is scarce in the U.S. and more plentiful in other parts of the world. We expect capital markets to react negatively to announcements of SEOs regardless of the choice of rights issues or public offers due to the adverse selection problem, especially as underwriter certification is not the norm. As to the difference between rights issues and public offers, theoretical predictions can work both ways. If higher quality firms with less information asymmetry choose rights issues over public offers, those firms will earn less negative stock returns around the announcements of new equity issues. On the other hand, rights issue firms may decrease their offer prices more than public offering firms, to benefit existing shareholders. If so, capital markets may react more negatively to announcements of rights issues. Therefore, whether negative reactions to announcements of public offers is greater than to those of rights issues is an empirical question. In short, we test the following hypothesis:  To test our hypotheses, we hand-collect data on the SEOs of South Korean industrial firms through the Data Analysis, Retrieval and Transfer System (DART), which is the electronic disclosure system of the Financial Supervisory Service (FSS). Decisions to issue new equity must be made public in a timely manner. In a SEO, the board decision should be disclosed on the day of the resolution, or on the next business day when the decision is made after business hours. In event studies, this disclosure date is considered as the event date. We collect information on the flotation method, offer price, offer size, and offering date of each SEO from Securities Reports that issuing firms file with the authority. We also obtain accounting and stock return data of the sample firms from FnGuide. Stock price reactions to new information show how the market evaluates the event. We measure short-term abnormal returns to seasoned equity issue announcements by employing a simple market model as in We measure abnormal returns on the day of seasoned equity issue announcement, and CARs of [-1, +1] and [0, +5] days to compare short-term announcement effects.  Our firm characteristic variables include Ownership structure is measured by controlling shareholders’ ownership [the fraction of shares held by the largest shareholder and his/her direct affiliates ( To measure information asymmetry from stock trading data, we use We control for market returns in our analyses. Panel A of Panel B of We present the means and medians of rights and public offering firms in Rights offering firms are larger in size and have on average lower market-to-book and intangible asset ratios, which indicates that they have less information asymmetry problems. They have better All but one of the differences (mean difference for How do firms choose between a rights offering and a public offering? This question remains largely unanswered, as markets that see substantial activity in both are scarce. Even in the case of South Korea, public offerings used to be very rare and received little attention in the literature. However, during the last decade or so, issues through public offers have increased greatly, and South Korea is now a viable setting for testing the choice between these two mechanisms. We conduct logit regressions to further analyze the choice of flotation method. The dependent variable takes a value of 1 if the SEO choice is a rights offering and 0 otherwise. The results in In Model 3 of   We previously tabulated average market reaction to announcements of seasoned equity issuances in To examine the relation between the announcement returns of SEOs and their discounts after controlling for other determinants, we run multivariate regressions and report the results in We include control variables following We repeat the analysis with alternative measures of announcement returns ( The results of logit and probit regressions in prior tables show that firms in better financial condition tend to choose rights offerings rather than public offerings. Therefore, it seems only reasonable that capital markets should react to announcements of public offerings more negatively. However, the announcement effects reported in Then why do managers/shareholders choose rights issues and discount their shares heavily, despite the adverse market reactions to them? We also compare the losses on existing shareholder positions and subsequent gains on new positions. First, we calculate SEO period return as the CAR from the day following the SEO announcement ( We also test for the possibility that issuing additional equity is to meet the actual needs of a firm. We track changes in leverage, R&D expenses, and cash ratios from the year prior to the SEO announcement date to the year after ([-1,+1]). The results in Can brokerage fees and schemes be a factor in the choice of flotation method in the SEO? We check for this possibility by investigating the role of brokers in the equity flotation process. Of the observations for which we have brokerage fee data (864 rights issues and 348 public offers), we winsorize at the 5th and 95th percentiles to exclude outliers, especially when calculating brokerage as a percentage of the issuance proceeds. Extreme values occur most often in cases of low subscription, where the offering firm is still obliged to pay a fixed brokerage fee, which can be larger than the actual issuance amount. Overall, brokerage fees as a percentage of total proceeds is not very different for rights and public offerings, as shown in There are at least two possible explanations for the sparsity of standby and underwritten public offers: either issuing firms do not want to pay higher brokerage fees, or brokerage firms are unwilling to provide certification to public offering firms. The former supposition may be disputed, as public offering firms are already paying brokers higher fees than rights offering firms for best efforts services. However, this may be related to more work involved in pitching the issuance to the public rather than just the shareholders, and needs further verification. The latter seems more likely, as brokers provide certification to many rights offering firms. The few underwritten public offerings are probably for bigger firms in the sample, as suggested by the larger issuance proceeds. This is additional evidence suggesting that the paucity of public offers with broker certification is because underwriters are unwilling to risk taking positions in smaller, inferior quality firms. In most markets, a certain type of SEO method dominates, making problematic any investigation of the choice of flotation method or subsequent market reactions. South Korea is one exception, with all three seasoned equity issuance methods (rights issues, public offerings, and private placements) used widely by corporations. In this paper, we use data for South Korea and focus on the choice between rights and public offerings and their differences, as private placements often arise from debt restructuring and are involuntary. We find that firms with less information asymmetry and better financial health, as proxied by size, intangible assets, leverage, and stock return performance preceding the SEO decision, tend to choose rights offerings over public offerings. The findings fit the model of We find one peculiarity, where the market reacts more negatively to rights offer announcements than to public offer announcements. This phenomenon can be explained in light of local regulations, which allows freedom of discount for rights issues, while it limits public offer discounts to a maximum of 30%. We document that the typical rights issue is discounted 10% more heavily than the public offer, but the shareholders of rights issuing firms can earn large issue-day returns that make up for the more negative market reactions around announcement dates. This table lists the main variables and their definitions. Firm characteristics are calculated from financial data of the fiscal year preceding the SEO announcement year.