A high-temperature triaxial permeability testing machine was used to study anisotropic permeability of oil shale at stresses that emulate in-situ conditions. The threshold temperature of permeability in the direction perpendicular to bedding is 450 °C and in the direction parallel to bedding is 400 °C. The magnitude of permeability of perpendicular bedding is low than 10−20 m2 below 450 °C, and increase from 10−19 to 10−17 m2 at 450–600 °C. The magnitude of permeability of parallel bedding is 10−19 to 10−18 m2 below 400 °C, and increase form 10−16 to 10−15 m2 at 400 to 600 °C. The ratio of permeability of parallel bedding to permeability of perpendicular bedding was maximal at 450 °C. Simultaneously, sample microstructure was characterized by X-ray computed tomography. Thermal cracks mainly occur in the bedding direction, and cracks perpendicular to the bedding are rare. Thermal cracks caused by increased temperature are the main reason for the change of permeability in the direction parallel to bedding, and the connection of macropores is the main reason for the change of permeability in the direction perpendicular to bedding.Oil shale, an unconventional resource with extensive worldwide reserves, contains organic matter (also called kerogen) in its solid skeleton Two problems exist in the In recent years, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and computed tomography (CT) have been used to study the dynamic process of pore and crack propagation in oil shale. Saif et al. used CT to study the evolution of pores and cracks at high temperatures, and the results show that many connected pores and cracks appeared from 390 to 400 °C Shale permeability parallel to bedding (K In addition, researchers found that the anisotropic permeability has an obvious relationship with the distribution of fractures in shale. Backeberg studied the anisotropic permeable pathway of clay-rich shale using nano-CT and found that the anisotropic permeability of shale correlates with the anisotropy of the initial crack In this paper, a high-temperature triaxial rock permeability testing machine was used to investigate the permeability of oil shale both parallel and perpendicular to bedding from normal temperature (20 °C) to 600 °C. CT technology was also employed to investigate the thermal cracking of oil shale parallel and perpendicular to bedding from normal temperature to 600 °C. The CT results are expected to provide insight on mechanisms of permeability changes over a range of temperatures. This study tries to provide the theoretical basis for The torque of the drilling bit sectioned the oil shale core into slices along the bedding planes during initial coring, because of the weakness of the oil shale bedding planes. CNC carborundum saw cutting machine ( An industrial microscopic X-ray CT system combined with the heating system used for the experiments, was developed by the School of Mining Engineering at Taiyuan University of Technology and the Institute of Applied Electronics at the China Academy of Engineering Physics (model l CT225k VFCB industrial CT), which has been introduced by Yang Permeability was measured using a real-time high temperature triaxial rock permeability testing machine designed by Taiyuan University of Technology ( A set of axial compression of 5 MPa and confining pressure of 6 MPa was applied to study the permeability of oil shale under high temperature and triaxial stress. The samples were then heated to specified temperatures (100, 200, 300, 350, 400, 450, 500, 550, and 600 °C) at a rate of 1 °C/min. We conducted the permeability measurements when there were no pyrolysis products at the temperature stage to reduce the effect of pyrolysis products on permeability. Nitrogen was used as the insert gas to measure permeability at different pore pressures (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, 2.5, and 3.0 MPa). The nitrogen gas flow was recorded at the outlet, with 20 min required for stabilizing the sample between two pore pressures and to then accurately reflect the effect of pore pressure. When testing was finished, the sample was heated to the next temperature, and the test procedure was repeated. It was assumed that gas permeation through the sample was an isothermal process and that the ideal gas law was applicable. In this condition, permeability obeys Darcy’s law Three-dimensional (3D) images of the evolution of anisotropic crack propagation of oil shale under various temperatures are shown in No millimeter-sized microcracks were observed, At 350 °C, a unique phenomenon occurred: the cracks closed, most likely because of conversion of kerogen to liquid asphaltenes that caused the pore volume to expand The main pyrolysis temperature range of kerogen is 400–550 °C, within which millimeter-sized microcracks further developed. The number, length, and aperture of the cracks parallel to the bedding plane substantially increased. The longest crack length was 6 mm, and aperture was 15 μm at 400 °C ( From 550 to 600 °C, the pyrolysis of kerogen is basically complete, as shown in The variation trend of permeability of the same bedding direction (i.e. perpendicular or parallel to the bed direction) versus the temperature is the same. We selected samples 2# (parallel to bedding) and 4# (perpendicular to bedding) to analyze the change of K In this section, the variation of permeability of oil shale perpendicular to bedding and the permeability of oil shale parallel to bedding versus temperature was analyzed, with the main data being exemplified by sample 2# and 4#. Under lower pore pressure (0.5 MPa), the Klinkenberg effect had a greater impact on permeability, so we choose the permeability under pore pressure of 3Mpa to analyze the effect of temperature on the anisotropic permeability. The variation of K Stage 1, from normal temperature to 450 °C: Permeability data cannot be obtained by steady-state method because of the ultra-low permeability of oil shale at low temperatures. As can be seen in Stage 2, from 450 to 550 °C: Permeability can be measured by the steady-state method when the temperature is up to 450 °C. With the increase of temperature from 450 to 500 °C, permeability changed from 2.77 × 10 Stage 3, from 550 to 600 °C: Permeability slightly decreased. At 550 °C, decomposition of organic matter in oil shale was basically completed, the pores in the oil shale closed under triaxial stress. The variation of K Stage 1, from normal temperature to 300 °C: At normal temperature, the value of K Stage 2, from 300 to 350 °C: Permeability decreased from 1.3 × 10 Stage 3, from 350 to 550 °C: Oil shale pyrolysis mainly occurs from 400 to 550 °C, some scholars have concluded that the permeability change is because of the change of the porosity after pyrolysis and found that this stage is the main stage of permeability increase Stage 4, from 550 to 600 °C: The permeability slightly increased, unlike the K The anisotropic coefficient is defined as the ratio of K  Sedimentation has an impact on the mineralogy, TOC content, fabric (degree of anisotropy), and texture of shale The gas transportation law in unconventional reservoirs (including shale gas and oil shale) is a combination of desorption and diffusion within micropores (<2 nm) and mesopores (2–50 nm), and Darcy flow within both macropores (>50 nm) and crack networks As shown in As the permeability of the oil shale is significantly different in the different bedding directions, the range of temperature conduction can also be vastly different. Based on the experimental results, the anisotropy coefficient of permeability is 60–500, indicating that the time of temperature conduction in the vertical bedding direction is much longer than that in the parallel direction. In this way, we can control the distance between the injection and extraction wells ( High-temperature triaxial rock permeability testing machine and CT were employed to study the anisotropic permeability and thermal cracking of the Fushun oil shale. The conclusions are as follows: Cracks parallel to bedding occur from 400 to 600 °C, and no obvious cracks are generated perpendicular to bedding. The variation of K The variation of K The formation of cracks and microcracks is the main reason for the increase of K This work was funded by