Fifth metatarsal tuberosity avulsion fractures are common. Despite good outcomes with nonoperative treatment, acute fractures with displacement, intra-articular involvement, comminution, or painful nonunion have been reported to benefit from early open reduction and internal fixation, especially in athletes. No consensus has been reached regarding the best surgical fixation technique. We present a case series of 4 patients with displaced fifth metatarsal tuberosity avulsion fractures and an innovative technique of fixation for the tuberosity avulsion fractures using a suture anchor.Fifth metatarsal base fractures are among the most common injuries of the foot Although most tuberosity avulsion fractures (zone 1) will heal successfully with nonoperative treatment, several investigators have shown that the tuberosity fractures can require ≤12 weeks to consolidate However, no unanimity has been reached regarding the preferred modality of fixation for tuberosity fractures. The recommended methods include fixation with Kirschner wires, tension band wiring, cancellous screws, and locking compression plating Therefore, we describe the cases of 4 patients with displaced fifth metatarsal tuberosity avulsion fractures and an innovative technique of fixation for the tuberosity avulsion fractures using bioabsorbable suture anchors (Bio-Corkscrew™, 5.5 × 14.7 mm; Arthrex GmbH, Munich, Germany). We describe a series of 4 patients with displaced comminuted fifth metatarsal tuberosity fractures who presented to us from July 2011 to April 2012. They were followed up for a mean of 27.3 (range 24 to 31) months. Of the 4 patients, 1 was male and 3 were female. Their mean age was 45.4 (range 18 to 72) years. All our patients had sustained twisting injuries of the foot during sporting activities. The male patient had sustained this injury during a football game, and the other 3 had sustained this injury during basketball, skating, and ballroom dancing, respectively. Standard anteroposterior, oblique, and lateral radiographs were obtained in the emergency room. All 4 patients had comminuted tuberosity avulsion fractures with ≥5 mm of linear or rotary displacement, or both ( All 4 patients provided written informed consent for the present study and were informed that the necessary data and photographs would be submitted for publication with no patient identifiers. All applicable institutional regulations concerning the ethical use of our patients were followed during the course of this research. After provision of informed consent, the patient was given general anesthesia. Surgery was performed with a thigh tourniquet in place and the patient in the supine position. We routinely placed a small sandbag under the hip to provide internal rotation of the affected leg by ~30°. The affected limb was prepared with povidone-iodine. A 3-cm dorsolateral incision was made over the tuberosity of the fifth metatarsal and continued proximally over the distalmost fibers of the peroneus brevis. The peroneus brevis tendon was identified and retracted inferiorly. The fracture hematoma was debrided and fracture bed cleaned with moist gauze. Dissection of the tuberosity fracture fragments was not performed to preserve the soft tissue attachments. The entry point for the bioabsorbable (polylactic acid) anchor was created using an awl and tapped. Next, a double-loaded 5.5-mm suture anchor (Bio-Corkscrew™, 5.5 × 14.7 mm; Arthrex) was inserted into the fifth metatarsal fracture bed under direct vision. Once the suture anchor was fully seated, the sutures and needles were released from the anchor driver. Small drill holes were made in the main bony fragment with a 1.6-mm Kirschner wire to pass the sutures. The suture threads were then passed through the tuberosity fragments and its soft tissue sleeve ( Postoperatively, the patients were kept non-weightbearing in a below-the-knee posterior splint with the foot kept in eversion to protect the repair. They were examined 2 weeks later for wound inspection and fitted with a walking boot and eversion wedge for another 4 weeks. Following that, the patient was allowed full weightbearing with a covered shoe at 6 weeks postoperatively. A structured rehabilitation program consisting of range of motion exercises was begun from the third week onward, and strengthening exercises were started once the patient was fully weightbearing at 6 weeks postoperatively. All 4 patients were allowed to return to their preinjury level of daily and sporting activities at 3 months postoperatively when the radiographs showed bony union. None of the 4 patients had experienced failed fixation at their last follow-up visit (12 months). The tuberosity avulsion fracture is the most common fracture of the fifth metatarsal base Several investigators have recommended internal fixation for joint displacement of >2 mm, a lateral prominence, an intra-articular incongruity >30% of the joint, comminution, or delayed union Each of these modalities have their own specific problems. Open reduction and internal fixation using a Kirschner wire through the tuberosity and into the diaphyseal cortex has been described In addition, cancellous screws have long been used to treat tuberosity avulsion fractures In our experience, the bioabsorbable suture anchors were able to provide a reliable fixation of the tuberosity fragments. The sutures can also be modified to suit the pattern of comminution. As stated, we have routinely passed sutures, not only through the main bony fragment, but also to provide purchase to the peroneus brevis tendon and lateral cord of the plantar fascia to ensure sufficient fixation. This technique provides adequate reduction of the displaced comminuted fragments under direct vision and can potentially allow for early postoperative rehabilitation. In addition, minimal soft tissue dissection is required for this technique. This would also obviate the need for removal of wires or prominent implants and prevent secondary displacement of the fragments with inversion forces, because the avulsed fragments are directly reduced and secured down with the suture anchor. To the best of our knowledge, the present case series is the first to report 4 consecutive cases of displaced comminuted fifth metatarsal tuberosity avulsion fractures treated successfully with suture anchors. In conclusion, displaced fifth metatarsal tuberosity avulsion fractures are common. No consensus has yet been reached regarding the surgical fixation techniques. We have described an innovative technique for fixation of the displaced comminuted tuberosity fragments with a suture anchor. This is a reliable technique with good results and potentially can allow for early rehabilitation. It also obviates the need for removal of wires or prominent implants.