The extraction and recovery of Ti from Ti-enriched tailing with acid leaching and precipitate flotation, as one of the critical steps, was proposed for the stepwise utilization of red mud. The factors influencing acid leaching and precipitate flotation were examined by factorial design. The leaching thermodynamics, kinetics of Ti4+, Al3+ and Fe3+, and the mechanism of selectively Fe3+ removal using [Hbet][Tf2N] as precipitating reagent were discussed. The extracting of Ti4+, Al3+ and Fe3+ in concentrated H2SO4 is controlled by diffusion reactions, depending mainly upon leaching time and temperature. The maximum extracting efficiency of Ti4+ is approximately 92.3%, whereas Al3+ and Fe3+ leaching are respectively 75.8% and 84.2%. [Hbet][Tf2N], as a precipitating reagent, operates through a coordination mechanism in flotation. The pH value is the key factor influencing the flotation recovery of Ti4+, whereas the dosage of precipitating reagent is that for Al3+ recovery. The maximum flotation recovery of Ti4+ is 92.7%, whereas the maximum Al3+ recovery is 93.5%. The total recovery rate for extracting and recovering titanium is 85.5%. The liquor with Ti4+ of 15.5g/L, Al3+ of 30.4g/L and Fe3+ of 0.48g/L was obtained for the following hydrolysis step in the integrated process for red mud utilisation.Bayer red mud is a challenging byproduct generated during the Bayer alumina production Titanium is one of the most valuable metals in red mud In our former work, it is found that approximately 85% of iron was recovered from red mud using selective flocculation desliming process. Thereafter valuable titanium, the remained iron and other components were enriched in the tailing derived from red mud The Bayer red mud was collected from alumina refinery in Henan province, China. The tailing derived from red mud was obtained with the procedure of directly recovering iron minerals by selective flocculation as described in our former work Concentrated sulfuric acid H The schematic diagram of stepwise recovering valuable metals from Bayer red mud is plotted in As described in There have been some studies on extracting titanium from red mud with acid leaching. Compared to other extractants, it was reported that concentrated sulphuric acid has a relatively good leaching performance The tailing was leached in a 1000 In this work, [Hbet][Tf The removal rate of metal ions ( The recovery of metal ions (R The concentration of Ti and Al ions was determined by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES). For obtaining a more accurate results, Fe content was determined in accordance with ISO 2597-1 because of its low concentration.All leaching, flotation experiments and chemical analysis were conducted in triplicate to get the more accuate results. Statistical analysis including the analysis of variance was conducted with Originpro v8.0 software. Thermodynamic calculation between Ti, Fe, Al and Ca oxides and sulfuric acid was conducted using HSC 6.0 software. X-ray diffraction (XRD) was performed on a D3 X-ray diffractometer equipped with a graphite monochromatized Cu–Ka radiation source ( During sulphuric acid leaching, the main chemical reactions between compositions of the tailing and sulfuric acid, and their thermodynamic calculations using HSC 6.0 software are presented in From the point of view of thermodynamics, A series of acid leaching experiments were conducted according to an orthogonal design method, which is a method used to solve for multiple factors As given in Under the optimized levels, the acid leaching experiments of titanium, aluminum and iron were conducted and their extracting efficiency are given in As revealed in As illustrated in The kinetics of extracting titanium, aluminum and iron were examined by testing different leaching times (from 10 to 150 It is seen that the extraction is fast, where equilibrium was reached within 120 The experimental data in It can be found from The X-ray diffraction pattern of the residue, after leaching by concentrated sulfuric acid, at the optimum leaching conditions is presented in  The results of the mineralogical analysis by X-ray diffraction were confirmed by SEM observations ( (a) Surface morphology of the residue (×5000); (b) and (c) EDS analysis for the assigned zone As shown in Precipitate flotation is a bubble separation process that involves the precipitation of the ionic species to be removed, using a precipitating agent, prior to its flotation with a collector. The interaction between the precipitate and the collector produces hydrophobic particles which then become able to attach to the air bubbles, introduced into the suspension, and are then removed in the foam phase Under fixed conditions as described in It can be seen from The optimal levels for L As seen from As stated earlier, [Hbet][Tf [Hbet][Tf For precipitate mechanism analysis, the removal rates As shown in An integrated process for the stepwise utilization of Bayer red mud was proposed on the basis of our findings. The first step for recovering iron minerals from red mud had been studied in our former study. The extraction and recovery Ti from Ti-enriched tailing with acid leaching and precipitate flotation, as the second step, is a connecting between the preceding first step and the following third step. In this study, the influencing factors and the mechanism in the acid leaching and precipitate flotation were examined by factorial design, thermodynamics and kinetics calculations, XRD analysis, and SEM observations. L This work was financially supported by the