Oxidation of magnetite pellet concentrates (from LKAB, Sweden) during drying and storage was studied using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). The Fe2+content of a standard LKAB pellet feed decreased by 0.2% during heat treatment at 105 °C for 2 days. The results indicate that magnetite concentrates of pelletizing fineness already start to oxidize to γ-hematite during drying at 105 °C, although 105 °C is recommended by ISO 7764 and ISO 3087 and given as the maximum allowable drying temperature in ISO 3082. The importance of drying time for the amount of magnetite oxidized should also be recognized, but is not mentioned in the ISO standards. The sensitivity of magnetite particles for oxidation during drying could not be predicted by measuring the BET surface area. A simple isothermal TGA run gives exact experimental data and is recommended as a standard procedure before choosing the drying temperature for magnetite concentrate samples.
                  Oxidation during storage at room temperature was observed as well. The Fe2+content in a standard Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara (LKAB) pellet feed decreased by 0.3% Fe2+during 4 years of storage at room temperature. Oxidation during storage was completely hindered when the samples were stored in a freezer at −50 °C. Therefore, freezer storage is recommended for all magnetite reference materials. These materials are used over several years and are especially susceptible to oxidation because they are usually finely ground and high in Fe2+content. The results also show that if the magnetite sample has partly oxidized to γ-hematite, the oxidation curve obtained by TGA will overestimate the Fe2+content of the sample, if background correction is necessary.The oxidation of magnetite mineral particles has been widely studied because of its great importance in the industrial production of iron ore pellets. The oxidation reaction is highly exothermic and actually provides more than two-thirds of the total sintering energy in pelletizing. The oxidation reaction of magnetite to hematite follows Eq. The oxidation of magnetite particles takes place in two main steps. The first oxidation step runs at low temperatures, below 350 °C. The second step starts soon after the low-temperature oxidation is finished and is completed between 900 and 1100 °C in magnetite concentrates of typical pelletizing fineness. Dissociation of hematite back to magnetite starts around or above 1200 °C, depending on the purity of the hematite phase ( Naturally, in the pelletizing process, the oxidation of magnetite at high temperatures, above 900 °C, is of particular interest. However, the low-temperature oxidation occurs relatively quickly and converts up to 15% of all magnetite to hematite. The temperature in the last drying zone of the pelletizing machine, in the upper part of the pellet bed, is high enough for the low-temperature oxidation to start. Pre-oxidation in the drying zone would consequently change the oxidation pattern of pellets at high temperatures. Initial thermogravimetric (TGA) measurements to characterize the low-temperature oxidation in magnetite concentrate powders showed instability and unexplained behaviour. This observation led to further studies on thermal stability of magnetite concentrate powders during storage and drying. The oxidation of sub-micron-size magnetite particles at room temperature has been verified earlier ( The studied magnetite concentrates were from LKAB's (Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara, Sweden) concentrating plants at Kiruna and Malmberget. The Kiruna pellet concentrate (KPC) is produced from the Kiruna magnetite ore mineralization by wet grinding in closed circuit with hydrocyclones. The Malmberget pellet concentrate (MPC) is produced from the Malmberget magnetite ore by wet ball mill grinding in an open grinding circuit. Differences in the grinding processes for KPC and MPC lead to different particle size distributions. The particle size distribution for MPC is wider compared to KPC. Typical sieving analysis values for KPC and MPC are given in The oxidation of pure magnetite leads to a weight gain of 3.455%. Due to the large weight gain, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was found suitable for the oxidation studies. TGA measurements were done using Setaram 92-16 thermobalance. Open, shallow platinum crucibles with a volume of 130 μl were used. The sample size was 105±5 mg. In non-isothermal measurements, a heating rate of 5 °C/min was used. Nitrogen (99.99990% N The wet-chemical analysis of the Fe In view of current knowledge, the low-temperature oxidation of colloidal magnetite particles produces γ-hematite, also called maghemite, as the only oxidation product at temperatures below about 500 °C ( In the case of larger, non-colloidal magnetite particles, it is now generally agreed that a stepwise oxidation mechanism takes place ( The LKAB magnetite pellet concentrates are wet ground and therefore sampled as slurries. The samples should not be filtered before drying because part of the fine tail would be lost. The slurry samples are normally dried at 105 °C in accordance with the ISO 3082 standard before homogenizing and division to subsamples. Because of the large amount of water, drying takes a few days. Typical LKAB Kiruna and Malmberget magnetite pellet concentrate samples (KPC and MPC, respectively) were sampled, freeze-dried and studied by TGA. Possible oxidation during drying was studied by running the KPC and MPC samples in TGA isothermally at 75, 105 and 130 °C for 48 h under oxidizing conditions. The corresponding weight gain curves are shown in The above-stated difference in oxidation behaviour between KPC and MPC during drying was somewhat surprising, because the BET surface areas were similar in these two samples (0.507 and 0.501 m A simple isothermal TGA run gives quantitative experimental data on the sensitivity of the magnetite sample to oxidation during drying. An isothermal TGA run is therefore recommended as standard procedure before choosing the drying temperature. A magnetite pellet concentrate sample was collected from the LKAB Malmberget production plant (MPC). The sample was filtered in a Buchner funnel, and the filter cake was divided into two parallel samples. One part of the sample was allowed to dry at room temperature and then stored in a paper sample bag at room temperature. The other part was freeze-dried and stored in a freezer at −50 °C. These two samples were chemically analyzed directly after sample preparation and showed 23.7% Fe The same two MPC samples specified in the previous chapter were also measured by TGA, first directly after sample preparation and then more or less regularly during the 4 years of storage. Observations regarding changes in the TGA curves are reported below. The weight gain (d DTG curves over the low-temperature oxidation peak of the MPC sample stored in a freezer at −50 °C for 0, 2 and 4 years are shown in Corresponding DTG curves for the other MPC sample stored at room temperature for 0, 2 and 4 years are shown in Non-isothermal TGA runs for the two MPC samples (stored at −50 °C and at room temperature) under nitrogen atmosphere are shown in The influence of the Curie point under N During the TGA run in nitrogen, the sample is magnetite and highly magnetic when the Curie point is reached. The weight change at the Curie point becomes therefore appreciable. However, when the sample is run under oxidizing atmosphere, almost half of the sample has already oxidized to hematite when the Curie point is reached. For this reason, the weight change at the Curie point under oxidizing atmosphere is much smaller, often hardly visible. Applying background correction on the oxidation TGA curve of magnetite samples leads, therefore, to a slight overestimation of the Fe The DTG curve for the MPC sample stored at room temperature showed an additional broad weight loss band between 200 °C and the Curie point. According to Interestingly, the final weight gain after background correction of the TGA oxidation curves actually describes the Fe The original Fe Possible oxidation of magnetite concentrate particles during sample preparation or storage leads to decreasing Fe The results point out that special care should be taken during drying of magnetite pellet concentrate slurries to avoid erroneous Fe The sensitivity of magnetite particles to low-temperature oxidation cannot be predicted by measuring the BET surface area. A prolonged isothermal TGA run is recommended as standard procedure before choosing the drying temperature for a specific type of magnetite concentrate sample. Once the drying temperature has been selected using the TGA curves as a guideline, it can be applied to all similar samples thereafter. For very sensitive samples, the choice is either to decrease the drying temperature to around 75 °C and accept the inconvenience of a much longer drying time or to use freeze-drying, which is tedious because of the large amounts of water in slurry samples. Oxidation during storage at room temperature was detected as well. The Fe When the oxidation of magnetite samples during drying and storage is understood, an explanation for certain behaviour in TGA thermograms is also gained. Oxidation during storage did split the low-temperature oxidation peak to two fairly well-separated peaks. The first one can be explained by the oxidation of magnetite to γ-hematite, the second by conversion of γ-hematite to α-hematite. TGA thermograms under non-oxidizing conditions showed that any γ-hematite formed during storage or drying will dissociate back to magnetite. This results in a weight loss specific only for the oxygen-free TGA measurement. Therefore, if background correction for the oxidation of magnetite samples is needed (for example, due to calcining), any γ-hematite in the sample would lead to an overestimation of the Fe Funding from the Agricola Research Centre (ARC) at the Luleå University of Technology and LKAB is gratefully acknowledged.