The iron stripping from di(-2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA) constitutes a problem in hydrometallurgical processes: whereas Fe(III) is easily extracted along with other elements such as zinc or cadmium, it is hard to strip it from the organic phase. It is well known that Fe(II) is readily stripped from D2EHPA, so a reduction of ferric to ferrous iron could be a way to solve this problem. In this work, the reductive stripping in vacuum of Fe(III) from D2EHPA has been studied by using SHG zinc powder as a reducing agent. The optimisation of operating conditions, such as degree of vacuum, acid concentration and quantity of added zinc, has been made. The experiments showed that a stripping yield greater than 89% in only one stage can be achieved, depending on A/O ratio, at 80 kPa of pressure. The iron reduction and stripping have been done simultaneously.Zinc sulphate solutions obtained by sulphuric acid leaching of ore materials or industrial waste containing zinc need to be purified because of the presence of other elements. Iron is generally the main impurity that has to be removed to avoid its deleterious effect during the following electrowinning step. The iron removal is mainly achieved by precipitation techniques, but the use of solvent extraction is increasing both for primary metallurgy and for the valuable metal recovery from industrial wastes. The main extractant used in zinc extraction is di(-2-ethylhexyl)phosphoric acid (D2EHPA), which also extracts Fe(III). Nevertheless, it is possible to obtain, from the stripping stage, a pure zinc solution by using dilute acidic strip solution; the stripping of Fe(III) is known to be very difficult. For this reason, the build-up of Fe(III) in the organic prevents direct re-utilisation of D2EHPA. Several investigations have been performed to strip Fe(III) from D2EHPA. The common way to extract iron from the organic solvent is by using concentrated acidic solutions. The stripping of Fe(III) by HCl solutions To increase the Fe(III) stripping from D2EHPA, NH The reductive stripping of Fe(III) is achieved by gaseous reductants, such as SO Over the past few years, galvanic stripping has been studied: this method is based on the ability of a solid metal (zinc or iron) to directly reduce ferric iron to the ferrous state in an organic medium In this work, the ferric ion stripping from D2EHPA is achieved in vacuum by galvanic stripping using zinc powder as the reducing agent. The redox reaction in the organic phase and the stripping were simultaneously performed in a stirred flask at different degrees of vacuum. A 30% by volume solution of D2EHPA in kerosene was used. The Fe(III)-loaded D2EHPA was obtained by mixing the organic solution with reagent grade Fe For the iron stripping, carried out at room temperature, a vacuum flask was used: the vacuum was achieved using a water ejector joined to the flask by a vacuum pipe, with a pressure gauge to measure the degree of vacuum. At the beginning of every experiment, the two phases, the Fe(III)-loaded D2EHPA (100 mL) and the H The experiments carried out in nitrogen (IP) were performed at room temperature, both by gas bubbling and by using a cover of the gas. In both cases, the flask used was that utilised for the tests in vacuum. Fe(III) reduction and stripping have been done simultaneously. After each test, the aqueous and the organic phases were analysed by AAS. The organic phase was stripped with 6 M HCl solution in order to analyse it by AAS. Preliminary tests were carried out to determine the time required to reach the maximum yield of iron stripping in vacuum. These experiments were performed using 100 mL of loaded D2EHPA and 100 mL of aqueous solution containing 0.05 M H  Since the quantity of added metallic zinc affects the redox reaction and, consequently, the iron stripping, it is important to study the influence of the added zinc quantity on the iron stripping yield. In It can be seen that the amount of stripped Fe increases up to  It can be said that by adding more than four times the stoichiometric quantity of zinc, the iron stripping yield remains almost constant although the zinc dissolved in the organic phase increases. This observation suggests that a part of zinc powder dissolves in the organic phase since the aqueous phase pH (about 1) is too low to have a considerable extraction of zinc by D2EHPA. As can be observed in In the following experiments, the excess of zinc powder added was maintained at 300%. To establish the influence of the stripping solution acidity on the iron stripping yield, the concentration of H Reaction time, required amount of zinc and H The zinc in both phases could be considered constant up to 60 kPa, thus, indicating the same trend of iron; with the pressure increasing, the zinc dissolved in the organic and aqueous phase rises slightly. This behavior can be explained, considering that when the In all the experiments, the zinc amount in the D2EHPA was noticed to be greater than the quantity required to reduce iron, so another reaction occurs as previously said, probably the direct dissolution of the solid zinc in the organic phase, according to the reaction: Though the zinc is one of the most extractable metals by D2EHPA, To point out the differences between reductive stripping of iron in vacuum, in air and in nitrogen, some experiments were carried out by using both dilute and concentrated sulphuric acid stripping solutions. The percentages of stripped iron in the different tests are reported in These results can be explained considering that the stripping process effectiveness is influenced both by oxygen presence and by gas bubble entrapment. Oxygen could re-oxidise a part of Fe(II) to Fe(III), thus, lowering stripping yields. This phenomenon is not evident, comparing the results of the tests carried out in air and in nitrogen when 0.05 M H The re-oxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III) is evident when 1 M H To predict the stripping yield of Fe(II) using only one stage, the McCabe–Thiele stripping isotherm was used. The results are reported in The stripping behavior of Fe(III) from D2EHPA at various degrees of vacuum, with an H The results showed that: contact time of 60 min is required to reach the maximum yield; a zinc excess of 300% compared with the stoichiometric quantity gives satisfactory results; though the acidity of aqueous solution improves the iron stripping, high H 80 kPa pressure allows us to obtain the same iron extraction yield achieved at lower pressure, but the zinc dissolved at 80 kPa is higher than that dissolved at 60 kPa. The comparison between the tests carried out in vacuum and in air or nitrogen highlights that in vacuum: highest extraction yields are obtained using both dilute and concentrated H phase separation is complete and fast, while in the presence of gases, a steady emulsion forms. The proposed process appears interesting, since the redox reduction and stripping of iron are performed in only one operation. By using one stripping stage, an iron extraction yield higher than 89% can be obtained by increasing the A/O ratio above 0.75. The only disadvantage is the discontinuity of the process.