Banana screen is an important innovation in screening process in the past decades to improve screen capacity. Although, it is increasingly employed in the mineral industry, the control and optimisation are still limited due to the lack of fundamental understandings of the process. This paper presents a numerical study of the particle flow on a banana screen at a particle scale by means of Discrete Element Method (DEM). Typical 3-deck and 5-deck banana screens are simulated. The effects of operational conditions and geometry on the screen performance are studied by a series of controlled numerical experiments. The results are analysed in terms of partition curves, distributions of percentage passing and other flow information, such as particle volume and velocities along the screen deck. They are useful to the development of a better understanding and the control of banana screening processes.Screening or sieving is an important unit operation for the separation of particles according to their sizes. It is widely used in industries ranging from the traditional mineral and metallurgical sectors to the contemporary fast-growing food and pharmaceutical engineering ( Most of the mathematical models of screening processes currently in use are phenomenological models. This is due to the lack of insight understanding of screening processes ( In principle, the bulk behaviour of particles in a system depends on the collected outcome of the interactions between individual particles and between particles and boundary walls. Therefore, it is very helpful to understand the screening phenomena on a particle scale. While this is often difficult to realize with the existing experimental techniques, numerical simulation based on the so-called Discrete Element Method (DEM) ( In this work we present a three-dimensional DEM model which is capable of simulating various screening processes. The model has been applied to an inclined vibrating screen with single deck and the effects of vibration conditions on the performance have been quantified ( DEM method uses an explicit numerical scheme to trace the motion of individual particles according to their interaction with each other ( Particle–wall interaction can also be calculated according to the above equations, which is treated as a contact between a particle and a finite polygon surface. Complicated geometries can be decomposed to a group of such surfaces. Each of these surfaces can have regular motion such as moving, rotating and vibrating. These numerical treatments are implemented by the Object-Oriented-Programming (OOP) in the code to facilitate the simulation of the complex screen decks vibrated under different conditions. Validation of the DEM model is through the simulation on an inclined screening process similar to the one in the literature ( In this work, banana screens with three and five decks are considered, as schematically shown in When a simulation begins, a mixture of different sized particles is generated continuously above the deck at the feed end and they fall under gravity to hit the vibrating deck. The particles will then pass through the apertures of the deck or flow along the deck to the discharge end. Information about their flow is recorded in the simulation. All the data used in the analysis are obtained after an operation has achieved its steady state, which means the inlet flow rate (feeding rate) equals to the outlet flow rate (sum of the flow rates of underflow and overflow) for each particle size fraction. The partition number of different sized particles in the overflow, defined as the ratio between the number of residue particles in the overflow to that of fed particles, is calculated, which yields the partition curve of the overflow shown in The case for vibration amplitude as low as 1.0 The partition curve can only reflect the overall screening performance of the process. Particles pass different parts of the deck, which should be quantified for understanding the process. For this purpose, the underflow particles are divided according to their positions of being sieved through the deck, which reflects the distribution of percentage passing along the deck. The results are shown in The underflow distributions are mainly determined by the local bed structure on the screen. The particle volume, which is the sum of the volumes of particles in the bed on the screen deck, has been quantified at steady state. The bed structure is related to the particle motion on the screen. In this work, the velocities of particles parallel to the screen deck are calculated to examine how fast particles are travelling along the screen. With a lower travelling velocity, particles can have more collisions with the screen and more passing chances. The effect of the vibration frequency is also studied. The distributions of the percentage passing for different sized particles along the deck are also examined, as shown in  In the above discussion, the vibration is linear and along the line of 45° with the horizontal line. Cyclical vibrations, employed widely in screen operation, are simulated as part of the present study. The partition curve in The effect of incline angles of the three decks is studied by varying the angle of each deck while keeping other decks unchanged. The overall performance is investigated by the partition curve of the overflow, i.e., the ratio of the number of residue particles in the overflow to that of fed particles for different sized particles, as shown in To obtain more detailed information, we quantify the distributions of the percentage passings of different sized particles along the screen. The variations of the incline angles of different decks are an effective way to control the velocity of particles, which is essential in controlling the percentage passing as seen from the above results. In For a 5-deck banana screen, the effects of vibration amplitude and frequency on its sieving performance are studied and compared with the 3-deck banana screen under the same vibration conditions. From These differences can also be attributed to the different particle velocities on different banana screens. With such low velocities on the discharge end, the accumulation can also be found on a 5-deck banana screen under this situation. We have also studied the effect of vibration frequency. The results on a 5-deck banana screen are found to be similar to those on a 3-deck screen, and hence are not discussed here. Particle flow in typical multi-deck banana screens has been numerically simulated by a three-dimensional DEM model. The effects of vibration conditions and geometry of the screen on the sieving processes have been studied. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: Screen performance can be improved by decreasing the vibration amplitude and/or frequency, using cyclical vibration rather than linear vibration, decreasing the incline angle of decks, or using a more flat 5-deck banana screen than 3-deck banana screen. Comparing to a 3-deck banana screen under similar conditions, a 5-deck banana screen yields better sieving performance and is more sensitive to the changes the vibration conditions. However, particle accumulation is more likely on a 5-deck banana screen. The increase of the percentage passing of small undersized particles is mainly at the first deck (feed end) while that of the near-mesh sized particles at the third deck (discharge end) and that of the medium sized particles at both decks; The distributions of the percentage passing and particle volume under different conditions are all related to particle velocities. Generally a moderate decrease of particle velocities can improve the percentage passing, but too low particle velocities may result in particle accumulation. Finally, we would like to emphasize that all the results presented in this work are obtained for dry particles. This is acceptable for developing some fundamental understanding. To simulate the banana screening processes more realistically, the present DEM method should be further developed to take into account the effects of liquid flow and various particle-liquid interaction forces. Moreover, more detailed studies are necessary in order to establish some quantitative relationships for practical application. Work in this direction is ongoing and hopefully will be reported in the near future. This project is supported by the Australian Research Council and BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance.