In the present work, high chromium cast irons (HCCIs) with different high carbon ferro-chrome (HCFC) content were cladded on a low carbon steel (LCS). The microstructure and mechanical properties of the bimetals were characterized. The results show that the microstructure of the HCCIs/LCS bimetals is compact, and no defects such as shrinkages and cracks are observed. The volume fraction of carbides increased with the increase of HCFC content. The carbide types of HCCIs are mainly consisting of Cr-rich M7C3 and M23C6, M3C and Mo-rich M2C. The matrix is consisting of martensite near the edges of the carbides and pearlite inside the grains. The hardness and wear resistance of the HCCIs increased with the increasing HCFC content. The HCCIs/LCS bimetals formed good metallurgical bonding, the interfaces are clear and complete. The diffusion of C atoms occurs on the interfaces of the bimetals, and the diffusion direction is from the HCCIs to the LCS, pearlite zones is formed on the LCS side by the interfaces. The thickness of pearlite zones decreased with the increase of HCFC content. Compared with the HCCIs, the HCCIs/LCS bimetals have greatly improved impact toughness, and the impact toughness decreased with the increase of HCFC content.High chromium cast irons (HCCIs) with high strength and good wear resistance have been widely used materials in many industries, such as cement manufacturing, mineral processing and slurry pumping, et al. In our previous work In the present study, the high carbon ferro-chrome powders are used as the Cr source, and mixed with the ferro-molybdenum powders, iron powders and graphite powders for the prepare of the wear part on the LCS surface, the chemical component of raw materials is shown in The particles morphology and X-ray analysis of the HCFC powders are shown in The process flow diagram is shown in The mass fractions of the HCFC in this work are 25%, 30% and 40%, respectively. According to the Cr content of the HCFC that shown in An optical microscope (OM) OLYMPUS-GX71 and field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) Ultra Plus (ZEISS) were employed for the microstructure observation of samples, and the reagent is 4 vol. % nital. A JXA-8530 F electron-probe micro-analysis (EPMA) was used to investigate the component. Microhardness profiles were obtained by a Vickers hardness (HV) tester using 200 g load for 10 s. Each HV value is the averagement of five measurements under the same conditions. The impact toughness values were measured by a JBW-500 pendulum impact testing machine at room temperature. The size of the samples was 10 mm × 10 mm × 55 mm with a V-notch. Every mechanical property test was repeated three times on same condition. The abrasive wear test was carried out by an MLG-130 dry sand/rubber wheel apparatus following the ASTM-G65 standard, the schematic illustration was shown in The metallographic structure analysis was sampled by wire cutting in the HCCIs part of HCCIs/LCS bimetals. As shown in SEM micrograph of the HCFC 40 sample and corresponding EPMA analysis results are shown in  When the HCCIs sample subject to wear, cracks initiation and propagation easily happen between carbides and matrix. Martensite formed between the hard carbides and the soft ferrite matrix plays a role in transition, and reduces the tendency of cracks initiating and expanding. The pearlite structure that formed inside the matrix has low strength, but it has good toughness, which can absorb more impact energy and avoid brittle fracture. The matrix structure combination of martensite and ferrite can effectively improve the comprehensive mechanical properties of the HCCIs. In this study, the wear resistance of the HCCIs/LCS bimetals was evaluated by the dry sand rubber wheel abrasive wear test. After wear test, the volume loss is shown in The worn surfaces of the HCCIs with different HCFC content were observed by a laser confocal microscopy as shown in  As the HCFC content increased, the volume fraction of the matrix decreased, and the absorption of the radial force was weakened, resulting in a large number of cracks in the sub-surface. These cracks gradually expand, and causing the carbides broken off the worn surface. The matrix which lost the carbides protection was easily cut by the abrasive particles. The carbides volume fraction of the HCFC 40 sample is larger than that of the other samples. As the abrasive particles continued cutting, the matrix plastically deformed by the tangential force, and the carbides are subjected to compressive stress to cause cracks. Broken carbides contact with each other, and generated support force to jointly resist the cutting of the abrasive particles, the overall wear resistance was improved. For bimetals, the microstructure of the interfaces often determines the bonding strength between the components. The stronger bonding strength between the components can obtain the higher integrity. The OM micrographs of the interfaces of different HCFC content HCCIs/LCS bimetals are shown in The microhardness across the interfaces of the HCCIs/LCS bimetals with different HCFC content was tested. According to the characteristics, divide the microstructure into four zones, namely the HCCIs zone, the diffusion zone, the pearlite zone and the original LCS. The average microhardness in each zone is shown in Impact toughness test was carried out on the HCCIs and corresponding bimetals (The HCCIs side was selected as the impact surfaces), the obtained results are shown in The fractures of the impact samples were scanned by SEM, the secondary electron images of the HCFC30 bimetal sample is shown in In the present work, the HCCIs/LCS bimetals with different HCFC content were prepared. The microstructure of the bimetals was systematically studied by OM, SEM, and EPMA. The mechanical properties were characterized by microhardness test, abrasive wear test and impact test, and the following conclusions could be made: The microstructure of the HCCIs is compact, and no defects such as shrinkage and crack are observed. The volume fraction of the carbides increased with the increasing HCFC content. The carbide types of the HCCIs are mainly consisting of Cr-rich M The HCCIs and the LCS formed good metallurgical bonding, the interfaces are clear and complete, and no microscopic defects such as microvoids and cracks were present. The diffusion of C atoms occurs on the interfaces of bimetals, and the diffusion direction is from the HCCIs to the LCS, and a certain thickness of pearlite zone was formed on the LCS side by the interfaces. The thickness of pearlite zone decreased with the increasing content. Compared with the HCCIs, the impact toughness of the HCCIs/LCS bimetals have greatly improvement, and decreased with the increasing HCFC content. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This research was supported by the Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: