Proximal humerus, humeral shaft, and distal humerus fractures are all common adult fractures, and often occur in older patients. While the treatment of proximal humerus fractures remains controversial, certain fractures benefit from plate fixation such as fracture-dislocations and head-split fractures. When plate fixation is chosen, anatomic reduction and restoration of the medial calcar are important for successful results. Further research is required to minimize complications and determine the optimal surgical candidates for plate fixation. Humeral shaft fractures are generally treated non-operatively. However, certain shaft fractures warrant plate fixation, such as open fractures, those with associated forearm fractures, and those in poly-trauma patients. Choice of surgical approach and plate depends on the location and type of the fracture. The majority of intra-articular distal humerus fractures should be treated with plate fixation. Dual plating is generally accepted as the gold standard treatment, while the optimal surgical approach and plate configuration requires more research.Humerus fractures comprise approximately 8% of all adult fractures, and their incidence increases with age Representing the third most common fragility fracture in older adults, proximal humerus fractures are increasing in prevalence, and many clinical issues have yet to be clarified. Most proximal humerus fractures occur in patients above the age of 50 years, after a ground level fall. Due to the complexity of the shoulder joint, many factors influence functional recovery, including fracture type, displacement, patient age, bone quality, functional demands, pre-injury shoulder function and patient comorbidities. As such, there is significant controversy surrounding the management of these injuries. While the majority of proximal humerus fractures are treated non-operatively, several operative treatment options exist. The most common operative procedure is open reduction and internal fixation with locked plating. Unfortunately, there are no undisputed set of indications for surgical treatment, and it remains unclear as to which fractures consistently benefit from plate fixation. Traditionally, indications for plating included displaced fracture types according to the Neer classification system Recently, increasing evidence from randomized controlled trials suggests that non-operative treatment offers comparable functional results to operative treatment for even displaced fractures, while complication rates for ORIF still range up to 30% Fractures which have been well-documented to have poor outcomes following non-operative treatment include: fracture dislocations, head-split fractures, varus angulation/displacement, and significant/complete head-shaft displacement ( Prior to the introduction of locking plates, internal fixation was performed using a variety of implants, including tension-band wiring, trans-osseous suture fixation, and semi-tubular, buttress and cloverleaf plates. However, locking plate fixation may be more advantageous for osteoporotic bone Open reduction and internal fixation of proximal humerus fractures can be achieved through a delto-pectoral, or a minimally invasive deltoid-splitting approach. While the delto-pectoral approach is extensile and the most commonly used approach, the deltoid-splitting approach was proposed to minimize extensive soft tissue trauma and allow better access to the posterior aspect of the humeral head, and especially the greater tuberosity. However, a recent randomized trial comparing the two approaches identified no difference in complication rates, functional scores, or re-operations between the two groups As a common osteoporotic fracture, the quality of bone must be considered. While locked plating has been shown to provide superior strength to conventional plating, there is still a risk of plate failure, intra articular screw penetration, screw cut out, or peri-implant fractures. Anatomic reduction is also important to reduce the risk of fixation failure. Care should be taken to restore medial support to the calcar, as this helps maintain reduction Unfortunately, complication rates following ORIF have remained high. Reported complication rates two years following ORIF for proximal humerus fractures have ranged from 20–60% Risk factors for complications following ORIF for proximal humerus fractures include fracture-dislocations, smoking, obesity, increasing age, and comorbidities Risk factors for screw cut out include increasing age, non-anatomic reduction of the calcar, fracture-dislocation, fracture type AO/OTA 11-C2 (impacted fracture with marked displacement) Although there remains controversy among surgeons and researchers regarding which proximal humerus fractures benefit from operative treatment, there is some consensus for surgery over non-operative treatment for fracture dislocations, head-split fractures and fractures with significant head-shaft displacement. Where ORIF is performed, anatomic reduction, and medial support may improve outcomes. Nevertheless, complication rates following ORIF of proximal humerus fractures remain high, and more research is required to optimize the treatment of these injuries. Elderly patients with such fractures, who have osteoporotic bone or are lower demand, perform poorly with ORIF, and may benefit from arthroplasty instead. Humeral shaft fractures account for up to 3% of all orthopaedic injuries. While overall they are evenly distributed between males and females, they do have a bi-modal distribution with the majority of high-energy fractures occurring in young males ages 21–30, and low-energy fractures occurring in older women, ages 60–80 years. Unlike proximal humerus fractures, the OTA/AO classification of humeral shaft fractures has moderate inter-observer reliability The optimal surgical approach for plating humeral shaft fractures will depend on the location of the fracture Minimally invasive plate osteosynthesis (MIPO) was developed to reduce soft-tissue damage during surgical repair. Recently, this technique has been shown to decrease the risk of iatrogenic radial nerve palsy, although proper reduction via this technique is difficult and requires experience Typically, humeral shaft fractures in patients with normal bone quality can be treated with traditional 4.5mm compression plates (either narrow or broad, depending on the size of patient), with 3 bicortical screws placed on either side of the fracture ( Anatomic reduction should be attempted, correcting any angular deformity and maximizing cortical contact. Fortunately, there is little functional effect of bone shortening of up to 3 The rate of complications following plate fixation of these fractures is high and has been reported as high as 30% In conclusion, while most humeral shaft fractures tolerate nonoperative treatment, there are certain indications for surgery. These include those with a significant gap between fracture fragments, fractures with more than 30° of angulation, proximal third oblique fractures, open or pathologic fractures, fractures of the proximal- or distal-third of the shaft, patients with poly-trauma, or those with ipsilateral brachial plexus or vascular injuries. The surgical approach will depend on the location of the fracture, and the choice of plate will depend on both the type of fracture and quality of bone. During the procedure, care should be taken to protect the radial nerve. If the bone quality of the patient is poor, intramedullary nailing may be preferred. More research is required to determine the role of dual plating for humeral shaft fractures. Distal humerus fractures are the rarest type of humerus fracture and represent a challenge to treat due to the complex geometry of the distal humerus. Similar to humeral shaft fractures, distal humerus fractures have a bimodal distribution, with peaks in young males 12–19 years, and older females, 80 years and older The majority of distal humerus fractures are intra-articular, and compared to other humeral fractures, there is a higher percentage of open fractures The risk of functional disability following non-operative treatment has been shown to be quite high, and therefore operative management is generally accepted as the gold standard for juxta-articular and intra-articular distal humerus fractures. However, some residual disability, including stiffness and weakness, may persist despite technically successful surgery Plates should be contoured to fit the anatomy of the distal humerus and pre-contoured plates may be very helpful. There is some debate surrounding the use of locking plates for distal humerus fractures. While locking plates have been shown to provide better stability for other fractures in patients with lower bone quality, there is a lack of conclusive clinical evidence surrounding their use specifically in distal humerus fracture patients The posterior approach is generally agreed to have the best exposure of both columns of the distal part of the humerus as well as the articular surface for intra-articular fractures. This can be performed via an olecranon osteotomy, triceps splitting, or triceps sparing approaches. Medial and lateral approaches can be utilized for partial articular fractures, although these are much less common in adults. The olecranon osteotomy has been the most widely used posterior technique and remains the approach of choice for most complex articular fractures amenable to dual plating when maximum visualization is required. Triceps splitting, reflecting and sparing approaches were developed to minimize the morbidity associated with olecranon osteotomy. The triceps-reflecting anconeous pedicle, or TRAP approach described by O’Driscoll provides visualization of the whole distal humerus Care should be taken to identify and release the ulnar nerve at the beginning of the procedure, to reduce the risk of its injury during hardware insertion As with proximal humerus fractures, anatomic reconstruction is important to minimize fixation failure. Stability should be maximized between the distal fragments and the humeral shaft. Patients with poor bone quality may lack the stability required for plate fixation. In patients over age 65 with complex intra-articular fractures, arthroplasty options should be considered, and readily available in the operating room. In these situations, an olecranon osteotomy approach should be avoided, to allow for intra-operative conversion to arthroplasty if the bone quality is judged to be too poor for successful fixation. Outcomes following treatment of distal humerus fractures are typically ‘good” but not “perfect”. The average patient has a flexion extension arc of approximately 100°, a flexion contracture of 20–25°, 75–80% of extension and flexion strength, some pain with heavy exertion, and a low rate of clinically significant posttraumatic arthritis. However, complication rates following plate fixation of distal humerus fractures have been reported to be as high as 44% Non-modifiable risk factors for complications following plate fixation of distal humerus fractures include increasing age, poor bone quality, comorbidities, open fractures, and associated neurovascular injury Distal humerus fractures are the least common type of humeral fractures and can represent a challenge to treat. While the gold standard treatment for intra-articular distal humerus fractures is ORIF with dual plates, there is controversy surrounding the optimal surgical approach, as well as plate configuration. Total elbow arthroplasty may be best reserved for elderly low-demand patients with comminuted intraarticular fractures. As with other humerus fracture types, age, comorbidities, and poor bone quality may increase the risk of complications. Further research is required to determine the optimal surgical approach, and plate configuration. Proximal humerus, humeral shaft, and distal humerus fractures are all common adult fractures, and often occur in young or elderly patients. While the treatment of proximal humerus fractures remains controversial, certain fractures benefit from plate fixation such as fracture-dislocations and head-split fractures. Humeral shaft fractures are generally treated non-operatively; however, certain fractures warrant plate fixation: such as those with more than 30° of angulation or other severe deformity, open fractures, and poly-trauma patients. The majority of intra-articular distal humerus fractures are treated with dual plate fixation, while total elbow arthroplasty remains an option for elderly low demand patients with comminuted intraarticular fractures. Further research is warranted to help identity indications for surgery in proximal humerus and humeral shaft fractures. Controversies in distal humerus fractures include optimal plate positioning and approach, and further studies in these areas are also warranted. EHS and MDM receive royalties from Stryker for the development of elbow implants. The authors of this manuscript express their thanks to the Osteosynthesis and Trauma Care Foundation for the sponsorship of the publication of this Supplement in Injury.