A concept is proposed for the recycling of Li-ion batteries with an open-loop method that allows to reduce the volume of wastes and simultaneously to produce valuable materials in large amounts (Metal-Organic Frameworks, MOFs). After dissolution of Nickel, Manganese, Cobalt (NMC) batteries in acidic solution (HCl, HNO3 or H2SO4/H2O2), addition of organic moieties and a heat treatment, different MOFs are obtained. Solutions after precipitation are analyzed by inductively coupled plasma and materials are characterized by powder X-Ray diffraction, N2 adsorption, thermogravimetric analysis and Scanning electron microscope. With the use of Benzene-Tri-Carboxylic Acid as ligand, it has been possible to form selectively a MOF, based on Al metallic nodes, called MIL-96 in the literature, and known for its interesting properties in gas storage applications. The supernatant is then used again to precipitate other metals as MOFs after addition of a second batch of ligands. These two other MOFs are based on Cu (known as HKUST-1 in the literature) or Ni-Mn (with a new crystalline structure) depending of conditions. This method shows promising results at the lab scale (15 g of wastes can be converted in 10 g of MOFs), and opens interesting perspectives for the scaled-up production of MOFs.Batteries have been extensively developed as mobile energy sources (mobile, cars…) or for energy storage, which is crucial for the development of renewable energy technologies ( The worldwide spent LiBs are estimated to hit 2 million metric tons per year in 2030 due to the popularity of electronic cars ( As valuable materials, Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) are hybrid materials obtained by the assembling of organic moieties around metals or clusters ( We propose in this work to combine the recycling of batteries with a hydrothermal method leading to the large scale formation of MOFs. When NMC batteries are dissolved in acidic conditions, metals (Cu, Al, Ni, Mn, Co …) are released in solution. The addition of organic moieties in solution followed by a heat treatment has allowed us to obtain 3 different MOFs; two are known in the literature as MIL-96 and HKUST-1 and another one exhibits a new crystalline structure. These MOFs have potential applications as gas storage materials or also as new electrode materials for Li-Ion batteries. The synthesis of valuable materials from waste is an interesting strategy to reduce the volume of the battery wastes and to make the recycling process of LiBs economically viable by an open-loop cycle. This proof of concept can be extended for the recycling of other materials. Reagents were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and were used as received without further purification. The battery wastes are provided by an industrial and were used without pretreatment and contain carbon, plastics, organics and metals. The average composition in weight percentage for the major elements is the following: Cu (18–25%), Al (10–15%), Mn (14–17%), Ni (2.5–3.5%), Co (0.6–1%), Li (1.5–2%), F (0.5–2%) and P (0.2 to 0.5 %). Materials were characterized by powder x-ray diffraction (XRD), thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), gas adsorption measurements, ICP OES (after digestion), and single-crystal XRD. PXRD patterns were obtained with a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer equipped with a Cu anode. TGA were measured in a Mettler-Toledo TG with auto-sampler. A FEI Quanta 200 environmental scanning electron microscope, equipped with an Everhart-Thornley detector (ETD) and a backscattered electron detector (BSED), was used to record images with an acceleration voltage of 30 kV under high vacuum conditions. Nitrogen physisorption measurements were performed using an ASAP 2020 at 77 K, after outgassing at 363 K during 12 h, reaching a pressure below 1 mmHg, and specific surface areas were calculated using the BET method ( Dissolutions of batteries ( The dissolution solutions (in HCl or HNO Finally, the amount of MOF obtained is optimal at 90 °C, and further analyses will be performed at this optimized temperature. Materials were activated to fully remove impurities and solvents from the cavities prior analyses. TGA analyses are in accordance with a material composed as : Al The quantity of ligands necessary for the precipitation has also been studied. In our conditions, the quantity of ligand has been tested from 10–40 mg with a volume of battery waste of 1 ml. In all conditions, a precipitate was observed and materials exhibit a white color, except for 30 mg and 40 mg of ligand in HNO Metal compositions of the materials have been determined by ICP-OES after digestion of the different materials ( Finally, optimal parameters to obtain materials with the higher purity are the use of 20 mg of ligands (Fig. SI-3) and a heat treatment of 90 °C in our conditions. These parameters allow to totally remove Al from the dissolution solution with low co-precipitation of other materials, and will be used in the next part of this work. After precipitation of the first MOF and precipitation of the Al, the supernatant is recovered and a new batch of BTC ligand (20 mg) was introduced to the solution. The mixture was then heated again for another 24 h to try to isolate other metals in MOFs materials. After this second step, new precipitates indeed appeared and after analyses, the formation of two new different MOFs was confirmed, depending on the conditions of synthesis (HCl or HNO In HCl, the PXRD pattern of the material ( In HNO After reaction and centrifugation of the materials, the supernatant is then used again for a third addition of BTC ligand (20 mg) in a third step. In this case, a very small amount of materials is recovered (around 10 % of what has been recovered for the second step). Moreover, these materials have revealed the same compositions and structures, in both cases ( Finally the scale-up of the reaction (by a factor 100) has been performed by increasing the quantity of ligand (2 g) and the volume of the dissolution solution (100 ml). Same protocols than previously described were used, and the process was stopped after step two. The three different materials obtained have been analyzed, and no difference can be found between these materials and those obtained in smaller scale syntheses. With 2 g of BTC and 100 mL of dissolution solution, 4.5 g of MIL-96 is synthetized. Then adding 2 more g of BTC, 5 g of Ni-Mn-MOF or Cu-MOF are obtained depending of the acidic condition. These quantitative results for the recycling of batteries as MOFs are very encouraging in the perspective of scaling up this process according to the flow scheme depicted in Today very few amount of LiBs are recycled because their recycling processes are very complex with low economic benefits due to the low price of recovered metals (e.g. 1 kg of Co cost around 30 USD in 2019). Here we propose a proof of concept to generate high valuable materials from spent LiBs. The requirement of energy is less to produce value-added products compare to pyrometallurgical method which involves very high temperature. In Finally, it is difficult to compare this method with others as the strategy is totally different but as MOFs are expensive materials and that only a low number of them can be synthesis in large amount, we believe that it can be considered to form such materials with wastes to make wastes valuable. Life cycle analysis including such process can be envisaged after the optimization of the process. An original strategy is proposed for the recycling of Li-Ion batteries with the production of valuable materials from wastes. Under specific conditions, it has been possible to produce Al-MOFs with high purity and porosity able to remove all the Al from a battery waste dissolution solution by specific metal precipitation. In a second step, after the removal of Al, two other materials can be recovered, containing high quantity of Ni/Mn or Cu/Ni/Mn metals depending on the involved acid. Both materials present high quality but co-precipitation of Manganese can be observed. Where Al and Cu-MOFs are already known for their interesting gas storage capacity (MIL-96 and HKUST-1, respectively), the other Ni/Mn-MOF can potentially have some interest as new electrode material and close the loop of a battery recycling process. Here is presented a proof of concept that has to be optimized to follow the industrial requirements. Moreover, this process should be tested with other battery waste sources containing different metal ratios or with pre-treated wastes, where connectors (Al, Cu) have already been separated. Finally, the production of valuable materials as MOFs, potentially in large scale, from wastes seems to be an interesting possibility to solve the production of MOFs and to reduce the volume of battery waste. Authors are grateful to Joseph Lautru and Xavier Le Goff for their respective help for SEM analyses and single crystal XRD and to the CEA and NTU for supporting this research through the SCARCE project. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: