We introduce a finite volume scheme to approximate the one dimensional breakage equations. An interesting feature is that it is simple in mathematical formulation and predicts particle number density and its moments with improved accuracy. Efficiency of the new scheme is compared with the existing finite volume scheme proposed by Bourgade and Filbet (2008) over some test problems. It is seen that the new scheme preserves the volume conservative property of the previous scheme and additionally gives an improved estimation of the particle number density and its zero-order moment. Furthermore, the new scheme is computationally more efficient than the existing one. A detailed mathematical analysis including convergence and consistency of the new scheme is also performed. This analysis proves that the new scheme follows a second order convergence rate irrespective of the nature of the meshes. Several example problems are solved numerically to validate the results.Description birth and death terms in the approximation of fragmentation kernel particle number density function average particle number density function in the approximation of total number of sub-intervals  particle property (volume) property representative of the Dirac-delta function length of Lipschitz constant  weight functions spatial truncation error breakage population balance equation experimental order of convergence scheme developed by volume consistent discrete formulation The particulate processes are well known in the literature as their applications can be found in various engineering branches as well as in physics, chemistry and several other disciplines. Among different particulate processes, fragmentation (or breakage) of particles into smaller pieces is very common. Several physical examples of particle breakage can be observed through the natural phenomenon like breaking up of a cluster, depolymerisation, fracturing of rocks, comminution in mills, etc. Besides these various designs of particle breakage are widely applied in the pharmaceutical, food, mineral, ceramic, paint and many more industries to produce various important daily life usage products like medicines, powdered food, etc. ( In the literature, these Eqs. In Eq.   Let us interpret the physical aspect of Eq. For the population balance equations, other than the particle number density, the moments of the density function also play important roles as some of them correspond to various important physical properties. Therefore, besides predicting the number density function, the estimation of its different moments are also done for these problems. We define the moments of the particle number density as In particular, the zeroth and the first moments are respectively proportional to the total number and the total volume of the particles in the system. It can easily be shown that the first moment satisfies the following relation It is interesting to note that the breakage population balance Eq. The detailed derivation of the above relation can be found in In the literature, there are several articles ( From Eq. Similarly, the truncated volume conservative formulation is written as In the literature, approximation of the population balance models using the finite volume method is gathering interest because of its relatively less complex structure as compared to the well known sectional methods of Besides developing the numerical schemes by finite volume methods, many authors have also presented the mathematical analysis of those schemes. Analysis of the schemes approximating the coupled aggregation-breakage problems can be found in the articles of In this work, the one dimensional breakage population balance equation in the form of Eq. Thus, a numerical scheme approximating the pure breakage equations based on the finite volume method is developed and investigated mathematically. The scheme is simple and is modeled to keep the total volume of the system conserved. In the following part of this paper we will discuss about the formulation of the scheme in In order to develop a discrete numerical scheme, we start with the discretization of the working domain. Let us divide the truncated domain ]0, The mid point of each cell Λ The truncated Eq. Integrating Eq. Let Here, we apply the finite volume methods directly to Eq. Considering Now in the birth term Changing the order of integration of the term Applying the mid-point quadrature rule to the outer integrals, the right hand side of relation Similarly, we apply mid-point quadrature to the outer integral of death term Let Hence, the solution of the semi-discrete system   Here, we refer to Theorem 7.2 (Chapter 1) of Now, we state and prove the following proposition.  Multiplying both sides of Since, From the above proposition, we observe that the finite volume approximation   Since If If  From the relation Let us denote the modified discrete birth and death terms in each of the Let us denote the numerical solution obtained from To perform the mathematical analysis of the semi-discrete system Let   Furthermore, a scheme is of    Let In this regard, please note that the numerical solution should remain non-negative at any time for a vector the system     The detailed proof can be found in    A generalized proof of the above theorem is given by  In the following proposition we prove that the map   Computing the norm Let us denote We now prove the main convergence result of this section.       Here we need to prove the nonnegativity, consistency and convergence of the solution to the system   Using previous equations we write Next we consider the term Let us first check the term (1 In this regard, let The relation Hence, Therefore, combining the two relations  In this section, we compute the numerical results obtained by applying the volume consistent discrete formulation (VCDF) over three different test problems and compare the results against the previous volume conserving approximation given by To this end, let us first recall the discrete BF2008 scheme proposed in Here, we denote In the literature the exact solutions are available only for a few simple problems [ The comparisons of the computed results of the particle density function and its moments obtained from the VCDF Let us consider a test problem with size dependent fragmentation kernel, It is observed that both the schemes conserve total particle volume of the system ( In Here, Besides geometric meshes, the numerical evaluation of EOC for the scheme VCDF is also performed over randomly and oscillatory generated non-uniform meshes. Those results bear quite similarity to the results on geometric meshes and so is of little interest. In this example, we deal with two problems having the same size dependent fragmentation kernel The relative error and the EOC is calculated in Here a typical problem with the size dependent fragmentation kernel The relative error and EOC is summarized in In this work we have introduced a finite volume approximation of the pure fragmentation Eq. The financial support by the