Regenerative chatter is one of the most complex dynamic processes in machine tools. It is characterized by the presence of self-excited vibrations during machining, limiting the achievable tolerances in the workpieces. In order to predict the set-up conditions that produce these vibrations, it is necessary to model the regenerative mechanism responsible of their appearance accurately, so that the system stability can be studied solving the characteristic equation of the chatter loop. Although the dynamic behavior of machining processes like milling, turning or drilling is governed by a time delayed differential equation with one time delay term, a very particular problem is presented in centerless grinding. In this process, in addition to the dynamic instabilities, geometric instabilities must be analyzed, which are another important factors limiting the workpiece tolerances and lead to three time delay terms in the modeling procedure. This fact complicates its study remarkably, and the resolution of the characteristic roots of the dynamic process of these kinds of machines has not been tackled in the specialized literature as extensively as in other machining processes, being this field a challenging research line. According to this, in this paper an original and efficient method is presented to solve the roots of the characteristic equation of the centerless grinding process, based on the application of the root locus method. The main features of the proposed procedure are its ability to obtain the solutions accurately and that it is capable of determining the origin of the instabilities, so it constitutes a powerful tool to predict machine response for different set-up conditions. These interesting properties are demonstrated through the simulation results presented in this paper.width of cut (mm) grinding wheel dress depth on diameter (mm) grinding wheel abrasive grain diameter (mm) equivalent diameter (mm) diameter of the grinding wheel, workpiece and regulating wheel, respectively, (mm) machine dynamic flexibility wheel grade number cutting stiffness (N/mm) contact stiffness per unit width between regulating wheel and workpiece (N/μm/mm) contact stiffness per unit width between grinding wheel and workpiece (N/μm/mm) grinding wheel dress lead (mm/rev) number of undulations generated in the workpiece workpiece Rockwell Hardness Number (HRc) Laplace operator grinding wheel structure number grinding wheel dress infeed rate (mm/min) grinding wheel surface speed (m/min) workpiece surface speed (m/min) volume percent of bond material in the grinding wheel (%) enterless grinding geometric parameters (see depth of cut increment due to unitary waviness error of the workpiece at workblade contact point depth of cut increment due to unitary waviness error of the workpiece at regulating wheel contact point angular velocity of grinding wheel and regulating wheel, respectively, (rev/min) workpiece angular velocity (Hz) metal removal parameter (mm The productivity of metal removal machining operations is primarily limited by the appearance of regenerative chatter. This phenomenon is characterized by violent self-excited vibrations, having a negative influence in both the surface finish of the workpieces and the lifetime of the machine and the tool. The origin of these vibrations is the regenerative effect, which is produced when the tool passes through a previously cut surface. Under certain cutting conditions, this effect causes the undulations of the workpiece to regenerate, leading to chatter vibrations. Due to the harmful nature of these vibrations, the development of tools for the theoretical prediction of chatter-free cutting configurations in different machine tools has aroused the interest of several researchers, starting with the early works of Tobias and Fishwick Traditionally, the stability in machine tools has been studied obtaining the borderline stability cutting conditions, resulting in the so-called stability lobe diagrams. These diagrams provide, as a function of the spindle speed, the maximum threshold values of a machine variable (usually the cutting stiffness) to guarantee stable cutting conditions. They have been extensively used to predict stable operating configurations in machining processes such as turning Among the machining processes, centerless grinding presents a very particular feature that complicates its study notably, derived by the fact that the workpiece rotates without any fixing points ( The researches conducted in this field have shown that it is necessary to generate a lobe diagram for each possible number of complete undulations that can be generated in the workpiece to perform a global stability study  This equation is composed of three time delay terms. The first one ( If all the roots have negative real part, they are located on the left part of the complex plane, and the system is stable. However, if at least one of the roots has positive real part, the system is considered to be unstable and during the grinding process the structural response grows in time, producing a considerable out of roundness in the workpiece. In this case, the real part The resolution of Eq. Miyashita et al. In order to apply the method, it is taken into account that Eq. The application of the root locus method consists in obtaining the solutions of the characteristic equation for increasing values of the cutting stiffness in the range 0→ For The poles of the term An infinite number of poles of the term The roots of the geometric characteristic equation For The zeros of the term An infinite number of zeros of the term An infinite number of poles of The root locus plot departs from the roots obtained for After finishing the root locus plot, the roots obtained for the last value of The goal of using the methodology described in previous section is to verify its ability to predict both geometrically and dynamically stable and unstable machine configurations, with the idea of comparing the theoretical predictions with some experimental results obtained previously in machining tests. In order to select geometrically stable or unstable configurations to simulate, Nyquist stability criterion was applied to the geometric mechanism defined in Dynamic stability was studied taking into account that for a specific geometric configuration of the machine there are two stable areas: one for low workpiece angular velocities and the other for high angular velocities With the idea of covering all the possible situations that can be presented in centerless grinding operations, four different machine configurations were selected in the simulations, as it is summarized in In order to simulate these four configurations, it is necessary to define the values of the different parameters involved in Eq. The tests were performed in an “Estarta 327 MDA” centerless grinding machine, with the wheel specifications shown in Several variables were set in the centerless grinding machine in the four reference tests. These variables have been grouped into the following three categories The variables related to the wheels and the workpiece fall into this category. They are shown in These variables are the ones easily changeable during a grinding cycle. These variables define the geometry of the centerless grinding set-up and they are changeable from a grinding cycle to another. They are summarized in The cutting conditions to program in the simulations were extracted from Contact stiffness values adopted in the simulations ( The development of the machine dynamic flexibility ( As far as the cutting stiffness is concerned, it was estimated applying the equation proposed in For easy to grind materials, Hahn and Lindsay To begin with the simulations, the parameters corresponding to the 1st configuration were programmed. The representative part of the root locus plot obtained applying the procedure described in In this figure, there have been distinguished the poles of the transfer function Two aspects are worth emphasizing: As a geometrically stable configuration has been simulated, none of the geometric roots located in the left half of the complex plane go through the right half plane, and the geometric roots located initially in the right half plane migrate towards the left half plane. This last circumstance shows that there is a minimum value of All the dynamic roots for Hence, the simulation predicts a stable machine configuration. This prediction is in agreement with the experimental results obtained for the 1st machine configuration, where no vibrations were appreciated and a circular periphery of the workpiece was obtained. The representative part of the root locus plot for the simulation performed with the values of the 2nd configuration is shown in Again, geometric stability of the process is verified. On the other hand, it can be seen that as the cutting stiffness is increased, one of the dynamic roots migrates towards the right half plane, becoming unstable and, thus, giving rise to chatter vibrations. Chatter frequency is 61.4 In the experimental test performed with this 2nd machine configuration, chatter frequencies around 62 The representative part of the root locus plot for the simulation performed with the values of the 3rd configuration is shown in In this case, none of the dynamic roots (not shown) became unstable when the cutting stiffness was increased, which demonstrates that the selected configuration is a dynamically stable one. Regarding the geometric roots, among the roots located initially in the right half plane, all of them but one pass to the left hand plane. This last root remains in the right half plane and it approaches the zero at 5.65 An important detail to observe in The representative parts of the root locus plot resulting from the simulation of the 4th configuration are shown in In this case, when the chart is completed, there are two unstable roots. The first one is a geometric root that approaches the zero at 237 Centerless grinding is a machining process prone to suffer both geometric and dynamic instabilities. Although most of the researches conducted in this field have studied the problem from the point of view of geometric instabilities, a combined treatment is necessary in order to effectively address the out-of-roundness problem over a wide range of grinding conditions. According to this requirement, in this work an efficient methodology has been presented to study the process, solving the characteristic equation from a root locus perspective. The main advantage of the proposed method is its ability to detect if a specific machine configuration is unstable or not, and, if it is so, the geometric or dynamic nature of the instability. Only one computer simulation is needed to perform such an analysis, so simplicity is another distinctive feature of the method. Some grinding experiments were performed modifying a set of variables in order to force the machine to work in different geometric and dynamic stability conditions. The proposed tool proved to be accurate, as it successfully predicted the practical results obtained in the tests. Hence, the work performed in this paper constitutes an important advance in the overall understanding of the roundness error generation mechanisms in centerless grinding. It makes possible to theoretically study the influence of different machine variables in the stability of the process, providing a powerful tool to assist in achieving optimum stable machining conditions without extensive experimental efforts. In this The roots have been obtained using an iterative technique. Starting from an initial estimation of each root, these techniques improve the estimates in successive iterations by means of the following procedure: The iterative method used in this work is the Newton–Raphson method, which combines the advantages of rapid convergence towards the exact solution together with programming simplicity. Initially, Eq. The partial derivatives of Eqs. Expanding in Taylor series both functions Re( The application of Newton–Raphson method is based on truncating the Taylor series after the first derivative term. Rearranging the resulting equations yields Hence, the terms Δ Since the solutions obtained applying Newton–Raphson method can diverge if the initial estimations are not close enough to the exact location of each root, an adequate initial set of estimations is required to begin with the iterative process. These estimations have been established based on the researches performed by Zhou et al.