Studies on the Merrill–Crowe process as applied to silver recovery have shown that one half of the used zinc powder is wasted in water reduction at high cyanide concentrations, while the other half reduces silver ions from the cyanide solution. However, the cementation mechanisms as an electrochemical process taking place on the zinc surface do not explain the split of the electric current resulting from the anodic dissolution of zinc into two equal values. This study demonstrates that the mechanism for silver precipitation at high and low cyanide concentrations differs considerably. At low cyanide concentrations cementation is essentially an electrochemically-controlled process following a shrinking-core behavior. At high cyanide concentrations, the process seems not to be electrochemically controlled. The areas for zinc dissolution and silver deposition are not connected by an electrical-conducting medium and reduction of silver–cyano complex ions takes place by hydrogen adsorbed onto silver growing outward from the cementing zinc particles. The results are based on scanning electron microscopy of solids recovered from cementations in stirred reactors and in situ observations by optical microscopy of the cementation process on the edge of thin zinc disks in cyanide solutions.The Merril–Crowe process for recovering gold and silver from cyanide-leached ores has been widely used throughout the entire world since its introduction at the end of 19th century. The acquisition of zinc powder represents one of the main investments for the plants that use this process, a suitable optimization of its consumption being clearly desirable. Undesirable waste of zinc has its origin mainly in three causes: (a) unconsumed zinc left in the precipitate, (b) impurities precipitation, and (c) other zinc-consuming side reactions. Together, these effects diminish zinc efficiency to recover silver drastically. The cementation efficiency It is generally accepted that the main chemical reactions involved in the cementation of silver from cyanide solutions using metallic zinc powder are of an electrochemical nature. This means that the respective half reactions are connected by an electrically-conducting medium, through which an electric current is established transporting electrons from the zinc oxidation sites up to the silver reduction sites. A schematic picture of this process, as shown in In the Merril–Crowe process as applied to silver recovery from cyanide solutions, the zinc oxidation and silver reduction reactions are Reaction According to the traditional view of silver cementation as an electrochemical process, the decrease in This work aims at thoroughly understanding the mechanism of the transition between Reactions For all experiments, deionized water and analytical grade AgNO In the first set of experiments, zinc powder cementation tests were carried out in a 2.5 L glass reaction vessel immersed in a temperature-controlled water bath. The zinc was added when the O The second set of experiments consisted of the cementations of silver in a two-dimension-like system. They were devised to elucidate if the areas of zinc dissolution and silver precipitation are or are not continuously connected by an electrically-conducting medium.   To demonstrate that silver outward growth began instantaneously upon zinc addition at high cyanide conditions, cementation tests with zinc particles having a rough texture on its surface were carried out ( The cementation of silver in the high cyanide regime can then be pictured as a silver shell growing around a hollow space and having an inner shape and size of the original zinc particle. Inside this hollow space the zinc particle progressively reduces its size. Additionally, the hollow space is free of Ag(CN) The transition of Direct measurements of the interaction energy between a metallic sphere (zinc) inside another hollow particle (silver shell) filled with a multiple electrolyte (cyanide solutions) are really difficult. Confronted with the difficulty of obtaining directly this data, the zinc disk experiments were designed to explicitly avoid the physical contact between zinc and its respective silver shell. The idea was to demonstrate the truthfulness of the hypothesis by deliberately avoiding that physical contact between cemented silver and the cementing zinc particle. If silver cementation stops then the physical contact is a necessary condition. Oppositely, if it continues then the cementation process should take place following a mechanism distinct from that conventionally accepted. Silver cementation carried out in two-dimensional systems like the zinc disk additionally allowed a direct observation of the evolution of the hollow space separating cemented silver and metallic zinc. Zinc disk experiments demonstrate that silver cementation in the high cyanide regimen does not necessarily need the electrical continuity between the areas for zinc dissolution and silver deposition. The results can only be explained on the basis of two chemical reactions taking place at different interfaces and coupled only by a transport process through the hollow space. Even though the chemical identity of the species that reduces silver on the outer silver–solution interface has not been determined exactly in this study, there are reasons to believe that hydrogen is the most likely candidate. Hydrogen is produced at the zinc–aqueous solution interface at such an extent that hydrogen bubbles are directly observed inside the hollow space of the zinc disk experiments. Thermodynamically, silver reduction with hydrogen from cyanide solution is not excluded. Gas desorption tests by pyrolysis, as detected by mass spectrometry, carried out at high vacuum on the solids recovered from the zinc powder cementations, indicate the codeposition of H, H The electrochemical mechanism as shown by Eqs. The overall Reaction Both Reactions The two different mechanisms of silver deposition at low and high cyanide concentration can be accounted for by the stability of Zn(OH) At high cyanide concentration, zinc–cyano complex species are more stable than Zn(OH) These novel results demonstrate that some electrochemical methods, such as Evans diagrams, should be used with a lot of precautions to carry out silver cementation on zinc studies particularly at high cyanide concentrations. The chemical routes and morphological patterns present in the cementation of silver from cyanide solutions with zinc powder depend on the cyanide concentration. At low free cyanide concentrations an electrochemical process taking place on the zinc particles describes well experimental observations. For high free cyanide concentrations, like those commonly used in plant operations, zinc oxidation and silver reduction reactions take place on different, non-electrically connected, interfaces. Under this last condition, the absence of contact between both metals causes the reduction of the efficiency of zinc to recover silver, exactly by one half of its theoretical maximum. This work has been partially supported by the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología, México, Grants G29589E and ER026 Materiales Biomoleculares, and by Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo Tecnológico de Servicios Industriales Peñoles. The authors thank Professor Bernardo José Luis Arauz Lara for the assistance in the use of the equipment at the Laboratorio de Fluidos Complejos, Instituto de Física, Universidad Autónoma de San Luis Potosí. Thanks to Dr. Miguel Angel Vidal for use of the mass spectrometer, Instituto de Investigación en Comunicaciones Opticas, from the same University, and for helpful discussions.