Measurement while drilling (MWD) data are collected during production drilling in the open pit operation in question. On every bench in the open pit, a fractured marble zone (sill) is left on top of the hard and un-fractured marble to facilitate subsequent loading and transportation. The boreholes are drilled through this sill and then continue into the solid marble. The varying sill thicknesses cause challenges in the charging and blasting processes since charging the sill can cause fly-rocks and failing to charge enough can result in big boulders that need to be reduced in size through a cost- and time-consuming hammering process. If the sill thickness in each borehole is known, borehole specific charging depths can be developed. This paper shows how a step-wise changepoint analysis on MWD data can be used to estimate sill thicknesses. The estimated sill thicknesses are compared with optical televiewer (OTV) images to validate the predictions. Principal component analysis is used to create variables which gradually explain a decreasing amount of the variances in the data. The study concludes that a mean and variance-based changepoint analysis on the first principal component (PC1) can detect the sill thicknesses with a correlation coefficient equal to 0.98 and sum of squared deviation 0.12 from actual sill thickness. The PC1 is mainly (46% of the variance) described by rotation pressure, feed pressure and dampening pressure, indicating that the variations in these three variables are most important when studying high contrast physical and mechanical differences in rocks.Mining is a high-cost, high risk activity. Proper planning is required in all stages of mining for a safe and profitable operation. Rig performance parameters or Measurement While Drilling (MWD) data is a source of information obtained at a low cost during bench drilling during the mining process. In this research, a specific interest is to use MWD data to identify the boundary between the fragmented rock on top of the pit floor and the hard rock zone in an open pit operation. The fragmented rock on top of the pit floor is called the sill which is produced because of the sub-drilling (drilling slightly deeper than the planned pit floor) of the pit floor. The thickness of the sill is unknown and varying in each boreholes. The production holes are drilled through this sill and according to company procedures each hole is charged with explosives up to a fixed depth below the pit floor. If the explosives are charged in the sill, it is an unnecessary use of explosives and it creates safety issues with potential fly-rocks. Further, if the holes are insufficiently charged, big boulders which require costly and time consuming hammering may be produced. Another possible way is to remove the sill before drilling performed, but this is also a cumbersome and costly process. One possible way to address this issue is to estimate the sill thickness. This research focuses on estimating the sill thickness using MWD data and appropriate (geo-) statistical analysis. Specifically, identify whether the changepoint analysis is a suitable method to detect the thickness of the sill. A further objective is to investigate the sill thickness variability. This is exemplified for one specific blast. The research is based on the MWD data collected from an open pit operation at Brønnøy Kalk AS, situated close to Brønnøysund in northern Norway. The biggest advantage of using MWD data is the availability of vast amounts of high-resolution data at a low cost. The changepoint analysis estimates the point where the statistical properties of a sequence of observations (time series) change. The validation of the sill thickness result is important. Televiewer images and useful for identifying the position and orientation of true sill/fractured marble part along the borehole images. The paper is organized as follows. In Sect. 2, the data and its characteristics used for the case study from a Norwegian marble mine are described. In Sect. 3.1, the changepoint analysis method used in this context is described and in Sect. 3.2, the complete algorithm is described. The results and discussions are shown in Sect. 4. The conclusions of the research are provided in Sect. 5. The MWD data are gathered from the drilling rig for regular and systematic monitoring of the drilling performance. MWD data from 16 boreholes are used in this study to identify a suitable method for finding the sill thickness. The boreholes are located in four blasts in different areas selected in cooperation with the mine geologist to ensure to capture the majority of the geological variability. In Along with MWD data, OTV images of the borehole wall have been recorded for the boreholes. The OTV images are used to study fractures and their downhole position and lithology variations and their orientation in a borehole. In this research OTV images are specifically used to identify actual sill thicknesses. OTV images are expensive to acquire and they are made available only for these 16 boreholes. The OTV camera sensor equipment is 1.5 m long and the camera is mounted in the lower section. The OTV images are therefore only available from 30 cm to 55cm below the borehole collar due to these technicalities, also described in the report. The unprocessed MWD data from the 16 borehole is illustrated as a density plot in A common pattern visible in the MWD data is due to the rod change effects. For approximately every 3.5 m down-the-hole a new drilling rod is attached to top of the previous one. During these rod changes the drilling will pause. While the rods are changed, anomalous MWD data are collected. Once the drilling restarts, the variables gradually stabilize. The rod change variations every 3.5 m down-the-hole are visible in the percussion pressure, feed pressure, flush air pressure and dampening pressure. Penetration rate and rotation pressure are not influenced to the same extent by the rod change. The data collected during the rod changes are not related to any mechanical properties of the rock and can mislead the further analysis. Feed pressure is one of the most affected variable because it is this part of the hydraulic system used to move the hammer upwards after disconnecting it from the rod and downwards after inserting the new rod. According to Peck, A changepoint is a point in a sequence of data where the distribution parameters such as mean and/or variance used to describe the time series, abruptly change. Several algorithms are available for detecting changepoints in a time series data, including Binary Segmentation, Changepoint method is rarely used in the MWD data but a recent study, Changepoint analysis will address the following questions related to the analysis of a time series. What is the change in the parameters describing the distribution? Where does the change in the distribution occur? Herein the authors are analyzing the shift in the mean and the simultaneous shift in the mean and variance. The theory used in changepoint analysis is further explained below. Let the random variable Versus the alternative For testing the mean and variance changes simultaneously, the interest is to test the hypothesis Versus the alternative The likelihood based test statistics for testing the null hypothesis in equation For testing the null hypothesis in equation Under Under SIC under The changepoint is estimated at The changepoint detection calculations are conducted using R software package “changepoint”. A sequence of procedures are followed to find the sill thickness. It is done based on knowledge about the drilling procedure and some outlier detection methods. Initially, the data associated to rod changes described in sect.2 need to be removed. Rod changes are done approximately every 3.5 m, and the sill thickness normally varies between 0 and 3 m down the borehole. MWD data from 3 m down the boreholes are drilled mostly in high pressure mode and also includes all the data associated with rod changes. So from 3 m down the borehole, all the data with feed pressures outside one standard deviation from the calculated mean of feed pressure data are eliminated from the analysis. By selection this 3 m boundary, it is ensured that the data used for outlier removal are collected in solid rock below the sill. The density plots of the data after eliminating the rod change anomalies are shown in MWD data from a complete blast is also used to illustrate the variability of estimated sill thickness using this step wise approach. The density of the MWD data after eliminating the rod change effect for the particular blast is displayed in After cleaning the rod-change anomalies from the borehole data, mean changepoint analysis on percussion pressure is conducted in every boreholes to separate the data drilled in low pressure and high pressure settings. The premise for this study is that the MWD data collected in the sill and the hard marble are different. The second use of analysis is to find the sill-solid rock transition. This change might affect not only the mean MWD, but also the standard deviation in the MWD data. The basis for this assumption is that the sill which is a blend of fragmented marble and voids will significantly affect the variance in the MWD data. It is also hypothesized that the crossing of the boundary between sill and solid rock will potentially affect all the MWD variables. This calls for a multivariate approach. Principal component analysis (PCA) is a mathematical procedure which transforms some possibly correlated variables into a set of uncorrelated variables or principal components. PCA is useful for dimension reduction of a multivariate data set. The analysis conducted in this research identifies which variable including the first two principal components, that is more suitable to estimate the actual sill thickness. Also, the test for mean change and mean and variance change for all the MWD variables and the first two principal components are conducted. These estimated sill thicknesses are then compared with the actual sill thicknesses obtained from the OTV images and shown in Out of the 16 boreholes, 12 selectively chosen borehole data are used to find the principal components and testing boreholes. The remaining four boreholes are used to validate the results. The selection of the boreholes are done based on a representation of varying sill and broken marble in the tested boreholes and validation boreholes. The component loadings from the 12-hole PCA, are used to predict the first two principal components PC1 and PC2 for the four validation holes. The four boreholes that are not included in the 12-hole PCA are thereby used to verify the effectiveness of the developed PC-scores. If these scores give a good approximation for the sill thicknesses then the same scores will be used to show the sill thickness variability for the selected specific blast. Principal components in this case are developed using in-build R command prcomp. MWD data are mutually correlated.  The sill thickness in 16 boreholes are estimated using 16 different changepoint analysis namely mean changepoint and mean and variance changepoint on every MWD (6 variables) variable and PC1 and PC2. The correlations between the estimated sill thickness and actual sill thickness and the sum of squared deviations of estimated sill thickness from actual sill thickness using different methods are given in  The plots showing all MWD variable, PC1 and PC2 vs depth of filtered data from borehole 1938–13 is displayed in The results from the four boreholes that are not included in the development of PC scores are displayed in A similar plot to From An illustration of estimated sill thickness variation in a blasting bench using the mean variance changepoint on PC1 created by MWD data is displayed in Once the sill thicknesses are identified, hole specific charging depths can be developed for a potentially better blasting plan. The drilling through the sill requires a stable sill that prevent rock fragments to fall into and block the hole and thereby prevent an effective charging of the hole. Not having a stable sill would require the removal of the sill or possibly the use of borehole casings to prevent influx of rock fragments into the borehole. This is a case specific study and rig and site specific calibration might be required while finding the PCA score and estimating sill thickness to expand this results.  The MWD data can be used as a tool to identify the sill thickness of individual boreholes in a blast. Changepoint analysis is an effective method to find the sudden transition between sill and hard marble. The sill thickness estimation using changepoint methods on feed pressure and dampening pressure are giving fairly good results. But the estimated sill thicknesses are most correlated ( Here, PC1, basically a “fractured rock indicator”, is described mainly by feed pressure, dampening pressure and rotation pressure. So, PC1 can be considered as a combined effect of three pressures. The sill thickness can be used to identify a hole specific charging depth of boreholes in a blast. By doing this, extra hammering of boulders can be avoided and increased safety can be achieved. The special cases like cavities in the boreholes or big boulders might affect the results slightly. Future research will aim to identify such cavities in the boreholes. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge Brønnøy Kalk The following is the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at