Carbon honeycomb adsorbents having molecular sieve characteristics were prepared by controlled single-step carbonization from 1×1×1cm3 cubes of spruce wood. The carbonized xylem retained the original tracheal structure of the wood. The obtained three-dimensional frame exhibits low transport diffusional resistance due to the wide straight micron sized channels. The wood-based carbon molecular sieve (CMS) samples, synthesized in various ways, were characterized by their dynamic adsorption properties using the unique potentials of the frequency-response (FR) technique. The carbon honeycomb cubes exhibited significantly lower macropore diffusional resistance and higher kinetic selectivity in N2 and O2 separation than that of a commercial pelletized adsorbent (Takeda MSC-4A).Temperature and pressure swing adsorption processes (TSA and PSA, respectively), used as short-cycle adsorption separation technologies have become commercially used processes in gas separation and purification In general CMS is a special class of nanoporous materials that separate gases due to a narrow pore size distribution. The microporosity in the amorphous structure of the CMS can be controlled by the choice of precursor, additives and thermal history. CMS’s sophisticated surface chemistry, namely the large variety of acidic and/or basic functional groups, may be an additional factor during their performance. However, the state of scientific development with regards to CMS synthesis and structural elucidation is quite low, especially in comparison zeolites In this paper, the preparation and characterization of wood-based CMSs are reported. To address the challenges mentioned earlier (i) sorption dynamics for the air components were monitored by the frequency-response (FR) technique found already powerful for studying diffusivities in zeolites Various natural and synthetic precursors have been used for producing CMS materials by controlled pyrolysis in addition to various multi-step methods. For economic reasons commercial CMS used for N Besides the shape-selective properties of the CMS materials in the ultramicroporous domains appearing in addition to microporosity, the long-range transport porosity, i.e., the macroporosity is also very necessary. The macroporous texture in carbonaceous materials of lignocellulosic origin conserves the features of the precursor, i.e., the skeleton of the plant precursor. The thin-walled and open micron-size channel structure of wood-based honeycomb monoliths (mainly from coniferous woods) results in fast molecular transport with low diffusional resistance. Nevertheless carbon honeycombs as monoliths has not received ample attention despite the advantageous combination of microporosity and macroporosity In the current paper our intention is to tailor the pores of carbon honeycomb adsorbents created during carbonization of spruce wood cubes. Additionally, our intention is to increase the effectiveness of N As summarized in N The scanning electron microscopic images were taken with a Hitachi S-570 SEM apparatus. A batch type FR apparatus, described previously by Rees and Shen The molecular mobility in various adsorbents is determined by the texture of the sorbent material. SEM images were taken to disclose the structural micron sized differences between commercial and lab-prepared carbon molecular sieves. The pelletized Takeda MSC-4A does not show an ordered hierarchical pore structure. These types of CMS are often obtained by the pelletization of carbonized natural precursors after grinding. Their macropore structure and hereby the overall diffusion resistance is strongly dependent on the type of raw material and the pelletization technique of the activated carbon powder.  N The Applying adsorbents in kinetic separation technologies it is essential to ensure the best accessibility of gas molecules to the active sites responsible for separation. In some cases the adsorptive molecules have to overcome a remarkable diffusion barrier to reach the active sites. Due to pelletization technique, which is commonly used in production of commercial CMS materials, an increased interparticle diffusion resistance appears that could deteriorate the effectiveness of the separation process. Investigating the role of the possible coexisting interparticle and intraparticle diffusion resistances, FR spectra were recorded on original and comminuted Takeda-4A as well as carbon honeycomb particles. In On the basis of the findings shown in Shen et al. A remarkable finding of this work is that the original intracellular water content of the spruce wood precursor strongly influences the static and dynamic adsorption properties of the CMS product. The dramatic change of the nanopore size in the graphitic microcrystalline domains of several nanometers has a critical role in the effectiveness of the separation. However, controlling the water content of the wood seems to be difficult. An oxidative post-treatment by cc. HNO The research described in this paper was supported by the National Office for Research and Technology (GVOP-3.2.1.-20004-04-0277/3.0) which supports are gratefully acknowledged. Thanks are due to Dr. Krisztina László and Dr. Michael J. Ferguson for helpful discussion. The author wishes to express his appreciation to Mrs. Ágnes Wellisch and Mr. György Bosznai for their excellent technical assistance.