Using a specially constructed apparatus, diffusion bonding of SU 263 alloy was studied in the temperature range of 1123–1323K and compressive stress of 90% of its yield strength at the corresponding temperatures to determine the relative importance of the process parameters, the mechanism(s) responsible for bonding and the joint characteristics. Bond quality was assessed by optical metallography and lap shear testing. The mechanism of bonding was evaluated by grain growth equation. The experimental results were compared with a model developed by Pilling [Pilling, J., 1988. The kinetics of isostatic diffusion bonding in superplastic materials. Mater. Sci. Eng. 100, 137–144] in which the void closure by creep flow and diffusion are considered. Quantified EPMA line scan analysis was carried out to confirm the bonding mechanism and to determine the composition at the interface.Diffusion bonding is a solid-state joining process in which two prepared surfaces are joined at elevated temperature ranging from 0.5 to 0.8 Diffusion bonding of superplastic materials, in particular in Ti–6Al–4V, is a well-established technique ( Alloy SU 263 of composition (wt%) Co 21.6, Cr 20.5, Mo 3.2, Ti 1.12, Al 0.7, balance Ni was received in the form of sheet of thickness 1.6 One half of the test piece prior to bonding is shown in For successful diffusion bonding, the test pieces should be correctly aligned and a vacuum maintained to avoid contamination. The upper and lower part of the jig used is shown in The jig consisted of an upper and lower part. The two halves of the specimen to be diffusion bonded were placed in the bottom portion using four stainless steel screws to prevent misalignment during bonding. A spacer sheet of same thickness as the specimen was provided below one half of the specimen as shown in Tensile tests are normally used to evaluate joints in thick sections but such tests are insensitive to the presence of residual voids at the bond interphase ( Single overlap shear test pieces were used to determine the shear strength of the bonds made under different conditions. In aluminium alloys it has been well established that when the overlap length is between 3 and 4 Shear tests were done on a Schenck closed loop servo hydraulic testing machine. The offset present due to lap was compensated by placing a spacer sheet of thickness equal to that of specimen at the grips. Strength ratio has also been determined which is the ratio between room temperature shear strength of bonded material and room temperature shear strength of base material treated at the same bonding conditions. It gives a quantitative measure of the soundness of bond and also the strength ratio is sensitive to the presence of voids at the interphase ( For all the bonded samples, a section through the bond line was prepared and polished. The bond line and the voids were observed in the unetched condition. Marble's reagent [10 The mechanical properties of the base material (in the solutionized condition) at room and high temperature were found out and listed in The fractional area bonded assesses the quality of bonding. The results are tabulated in A hardness survey across the bonding interface at various bonding conditions shown in A perfect bond should exhibit a hardly discernible bond line with uniform composition. On the other hand, either a void or a second phase present in the interface makes a distinct bond line and results in properties different from that of the base material. The distinctly discernible line has to be avoided no matter whether it is a void or second phase. The area of the distinct bond line, which appears in the optical micrograph ( Strength ratio has been tabulated in A multiple regression analysis (based on sixteen conditions and in each condition three samples were diffusion bonded to get average value of area fraction bonded) was made to correlate the area fraction bonded ( Based on Eq. The slopes of the curves are 0.0030, 0.0017 and 0.0014 for bonding periods of 6, 12 and 24 In a similar way, the rate of area fraction bonded decreases from 0.0183 to 0.003 on increasing the temperature from 1123 to 1323 The experimental parameters, temperature, pressure and time, discussed in the previous section had not achieved a complete interphase free bonding. The bonding pressure cannot be increased beyond 0.9 of the yield strength since further increase in pressure cause macroscopic deformation of material. Alternatively, the temperature and time can be increased. However, increasing the time beyond certain limit cause metallurgical degradation of the parent metal by precipitating incoherent precipitates and brittle phases due to thermal degradation of the precipitates. Moreover, the increasing bonding time will result in difference in diffusion of the elements and forms only a second phase and may not be useful in fetching an interface of the parent metal. From Eq. Hence, the only parameter, which ensures the bonding without second phase, is the temperature. From Eq. An experiment was carried at 1423 The micrograph shows a very thin interface of about 1.6 The grain growth equation ( The experimental bonding conditions (temperature and pressure) are marked in the deformation mechanism map of MAR M 200 ( The experimentally measured rate of void closure is compared with Pilling's model (   The above numerically determined bonding mechanism is validated by a quantified EPMA line scan. A sound bond was achieved in SU 263, when diffusion bonded at 1323