Literature shows interdisciplinary research as an essential driver for innovation. Ideas that are used as a starting point for this research are of an interdisciplinary nature because they combine aspects from different disciplines. The identification of interdisciplinary ideas at an early stage enables the start of interdisciplinary research and thus, it enables advances to be made in the innovation process. We propose a new methodology that combines semantic clustering and classification to estimate the interdisciplinary nature of ideas from a set of given ideas. The set is created automatically by use of an existing idea mining approach. Ideas from this set are semantically clustered to obtain concepts that are latent in the data. The relationship between each concept and each discipline pair from a set of given disciplines is calculated. Based on the degree of relationship, concepts are used to represent the interdisciplinary field spanned by the two disciplines. The ideas standing behind these concepts are identified as interdisciplinary ideas. As a result, the proposed methodology enables an estimation of the interdisciplinary nature of given ideas. The results might be helpful for researchers as well as for decision makers in the field of innovation management.Literature defines interdisciplinary research as a research that covers several different disciplines and it shows that interdisciplinary research is an essential driver for innovation ( An innovation process drives a new idea ( As described above, interdisciplinary research is an essential driver for innovation. This means, the probability of processing a successful innovation is normally larger by applying interdisciplinary research than by applying research that is focused on a single discipline. Ideas standing behind interdisciplinary research are characterized by an interdisciplinary nature to fulfill the requirement that the subsequent research has to cover several disciplines. Estimations about the interdisciplinary nature of an idea can be done beforehand: before starting the innovation process. Providing these interdisciplinary ideas as a substitute for innovative ideas might be helpful for decision makers in the field of innovation management. The interdisciplinary nature of an idea can be estimated by the idea's creator subsequent to the generation of manual ideas. In recent years, literature introduces idea mining approaches that aim at generating ideas automatically where existing ideas are identified and extracted from text documents or from the internet ( Interdisciplinary means that research is related to several disciplines and it is also important to know that disciplines change over time e.g. as an area of research that suddenly appears, that grows, that shrinks, that melts, and that transforms ( We propose a new methodology that estimates the interdisciplinary nature of ideas. It enables an automated process where estimation can be done for the large number of ideas provided by an existing idea mining approach. Latent semantic indexing (LSI) ( The paper is structures as follows: In Overall, results from the case study show that the methodology is successful compared to related approaches and thus, it might help decision makers to improve the performance of the innovation process. Today, a huge amount of data is provided in the internet and many interesting ideas can be found within these data. A manual identification of ideas by human experts is not suitable because of the large size of data. Thus, (semi-) automatic approaches are provided to extract ideas from data especially textual data ( Idea mining ( Based on a given problem description, idea mining normally identifies a large number of possible solution ideas automatically. To present the ideas in a comprehensible way to human experts, a text phrase is built for each idea. The text phrase is taken over one-to-one from the document where the idea is described. Human experts evaluate the ideas to show whether they can be put successfully into practice. Literature-based discovery is closely related to idea mining. It has the aim to extract new knowledge from literature ( Textual patterns consist of syntactic aspects (words) and of semantic aspects (meanings). In contrast to well-known knowledge structure based approaches (e.g., bag-of-words) that focus on syntactic aspects, semantic approaches focus on aspects of meaning. Texts normally are written by several different authors with different writing styles, different wordings, and different contexts. Semantic approaches enable the identification of a common meaning within texts even if the texts do not share a common word (  Besides LSI, semantic clustering also can be processed by using other approaches as proposed in the literature e.g. ‘Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing’ (  The proposed approach by  In a first step, idea sources have to be determined. Sources should contain ideas that are able to solve a given decision problem. Determining idea sources could be done by selecting locally stored documents or by crawling documents from internet. The textual data in the documents have to be preprocessed to create a term vector for each document (see In a second step, idea mining is applied. It identifies problem solution ideas from the given term vectors (see In the fourth step, the collected concepts are assigned to a set of disciplines. Concepts that are assigned to at least two distinguishable disciplines are selected (see As a result, interdisciplinary ideas are identified from a set of given ideas. This might help decision makers in the field of innovation management by selecting solution ideas. The approach is processed in a case study (see The aim of the approach is to identify interdisciplinary solution ideas for a given decision problem. Thus, the decision problem has to be determined as well as textual data sources that possibly consist of these solution ideas. An example for this is given in the case study (see Textual data from the determined sources is extracted. An important factor for processing these unstructured texts is preprocessing. Many standard methods from text mining can be combined to obtain relevant key words as well as their term weight within the data collection. Raw text cleaning is applied because this processing is restricted on textual data. It discards scripting code, images, punctuation, as well as specific characters. After determining the term unit as a word, tokenization is applied to identify and delimit different terms. Typographical errors are corrected by using a dictionary. To transform all terms in a homogeneous way (capitalized first sign and all further signs in lower case), case conversion is applied. To distinguish relevant terms from non-relevant terms, filtering methods are used. With stop word filtering, low-informative terms that are frequently used in texts are discarded. Further, low-informative terms are identified by part-of-speech tagging where the grammatical role of a term is identified. A large number of terms is reduced by considering terms that occur more frequently than once or twice also known as Zipf's law ( A well-known formal representation of unstructured texts is a term vector in the vector space model ( The collected and preprocessed textual data is stored in term vectors for each document. Idea mining (see  The processing of semantic clustering is based on LSI splits the term-by-idea matrix Matrix Σ is a diagonal (r x r) matrix. Components of matrix Σ are singular values in a descending order. Matrix Components of the ( The selection of To reduce the number of concepts, matrix Concepts that are too general normally are not represented by an idea one-to-one. Each idea only represents a part of the concept. Thus, the maximal component value of The concepts are assigned to disciplines to identify their interdisciplinary. Concepts are represented by term vectors built by the columns of matrix Concepts are of an interdisciplinary nature if they can be assigned to at least two disciplines. However, the two disciplines should not be related ( In general, two different kinds of relationships ( A second kind of relationship is that disciplines are related in a substitutive, integrative, predecessor or successor way. Substitutive means that a discipline replaces another one. Integrative means that two disciplines are needed to create an application. Predecessor or successor means that two disciplines are needed to create an application but the second one only could be processed after the first one is finished. Disciplines - that are related in these ways - deal with the same application field (the same end). The descriptions of two related disciplines are similar because both contain the same domain specific terms describing the end. Thus, this kind of relationship is also identified if the similarity measure of the two corresponding discipline term vectors is above a specific threshold. A standard multi-label classification approach (see Sect. 2.4) is used to assign term vectors representing the concepts to one or several term vectors representing disciplines. Concepts that are assigned to two un-related disciplines are selected for further processing. Further, the discipline pairs standing behind the selected concepts are indicated as an interdisciplinary field. The columns of matrix A case study is processed to show the feasibility of the proposed approach. It supports a German governmental research organization by identifying interdisciplinary ideas from a set of ideas collected from the internet. This might help strategic decision maker of the organization by funding decisions of research activities. Ideas are collected concerning the topic: energy supply from renewable sources. In general, energy supply becomes a more and more important topic for governments especially for those with low energy resources (natural gas, fossil oil etc.). As seen from the conflict between Russia and Ukraine in 2014 / 2015, many European governments are afraid of potential unreliability of energy delivery from abroad. Thus, there strategic aim is to get more and more independent from energy import. A means for this is to increase the usage of renewable energy sources e.g., by starting related research funding activities. Ideas related to this topic include many existing as well as upcoming techniques e.g., power-heat coupling, heat pumps, biomass combustion, photovoltaic, water, and wind power plant. Some of them are of an interdisciplinary nature and identified by this approach. Results are compared to results of a further approach ( The used parameters and results of the case study are depicted in To identify ideas with idea mining, a document collection has to be provided that contains ideas related to energy supply from renewable sources. Web mining is used to create such a document collection. Due to the fact that web mining using a variety of search queries often leads to huge amount of document results, case study is based on one search query: ‘renewable energy‘. This enables the identification of documents related to the topic. Further, the case study is restricted to the English language. We are aware that there are important contributions and sources of ideas also in other languages, but in our case search queries are only executed in the English language, restricting results to the English language documents to prevent translation problems. The query is executed by a self-developed program that uses Google web search advanced programming interface (API). This search query leads to 497 unique result documents where double entries and entries strongly related to another result document are not considered. For each of the 497 result documents, the program extracts the corresponding hyperlink. With a self-developed internet crawler, each hyperlink is opened and the corresponding full text is stored as a document for further processing. Methods from For applying idea mining, existing ideas that consist of a known means-end combination have to be provided. In this case study, this is done by providing the plain text of Parameter selection is important for idea mining and an optimized parameter set depends on the domain. Using a parameter set from a related domain is a good solution approach (see The algorithm of the internet tool ‘Technological Idea Miner’, version 1.5 is used for idea mining. The used parameter values are: LSI is applied on the data by using SAS 9.3 Textminer. Before applying LSI, k has to be determined as the number of concepts. A large number of A small number of Small changes of Disciplines are provided by using scientific categories. A well-known collection of these categories can be found in the science citation index (SCI). This index is based on bibliographic information and cited references from about 3700 science and technical journals. Within the SCI, journals are assigned to 172 scientific categories. SCI also provides a detailed description for each category in scope notes ( A set of related disciplines is taken over from As seen from Three human experts evaluate the 54 ideas. Each idea consists of a textual pattern extracted by the automated idea mining approach. The approach is characterized by a precision value of about 40% ( As shown by our previous work ( Overall, the results indicate that supporting experts by an automated tool for identifying interdisciplinary ideas increases performance compared to the manual identification of interdisciplinary ideas. This is because reading 497 documents and extracting interdisciplinary ideas manually is much more time consuming than identifying unique and comprehensible ideas from 54 automatically extracted ideas. Further, the results indicate that a balanced selection of Below, four ideas are presented in detail while six ideas are presented in brief. An identified interdisciplinary idea is a specific enzymatic biofuel cell. In contrast to standard fuel cells that use precious metals as a catalyst (e.g., platinum or nickel), enzymatic fuel cells use enzymes as a catalyst to oxidize the fuel. To avoid disadvantages caused by enzymes’ short life cycle in a fuel cell, the idea is to protect enzymes by a redoxhydrogel sheath. The means (redoxhydrogel sheath) is based on chemical reactions within the fuel cell and thus, it is related to category ‘Chemistry, Analytical’. The end (using enzymes as a catalyst) is assigned to category ‘Biotechnology & Applied Microbiology’. Both categories are unrelated according to The corresponding concept contains terms from the idea but also terms that co-occur with these idea related terms e.g. in other ideas. Some terms e.g. enzymes and catalyst often co-occur with terms from biotechnology or microbiology. Other terms e.g. fuel cell, oxidize, redox, hydrogel often co-occur with terms from chemistry. Thus, the concept is similar to biotechnology and applied microbiology and to analytical chemistry category. A further example is based on wind turbines. Standard wind turbines deal with several categories that are related e.g. ‘Materials Science, Composites’, ‘Mechanics’, ‘Engineering, Mechanical’, ‘Metallurgy & Metallurgical Engineering’, and ‘Thermodynamics’. According to the proposed methodology, standard wind turbines are not of an interdisciplinary nature. In contrast to this, ideas for advanced wind turbines also exist. One idea is the use of wings in a form of a nautilus shell that is optimized for urban use because of its quiet run. Another idea is this context is to use a dual-wing-approach taken over from the wings of birds to handle better with low wind strength. The two ideas combine the end (wind turbines) - as assigned to the above mentioned categories - with the means (wing concept taken over from animals) - as assigned to category ‘Biology’ -. Because of the un-related categories, the ideas standing behind this example are of an interdisciplinary nature according to the proposed methodology. A solar-wind hybrid power system (WindRail) is identified as an interdisciplinary idea. In contrast to standard wind hybrid power systems, it consists of a wind turbine and a solar system that is mounted between a building's facade and the roof edge. It uses aerodynamic effects from the air flows to create energy. The corresponding concept is assigned to the categories ‘Construction & Building Technology’ and ‘Engineering, Aerospace’ that are unrelated. Further identified interdisciplinary ideas are wave power stations, osmotic power stations, use of methane and use of hydrogen in biomass context, permacultures, energy-self-sufficient home. The results of the proposed approach are compared to results of a further - already evaluated - approach ( For each of the 834 ideas that are identified by idea mining, both approaches compute a binary assignment (a specific idea is of interdisciplinary nature or not). The assignment of both approaches is equal in 732 cases. These are the less-critical cases because the comparative approach is already evaluated successfully in The performance of the 102 assignment is evaluated by using precision and recall measure. True positive (TP) is calculated as the number of ideas that are correctly assigned to interdisciplinary. Further, the number of ideas incorrectly assigned to interdisciplinary is the false positive (FP) and the number of ideas that are incorrectly not assigned to interdisciplinary (missing ideas) is the false negative (FN). The definition of precision is TP / (TP Evaluation shows results for the proposed approach: TP A new methodology is provided that identifies the interdisciplinary nature of ideas. Ideas are provided by an automated idea mining approach initialized by needs of strategic decision makers. The proposed methodology extracts concepts by applying semantic clustering. Concepts are assigned to several disciplines and based on this assignment, concepts are estimated as interdisciplinary. The ideas standing behind the concepts are presented as ideas of interdisciplinary nature. In contrast to this, a related approach assigns the ideas from idea mining directly to several disciplines and based on this assignment, the corresponding idea is presented as ideas of interdisciplinary nature. The advantage of the proposed approach is that the aspect of meanings is considered for each idea. Means and ends can be recognized semantically even if uncommon terms are used to describe the idea. An evaluation shows that the proposed approach is successful compared to a related approach and its performance is also above frequent baseline. Overall, the proposed approach might help decision makers by the identification of inderdisciplinary ideas and thus, it might help them to improve the performance of the innovation process. To improve performance of the proposed approach, future work should focus on using alternative semantic clustering methods e.g. PLSI, NMF, or LDA instead of using LSI. A further avenue of future research is to use the proposed methodology with time series data and with big data. For this, the proposed approach is processed once to create the latent semantic subspace by LSI. Then, new ideas - as collected at recurrent periods of time from the internet - can be projected into this latent semantic subspace and the ideas standing behind the interdisciplinary concepts can be analyzed quickly. This probably enables to process a very large number of ideas at short time. Another avenue of future research is to consider multi-language documents. By use of an automated translation, a large number of foreign language documents can be transformed to a target language whereby the effect of translation on the document content has to be evaluated. Future work also could be focused on identifying synergy effects to literature-based discovery. Interesting approaches in this field are Swanson's ABC model, as an approach that identifies hidden relations from a set of articles within a domain. Further, the RaJoLink method identifies candidate hypotheses for future discoveries based on rare terms (