An experimental study was conducted, in which synthetic samples made of construction grout and pyrite grains were subjected to high voltage pulses in a single-particle and single-pulse mode, in order to investigate the effect of electrical breakdown channel locality on particle breakage behaviour. The data confirm that the locality of electrical breakdown channel dominates the breakage response of particles. When a breakdown channel passes along the axis of a particle, it generates a finer product and produces more cracks/microcracks on the fragments. The electrical breakdown channel locality is controlled by the grains of minerals with high conductivity/permittivity and their location in a particle under the identical machine settings. The outcomes using the synthetic samples are helpful in understanding the breakage behaviour of natural ore particles in electrical comminution.The increasing demand for natural resources has driven the minerals industry to rapidly expand into new ore bodies which are harder, deeper and of markedly lower grades. These previously uneconomic ore bodies are forcing the industry to seek innovative approaches to improve the efficiency of the comminution circuit. In this context, the technology to break rocks using high voltage pulses has been discussed as a potential route for comminution ( The second methodology to exploit electrical breakage is pre-weakening. It was found that the ore particles can be weakened after electrical breakage treatment ( However, it was found that there existed pronounced ore-dependent variations that affect mineral liberation and pre-weakening by electrical comminution. This effect can be explained by referring to the mechanism of solid electrical breakdown provided by After bridging the electrodes, the main trunk of plasma streamers expands as a result of joule heating. As the joule heating increases, the diameter of the main trunk increases from microns to hundreds of microns, generating excessive tensile stresses and causing disintegration of the solid. The tree growing and solid disintegration processes of the mineral particle have been illustrated by For a particle with given mechanical properties and an applied mechanical stress, the result of the subsequent breakage event is determined by the locality of the stress. In the case of electrical breakdown, induced by high voltage electrical pulses, the locality of stress is determined by the passage of the channel of plasma (electrical breakdown channel), which explodes at the point of achieving critical pressure.  The simulation studies of One of the reasons is attributed to the interactions between material properties and pulse discharge conditions. Many factors associated with ore particles affect electrical breakage results, such as mineral composition, particle size, shape, texture and orientation (   It is not new to break concrete by high voltage electrical pulses. A number of studies which investigated the feasibility of liberating concrete with electrical comminution for the recycling purposes have been reported ( The synthetic samples were made of a general construction grout and water, with the addition of high conductive metalliferous grains. The synthetic sample used Dunlop® construction grout, which is a general purpose high strength grout made of quartz sand in a narrow size fraction around 300 In this study, three groups of synthetic samples were prepared: The Group 1 sample was made of pure grout and water, without the addition of high conductive metalliferous grains. The ratio of water to grout was controlled between 0.2 and 0.15. According to the standard procedures described in the technical datasheet of Dunlop® grout, the grout powder was always added to water before mixing with an electrical type mixer. The mixed grout was packed into a mould within 30–45 Group 2 samples were made of water and grout mixed at a ratio of 0.25, with the addition of high conductive metalliferous grains. Pyrite powder of the same size as the quartz sand was used as the high conductive metalliferous grains. A pyrite grain column was formed along a desired route inside the sample by injection. The diameter of the pyrite column was 4.73 Group 3 samples used the same water to grout ratio of 0.25 as Group 2. A single pyrite particle of 2.36–3.35 In electrical comminution, a high voltage pulse can be either discharged to a particle bed or to a single particle. To provide sufficient product material for analysis and downstream processing, almost all the published work used a particle bed of multi-layers with hundreds or thousands of continuous pulse charges in each test. The tests were completed either in batch ( A characterization method of the pre-weakening effect on ores by electrical breakage based on single-particle tests had been developed by Another advantage of the single-particle test is that the response of a single particle subjected to a single pulse discharge can be inspected. In contrast to this, the batch test of a particle bed gives an average result for a number of incremental breakage events, some particles receiving more pulse energy than the other particles. Therefore the single-particle tests were adopted to study the effect of electrical breakdown channel locality. The three groups of the synthetic samples were treated by selFrag, a laboratory high voltage pulse equipment (refer to Group 1 samples were used as a benchmark for comparison with Groups 2 and 3. Twenty repeat tests using Groups 1 samples were performed. Their fragments were combined for sizing analysis and the JKRBT test ( In the preliminary tests with Group 1 samples it was found that the response of the single homogeneous (pure grout) particle to electrical comminution was random and varied from one particle to another. The breakage response of a single particle can be classified into three categories: intact, surface breakage and body breakage. For the samples without oven drying treatment, only intact response and surface breakage were found, but no body breakage occurred. For the oven dried Group 1 sample, on the other hand, the probability of body breakage increased from 0 to approximately 50%. This agrees with results in the literature reporting that replacing the water in pores with air will increase the breakage probability of the particle by high voltage pulses ( Since the pulse energy discharged to each particle was kept constant, the degree of breakage for each single particle was determined by the path of the electrical breakdown channel in this study. Apparently, if the electrical breakdown channel grows through water the particle will be affected only by the external shockwave caused by electro-hydraulic breakage, which is not strong enough in this case. Therefore the particle remains intact after pulse discharge ( In almost all the electrical breakage treatment of Group 2 samples, single or multiple electrical breakdown channels were induced along the high conductive columns inside the particles, causing body breakage. The body breakage probability of samples Syn-9 and Syn-11 was 90% while all other samples reached 100%. During electrical breakdown, the plasma streamer of very high temperature inside the electrical breakdown channel created visible burning traces on the pyrite grains. The burning traces, as an indicator of the existence of an electrical breakdown channel, suggested that not all the high conductive columns in the samples with multiple high conductive columns induced electrical breakdown. For the samples with two or three high conductive columns (Syn-10 to Syn-13), about half of the body broken particles induced two or three electrical breakdown channels passing along each of its high conductive columns, while in the other half of particles only one high conductive column induced an electrical breakdown channel successfully. Although sample Syn-13 had thee high conductive columns, there was only one particle that attracted three electrical breakdown channels to pass all of its high conductive columns. Other Syn-13 particles induced only one or two electrical breakdown channels. It was also found that, the horizontally-placed high conductive column in sample Syn-9 did not create a horizontal electrical breakdown channel, but generated a response similar to the samples with multiple vertically-placed high conductive columns. Another indication of breakdown intensity is the burning trace width. Since the diameter of pyrite grain columns in all Group 2 particles are identical (4.73 For Group 3 samples all the pyrite grains attracted an electrical breakdown channel to pass along them successfully, which was proved by the black burning traces around the grains. For samples with a pyrite grain embedded in the centre (Syn-17) or on the bottom surface close to the ground electrode (Syn-21), the electrical breakdown channel intruded into the top surface of the particle, then passed along the pyrite grain and reached the bottom of the particle. Since the electrical breakdown channel passed the main body of the particle, samples Syn-17 and Syn-21 were broken by the radial tensile force generated along particle axis, giving a body breakage probability of 100%. When the pyrite grains were placed on the side or on the top surface of a particle (Syn-19 and Syn-20), the induced electrical breakdown was likely to develop along a channel on the particle surface. As a result, surface breakage dominated in the response of samples Syn-19 and Syn-20 to high voltage pulses, with a surface breakage probability of 70%. Correspondingly, the response of body breakage for the rest 30% particles can only be attributed to a split of fragments by the explosion of the electrical breakdown channel on particle surface, rather than the radial tensile force generated in samples Syn-17 and Syn-21. Previous studies at the JKMRC found that ore particles with high conductive grains on the surface would present high resistance to electrical comminution, which was attributed to the enhancement of electrical field on the particle surface caused by the high conductive grains ( As mentioned above, pyrite (forming a column or as a single particle) is able to attract an electrical breakdown channel to pass along it in electrical breakage. This ability can be explained by the pronounced difference in electrical properties between pyrite and cement ( The breakage test on Group 2 samples indicates that in electrical breakage the channel of electrical breakdown always grows along a high conductive column. When there are more than one high conductive columns in a particle, it is possible to induce multiple electrical breakdown channels. But the existence of an additional high conductive column cannot guarantee the generation of an additional electrical breakdown channel. As mentioned above, the process of electrical breakage of mineral can be described with a tree-like electrical breakdown model. The breakage test result of Group 2 samples suggests that the “tree” of electrical breakdown channels can have more than one “trunk” at the same time, but in most cases a main trunk would release more explosive energy than the other trunks. In the breakage test on Group 3 samples, the channel of electrical breakdown always passes along the pyrite grain. However, the route of the electrical breakdown channel away from pyrite grain is determined by the relative position of the pyrite grain. As expected, a particle with pyrite grain located in the centre (Syn-17) attracted the electrical breakdown channel to pass along the axis of the particle, while the pyrite grains embedded on the top or side surface of particles (Syn-19 and Syn-20) resulted in an electrical breakdown channel passing along the particle surface. The channel of electrical breakdown in sample Syn-21 is interesting. The pyrite grains are embedded on the surface (bottom) of Syn-21 particles, but the locality of the electrical breakdown channel in sample Syn-21 is similar to sample Syn-17, rather than Syn-19 and Syn-20. The reason why the electrical breakdown channel has not grown along the particle surface of Syn-21 can be explained as such: the top electrode of the selFrag machine is positive while the ground electrode is negative. During electrical breakdown, the electrical breakdown channel grows from positive electrode to ground electrode. For a particle with high conductive grain located close to the ground electrode, the high conductive grain will attract the pulse energy generated from the positive electrode and induce the breakdown channel into passing along the axis of the particle through the high conductive grain to the ground electrode.  The product size distribution curves of Group 3 samples are given in  The above sections have demonstrated that the electrical breakdown channel locality affects breakage product size distribution. It was expected that the same breakdown channel locality would generate the same product size distributions. A comparison was made between samples Syn-7 and Syn-17, both exhibiting the same breakdown channels through the centre of the particles. The difference is in the way of inducing the breakdown channel: Syn-7 using a column of pyrite powders through the cylindrical particle axis; Syn-17 using a single coarse grain of pyrite embedded in the centre of each particle. This may be explained by the description of “tree trunk and branches structure” of the electrical breakdown channel (  It was found that the location of electrical breakdown channel not only affected the product size distribution of electrical comminution, but also dominated the generation of cracks/microcracks. In the test of Group 2 samples, particles broken by electrical breakdown channel along the cylindrical axis of particle (Syn-7 and Syn-12) present denser radial cracks extended from centre to side surface of the particle. In contrast to this, only a few cracks can be found in the particles with the electrical breakdown channel away from particle axis (Syn-8 through to Syn-11 and Syn-13). The fragments of different sizes from samples Syn-7 and Sny-13 are scanned to demonstrate this finding ( The similar trend was also found in Group 3 samples. More cracks appeared on the progeny particles of samples Syn-17 and Syn-21 (breakdown channel located along the particle axis) than on samples Syn-18 and Syn-19 (breakdown channel on the particle side surface). The JKRBT tests were conducted on the untreated synthetic particles (Group 1 without pyrite grains) and the pulse-treated fragments of Syn-7, Syn-13, Syn-17 and Syn-20 samples to quantitatively evaluate particle residual competence associated with the cracks/microcracks generation in the electrical breakage process. The value of Axb is an indicator of particle resistance to breakage, the larger Axb indicating the less resistance to breakage. The typical Axb values in the JKMRC database that consists of more than 2000 standard Drop Weight Tester data for ore particles are between 20 and 300.  The Axb data in In this study the effect of electrical breakdown channel locality on electrical breakage was investigated using the synthetic samples. The test results are highly relevant to the electrical breakage of ore particles. The synthetic particle tests indicate that the locality of electrical breakdown channel is the most important factor affecting the product fineness, crack density, and particle residual competence. From the material property point of view, the locality of breakdown channel is determined by the existence of high conductivity/permittivity grains in a particle and the location of these high conductivity/permittivity grains in the particle. Test results using the synthetic particles indicate that for particles with multiple high conductive columns or multiple high conductive grains, a single high voltage pulse may generate a major breakdown channel along one of the conductive column (or grain), but cannot guarantee the generation of the electrical breakdown channels along all of the high conductive columns (or grains). This is similar to the natural ore that may contain multiple metalliferous grains in each particle. It has been found that the high grade ore is not necessarily meant easier to break or to generate the weaker fragments in electrical comminution ( In the synthetic particle tests the burning traces were used to locate the breakdown channels. The burning traces were the results of the exothermal reaction of high conductive grains with water, which provides extra heating process. The exothermal reaction during the electrical breakdown may cause mineral oxidation, changes in particle surface chemistry and mineral phases. These changes may have an adverse impact on the downstream processes such as flotation. More study in this area is under way. Electrical breakage tests on synthetic sample were conducted to investigate the effect of electrical breakdown channel locality on electrical breakage. There are three categories of breakage response to electrical breakage: remain intact, surface breakage and body breakage. The locality of electrical breakdown channel dominates the breakage response of particles in electrical breakage, including product size distribution, cracks/microcracks generation and particle residual competence using Axb value as an indicator. The synthetic sample tests indicate that when a breakdown channel passes along the axis of a particle, it will generate a finer product size distribution at the coarse end, and produce more cracks/microcracks and hence less competent fragments. The electrical breakdown channel locality is controlled by the existence of the grains with high conductivity/permittivity and the location of these metalliferous grains in a particle, rather than the amount of the metalliferous grains (ie. ore grade) in the particles. When the metalliferous grains are embedded in the middle of a particle or are placed close to the ground electrode, the electrical breakdown channels are likely to cause body breakage. While the metalliferous grains are located on the particle surface close to the positive electrode, the breakdown channel is likely to cause surface breakage, which leads to less pre-weakening effect. Note that the conclusions drawn here are under the machine setting conditions that can provide the sufficient electrical field strength to initiate electrical breakdown and the energy to maintain the streamer propagation through a particle. The outcomes using the synthetic samples are helpful in understanding the breakage behaviour of natural ore particles in electrical comminution. Based on the knowledge of the effects of breakdown channel locality, models for breakage probability and breakage degree will be developed for the minerals industry. The financial support from Newcrest Mining for a PhD candidate in this study is gratefully acknowledged.