With increasing molybdenum ore mining, the difficult to treat ores, i.e., lower-grade and fine-disseminated ores have gradually increased in importance. Kerosene was widely used as the conventional collector of molybdenum flotation all along, but it does not adapt well to the flotation of molybdenite in difficult to treat ores. Meanwhile, kerosene has been cancelled from the manufacture catalogue in China, which makes large refineries no longer produce it, and in turn makes it difficult for a molybdenum flotation plant to purchase kerosene and makes it even harder for kerosene to keep a stable composition. Therefore, many molybdenum flotation plants began to apply diesel oil instead of kerosene as collector for molybdenite. However, the flotation results reveal that diesel oil from different manufacturers or being of different specifications from the same manufacturers has a different effect on the flotation of molybdenite, and pulp temperature has an obvious effect on the flotation efficiency of diesel oil. In pulp temperatures ranging from 10 to 30°C, the flotation recovery of molybdenite increases with increasing high-boiling component in diesel oil. When pulp temperature is below 10°C, the flotation recovery of molybdenite is related to the dispersibility of diesel oil, i.e., the proportion of high-boiling and low-boiling component in diesel oil. Therefore, a molybdenum flotation plant should not blindly apply diesel oil instead of kerosene as the collector for molybdenite, but should select diesel oil that is suitable for the properties of its ore. This technical note is helpful to better select the proper collector for a molybdenum flotation plant.Molybdenite possesses excellent natural floatability ( Many studies ( The molybdenite sample used in this study was from the tungsten–molybdenum mine of Luanchuan in Henan Province, China. It is a skarn type tungsten molybdenum deposit, in which molybdenite occurs as a major phase and scheelite as a minor phase. Typically, Mo concentration ranges from 0.04% to 0.3%. These mineral samples were crushed to below 2 The reagents used in this study were: diesel oil as the collector for molybdenite, diesel oil from various sources (see Flotation was conducted in a 3L hitch groove flotation machine at a rotating speed of 1700/min. In the flotation process, a 1 In order to inspect the repeatability from replicate tests, each test condition was repeated five times. Five test results gave an arithmetic average value, and the analysis of variance was used to confirm the reliability of test results. The most reliable and reasonable data will be used for making summary graphs and analyzing test results. Six kinds of diesel oil from different manufacturers were selected to serve as the collectors of flotation, numbering from diesel oil 1 to diesel oil 6. The influences of the dosage of each kind of diesel oil at pulp temperatures of 20 As shown in As shown in As everyone knows, nonpolar oil is generally used for the molybdenum collector, whose chain length and dispersibility are the major factors contributing to its collecting ability. The maximum length of the carbon chain is closely related to the boiling point of diesel oil. The higher the boiling point of diesel oil, the longer the maximum length of carbon chain is. When pulp temperature is above 10 It can be verified that crude oil components or production processes of diesel oil are different all over China, causing the diesel oil from different manufacturers or being of different specification from the same manufacturer, to have different composition and average carbon chain length, and in turn to have a different effect on the flotation of molybdenite. Therefore, a molybdenum flotation plant should not blindly apply diesel oil instead of kerosene as collector for molybdenite, but should select the diesel oil suitable for the properties of its ore, which has the optimum high-boiling component in diesel oil and proper average carbon chain length. In the paper, diesel oil 2 is the most applicable collector for molybdenite of Luanchuan. Diesel oil from different manufacturers or being of different specification from the same manufacturer has a different effect on flotation of molybdenite. The decrease of pulp temperature can reduce the dispersibility of diesel oil, especially the high-point component in diesel oil. Low pulp temperature has a negative effect on the molybdenum flotation when diesel oil is used as collector. Therefore, a molybdenum flotation plant should not blindly apply diesel oil instead of kerosene as collector for molybdenite, but should select diesel oil suitable for the properties of its ore. In this technical note, diesel oil 2 is the most applicable collector for molybdenite of Luanchuan. This work was supported by China Molybdenum Co., Ltd., and Xi’an University of Architecture and Technology.