Advantages and disadvantages of available solution techniques for pulse problems in non-linear stochastic dynamics are discussed. First, random pulse problems, both, those which do and do not lead to Markov theory, are presented. Next, the analytical and analytically numerical techniques suitable for Markov response problems such as moment equations, Petrov–Galerkin and cell-to-cell mapping techniques are briefly discussed. Usefulness of these techniques is limited by the fact that effectiveness of each of them depends on the mean rate of impulses. Another limitation is the size of the problem, i.e. the number of state variables of the dynamical system. In contrast, the applicability of the simulation techniques is not limited to Markov problems, nor is it dependent on the mean rate of impulses. Moreover their use is straightforward for a large class of point processes, at least for renewal processes.An often posed question is: whether or not it is of general interest to consider the problems of response of dynamical systems to random pulse trains. In order to justify such an interest let us realize the fact that any excitation to the dynamical mechanical system may be effectuated in either of two ways: as a continuous function of time, or by impulses (jumps in the velocity response process). A class of practical engineering problems leading to the random impulse process representation embraces all kinds of trains of shocks or impacts; in more general terms these are the loads which occur as random events. Representative examples of such problems are known to be: dynamic response of bridges to highway traffic loads If it is of interest, which has been rather commonly accepted for a long time, to consider problems of response to random excitations with time continuous sample paths, it is equally of general interest to consider problems of response to impulse process excitations. However, the latter excitations cannot be treated by the usual techniques, because they reveal inherently non-Gaussian nature. A Gaussian process is only an asymptotic special case of a stochastic impulse process. Although as a basic model an external impulse process excitation may be assumed, an insight into the physical nature of many problems reveals that the jump of the velocity response is the result of collision of two bodies. Consequently, the total impulse equal to the increment of the momentum of the system under consideration depends on the velocities of both colliding bodies prior to the collision and hence it depends on the state variables of the problem. This leads to the multiplicative noise (parametric excitation) problem One of the earliest papers dealing with the response of a non-linear dynamical system to a random train of impulses was given by Roberts The aim of this paper is to present an overview and discuss advantages and disadvantages of the solution techniques having been developed by the authors and co-workers for non-linear dynamical systems driven by random pulse trains. These techniques have recently been collected together with the techniques for continuous stochastic excitations Consider a general multi-degree-of-freedom non-linear dynamical system under a random train of general pulses driven by a stochastic point process The differential rule for non-diffusive, Poisson-driven, Markov processes is known as an integro-differential analogue of the classical Itô’s differential rule In order to derive the equations for moments from the differential formula However if the increments of the regular counting process For example in the cases of The problem is finally converted to a Poisson driven one at the expense of augmenting the structural state vector Thus the augmented state vector is governed by the stochastic differential equations Although the structural state vector For a general Poisson-driven pulse problem governed by It is no doubt that the accuracy of the results obtained with the help of a closure technique depends on the ability of the tentative probability density function for the evaluation of the unknown expectations entering the moment equations, to qualitatively model the actual density function, i.e. it should have freedom to represent possible multimodal or multipeak shapes and discrete probability components. Consider the dynamical system subjected to a random train of impulses and to initial conditions If the train of impulses is driven by a homogeneous Poisson process, the probability The probability Joint probability density function of the state vector For systems with polynomial drift vectors the following modified cumulant neglect closure scheme may be used. In case of closure at the order The modified cumulant-neglect closure technique proved to be effective in the case of evaluating transient response moments for low mean rates of impulses, i.e. for sparse trains of impulses The forward Kolmogorov–Feller equation for the joint probability density The forward integro-differential Kolmogorov–Feller operator is given by The backward Kolmogorov–Feller equation with absorbtion boundary conditions is Attempts to solve the problems Bergman and co-workers The Petrov–Galerkin method for solving the boundary and initial value problems For the problem The Petrov–Galerkin method is then combined with a finite element technique, so the shape and weighting functions are assumed for an element. The shape functions may be assumed as continuous piece-wise linear and the weighting functions as the combination of piece-wise linear and quadratic functions. It has been found that for a two-dimensional problem, i.e. the Duffing oscillator under trains of impulses with high to moderate mean rate, the Petrov–Galerkin method provides very accurate solution of the backward Kolmogorov–Feller equation Cell-to-cell mapping or path integration are the names assumed for the numerical techniques of evaluating the probability density of the time and state space continuous Markov vector process by considering the process at discrete time instants and by discretization of the state space, hence by reducing the process to a Markov chain. The technique is based on the fact that for sufficiently short time interval (time step) the asymptotic form of the transition probability density function can be derived and then the probability density is evaluated by performing step-wise convolution integration. Different schemes may be devised depending on different approximations of the drift and diffusion vectors. Application of the path integration technique to non-linear systems driven by Gaussian white noise excitation is based on the local Gaussian behaviour assumption, i.e. on the fact that for small time intervals, hence at small displacements the equations of motion can be linearized about the initial state, hence the response becomes locally Gaussian. In other words, if the time interval is sufficiently small, the asymptotic Gaussian form of the transition probability density may be employed. Naess and Johnsen The application of the path integration schemes to pulse driven systems was given by Köylüoğlu et al. Let us outline the technique for Poisson driven pulses. The time axis is divided into small time intervals Δ If the time interval Δ The sample space is divided into a finite number The probability The transition of states can be represented by the matrix equation The cell-to-cell mapping technique described before has been applied to a Duffing oscillator under Poisson The sample path of the random train of impulses is obtained by generating the sequence of interarrival times and the sequence of impulse magnitudes. The interarrival times may be sampled directly from the given probability distribution, or in the case of an Erlang process, with the help of a generated train of Poisson distributed points. The impulse magnitudes are generated as sample values of a random variable The response sample curve is next obtained by numerical integration, of the homogeneous governing equation of motion between the impulse arrival times, whereas at every time point of an impulse occurrence the velocity response is increased by a jump, which gives the updated initial condition for the next interarrival time interval. Usually a standard fourth-order Runge–Kutta technique may be used for numerical integration. Usually an ensemble of 50 000 response sample curves was generated for the problems considered by the authors, and in the case of ergodic sampling The simulation technique is quite straightforward to apply for a large class of regular point processes if the probability distribution of the interarrival times is specified. This class certainly embraces all the renewal processes. Possible extensions of the simulation technique can be performed for the problems in which the interarrival times and the impulse magnitudes are correlated random variables. Consider a Duffing oscillator under a Poisson driven train of impulses. Let Computations have been performed for two different values of the mean arrival rates of impulses: The random magnitudes of impulses have been assumed as centralized, Rayleigh distributed random variables, calibrated in such a way that in both cases A uniform 50×50 mesh has been used with the limits The simulation results have been based on the ensemble of 100 000 of the response sample functions obtained by numerical integration, with the help of fourth-order Runge–Kutta technique, of the homogeneous governing equation of motion It is seen that the agreement between the analytical and simulation results is certainly very good in the case of zero-mean initial conditions and in both cases In the case of non-zero mean initial conditions, for A brief review of analytically-numerical techniques, developed by the authors and co-workers, for non-linear dynamical systems under random impulses is done. Effectiveness of these techniques depends on the mean rate of impulses, for example performance of cell-to-cell mapping technique is very good for low mean rates (sparse pulses) and the performance of the Petrov–Galerkin technique, vice versa, for high mean rates (dense pulses). Another limitation of usefulness of these techniques is the size of the problem, i.e. the number of state variables of the dynamical system. In contrast, the applicability of the simulation techniques is not limited to Markov problems, nor is it dependent on the mean rate of impulses. Moreover their use is straightforward for a large class of point processes, at least for renewal processes. Concluding, authors wish to express the opinion that the avenue of further development of the solution techniques for pulse problems in stochastic dynamics should be directed onto optimization of the simulation techniques. Using a Taylor expansion we obtain Retaining only the terms of the first order in d Taking into account the regularity property of the counting process The infinite sum is nothing but a Taylor expansion of