The vast majority of distal radius fractures respond well to either nonsurgical or surgical treatment methods. Several fracture patterns, however, are known to be problematic. Failure to recognize their particular intricacies may result in the formation of fracture nonunions, malunions, wrist arthritis, and/or carpal instability. The aforementioned consequences of failed treatment often require salvage techniques to improve upper extremity function. Techniques for limiting complications associated with surgical fracture management are presented in an algorithmic format to assist the treating physician. Indications and contra-indications of each technique are reviewed, and our preferred methods and surgical pearls are presented.Fractures of the distal radius are the most common bony injury to the upper extremity. Minimizing the risk of failure requires the ability to recognize potential problems before they arise. We tailor fixation to the “personality” of the fracture (ie, bone quality, fracture orientation, concomitant soft-tissue injuries), and limit the amount of stripping to preserve the soft-tissue envelope as much as possible. Factors associated with a higher likelihood of treatment failure are as follows: (1) very distal fractures with a small volar–ulnar fragment, (2) intra-articular depressions as a separate central fragment, (3) volar and dorsally comminuted fractures, (4) shear fractures, (5) severely osteoporotic fractures, and (6) distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) ligament disruptions with a small or no ulnar styloid fracture ( For very distal fractures, traditional volar plate fixation does not provide a buttress to the small volar–ulnar fragment, which might displace volarly along with the carpal bones, resulting in a radiocarpal dislocation. The most distal plate fixation can be achieved with the Synthes fixed angle distal radius plate (Synthes, Inc, Paoli, PA), and we prefer this implant for these injuries. One of the difficulties encountered when using this plate is that the volar radiocarpal ligaments can be damaged while clearing the footprint for the plate because the distal portion extends past the watershed line. Other fixation options include small threaded Kirschner wires (K-wires) or 1- or 1.3 mm screws placed outside the plate. We have also used suture to lasso the fragment when even small screws or pins have the potential to split a fragile portion of fractured bone. Supplemental external fixation might also be considered to minimize volarly directed shear stresses across the radiocarpal joint. Central depressions can be difficult to elevate. The technique is similar in concept to elevation of Schatzker II fractures of the tibial plateau, and the approach to fixing them is the same. An extended FCR approach with pronation of the shaft away from the distal fragment provides excellent access to the fracture, and elevation of the central depression can be accomplished with a small blunt tamp. One needs to be careful of sharp instruments because they can split the fragment and render a complex surgery more difficult. For filling the void, structural graft might be necessary depending on fixation type, particularly if rigid subchondral support cannot be achieved. If the fracture cannot be well visualized fluoroscopically, a dorsal capsulotomy or arthroscopy should be considered. The arthroscope can be inserted directly through the space of Poirier from the volar side without ligament disruption. It is crucial to place the fixation directly beneath the subchondral bone to prevent recollapse of the depression. A “distal on first” technique, with which the distal fixation is placed before the proximal fixation, secures the articular fragments first, converting a complex fracture into a simple extra-articular fracture on a stick ( K-wire fixation alone is a viable option for extra-articular and simple intra-articular fractures. We advocate the technique described by Glickel et al For the aforementioned patients, fixed angle plate fixation allows the construct to bridge or bypass the comminuted segment. Shear fractures are best treated with either volar or dorsal buttress plates depending on the direction of displacement. Severe osteoporosis might require not only a longer plate but also supplemental external fixation to minimize stress across the screw-bone interface. Ulnar styloid fractures usually are not clinically significant, and thus tend to be ignored. Even the simplest distal radial fractures require assessment of instability in full pronation, supination, and neutral forearm rotation and assessment of any crepitation through the full range of forearm rotation after fixation of the distal radius. Although large fragments that involve the fovea (the attachment of the ligamentum subcruentum) are more obvious and relatively straightforward to fix, the subtle DRUJ disruption is just as significant and more difficult to repair. Large fragments should be fixed with plates or screws. Smaller fragments require either 1 or 2 smooth pins coupled with a tension band suture or wire. For cases in which bony fixation is minimal or nonexistent, we use soft-tissue fixation with an anchor into the fovea capturing the ulnar corner of the triangular fibrocartilage complex (TFCC). Cross pinning the DRUJ with two 0.062-inch K-wires is recommended for 6 weeks when fixation is not rigid. Even when everything is done correctly and every precaution has been taken, complications can still occur. An overview of how to handle these complications can be found in the following paragraphs. Nonunions of distal radius fractures infrequently occur because of the robust blood supply of the metaphyseal bone. When distal radial nonunions do occur, causes include infection, bone loss, inadequate stability, and compromised blood supply. Fractures that are treated closed rarely develop nonunion because they acquire sufficient stability and bone contact with which to heal. With closed distal radial fractures, blood supply, and infection are rare concerns. Infection must be ruled out in cases of open fracture and in cases of nonunion that have undergone previous surgical treatment. Bone loss, instability, and compromised blood supply are risk factors not only for nonunion but also for infection as well. Patients with nonunion typically present with pain and might exhibit gross deformity. Loss of motion at the wrist, although nearly always present, is rarely a complaint. Pain commonly occurs on the ulnar side of the wrist, either from ulnocarpal impaction and/or DRUJ instability or degeneration. Because of the stabilizing strut effect of the intact distal ulna and the fibrous union that typically occurs, frank motion at the fracture site is rarely observed. Occasionally, patients experience gross motion and tenderness at the fracture site and might have accompanying DRUJ disruption, such as which occurs after a Galeazzi fracture. This most commonly occurs with fractures at the metaphyseal–diaphyseal junction of the distal radius. A physical examination should include assessment of wrist range of motion and evaluation of grip and pinch strength. The distal radius has very little overlying muscle mass and should be noticeably cooler to the touch than the proximal forearm when not infected. Evaluation of the DRUJ and the TFCC should include stability assessment, grind test, and elicitation of pain with ulnar deviation in maximal pronation and supination. In cases in which infection is possible, even if not suspected, standard markers—such as white blood cell count, C-reactive protein, and erythrocyte sedimentation rate—should be obtained. Three views of the wrist typically are sufficient to visualize a nonunion, although computed tomographic (CT) scans should be considered if plain films are inconclusive. Three-dimensional reconstructions can be very helpful, and we routinely use that method of imaging when CT scans are deemed necessary. Of particular concern are the volar ulnar corner of the radius, which can fragment or even resorb, resulting in volar radiocarpal instability, and the dorsal ulnar corner of the radius, which, if displaced, can result in DRUJ instability and radiocarpal joint incongruity. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) rarely is indicated, unless avascular necrosis of a fracture fragment or infection is suspected. If hardware is present, MRI findings often are difficult to interpret. Nuclear imaging modalities are better options in the setting of internal fixation. Indium labeled white cell scans correlated with sulfa colloid scans can be very helpful in localizing infection and are more specific than technetium scans. However, a triple phase bone scan is very sensitive, is less expensive, requires less radiation exposure, and can be performed first to rule out infection if suspicion is low. For functionally low-demand or physically compromised patients, splinting and targeted steroid injections can be considered. Symptomatic nonunions are generally a mechanical problem that requires a mechanical solution for definitive treatment. Treatment should be customized for each patient on the basis of the site of the nonunion, the size of the defect, the joints involved, the stability of the DRUJ and the proximal radioulnar joint, the presence of associated ligament or bony injuries, and the overall health, age, and functional demands of the patient. We have been using the volar extended FCR approach almost exclusively. Extra-articular nonunions are rare, and infection should be considered as a potential cause if an overlying surgical or traumatic scar is present. Even if serum infectious markers are negative, we routinely culture the wound and any indwelling hardware. A high index of suspicion might warrant obtaining frozen sections, but doing so adds appreciably to the operative time and the value is unclear in this setting. External fixation of the fracture is considered if splint immobilization is not adequate. If fracture healing is not evidenced after 6 weeks, our preference is to remove the fixator and insert autograft from the iliac crest in combination with plate fixation. When dealing with atrophic nonunions, even if the gap is minimal, a combination of structural and morcellized graft from the iliac crest is our choice, although no consensus is presented in the published data. Hypertrophic nonunions rarely require separate graft harvesting because enough callus usually is present to fill the fracture gap, and vascularity of the bone ends is not a concern. It is generally easier to obtain fixation before grafting, both to align the fracture ends and to determine the size and shape of the fracture gap. Temporary fixation can be achieved with percutaneous K-wires or small temporary plates. Definitive fixation can be achieved with any of the variety of fixed angle volar plates now available. Intra-articular fracture nonunions present a much bigger challenge, particularly when presenting in combination with ligamentous injuries. Most commonly, intra-articular nonunions involve the volar ulnar corner of the radius and result in volar subluxation of the carpus. Radiocarpal stability restoration is imperative and can be accomplished using the following methods. If the bony fragment is salvageable, rigid internal fixation with or without the use of supplemental external fixation is recommended. Structural osteochondral grafting to rebuild a resorbed or missing fragment is a viable yet technically challenging option. A good donor site is the tip of the olecranon, which can be easily harvested and carries minimal donor site morbidity. Ligament and capsular repair or reconstruction is mandatory after these grafting efforts. Another option is to perform an extra-articular osteotomy and create a neutral to dorsal tilt of the articular surface. If DRUJ stability is also compromised, a volar sigmoid notchplasty A dorsal approach often is needed to adequately visualize the joint surface. We advocate making this incision first, even if a volar approach is planned, to help guide decision making. Arthroscopy can also be used for this purpose. Segmental defects usually are the result of high-energy trauma, such as motor vehicle collisions and gunshot wounds, or débridement of open fracture or infection. Small defects can be treated with vascularized or nonvascularized intercalary grafting from the iliac crest. Other sources of autograft, allograft, or bone substitute can be considered depending on the size and milieu of the defect. Defects larger than 1-2 cm treated with nonvascularized grafting are slow to heal and are associated with a higher rate of nonunion. Vascularized crest grafts are a good option for defects smaller than 4 cm, and vascularized fibular grafts are a better option for larger defects. An overnight hospital stay is recommended for compartment checks, pain control, and strict elevation. For the majority of patients, the arm is placed into a sugar-tong splint immediately after surgery. If the fixation is sufficiently rigid, only a volar splint is applied. A long- or short-arm cast is placed after 2 weeks when the swelling has decreased and is maintained until fracture union. Compliant patients with stable constructs are transitioned to a removable volar splint at 2 weeks while undergoing self-directed range-of-motion exercises. If distraction osteogenesis has been performed, splinting is not necessary. The wrist is a combination of multiple interdependent joints, and each must be assessed independently and in concert. Distal radial fractures and associated injuries can result in posttraumatic arthritis of the radiocarpal, intercarpal, and DRUJs. Isolated radioscaphoid arthritis can occur, particularly in the setting of Chauffeur fracture or early scapholunate advanced collapse. Many patients who present with posttraumatic arthritis are unaware of previous trauma, considering the delay between the inciting injury and the onset of arthritic symptoms sometimes is longer than a decade. Three views of the wrist typically are sufficient to make the diagnosis of posttraumatic wrist arthritis. The typical osteoarthritic signs of decreased joint space, subchondral sclerosis, and osteophyte formation are accompanied by angular and/or translational deformities with or without articular discongruity. Significant remodeling often occurs and can obscure a clear picture of the initial malunion appearance. Contralateral radiographs might be necessary, particularly when evaluating native ulnar variance. CT scanning might be necessary, particularly when hardware has been placed and penetration into the joint is suspected. CT scans are also helpful if subtle DRUJ instability is suspected: 3 images of a single axial cut of both wrists at the level of Lister's tubercle with the forearm in neutral, supination, and pronation are obtained. MRI might be helpful in determining associated ligamentous injuries or areas of bony necrosis. As with all types of arthritis, splinting and steroid injections might delay the need for surgical intervention. For patients with radiocarpal or intercarpal arthritis, a volar splint is valuable not only in managing symptoms but also in providing a preview of life with a fused wrist. A custom fabricated ulnar gutter splint that limits pronation and supination can be used for DRUJ arthritis. Steroid injections can provide months or even years of pain relief and help to defer, but not avoid, surgery. However, for the elderly patient with minimal functional demands, a combination of splinting and injections might be the definitive treatment. Unless pancarpal arthritis is noted or the patient has low functional demands, our bias is to aggressively treat posttraumatic arthritis with the aim of preserving any remaining serviceable articulations. Patients who have a functional range of motion might consider procedures that limit wrist motion to be less desirable. Realization that the success rate of global wrist denervation procedures is high renders these options viable alternatives to limited or total arthrodesis whenever wrist motion is a functional necessity. Isolated radiocarpal arthritis with midcarpal preservation can be treated with motion-salvaging or motion-sacrificing procedures. Patients should be counseled that total wrist fusion is a more predictable operation for pain relief but that the loss of motion is permanent. The isolated radiocarpal fusion is a good alternative when the midcarpal joint is unaffected. However, in our practices, we obtain patient consent for both procedures, knowing that intraoperative examination of the midcarpal joint will determine the surgeon's choice of fusion type. We prefer a modification of the technique described by Garcia-Elias et al If the lunate fossa and the midcarpal joints are unaffected, either a PRC or a four-corner fusion with scaphoid excision is a good salvage option ( Pancarpal arthritis leaves few options. Wrist fusion is the most predictable operation for relieving pain but results in complete loss of motion of the wrist. As described by Eaton, The sigmoid notch and radioulnar ligaments often are ignored in the evaluation of the distal radial fracture. We advocate routine examination of DRUJ stability after surgical fixation of all distal radial fractures. If the instability is initially missed or develops during the early postoperative period, open or arthroscopic TFCC repair can be attempted. Long-standing instability is a much bigger problem because the shearing forces that result from an unstable articulation eventually lead to accelerated cartilage wear. If no viable tissue remains for repair but arthritic changes have not yet set in, we perform ligament reconstruction as described by Adams and Berger ( If the DRUJ has arthritic changes or is incongruous secondary to a malunion or nonunion extending into the sigmoid notch, ligament reconstruction is contraindicated. We prefer a distal ulnar resection (Darrach procedure) ( Simple ulnar positive variance with no arthritic changes in the DRUJ responds well to ulnar shortening. Plain radiographs of the contralateral side are mandatory to evaluate the native variance of the wrist before collapse of the distal radius through the fracture. We prefer a formal ulnar shortening (Milch procedure) to a Feldon wafer technique, although both methods have proponents. The wafer technique does not address the DRUJ incongruity resultant from radial shortening and is more appropriate for nontraumatic ulnar positive variance, in our view. Litanies of plates are available for ulnar shortening. In our practice, we find that a freehand cut is just as accurate, if not more accurate, and obviates the need for cumbersome jigs. We advocate using a seven-hole small fragment plate. If the plate is placed volarly on the ulna, patients rarely require plate removal. We make 45° angled cuts in parallel with a thin sagittal saw. The first cut is made to, but not through the far cortex. The second cut is then completed, and the first cut is continued. Care must be taken to continuously irrigate the saw blade while cutting bone in an effort to minimize the risk of heat-induced osteonecrosis. An articulated tensioning device can be placed before osteotomy is performed to facilitate compression and control rotation. Postoperative protocols depend on the surgery that has been performed. For fusions, 2 weeks in a volar or sugar-tong splint and then casting until union is achieved are recommended. Typically, union is between 6 and 8 weeks. For PRC, 3 weeks in a nonremovable postoperative splint is sufficient as long as the radioscaphocapitate ligament has been preserved. For interposition arthroplasty, we suggest 2 weeks in a splint and then 4 weeks in a short arm cast. Any procedure at the DRUJ or TFCC requires 2 weeks in a sugar-tong splint and 4 weeks in a cast just above the elbow. Active and passive motion are initiated after cast removal, but an orthoplast splint (Johnson & Johnson, Langhorne, PA) is to be continued for 4 weeks and worn whenever the patient is not performing range-of-motion exercises or showering. Once the orthoplast splint is removed, progressive resistive exercises can begin. Hardware failure after a distal radius fracture treatment is rare. When it does occur, an associated nonunion can be assumed and infection should be suspected. Screw loosening or back-out is more common, particularly when locking screws were not used or were inadequately engaged in the plate. The most distal row of volar screws and any dorsally placed screws are likely to cause tendon irritation as they loosen. We replace any locking screws that are not well fixed to the plate before closure during our index and revision procedures to avoid this complication. Also, any nonlocking screws with poor purchase are removed and replaced with wider screws whenever possible. Screws that are too long can irritate tendons on the back side, leading to tendon rupture. This is particularly true of sharp screw tips with self-tapping threads. We prefer to use blunt pegs whenever possible, and we undersize our screws to minimize the risk of delayed tendon rupture. Violation of the joint with the most distal screws is always a concern, particularly in the ulnar corner. The DRUJ is difficult to visualize and is easily penetrated by a screw placed too far ulnar on either the volar or dorsal sides. Penetration of the radiocarpal joint can be avoided by obtaining an anatomic reduction and positioning the plate in its recommended position relative to the watershed line. Fixed angle devices are precontoured to an anatomically correct distal radius, and an inability to restore volar tilt necessarily results in penetration of the joint if the plate is placed in the recommended position. If an anatomic tilt and inclination cannot be restored, consider placing the plate more proximally to avoid this complication. Patients with hardware failure usually recall an incident during which they heard or felt a clunk or pop and might complain of pain. Function of the limb might be compromised. Patients with screw loosening or screws that are too long might complain of pain and swelling secondary to tenosynovitis. This might be the only sign of impending tendon rupture. Violation of the joint with screws presents with worsening pain and crepitation. Plain radiographs usually are adequate for evaluating the integrity of the hardware. We recommend posteroanterior, lateral, and 20° of pronation and supination oblique views. A 22° oblique lateral view is useful to look for screw penetration into the joint. Breakage of hardware should be treated by revision surgery, if symptoms warrant. A painless nonunion or fibrous union in the setting of a broken plate that is well concealed under the pronator quadratus, however, merits observation with interval follow-up. Cases in which a screw appears to be backing out should be watched closely. If tendon irritation becomes a concern, timely removal of hardware is recommended. The surgeon should be prepared to address any nonunion after hardware removal if the nonunion is symptomatic. Violation of the joint ( In cases of hardware removal only, even if asymptomatic nonunion is present, postoperative immobilization is not necessary except when wound healing is a concern. In cases in which removal of hardware is accompanied by revision surgery, we immobilize the limb according to the guidelines listed above for nonunion salvage techniques. Advances in techniques and instrumentation have dramatically improved our ability to restore the wrist to its preinjury form and function after a fracture of the distal radius. Recognizing the potential pitfalls is critical to minimizing the risk of failure. However, despite our best efforts, failures do occur. Not all failures can be salvaged, and managing patient expectations is critical. Fusions are reasonable options for addressing joint pain but should be as focused as possible to maximize overall wrist motion. It is imperative to maximize function of the DRUJ because it is a significant source of patient morbidity.