This paper presents a novel method to measure the concentration of methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC), a widely used frother in coking coal flotation. It is based on the specific interaction between MIBC molecules and a formulated liquid mainly comprising cyclodextrin and pyrene. The method involves mixing the formulated liquid with the sample solution for a short period of time before measuring the absorbance using a UV–Vis spectrophotometer. It shows high measuring accuracy with minimal interferences from diesel, flocculants and inorganic salts present at typical concentrations in coking coal flotation plants.Raw coal is often subjected to beneficiation processes to remove excessive impurities before being sold to market. Among the beneficiation methods, froth flotation is widely used for fine size fractions (typically < 1 mm). Froth flotation for coal cleaning has become increasingly more important as more and more fines are generated owing to application of advanced and automated mining techniques. For instance, fines account for around 20 wt% of the raw coal feed in a typical hard coking coal processing plant in Australia ( One of the most important process parameters for a coal flotation operation is the concentration of frother. Use of frother at appropriate concentration levels can produce desirable bubble size and stability and mobility of the froth phase, which in turn significantly affect the kinetic viability of the flotation processes and its separation efficiency. Excessive residual frother in plant water could cause over frothing (so-called ‘froth out’) problems in pumps, sumps and thickeners. On the other hand, insufficient frother addition in the flotation process often leads to loss of yield ( The existing techniques for measuring frother concentration are not effective. Calculating frother concentration based on the dosing amount of frother is difficult in the operating plant owing to incomplete dissolution and unknown distribution of frothers between flotation pulp and froth ( Research efforts have also been made by others to develop non-analytical techniques to measure frother concentration online, ranging from breathalyser-type alcohol detectors ( In the present study, we demonstrate a novel method involving the mixing of the sample solution and formulated liquid to measure the concentration of MIBC, a short chain alcohol commonly used as frother in coal and metalliferous ore flotation process ( Pyrene (99% pure), De-ionized water (18.2 MΩ cm) produced from a Milli-Q system (Millipore) was used throughout the experiments. In preparing different formulated liquids, two different stock solutions of pyrene were prepared: Dissolving excessive amount of pyrene into the de-ionized water, which was allowed to equilibrate for more than 48 h at room temperature. Any floating micro-crystals were removed and the remnant solution was used. In determining the concentration of pyrene in the formulated liquid, the water solubility of the pyrene at 27 °C was assumed 0.780 μmol/L, the mean of two reported values: 0.815 ( Dissolving excess amount of pyrene into methanol-water mixtures (i.e., 5, 10, 15, 35, 55 v/v %), which were allowed to equilibrate for more than 24 h. The solubility of the pyrene in these methanol-water mixtures with 5, 10, 15, 35 and 55 v/v % methanol were assumed 1.33, 2.13, 3.42, 22.68 and 150.15 μmol/L, respectively ( The prepared pyrene stock solution was wrapped with aluminium foil and stored in darkness to minimize the photochemical degradation of pyrene ( Other stock solutions were prepared by adding a suitable amount of the corresponding chemical into the de-ionized water. These stock solutions included 0.0159 M A stock electrolyte solution was made by mixing 0.493 g of MgSO  For the purpose of establishing calibration curves, a 1000-ppm stock MIBC solution was used to prepare the standard sample solutions. Typically, each standard sample solution with known MIBC concentration was mixed with a formulated liquid. In some tests, flocculant, collector, and inorganic salts were introduced into the standard sample solution to mimic the chemical composition of process water in some flotation plants. The final solution (i.e., a mixture of formulated liquid and sample solution) was agitated at 180 rpm using a shaker incubator (TU-453, M.R.C) for 15 min, unless stated otherwise. The absorbance of the final solution was then measured immediately using a UV–Vis spectrometer (Cary 50, Varian) at an ambient room temperature, which was controlled at 23 Calibration curves were constructed to show the response of the analytical method to known concentrations of MIBC. Each calibration curve represents the best linear fit (based on the least-square method) to a set of experimental data. ANOVA (Analysis of variance) tests were conducted using Minitab17 to test differences between two or more means. Also, two tailed We also analyzed the measuring uncertainty of the present method by following the procedure described elsewhere ( Next, the 95% confidence deviation, The content of this section is as follows.  It was possible to plot the absorbance (   Note that the present analytical method would require much shorter time to complete a test compared to the colorimetric technique developed by Finch and co-workers. The injection of the formulated liquid can be automated, so the short test time of the present method makes it promising for the online application in plant conditions to provide feedback for process control. Residual flocculant is commonly found in coal flotation plant water circuits and some plants experience high flocculant returns in the flotation water stream (  The higher Δ One can speculate that at high ionic strengths, a certain type of electrolyte in the process water could interfere with the MIBC concentration measurement. However, the concentration of SO Diesel is a widely used collector in the coal flotation process, where diesel is adsorbed onto coal surface to render the latter more hydrophobic. Diesel is often added prior to addition of MIBC. Typically, the concentration of residual diesel in coal flotation plant water circuits is very low, less than 1 ppm. In the present work, we measured the Δ   Comparing the Δ To improve the measuring sensitivity of the present MIBC analysis technique, we explored the possibility of adding another reagent to suppress the interference of diesel. In the present work, we tested  In what follows, we investigated the effect of MIBC concentration on the Δ The MIBC concentrations of the calibration curves reported above ( Further experiments (not shown here) with even higher methanol concentrations (i.e., 35 v/v and 55 v/v %) were used to prepare pyrene stock solution II. It was found that the gradient of the curves were 4 and 5 times greater than that of 10 v/v % methanol. However, we observed that either the pyrene or The measuring accuracy of this method was assessed by following the procedure described in The measuring accuracy at 95% confidence level (E This level of accuracy can be considered sufficient for monitoring and controlling the MIBC concentration in a coking coal flotation process to improve operation smoothness and lower reagent costs. It could be further improved by optimising the reagent scheme of the formulated liquid and/or analytical procedure. This paper proposes a new tool for measuring MIBC concentration in coking coal flotation based on the specific interactions between MIBC molecules and the formulated liquid. In-plant tests of this tool are underway, and the results will be communicated in the next communication. A new analytical approach was developed to measure the MIBC concentration in the flotation and the water circuit through the coking coal processing plant. It is based on the specific interaction of the apolar group of MIBC with a formulated liquid comprising The present method shows high accuracy for measuring the concentration of MIBC, which is the most widely used flotation frother, with little interference from diesel, flocculants, or salts at typical concentrations in coking coal flotation plants. When the estimated concentration of MIBC in the sample solution was at a typical MIBC concentration range of Australian coking coal flotation practice (i.e., 7–11 ppm), the 95% confidence deviation of the present method was 1.2 ppm. The authors are grateful for the funding provided by the Australian Coal Association Research Program (ACARP Project C23035). The authors thank Dr. James Vaughan for allowing them to use the UV-Vis spectrometer and the shaker incubator in his laboratory.