Introduction
                  Distal radius fractures with both metaphyseal and diaphyseal comminution are commonly encountered injuries due to high-energy trauma. However, effectively treating patients with this disease remains challenging for the surgeon.
               
                  Hypothesis
                  The goal of this study was to evaluate the outcomes of minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis (MIPPO) technique for distal radius fractures with long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Nine patients with distal radius fractures involving long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution were treated with MIPPO from June 2011 to May 2012. Radiograph index, the range of motion of the wrist and forearm, grip strength, the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score were assessed at final follow-up. Additionally, time to bone healing, time to return to work or activity, and postoperative complications were also recorded.
               
                  Results
                  All nine fractures healed by 13±1.3 weeks postoperatively. At an average follow-up of 15.9±3.6 months, the radiographs revealed a mean radial inclination of 18.2±2.7°, a mean volar tilt of 10.7±3.2°, and a radial shortening of 2.3±1.0mm. Nine patients had excellent wrist function according to the DASH score, range of motion, and grip strength. Except one patient experienced delayed healing of the distal incision, no complications occurred. All patients resumed work or activity within 16.2±1.9 weeks.
               
                  Discussion
                  Volar MIPPO is a safe and effective surgical treatment method for distal radius fractures with long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution, with few potential complications.
               
                  Type of study/level of evidence
                  Therapeutic IV.Distal radius fractures with both metaphyseal and diaphyseal comminution are commonly encountered injuries as a result of high-energy trauma. These extensively comminuted fractures of the wrist complicate the proper reduction and restoration of anatomical alignment and thus remain a major clinical challenge for the surgeon. Currently, only a few treatment options have been entertained to treat these difficult fractures, including distraction plate fixation The minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis (MIPPO) technique is one of the widely recommended techniques in which division of the PQ muscle was not involved, but a long LCP was inserted through two small incisions made on the volar side of distal forearm In addition, with regard to skin incisions, Imatani et al. The purpose of this report was to describe this specific operative technique and to evaluate the clinical, radiographic, and functional outcomes of distal radius fractures with long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution in mainland Chinese patients. We hypothesize that volar MIPPO may be a safe and effective option for treating distal radius fractures with long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution. The study was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of local hospital. All patients gave informed consent to allow their wrist images, clinical outcomes, and radiography data to be used for publication. This retrospective study excluded patients presented with open fractures, simple distal radial fractures without long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution, and neurovascular injuries of the forearm. Nine patients who suffered closed displaced distal radius fractures with long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution at least 5 At a mean of 7.3 Postoperatively, neither a splint nor any other means were used to strengthen the fixation. Shoulder, elbow, and digit motions were encouraged at 2 or 3 days after surgery without any weight-bearing activities. All patients were followed with clinical and radiographic examination in 3- or 4-week intervals. When a callus appeared, the patients were asked to perform more active exercises. At the final follow-up, a different senior surgeon, who had not participated in the treatment of these patients, evaluated the outcomes as following: the bone healing time was determined by the presence of bridging calluses in 3 of the 4 cortices observed on the anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the radius. Delayed union was defined as lack of any healing on plain radiographs within four months. Nonunion was defined as lack of any healing on plain radiographs within six months; the degree of fracture deformity was assessed by measurements of radial inclination, volar tilt, and radial shortening based on the anteroposterior and lateral projection radiographs taken; the range of motion at the wrist and forearm (extension and flexion of the wrist joint, pronation and supination of the forearm) was measured by using a standard goniometer; grip strength was tested by using the Jamar dynamometer (Sammons Preston, IL, USA) and expressed as the percent of the contralateral uninjured side; the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) score was used to quantify disabilities related to the upper extremity, with a score ranging from 0 points (no disability) to 100 points (maximum disability); patient satisfaction was assessed by simply asking patients if they were satisfied with the result (yes/no); in addition, the operative time (min, recorded from the first skin incision to the last suture), radiation time (min, provided by the fluoroscopic apparatus for each procedure), blood loss (mL, estimated according to both the weight of blood on surgical swabs and the volume of flushing solution), complications, and the time to resumption of work were all recorded. All the patients underwent the MIPPO surgery successfully, with the average operative time of 69.6 This present study first reported the use of volar MIPPO via two small perpendicular incisions (2 The distinct concern with the use of MIPPO technique is damaging anatomical structures with the incision and the surgical approach, such as the radial artery, the median nerve, and the palmar cutaneous branch of the median nerve ( Compared with dorsal non-locked plating, radial–ulnar dual-column locked plating, and locked intramedullary fixation, the volar locked plating seemed to have higher bending stiffness, bending strength, and resistance to 5 In addition, the titanium plates are less heavy and bulky and, therefore, there is no need for plate removal in most cases, decreasing the related complications, such as wound infection This study has several limitations. First limitation of the current study is the small number of cases for evaluation of MIPPO procedure due to the relative rarity of metadiaphyseal fractures. Second limitation was the short follow-up period. The small sample size and short follow-up may jointly influence the statistics of complications. The last limitation is the lack of a control treatment with Henry approach. Volar MIPPO may be a safe and effective surgical treatment method for distal radius fractures with long-segment metadiaphyseal comminution. However, further study with increased number of patients, a control group, longer follow-up is still needed to verify the advantage of MIPPO. The authors declare that they have no competing interest.