The combination of adsorption on zeolites and vacuum ultraviolet (V-UV) irradiation was applied to the treatment of gaseous effluents containing volatile organic compounds (VOCs). A xenon-excimer (Xe2*) radiation source emitting at 172nm was employed and two types of zeolites (faujasite Y (DAY) and ZMS-5 (DAZ)) were tested in adsorption/irradiation cycles of three model VOC pollutants (1-butanol, benzene and toluene). A specific diffusion cell was used in dynamic experiments for producing air streams containing each VOC at chosen and stable concentrations. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses were performed on the solids after VOC saturation and irradiation. Important changes were detected in the properties of the DAY zeolite when using toluene as a pollutant. In particular, the Si/Al ratio was modified at the surface and in the framework of the zeolite, as a consequence of a rearrangement of the Al and Si atoms in the solid. In contrast, the DAZ zeolite retained its superficial and structural properties after V-UV treatment. In the case of 1-butanol, changes in the zeolite structure were negligible, and no change was observed in the zeolite in the case of benzene. Solid state NMR analysis confirmed these results and revealed that when the DAY zeolite saturated with toluene was irradiated at 172nm, changes in the shifts of Si and Al atoms took place, suggesting a possible interaction/reaction between the zeolite framework and the benzyl radical produced as a consequence of the toluene oxidation.Volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are major air pollutants coming largely from industrial processes. One of the procedures available for the treatment of gaseous effluents containing low levels of pollutants involves usually two-steps: adsorption of pollutants onto a porous material and regeneration of the adsorbent by pollutant degradation We previously reported In this work, we have investigated the effect of V-UV irradiation on the degradation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) contained in gaseous effluents and adsorbed on zeolites. 1-Butanol, benzene and toluene were used as models for aliphatic and aromatic pollutants, respectively. Two types of zeolites were employed as adsorbents: faujasite Y (DAY) and ZMS-5 (DAZ). Cycles of adsorption/irradiation were performed, using a xenon-excimer lamp as a V-UV (172 1-Butanol (99.5%), benzene (99%) and toluene (99%) were purchased from Aldrich, and used as received. The commercial zeolites used in this study were cylindrical pellets (diameter 2 The zeolites were characterized by the following methods: solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (solid state NMR), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), BET surface area measurements (BET) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) coupled with an EDX detector. Solid-state NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker Avance 400 spectrometer equipped with a 4 The XPS analyses were carried out using a Leybold–Heraeus commercial surface analysis apparatus (LHS 11), equipped with a single channel detector, and employing AlKα radiation (1486.6 The surface area and pore volume were measured by N The scanning electron microscope (JSM-840 A, JEOL) was operated at 20 Both adsorption and irradiation experiments were carried out in a continuous flow annular reactor (length: 15 The polluted air streams used in dynamic adsorption/irradiation experiments were generated with diffusion cells During the adsorption phase, the air stream containing the VOC at a chosen constant concentration passed through the fixed bed of zeolites in the photochemical reactor, while the lamp was off. Once the VOC breakthrough curve was totally described and adsorbent (zeolite) saturation completed (VOC concentration at the exit of the reactor is identical to the entry concentration), the shift from the adsorption to the irradiation/oxidation phase was accomplished by turning the lamp on. The temperature inside the reactor was approximately 40 Two adsorption/V-UV irradiation cycles were performed under a constant flow of an air stream containing a chosen and constant concentration (2000 The two adsorption/irradiation cycles in the case of toluene using the DAY zeolite as adsorbent are shown in Switching on the V-UV lamp induced a photo/thermodesorption process of toluene from the solid, leading to a significant increase of the toluene concentration in the gas phase for a short period of time ( After about 7 After 12 The evolution of toluene oxidative degradation was also followed by FT-IR analysis of the gaseous effluent at the reactor outlet. The result is shown in After the adsorption/V-UV irradiation cycles, the DAY pellets were strongly colored ( The most likely explanation of this result is that colored intermediates of the oxidative degradation of toluene remained physically trapped in the zeolite channels and could not be photolyzed and further oxidized. The zeolite could also be involved in the degradation process of toluene, In order to evaluate the role of the zeolite structure in the color changes, experiments were carried out with the same pollutant, using a different zeolite adsorbent (DAZ), in otherwise identical experimental conditions. The evolution of the toluene concentration in the gaseous effluent at the reactor outlet under irradiation at 172 The two adsorption/irradiation cycles of benzene, using the DAY zeolite as adsorbent, are shown in After about 8 The results obtained with the aromatic VOCs were compared with those for an aliphatic compound, 1-butanol, using the DAY zeolite as adsorbent. The first saturation of the DAY zeolite was reached after 240 During the second adsorption process, the re-saturation of the solid needed 152 The adsorbents were analyzed using different techniques for checking if changes in the zeolite structure might result from the exposure to V-UV irradiation at 172 In order to evaluate the effect of VOC adsorbed on the zeolite, solid state NMR analyses were performed on the adsorbent before and after saturation with VOC, as well as after irradiation at 172 Control experiments showed that V-UV irradiation of the zeolites (DAY and DAZ) at 172 Representative When the DAY zeolite was saturated with VOC, besides the signals assigned to the DAY original structure, new signals were observed, as expected: at 2.0 Clear changes appeared in all cases when the zeolite saturated with a VOC was irradiated at 172 The No change was observed in these spectra when the DAY zeolite was saturated with VOC, confirming that the VOC adsorption in the solid does not produce any change in its Al and Si structure. It also means that the VOC molecules trapped inside the zeolite (observed in the When DAY was saturated with benzene and irradiated at 172 Because the most pronounced changes were observed with toluene, solid state NMR analyses were performed with this compound using the DAZ zeolite. The original DAZ shows an The BET analyses for DAY and DAZ zeolites are shown in Concerning DAZ, the porous volume remained unchanged within experimental error, while the surface area decreased slightly. The NMR analyses of DAZ saturated with toluene and irradiated showed some residual VOC in the solid after irradiation. The BET results lead to the conclusion that the remaining toluene and/or oxidation products found in the DAZ after irradiation should be on the surface of the solid and not inside the structure. The results of the EDS analyses in the cases of the DAY and DAZ zeolites are shown in When DAY was saturated with toluene and irradiated, the ratio Si/Al decreased in comparison to the original DAY. As already observed in the NMR analyses, there was no change when DAY was irradiated in absence of pollutant. Adsorption of toluene might affect slightly the Si location in zeolite structure, as Zhu et al. have observed with a zeolite Na-Y Supplementary surface analyses (X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, XPS) were made in order to compare the Si/Al ratio at the surface (XPS) and inside the zeolites (EDS). The results of the XPS analyses in the cases of the DAY and DAZ zeolites are shown in In summary, the EDS and XPS results demonstrate that a zeolite structure rearrangement was taking place under irradiation in the presence of toluene. Some Si and Al atoms were changing their chemical characteristics and moving from their original area at the surface or in the framework of the zeolite. As already pointed out, this change was not observed without irradiation. In all the experiments described (Section when an air stream containing the VOC at a constant concentration of 2000 The photo/thermodesorption phenomenon, induced by switching on the lamp, led to an important increase of the VOC concentration in the gas phase ( The important difference in the irradiation times needed for VOC degradation in the case of toluene compare to benzene and 1-butanol may be due to basically two factors: the diffusion process through the solid and the desorption from the solid, not only of the original VOC but also of its oxidation products; and the interaction between the VOC (and eventually its oxidation products) and the zeolite framework that might be stronger for toluene. In fact, the π-electron system of the aromatic toluene ring interacts strongly with the Lewis acid extra-framework cation, whereas the methyl hydrogen atoms interact with the basic framework oxygen atoms Taking into account the larger porous volume of the DAY compared to DAZ, it is expected that the toluene will diffuse much better in the DAY and the CH The change in superficial and structural characteristics obtained with the DAY saturated with toluene and irradiated could be attributed to two possibilities: Some sites in the DAY zeolite are occupied by organic compounds as a result of the photolytic oxidation process of toluene or/and, There is some intrinsic change in the zeolite which modifies the original surface characteristics. Actually, both phenomena could occur at the same time and the oxygen molecule plays an important role in the overall oxidation process. V-UV irradiation has enough energy (695 In this case, the more labile C–H bonds in toluene are those from the CH The benzyl radical may undergo several reactions. It may be trapped by molecular oxygen to yield peroxyl radicals, which are key intermediates of the subsequent thermal reactions leading to the production of by-products ( In this case, the benzyl radical generated during irradiation of the DAY saturated with toluene may diffuse to the internal structure of the solid, forming a very stable complex benzyl radical–zeolite, which produces a change in the original structure of the zeolite. Apparently, this behavior is not happening with the DAZ. In the case of 1-butanol and benzene, both zeolites behave as a reservoir, where the pollutants are absorbed and later degraded by V-UV irradiation (V-UV photolysis), regenerating the adsorption capacity of the solids The physicochemical analyses corroborate the hypothesis of a reaction between the radical and DAY. The benzyl radical is probably bound to the Al atom of the solid structure, in agreement with the solid state NMR results, showing that changes occurred in the chemical shifts of some Al and Si atoms. In the original DAY, the Al atoms are four-coordinated and after toluene saturation and irradiation, some six-coordinated Al atoms were found, which could be attributed to the presence of a complex structure produced when the benzyl radical reacted with the zeolite framework. This reaction induced also an effect on the Si atoms shifts, which initially were in Q3 sites and after irradiation new Q4 sites were detected. The results obtained in this work show the possibility to treat gaseous effluents containing VOCs by employing two types of zeolites as solid reservoirs (DAY and DAZ) and using V-UV irradiation at 172 Depending on their stability, the radicals produced during VOCs irradiation could diffuse inside the solid and react with the zeolite framework, changing its properties. The diffusion rate of VOCs could control the efficiency of the degradation process, since the V-UV radiation at 172 Thus, although the combination of the adsorption process and the V-UV photolysis may be of advantage to treat pollutant containing air streams, the pollutant characteristics as well as the adsorbent properties have to be taken into account, as modification of the reservoir/adsorbent solid structure could decrease the adsorption capacity of the solid for following treatment. The authors thank Instituto Venezolano del Petroleo (Intevep) for performing all BET, SEM and XPS analyses, and are particularly grateful to Dr. Alfredo Viloria, Luis Castillo, Ismael Gonzalez and Edgar Cañizalez from PDVSA-Intevep.