The effects of ultrasonic treatment on the cloudiness (cloud level and cloud stability), sedimentation and storage of apple juice were studied at various amplitude levels (50 and 100μm), pulse durations (50% and 100%), and temperatures (40, 50 and 60°C). Ultrasound at high amplitude, temperature, and time minimized the coarse particles in the apple juice and increased its cloudiness quality. The ultrasonic treatment increased the cloudiness level up to 16.9 times and the cloud stability up to 9.8 times. Up to 58% of solid particles causing sedimentation were suspended after the treatment. Even after storage for four months, the apple juice remained cloudy without any additional processing. Total yeasts and molds were completely inactivated (<1 logcfu/mL) by the ultrasonic treatment. These findings suggest that thermosonication could be considered a good alternative to conventional treatment in order to achieve the desired cloudiness in cloud apple juice processing.
               
                  Industrial relevance
                  The article demonstrates some interesting results in using ultrasonic treatments on cloud quality parameters in apple juice. The ultrasonic treatments applied at high temperature improve dramatically cloud value and cloud stability, and decrease sedimentation level of the juice. The treatments also completely inactivate yeasts and molds in the juice. Thus thermosonication could be considered as a good alternative to achieve the desired cloudiness in apple juice processing.Apple ( Cloudy apple juice is rich in bioactive compounds, whereas clear apple juice, produced by removing the bioactive compounds, is more popular among consumers. Cloudy apple juice is produced by direct pressing of the mash without the addition of enzymes. It has pulp particles dispersed in a serum constituted by macro-molecules such as pectin and proteins ( The major quality parameters of cloud apple juices are their cloudiness and microbial safety. The cloudy properties of apple juices are a decisive factor in consumer acceptance of apple juice and the prevention of yeast and mold growth in acidic juice is important on health grounds. The cloud stability of apple juice is generally related to the diameters of the particles in the juice. Particle sizes above 0.5 Over the past few years, it is observed that modifications in the food processing techniques depend on increased demands. The novel techniques change chemical, physical and organoleptic properties of food. Ultrasonic treatment is a major novel technique used in the food industry for numerous processes, such as cooking, cutting, emulsification/homogenization, crystallization, extraction and microbial inactivation. ( The objective of this study was to determine the effect of sonication on the cloud quality of apple juice under different treatment temperatures, amplitudes, and pulse durations. The cloud quality was determined using the cloud value, cloud stability, and sedimentation. The effect of ultrasonic treatments on the particle size and yeast and mold activity in the apple juice was also studied. Apples ( An ultrasonic processor (UP400S, Hielscher, Germany) with a 22 The apple juice samples were centrifuged at 760 The apple juice (100 Three drops of apple juice were dropped on the lam and dried in an oven at 60 The apple juice samples were serially diluted with 0.1% sterile peptone water, and 0.1 Sensorial properties of the untreated, pasteurized, and ultrasound-treated apple juice samples were determined by a panel of 12 laboratory staff members. For the sensorial analysis, the ultrasound treatment was applied to apple juice samples at amplitudes of 50 and 100 Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 15.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA). Variance analysis (ANOVA) was applied to determine the differences between the experimental runs. The cloud value and stability of the cloud apple juice are major quality parameters. The cloud stability indicates how much apple juice is stable after centrifugation at 4200 The ultrasonic treatment enhanced the cloud value and stability of the apple juice, with the treatment temperature ( In this study, the treatment temperature played a very important role in the cloud level and stability. The ultrasonic treatments of apple juice at 60 Many studies reported that a high temperature enhances the effect of ultrasonic treatment ( Particles larger than 1 After storage for 24 As reported previously, various methods can be used to minimize the large particles in apple juice and enhance the cloud stability during cloudy apple juice production ( The effect of ultrasound at amplitude of 100 In theoretical, the cloudy stability of the juice after centrifuge denotes the cloudiness of apple juice after storage for one year. The size of particles affects the precipitation of large molecules and cloud stability depending on time and gravity. However, other molecules and a change in particle charge also influence the cloud stability ( To determine storage-related changes in the physical appearance of the apple juice treated with ultrasound, the juice was placed in bottles of about 200 Ultrasonic treatment applied at 60 The acoustic cavitation may explain the inactivation of the yeasts and molds. In another study, lysis of cells was attributed to acoustic cavitation to disrupting cellular, structural, and functional components by generating intracellular cavitation and mechanical shocks ( The sensorial properties (color & appearance, odor, flavor, cloudiness, and general acceptability) of the apple juice samples are shown in The panelists indicated that the untreated apple juice had the best aroma and flavor. Also they scored the parameters negatively affected after the ultrasonic treatment at 60 The present study reports the advantages and disadvantages of ultrasonic treatment at different temperatures, times, and pulse durations. The results clarify some previous uncertainties surrounding the quality parameters of apple juice treated with ultrasound technology. The treatment temperature of the ultrasound had a very important effect on the cloud level, cloud stability, sedimentation, and particle size of the apple juice. The cavitation intensity increased with a rise in temperature, and the most striking results were obtained at 60 The ultrasonic treatment significantly enhanced the cloud quality of the apple juice. The cloudy quality was good even after four months of storage. According to the results of the microscopic analysis, the ultrasound increased the cloud level and the stability of the juice by grinding coarse particles in the juice and created a stable suspension. Thus, the physical appearance of the apple juice increased. Based on the results obtained, ultrasonic treatment, either alone or with other systems, seems suitable for the production of cloudy apple juice. However, more research is needed to determine the effect of thermosonication on sensorial and functional properties of apple juice. This research was supported by the Research Fund of