Planar anode-supported solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) typically show curvature behavior. The cell is warped due to the mismatch in the properties of the cell layers during fabrication process. Scaling up anode supported cells for industrial and commercial applications increases the warpage due to geometrical consideration. In this work, the curvature radius and maximum deflection of small cells are compared to large cells to gain a better insight into the warpage behavior in the scaling up process. The obtained results show that the curvature radius significantly increases by increasing cell size, whereas with respect to geometrical consideration, scaling up should result in no radius change. Also, the interaction between cell size and applied load (during sintering) has been investigated. The curvature radius generally increases with increasing total load density and cell size. The influence of total load density decreases for the large cells and the influence of cell size decreases with increasing total load density. Furthermore, an expression is proposed for the estimation of the curvature radius in the scaling up process by taking into account the effect of size and applied load and interaction between them.Solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs) are energy conversion devices that convert chemical energy of fuels into electrical energy. Solid oxide fuel cells have attracted great attention due to high energy conversion efficiency, fuel flexibility and low pollution. Two major configuration designs for SOFC are currently being developed commercially: planar and tubular designs. Planar SOFCs have a number of advantages, including high power density and low cost fabrication Fabricating a flat anode-supported cell is very important for successful stack assembly and commercialization of planar SOFC technology Small-size cells (“button cells”) are used to conduct preliminary studies for SOFC research. Using button cells to test the effect of various parameters on the cell performance is preferred because it is cost effective and quick to get many tests done in a short amount of time. Although small-size cell data are obviously useful, it is necessary to enlarge the cell size for the large stack output The purpose of the present work is to provide a better insight into the warpage behavior of the planar anode-supported cell in the scaling up process. Small cells have been fabricated by water-based tape casting and co-sintering method. The curvature radius and maximum deflection of these cells have been measured as a criterion for the warpage behavior and the results have been compared with the large cells. It has been shown that the curvature radius greatly changes with increasing the cell size, even when all the effective parameters (e.g. component thickness, material composition, sintering scheduling) are kept constant. Effect of changes in size and applied load and interaction between them on the warpage behavior has also been studied. An expression has been proposed to estimate the curvature radius for the scaling-up process. Furthermore, effect of cell shape on the warpage behavior of small cells has been investigated. Commercial 8YSZ (FCM, USA) powder with a surface area of 6.7 m The thicknesses and dimensions of 7 fabricated half cells are reported in The surface of fabricated half-cells was scanned by an optical 3-D scanner (COMET LƎD, Steinbichler Optotechnik, Germany). The Cartesian coordinates of about 400,000 points from the surface of each sample were collected and analyzed using GEOMAGIC STUDIO 2012 software. For each half cell, the best sphere was fitted to the collected data and the radius of the fit sphere is considered as the curvature radius of the half cell. Also for each sample, a flat plane was fitted to the data and the distance between the highest and lowest points of the sample from the fitted plane was considered as the maximum deflection of half cells. Assuming that the curvature of cell is uniform and curvature radius is constant for any cross-section ( Many investigations on the cell warpage For thorough investigation of the effect of size, warpage behavior of 7 small cells have been measured and the results are shown in As expected, maximum deflection increased with increasing cell size. There is good agreement between previous studies that the maximum deflection increases as the cell size increases The expression (2) also shows that the maximum deflection increases with an increase in cell size, when other parameters are kept constant. Nevertheless, results of These findings are supported by the results reported in the literature. Using expression (1) and converting deflection data The main reason for this dependency may be attributed to the cell weight (influence of gravity). It has been shown that the gravity can have an important effect on the warpage After optimization of various parameters through fabrication and testing of button cells, two parameters change in scaling-up process; size and applied load during sintering. In the previous section, the size dependence of warpage has been discussed. In order to gain a better insight into the warpage behavior in the scaling up process, Comparing different rows in The data in Where Using data from the fabricated bottom cell, one can calculate The warpage behavior of small cells has been demonstrated in The curvature radius and maximum deflection of small cells are given in Size dependence of the warpage for planar anode-supported solid oxide fuel cell has been investigated. It has shown that the curvature radius of cells significantly changes with increasing cell size, when all other parameters are kept unchanged and one cannot assume that under identical conditions, the curvature radius for different cell sizes is equal. The effect of size on the curvature radius may be attributed to the gravity effect. Study of effect of cell size and applied load (during sintering) and interaction between them show that the curvature radius generally increases with increasing total load density and size (weight) of samples. The effect of total load density decreases for the large cells and the effect of cell size decreases with increasing total load density. Based on these observations, an expression is proposed to estimate the curvature radius in the scaling up process considering the effect of size and total load density and interaction between them. The warpage behavior of cells changed from cylindrical to spherical with decreasing cell size. The effect of cell shape on the warpage for button cells was noticeable and circular cells were flatter than square cells and square cells were flatter than rectangular cells. This work was financially supported by the