In this paper, UCS of limestone rock was determined by indentation testing on rock fragments. The size of the fragments was in the range of 2–5mm, which is within the size range of drill cuttings. Here, scatter of the data was investigated by calculating the coefficient of variation that showed the size dependency of the conventional indentation parameters; Indentation Modulus (IM) and Critical Transition Force (CTF). Thus, it is recommended that the results of indentation tests should be normalized by the fragment size and presented in the form of Normalized Indentation Modulus (IMn) and Normalized Critical Transition Force (CTFn). Regression analysis was carried out to show the relationship between the IMn or CTFn and the UCS. Linear and exponential regression provided reasonable correlation coefficients of higher than 0.74 and 0.85, respectively. The proposed empirical equations for estimation of the intact rock UCS from the normalized indentation indices were verified using independent data from limestone rocks not used in developing the correlations. The outcome was a strong agreement (R~1.00) between the estimated and measured UCS. Based on the statistical analysis, minimum number of indentation test was determined for random size samples. It is suggested that indentation testing will be carried out using uniform fragment sizes to reduce the required number of indentation tests.Mechanical properties of rocks, especially the UCS and E, have significant impact on the design of rock engineering projects ( Conventionally, two well-known techniques are used to obtain rock mechanical properties: (a) standard laboratory tests on rock cores, e.g. Although these methods are reliable for obtaining rock strength, practical limitations such as the costs involved, unavailability of rock cores and well logs in some intervals and the time required for delivery of results make them restricted ( Empirical correlations between rock mechanical properties and easily obtainable and reliably measured parameters such as porosity and density ( measurement of P and S wave velocities by Pulsed Ultrasonic on Cuttings (PUC) ( laboratory test on reconstructed core from rock cuttings ( correlation between mineralogical or textural characteristics and mechanical properties ( indentation test on drill cuttings as a laboratory technique ( The laboratory indentation test uses small rock fragments in the range of 2–5 This paper presents a new method for interpretation of indentation test results that leads to a new correlation between the normalized parameters of Indentation Modulus (IM A total of 9 limestone boulders were collected from various types of limestone from outcropped rocks of Iranian oil fields. Boulders S1–S6 (UCS from 280 A number of core plugs were drilled out of the samples for conventional UCS testing (see Indentation test measures the force and displacement of an indenter while penetrating into a rock fragment until it breaks apart. A cylindrical flat-end indenter stylus with the diameter of 1 The results are shown in the form of load versus penetration, similar to the conventional stress–strain curves. A typical curve, illustrated by In Section 3.1, the results of the conventional indentation indices are presented which indicate size dependency of the results. The indentation indices were normalized to decrease the size dependency of the indices when testing samples containing fragments of different sizes. An arithmetical average value for normalized indentation indices (IM A statistical analysis was performed to determine the minimum number of rock fragments required for a reliable assessment of the indentation indices and to allow the size dependency analysis. The number of data points required for determining a mean representative value in rock mechanical problems is a function of sample heterogeneity, sample sizes and scatter of the results. An advantage of the coefficient of variation is its independency on the units of measurement. The other important factor for determining the minimum number of samples is the precision index ( Combination of Eqs.  For the indentation test, different researchers suggested different numbers of indentation tests in order to compute an average value; A total of about 220 indentation tests were carried out on 6 specimen groups of limestones, each containing around 35 rock fragments. Macroscopic and microscopic residual imprints of the indenter and post failure fractures are presented in IM varied from 2425 CTF was between 290 CV CV The CV To illustrate the effect of specimen size, a total of 40 load-penetration curves of Sample S1 are presented in The sizes of all fragments in each specimen group were measured and plotted against the corresponding IM and CTF, which confirmed the size dependency of the indentation indices ( Statistical approach was used to determine the required number of tests to obtain an acceptable CV Note that the required number of tests varies in relation to the importance of the investigations. Larger number of tests is required to achieve a higher precision index. The number of fragments in this investigation satisfies the Regarding to the number of tests carried out in this investigation and guides on Generally, possible factors causing scattering of results in a specimen group can be the size of fragments, heterogeneity, fragment microstructure, diameter and thickness of disk, number of fragments in a specimen group, and the mechanical properties of resin. The last 3 parameters were kept constant in all these tests to minimize their influence on the test results. The number of fragments in a specimen group can directly influence the indentation parameters. However, their effects can be minimized when considering a reasonable precision index based on the project importance. Using statistical methods for determining the required number of tests, results in a representative population and reliable assessment of the mean value of indentation parameters. Based on the findings in this investigation, the fragment size had the greatest effect. Therefore, we suggest normalizing the indentation indices by the fragment size to reduce the size effect. The obtained IM and CTF were normalized using Eqs. Linear regression for: To verify Eqs. The laboratory UCS of Sample S7–S9 was plotted along with the correlation curves of It is to be noted that the UCS of samples used for developing the correlation equations was in the range of 30–280 We used the indentation testing of rock fragments for determining indentation indices that can be employed to estimate the uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of rocks. The results of indentation indices are size dependent and thus we recommend using the normalized indentation indices for determining the UCS and doing indentation test on fragments of approximately the same size. Correlation coefficient of the normalized indentation modulus (IM The proposed correlations were verified using the normalized indentation indices of three other limestone samples that had not been used in developing the correlations. Results showed that the correlation coefficient between the estimated and measured UCS was near 1.00. Obviously, the near perfect match in this case is accidental and such a close match should not be generally expected. The strong correlation between indentation indices and UCS, verification results and simplicity of indentation testing indicate great promise for real-time rock strength and borehole stability assessments. It should be noted that the proposed correlations are valid only for the limestone rocks with rock fragment sizes between 2 and 5