Microwaves are shown to provide higher heating rates, however, the destructive interference of propagating waves leads to poor heating performance for specific lengths of samples. Enhanced processing rates for all length scales due to microwave incidence would be important for material processing and current work on discrete material processing involving intermediate air layers with microwave incidence attempts to fill the gap. Simulation studies involve electric field, microwave power and temperature which are obtained based on microwave propagation and energy balance equations. A preliminary investigation on average power absorption within beef (highly lossy) and bread (low dielectric loss) samples vs sample thickness exhibits a few local minima of average power which forms the basis of investigation on the role of discrete samples. The thickness of air layer plays a significant role to dramatically alter the interference of waves and power absorption within each sample layer. It is observed that three discrete sample layers (case 3) exhibit larger heating rate than that within the continuous sample (case 1) for specific sample thicknesses. In general, case 2 samples (with one intermediate air layer) show lesser power or heating enhancement in the presence of either one side or both sides microwave incidence. Based on two factors, ‘large heating rate’ and ‘optimal thermal runaway’, the efficient heating strategy may be derived for both high and low lossy food substances.Due to the volumetric heating effects, microwaves are largely used in various processing applications involving heating, drying, chemical reactions, heat and mass transfer, oil extractions, food processing, nanomaterials processing and many more (  A few earlier works on enhanced microwave power absorption involve theoretical studies on maxima on microwave power. The maxima in microwave power are often termed as ‘resonances’ which occur due to constructive interference of propagating waves within samples ( Introduction of the concept on discrete samples was first proposed by Analysis of electric field, microwave power absorption and temperature distributions was carried out in the presence of uniform plane waves where electric and magnetic fields are perpendicular to the direction of propagation. A sample incident with microwave radiation is schematically illustrated in The total thickness of the continuous/discrete sample (along the Microwaves are assumed to be incident normally on the opposite faces of the slab as shown in The transmitted electric field ( The power absorption in the Due to volumetric absorption of microwave power, every point of materials acts as a heat source and the temperature profile evolves with time due to a combined effect of heat generation and conductive heat transport. Temperature characteristics are predicted via solving energy balance equation with the assumption of materials exhibiting constant thermal properties in the temperature range. A one-dimensional heat transport model is adequate as the thickness of the sample–air assembly is assumed to be very small compared to lateral dimensions (along Note that microwave power, Using the following dimensionless variables: Dimensionless form of the energy balance equation in the presence of microwave, Eq. Electric field (Eqs. Thermal and dielectric properties of beef and bread samples are given in In all cases, the sample is exposed to total radiation of intensity 3 Analysis of microwave power absorption within continuous beef and bread samples is carried out for situations involving (i) microwave incidence at the left face of the sample (type 1) and (ii) equal microwave incidence at both the faces (type 2). Note that intensity of total microwave incidence for both types of incidences is 3 Continuous food sample (case 1) with a specific sample thickness corresponding to any specific length (      The first column of A few interesting interference patterns for traveling waves are observed for discrete samples. It is observed that there is a significant jump in amplitudes of both transmitted and reflected waves within the air layer and the amplitudes of traveling waves attain greater magnitudes within the air layer than that within discrete food samples. It is also found that both the traveling waves remain spatially invariant within the air layer for cases 2 and 3. Although amplitudes are quite larger within the air layer, the traveling waves are in destructive interference and the minima in amplitudes of the electric field occur at the center of air layers for cases 2 and 3. On the other hand, maxima in amplitudes of electric fields occur at both the left and right faces in spite of smaller amplitudes of traveling waves which are in constructive interference. It is interesting to note that evolution of another maxima in amplitude of the electric field at the left face of the sample occurs due to the intermediate air layer or layers for cases 2 and 3. The second column of The last column of  The first column of The second column of The last column of  The first column of The second column of The third column of  The first column of The second column of The third column of  The first column of The second column of Temperature difference and heating rates in various food layers for both sides incidence with   Simulation studies have been carried out for spatial distributions of microwave power and temperature with cases 1–3 and it is found that case 3 exhibits larger power absorption and temperature for specific sample lengths with suitable sample ratios for the bread samples. Enhancement of spatial temperature and power absorption within discrete bread samples can be explained following a similar manner for the studies of beef samples and thus detailed discussions on spatial distributions for bread samples are omitted for brevity of the paper. However, influence of discrete bread samples on temperature difference (  The first column of The second column of Temperature difference and heating rates in various food layers for both sides incidence with Efficient microwave heating is based on enhanced microwave power absorption with optimal thermal runaway, which has been studied for various materials in this study. Earlier works found that microwave power absorption within materials is quite less for specific length scales of materials and current work is aimed to enhance power absorption when a continuous sample is replaced with discrete samples which are separated by air layers. Test materials are considered as high and low lossy substances (beef and bread). In general, materials exhibit a series of minima and maxima on average power absorption over entire length scale (up to 5–10 Effective average power for type 1 incidence is larger than that for type 2 incidence either for case 2 or for case 3 with both beef and bread samples. Enhancement of effective average power within beef samples is found to be 3–4 times of average power within continuous samples at Spatial distributions show multiple maxima of power and temperature for case 2 or case 3 sample. As a consequence, local hot spot may be a side effect especially for case 3 and test cases are also shown to demonstrate the controlled heating scenarios with enhanced convective heat transfer coefficients at the wall. The heating efficiency also depends on degree of thermal runaway ( Current analysis demonstrates that the enhancement of microwave power absorption occurs for multiple discrete beef and bread samples in the presence of uniform plane waves with customized microwave oven. These simulation studies may be useful to be guidelines for experimental studies of microwave heating in custom ovens.  Authors would like to thank Anonymous reviewers for critical comments which improved quality of the paper.