Water fractions derived from biofuel production contain oxygenated hydrocarbons that can be converted by aqueous-phase reforming (APR) into hydrogen. As a result, the product efficiency of biorefineries may improve. However, the hydrothermal and high pressure operating conditions of APR limit the reaction kinetics, thermodynamics and catalyst stability. To overcome these limitations, an active and durable catalyst should be developed to selectively convert oxygenated hydrocarbons into hydrogen. For this study, methanol was selected as a model compound. Nickel-based catalysts with dopants such as copper and cerium and different supports were tested for the APR of methanol. The results revealed enhanced performance of doped catalysts in comparison to monometallic materials, and the effect of supports improved in the order α-Al2O3 < β-SiC < ZrO2 < γ-Al2O3. Accordingly, NiCe/γ-Al2O3 exhibited the highest values of methanol conversion and hydrogen yield. These results satisfied the target of this study to develop an active and hydrogen-selective catalyst and proved the suitability of cerium-doped nickel on alumina to convert methanol into hydrogen.Biofuels can be produced from lignocellulosic biomass and waste streams of biomass processing Organic waters derived from biorefineries constitute a complex mixture of oxygenated hydrocarbons challenging to process. Therefore, model compounds are frequently used as feedstock to study APR. Glycerol The water fractions derived from the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to biofuels have received slight consideration as APR feedstock. The number of studies on the APR of methanol and other model compounds found in those waters is scarce. Published research on the APR of methanol over nickel-based catalyst is limited to Ni Sn-Raney To find an active nickel-based catalyst for the APR of methanol to selectively produce hydrogen is the intended outcome of this study. For that purpose, nickel and nickel promoted with copper and cerium were supported on β-SiC, Al Nickel and bimetallic combinations of nickel and copper or cerium supported on porous silicon carbide and metal oxides, and Pt/γ-Al For the wet impregnation (WI in The metal content of fresh catalysts was determined by atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) and/or X-ray fluorescence (XRF). The AAS analyses were conducted for the catalyst supported on β-SiC. Samples of 0.2 g were first dissolved in HNO The surface properties of pure supports and fresh catalysts were determined from nitrogen physisorption data. The adsorption and desorption isotherms were obtained by a MicromeriticsTristar 3000 device. Prior to the physisorption, catalyst samples of approximately 0.5 g were degassed overnight at 300 °C under helium flow. The BET method was used to calculate the surface area. Pore volume and diameter were calculated by the BJH method with data from the desorption-isotherm. Surface species were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) in a PANalytical X'Pert PRO MPD Alpha-1 diffractometer with Cu Kα1 radiation (45 kV and 40 mA). The X-ray scanning was performed in continuous scan mode in the range 10°–90° (2θ) and a step size of 0.0131°. In addition, the crystallite diameter of nickel was estimated using the Scherrer equation based on the peak broadening of the most intense NiO peak of fresh catalysts. The performance of the catalysts listed in The outlet streams were sampled every 20 min for approximately 3 h. The gaseous and liquid products were analysed online and offline respectively by gas chromatography (GC). The gases were analysed in a HP5890 Series II gas chromatograph equipped with TCD (Thermal Conductivity Detector) and FID (Flame Ionization Detector), and a Carboxen 1000 column. An Agilent technologies 7890A GC System equipped with a FID and a HP-INNOWax Polyethylene Glycol column was used to analyse the liquid products. The results presented in this study were obtained after 150 min of reaction, when the reaction reached an initial stability. The catalytic performance was evaluated in terms of carbon yield to carbon containing gases (Eq. The nominal and measured amounts of metals in the fresh catalysts are summarized in The textural properties of fresh catalysts and pure supports are summarized in X-ray diffractograms of pure β-SiC and its metal-impregnated forms are shown in  In accordance with the ZrO Scherrer equation (the original reference can be found in Ref.  The APR of methanol yielded no liquid products. Unreacted methanol was the only compound observed in the analysis of outlet liquids. The compounds detected in the gas analyses were H The α-alumina and β-silicon carbide-supported catalysts exhibited low CtG and hydrogen yields around 1% ( As presented in Section The values of CtG reached 6.5% and 2.7% over NigAl and NiZr respectively, whereas 1.2% was obtained over PtAl. In spite of its high surface area (Section In spite of the reported low selectivity and stability of nickel-based catalysts under hydrothermal conditions, they are traditionally applied in APR due to their high activity  β-SiC is defined as mechanically strong, thermally stable, and with chemical and oxidation resistance This work aimed at finding an active and hydrogen-selective catalyst for methanol aqueous-phase reforming. High surface area catalysts, such as γ-alumina-supported catalysts, exhibit superior performance compared to catalysts with lower surface area. The addition of Cu or Ce to the Ni-based catalysts enhances their activity. Copper improves the hydrogen selectivity, whereas cerium additionally promotes carbon yield and hydrogen yield. Cerium-promoted nickel on γ-alumina proved to be a suitable catalyst for APR of methanol to produce hydrogen. Therefore, NiCe/γ-Al The authors thank Prof. Klaus Hellgardt and Prof. Leon Lefferts, members of the scientific advisory board of the AQUACAT project, for their guidance and support, and Prof. Riikka Puurunen for her input and valuable comments on the manuscript. Additionally, we are grateful to Aleksi Rinta-Paavola for his involvement in the preparation and characterization of catalyst. This work was funded by