The delamination phenomenon is one of the major failure mechanisms in composite materials formed by the stacking of successive layers. The fracture mode that has been studied the least within this phenomenon is mode III, due to the difficulty its simulation involves. A novel test device is presented in this paper that allows laminated composites to be subjected to this mode of loading. Characterization tests were carried out on two materials with different matrices in order to analyse the influence of the type of matrix in the fracture behaviour under mode III-fracture. Furthermore, two analytical models adapted to this test methodology have been used for the determination of the value of the energy release rate for this mode of loading in both materials. The load was applied at different distances from the front of the notch, this being another parameter that was analyzed.
                  From the results obtained it follows that the device used in this work allows a dominant mode III and that this result holds for different points of load application studied.In a laminated composite material consisting of practically homogenous laminae, the main damage macromechanisms are the initiation and propagation of cracks between layers. Separation along the interface of the layers of material is known as delamination. The growth of delamination leads to a significant reduction in the strength and rigidity of the element, which can produce the collapse and catastrophic failure of the structure. Crack propagation can occur in three failure modes. This paper focuses on mode III failure, also known as tearing mode failure, when the shear stress moves the lips of the crack in a parallel direction to the crack front, in perpendicular to crack growth Numerous papers have been published on this fracture mode using different loading devices, even several mode III methods were discussed by Ge et al. The Split Cantilever Beam (SCB) test The Edge Crack Torsion (ECT) test Another of the methods that have been used is the Anti-Clastic Plate Bending (ACPB) test, initially developed by Farshad and Flüeler Yoshikara A new test method (6ECT) has recently been developed based on modifications to the conventional ECT method Davidson and Sediles Finally, Johnston and Davidson In this paper a novel testing device for testing composite materials in mode III is presented and its reliability is checked using a 3D video correlation system. Also two analytical models has been developed and used for the determination of the value of the energy release rate. A valid test device has been designed to cause delamination of the composite under pure mode III fracture, which is not achieved with the other aforementioned SCB, MSCB and ECT devices. The device ( The load is applied to the test specimen via a load-block (7) fixed to a linear bearing (4) that moves along a guide rail. The guide rail is fixed to the clamp (1), which is in turn coupled to the actuator of the test machine. The load-block includes two small cylinders of 2 By means of this arrangement of elements, it is possible to regulate the point of application of the load on the specimen by simply sliding the load block (7) along the longitudinal guide rail (3), making the cylinder (8) which transmits the load coincide at the desired point “a  For the calculation of the energy release rate, under mode III fracture a classical methodology is based in the compliance method I is applied: The geometry of the specimen used is shown in For adaptation of the classical formulation, has been considered that the device used restricts the transverse movement and the turns of the lower half of the specimen and that the effect of shear may be representative. So the effects of bending moment and shear generated during loading of the specimen were considered for calculating the transverse displacement of the upper half of the specimen. Moreover, two different formulations for calculating the displacement of the point of load application were used in order to analyse the possible influence of warping of the straight sections of the specimen during the loading: Timoshenko short beams (considering warpage of the section) and the Classical theory of bending for long beams (without warping of the section). It should be noted that the device and test equipment used allows the application of some axial load which limits, significantly, the possibility of warping of the straight sections in the tip of delamination and along its length. The energy release rates used are: According to the Timoshenko beam theory, the total displacement is Two types of composite materials were used. One of the materials is made from Hexply® 8552 prepreg epoxy resin tape as the matrix and HexTow® AS4 high resistance and damage tolerance unidirectional carbon fibre reinforcement, marketed under the name Hexply® AS4/8552 RC34 AW196. The other material is made from Hexply® 3501-6 prepreg epoxy resin tape as the matrix and high strength and HexTow® AS4 high resistance and damage tolerance unidirectional carbon fibre reinforcement, marketed under the name Hexply® AS4/3501-6 RC37 AW190. DCB specimens were used for the static characterization of delamination under mode III fracture. These specimens are made from a carbon fibre laminated composite with unidirectional reinforcement. They are uniform rectangular specimens, of thickness h and width b, with a non-adherent artificial crack initiator of length The laminate used in the tests was symmetrical, with an even number of unidirectional layers. The laminate is composed of 32 plies at an orientation of 0° with respect to the carbon fibre reinforcement, in which an anti-adherent insert 10 Length (L): 160–200 Width (b): 10 Thickness (h): 6 Length of initial delamination ( Total length of the crack initiation insert ( The testing equipment used was a walter The tests were performed on specimens with different initial crack lengths, The static tests under mode III loading were carried out as per the previously described procedure. The resistance to interlaminar fracture under mode III loading was calculated using the aforementioned theories, namely the Timoshenko beam theory for the behaviour of short beams (considering warping of the section) and the Euler-Bernoulli or classical beam theory for the bending of long beams (without warping of the section). The results for the energy release rate, G The values of the above table are represented in Similarly, The values of the above table are represented in It should also be noted that the lowest energy release rate value was always obtained for the material with the 8552 matrix. This matrix is made with the aim of obtaining a high level of toughness. This has been demonstrated in the case of mode I fracture One of the important issues that were raised during this work was to determine the influence of the field of stresses and strains, assuming elastic behaviour of the material, generated in the front of delamination in the vertical and longitudinal direction. In order to minimize the influence of stress and strain concentration at the crack front we have followed different strategies: On the one hand, it has been considered that the possible shear stress in the longitudinal direction of the laminate would create a relatively important part of mode II. In order to avoid it, the testing device allows free movement of the specimen in the longitudinal direction. Moreover, the possible warping or vertical movement of the sample during the test also would create a shear stress. It would cause a certain component in mode I, (separation in the vertical direction from the lips of the specimen). So the designed device avoids this warping in the loading part of the sample while the load in the specimen is applied in a point with a single loading roller. On the other hand, a study of the displacement field generated during the testing process was made from the experimental point of view for different specimens and different cracks lengths. This work let to identify the active components of tensor deformation using a video digital image correlation equipment, see In order to validate the proposed methodology, based on the consideration that during the tests carried out with the device shown previously ( Analyzing the displacement field determined, using the explained methodology, the ratios of the different fracture modes for several lengths of delamination were obtained and shown in In summary, from the analysis of displacement field in the fracture zone, the average values of the percentages of the components of each fracture mode of total energy release rate, G It can be concluded from the experimental study that the test devices and the methodology developed in this paper to characterize composite materials subjected to the process of delamination under mode III fracture loading are both suitable and ensure initiation of the process under mode III. The combination of two actuators in the test equipment, one linear and the other angular, provides a high degree of reliability in the results by preventing longitudinal warping of the specimen, while at the same time simplifying the test method compared to other current methodologies. The type of specimen used (DCB) is suitable for characterizing the material under mode III fracture. The formulas for calculating the energy release rate under mode III fracture loading applied in this study are considered to provide a valid value for this parameter which is in keeping with those obtained in other research studies on these materials using different test methodologies or by means of numerical modelling. The most conservative calculation formula and hence the one that is considered more suitable from the point of view of safety and the testing methodology used with restriction of the warping of the straight sections is the one developed from classical beam theory for the bending of long beams. For both materials, the length of the insert initiating the delamination process does not have a significant influence from a certain value onward. The energy release rate under mode III fracture may hence be considered independent of the crack length employed. Of the two materials studied in this paper, the one with a more fragile matrix, i.e. AS4/3501-6, is the one that provides higher values of fracture toughness under this loading mode. The same behaviour was observed in mode II. The variations in results are relatively low compared to those usually obtained for carbon fibre-reinforced composite materials. The authors are grateful for financial funding from Spain’s “