The effect of electrospun chitosan-based nanofibers (CH) and thymol-loaded electrospun chitosan-based nanofibers (TCH) were investigated in terms of stability of unstable B vitamin complex during cold storage period. Scanning Electron Microscopy revealed that the average fiber diameters were determined to range between 98.12 nm and 135.94 nm. CH and TCH were both effective against loss and rapid changes of unstable B vitamin complex. 7% average change in thiamin value was observed for samples coated with TCH, but it increased up to 39% in uncoated samples. In terms of thiamin content, the positive effect of nanofiber coating for the samples coated with TCH was observed on the 11th day of storage. Average change in riboflavin for CH and TCH was found to be lower. Particularly, sharply changes in nicotinamide acid, pyridoxal, pyridoxine and pyridoxamine contents were determined for uncoated samples, as compared to slightly changes in CH and TCH. The objective of this work was to obtain nanofibers. In this sense, potential effect of nanofibers on vitamin B profiles of fish fillets was to investigate. The results revealed that coating of the fish fillets with the nanofibers could be a promising technique to keep the stability of unstable B vitamin complex.Food is considered to be unique source of protein, fat, vitamin and mineral for well-balanced human diet. Cheese, egg yolk contain smaller amounts of vitamin as compared to meet. Furthermore, fish or different sort of seafood includes much more important nutrients such as omega-3 fatty acids (EPA; Eicosapentaenoic Acid, DHA; Docosahexaenoic Acid), vitamins, which are so important for human health ( In this respect, different kinds of preservation methods such as irradiation technique, food preservatives, packaging techniques, processing methods have been utilized for a long time in scientific researches. Different studies on conventional preservation reveal that there are different disadvantages of using this kind of preservation method. For example, food irradiation gives rise to increase in malondialdehyde (MDA) level and vitamin losses ( Novel approaches on food preservation have been recently taking a great deal attention in scientific area. In this respect, recent studies have revealed that microbial spoilage (growth in total viable bacteria count, growth in psychrophilic bacteria and total yeast and molds) of fish fillets can be delayed by using nano-scale material ( Type of used material to obtain nanostructure should be of very critical, in this respect, the use of GRAS material is highly important. Chitosan and thymol can be already regarded as GRAS by U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA; 21 CFR 182.10) ( The first aim of study was to successfully obtain bioactive material-loaded biopolymer-based nanocarrier by using electrospining technique and coat the fish fillets with obtained nanofibers. The final target of the study was to reveal the effect of the nanocoating process on unstable vitamin B profile of fish fillets during cold storage conditions. The vitamin standards (nicotinic acid, nicotinamide, riboflavin, thiamine, pridoxine hydrochloride, pridoxamine hydrochloride and pyridoxal hydrochloride), enzymes (taka diastase, aspergillusoryzae, 100 U/mg and acid phosphatase, potato, 0.5–3.0 U/mg) and teflon tube “tubing” (length: 20 m diameter: 0.5 mm), potassium ferricyanide, potassiumdihydrogen phosphate, and 1-heptanesulfonicwere obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, U.S.A). In this study, all other chemicals were used in high purity. Standard stock solution of each vitamin was prepared in 0.1 N hydrochloric acid solution. Each standard is freshly prepared daily. Working standards in three levels are prepared from stock solution. Extraction methods described The level of B The content of riboflavin an in fish fillets was determined by HPLC, consisting of Shimadzu LC 20AT pump with a Shimadzu RF-10AXL fluorescence detector (FLD) (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan) according to procedure described by Due to its structure, thiamine can not be detected in the fluorescence detector alone. Therefore, pre-column derivatization is required to be detected by the fluorescence detector. Detection methods described Finglas et al. (1984) Similarly, as in thiamine, post-column derivatization is required to determine niacin. For post-column derivatization, a photo-chemical derivatization system was established in the laboratory. Detection methods described S. Electrospinning process is shown in Distance was arranged to 10 cm and high voltages in the electrospinning process for CH and TCH were arranged to 22 kV and 24 kV, respectively. Flow rate of electrospinning solutions was controlled to be 0.6 mL/h by using software system ( Electrospun chitosan-based nanofiber and thymol-loaded chitosan-based nanofibers were obtained on aluminum foil. After obtaining nanofiber on aluminum foil, three skinless 50-g fish fillets for each analysis period (1, 5, 9 and 11) were wrapped with these nanofibers and then stored at cold storage conditions (3 ± 1 °C) during 11 days, separately. Magnifications of 10000, 5000 and 2500 × were used to obtain scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images defining morphological properties of nanoscale materials (CH and TCH). Electrospun CH and TCH samples were detected under low vacuum in a field emission SEM (FEI, Quanta Feg 250, USA) with a working distance of 8 mm. At an accelerating voltage of 5 kV, secondary electron images were revealed. According to Vitamin measurements in fish fillets were repeated twice with three replications. All measurements were subjected to analysis of variance (ANOVA) to evaluate the effect of vitamin stability of fish fillets coated with CH, TCH and uncoated group during experimental days. JMP software (Cary, USA) was used to determine significant differences between three groups by ANOVA. Mean values were further analyzed using “Student's The results indicating thiamin, riboflavin, nicotinic acid, nicotinamide acid, pyridoxal, pyridoxine and pyridoxamine concentrations are given in Thiamine (B In addition to widely used preservation methods, researchers have recently conducted some novel approaches related to directly nanoencapsulation of thiamin to prevent the loss in thiamine. In this study, thymol was nanoencapsulated into biopolymer-based nanofibers and then directly fish fillets were coated with TCH and CH. The results revealed that coating with TCH provided merely 7% average change in thiamin value, but this value increased up to 39% in uncoated samples during experimental (11) days. Until 5th day of the storage period, TCH kept the initial value (145 mcg/100 g) of thiamin in fish. On the contrary, thiamine value of uncoated samples with nanofibers decreased up to 6%. Differences between control group samples and coated samples in terms of thiamine content were visible only on day 11 of storage. Because, by the 9th day of storage, thiamine content was found to be higher in uncoated samples. Also, CH provided better preservation to prevent the loss of thiamine in fish as compared to that of uncoated samples during cold storage conditions. Fish is a good source of riboflavin that is a water-soluble vitamin and also protecting against cardiovascular and cancer diseases ( Previous literature studies noted that African cat fish riboflavin content was determined as 0.03 mg/100 g ( CH and TCH samples indicated highly unstable behavior (p < 0.05) as compared to uncoated samples. During analysis days, there was no important change between initial (3.6 mg/100 g) and last value (3.9 mg/100 g) of C samples (p > 0.05). As known, nicotinic acid is directly associated with niacin. As stated by These results revealed that being fatty fish or low fatty of fish, fish species and also storage conditions can affect the changes in niacin concentration in fish fillets. Coating with electrospun chitosan based nanofiber and loading bioactive material into biopolymer and then coating was not significantly to keep nicotinic acid stability in fish. This case may be associated with degradation of tryptophan presence in fish meat. Nicotinamide that had important duty such as the synthesis of components necessary for production of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and neuronal nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD+) synthesis is water-soluble active form of niacin ( In this study, initial contents of nicotinamide acid in C, CH and TCH groups was 7.79 mg/100 g, 8.43 mg/100 g and 7.78 mg/100 g, respectively. At 5th day of cold storage period, sharply decrease (from 7.79 to 2.2 mg/100 g; 70% loss (p < 0.05)) was detected for uncoated samples, but at the same analysis period, 20% (p < 0.05) and 1% (p > 0.05) average change in nicotinamide acid in fish coated with CH and TCH, respectively was observed. Also, there is statistical differences among all groups during cold storage period (p < 0.05). This results revealed that nanofiber coating prevented significantly the losses and rapid changes in nicotinamide concentration. There is already highly limited study related to concentration of nicotinamide acid in fish fillets, though, the levels of nicotinamide in the literature was reported for anchovy as stated by Pyridoxal, bioactive form of B Initial concentrations of pyridoxal in C, CH and TCH was 226, 183 and 141 mcg/100 g. Statistical differences between uncoated samples and the coated with electrospun nanofibers samples were defined (p < 0.05). The most rapid decline (from 226 to 101 mcg/100 g; 57% change) was detected in uncoated samples (p < 0.05), while any remarkable decrease was not observed for CH and TCH at 5th day of cold storage. However, sharply decrease with 45% and 49% was determined in CH and TCH groups (p < 0.05) at 9th day of cold storage. As known storage of food during at −18° could cause decrease in vitamin B Pyridoxine, played a significant role in enzymatic activity and a member of the vitamin B complex family, is sensitive to light and ultraviolet radiation ( In this study, initial value of C, CH and TCH was 30, 11, 36 mcg/100 g in this study (p < 0.05). When pyridoxine value of control group samples decreased 14 mcg/100 g, on the 5th day of cold storage, pyridoxine value of CH group did not decrease the same level (14 mcg/100 g). Moreover, TCH did not change the pyridoxine value of fish fillets coated with electrospun bioactive material-loaded chitosan-based nanofibers. In literature based on fish, B These results suggested that nanofiber coating provided more stable product as compared to other groups until 5 days after storage, which is known unfit for human consumption. Also, statistical results of uncoated samples indicated that there was unstable situation in terms of pyridoxine until 5 days (p < 0.05). Occurrence of pyridoxamine, known to be one form of B The major vitaminers were detected as pyridoxal and pyridoxamine for oyster and shrimp meat, though, pyridoxamine was found to be the major vitaminer for canned tuna and salmon ( SEM images of CH and TCH are presented in The chitosan-based (CH) and thymol-loaded chitosan-based nanofiber (TCH) scaffolds revealed their effectiveness on unstable B vitamin groups of gilthead sea bream fillets. TCH provided better stability with 7% average change in thiamin value as compared with the other groups. Average change in riboflavin for CH samples was found to be 3% during experimental days. At 5th day of cold storage period, 1% average change in nicotinamide acid in fish coated with TCH was observed. Rapidly decline (from 226 to 101 mcg/100 g; 57% change) in pyridoxal concentration was just detected in control group samples. Also, TCH did not change the pyridoxine value of fish fillets until 5th day of cold storage period. The rapidly changes (above 40%) in pyridoxamine value occurred for control samples at the 5th day of cold storage. Loading of thymol into chitosan-based nanofiber increased diameter (from 98.12 nm to 135.94 nm) of the nanofibers. Because of the fact that CH and TCH provide successfully vitamin B stability of the fish fillets, this study revealed that the use of fabricated scaffold nanofibers providing larger contact area on fish fillets is evaluated to be a promising approach for the further food applications.