This study evaluates the efficiency of chemical leaching of complex antimony and arsenic sulphides (tetrahedrite, jamesonite, enargite) in alkaline Na2S solution following mechanical activation in a laboratory planetary mill and attritor, respectively. Antimony and arsenic are extracted into the leach liquor and the copper or lead-containing solid residues can be exploited in pyrometallurgy. The mechano-chemical leaching of tetrahedrite concentrate was performed in an industrial attritor in a process called MELT and compared with the conventional chemical leaching of mechanically activated tetrahedrite. The MELT process leaches antimony several times faster, under similar conditions, than the industry tested hydrometallurgical SUNSHINE process which does not apply milling.The traditional scheme of metals extraction from sulphide minerals involves some form of mechanical processing to enhance the accessibility of the valuable component by the leaching agent. The application of mechanical activation as a pre-treatment step before leaching is very effective in case of oxide and carbonate minerals ( During mechanical activation the crystal structure of a mineral is usually disordered and generation of defects or other metastable forms can be registered. These effects are not stable and have different relaxation times ( On the other hand, if the mechanical activation and chemical leaching are integrated into a common step all the excitation states can be utilized. In addition to the improvement of grinding performance — the leaching agent serves also as grinding additive. Thus there is a possibility that a common mechanical activation and leaching step – called mechano-chemical leaching – contributes to operational benefits and economics of the overall process. Selective treatment of copper ores containing antimony or arsenic is offered by hydrometallurgical processing in alkaline media. In this media, antimony, arsenic, as well as any mercury, form soluble complexes and copper remains bound in the solid residue. The process has high selectivity because this copper residue, together with any precious metals, is suitable feed for pyrometallurgical operations. Complex sulphides are interesting from this aspect. The reactions of the copper containing minerals tetrahedrite (Cu Tetrahedrite, enargite and jamesonite have been selected in this work as model minerals for a comparative study of two modes of leaching. The separate mechanical activation and subsequent chemical leaching is applied in the first mode and compared with the combined mechanical activation and chemical leaching (mechano-chemical leaching) in the second mode. The investigations were carried out with samples of tetrahedrite, enargite and jamesonite. Their phase composition and chemical assays are given in The phase composition was performed by X-ray diffraction using a diffractometer DRON 2.0 (Techsnabexport, Russia) and FeK Dry mechanical activation of jamesonite was performed in a planetary mill Pulverisette 6 (Fritsch, Germany) under the following conditions: sample 5 g; grinding balls, 50 (diameter 10 mm); grinding material and vessel, tungsten carbide; dry grinding time in air 30 min; mill speed, 400 rpm. Wet mechanical activation of enargite concentrate was performed in a stirred ball mill (attritor) Molinex PE 075 (Netzsch, Germany) under the following conditions: concentrate, 20 g; steel grinding balls, 2000 g (diameter 2 mm); grinding medium, 200 mL water; grinding time, 30 min; stirring speed, 1000 rpm. After grinding, the aqueous slurry of activated concentrate was dried. Reactions were carried out at 90 °C in a 500 mL glass reactor containing 400 mL of leach solution (100 g/L Na Mechano-chemical leaching was tested in a stirred ball mill (attritor) LME 4 (Netzsch, Germany) under the following conditions: 1.8–4.0 kg of concentrate; 12 L leach solution (300 g/L Na Jamesonite (FePb Jamesonite is very sensitive to the effect of mechanical grinding. In principle, ores rich in jamesonite can be treated hydrometallurgically. Enargite (Cu Comparative studies have been performed with mechanically activated and non-activated samples ( On the basis of the laboratory tests, a simplified flowsheet has been proposed ( The principle of mechano-chemical leaching has been already verified in an attritor working in a batch mode ( The experiments with alkaline leaching of tetrahedrite concentrate under conditions close to hydrometallurgical practice also showed good results. The data presented in This high extraction of antimony means that only a small fraction of tetrahedrite remains in the solid residue, which corresponds with the XRD data in The concept of mechano-chemical leaching of tetrahedrite concentrates (named MELT process) was developed and verified in a laboratory attritor ( A similar leaching process called SUNSHINE has been applied by Sunshine Mining and Refining Co. in the USA ( Our results indicate that mechanical activation has a positive influence on the alkaline leaching of the complex sulphides under study. The recovery of penalty metals such as Sb and As increased 5 times for jamesonite, 1.4 times for enargite and 4 times for tetrahedrite as a result of mechanical activation before leaching in Na The comparison of chemical and mechano-chemical leaching of tetrahedrite shows that the combined mechano-chemical leaching is 2.5 times more effective. The leach kinetics are slower than the kinetics of chemical leaching of previously mechanically activated tetrahedrite, but the advancement of mechano-chemical leaching consists in the integration of the leaching and mechanical activation into one operating step. The results obtained for the MELT process in pilot plant tests confirmed shorter leach times in comparison with the SUNSHINE process which does not apply milling, albeit with more concentrated and higher pulp density solutions. It is possible that freshly exposed mineral surfaces undergo surface reactions with water or the grinding media in the grinding mill which differ from the direct heterogeneous reactions that occur with combined mechano-chemical leaching. More detailed studies are required to compare particle size distributions before and after mechanical activation to try to understand and quantify changes in leach kinetics in terms of surface area as well as mineral structure, but this is complicated by the agglomeration of finely ground particles. The authors thank the Slovak Grant Agency VEGA (grant No. 2/5151/5) for the financial support of this paper.