Three-dimensional printing (3DP) process stands as a developing technology for food manufacturing, which offers the opportunity to design novel food products with improved nutritional value and sensorial profile. This review analyses the potential applications of 3DP technology for meat processing and the elemental aspects affecting the printability and post-processing feasibility of 3D printed meat products. The combination of nutritionally balanced ingredients and novel internal structures may be schemed into a multi-material 3D model that meets special individual needs, such as chewing and swallowing difficulties. Furthermore, a temperature-controlled extruder-type 3D printer built with multi-head system is suggested to suit the required conditions for meat safety and rheological requirements.Only 7.2% in weight of a cattle carcase accounts for cuts that are considered suitable for high-value steaks ( An emerging technology for the food industry, which represents a great opportunity to seize meat by-products for the fabrication of customized meat products, is three-dimensional printing (3DP). 3DP technology uses a computer-aided design (CAD) software assisting a digital manufacture machine in the generation of three-dimensional objects without any additional tool ( Based on the additive manufacturing (AM) process, which consists of a layer-by-layer deposition with predetermined thickness to create complex freeform structures ( The application of 3DP in the food science field comprises various aims such as novelty/fun/creativity, convenience and efficiency, health/nutrition, reducing waste and enhancing environmental sustainability, and alleviating world hunger ( However, in order to manufacture a 3D printed meat product with a desired design, sensorial profile and nutritional value, first the printability of the meat paste needs to be assessed. The printability of any food material refers to its ability to be handled and dispensed by a 3D printer into a freeform structure after deposition ( Based on the printability of food ingredients, three categories were identified by A material with native printability has enough flow ability to be easily extruded from the nozzle without additional flow enhancers ( On the other hand, non-native printable traditional food materials require additional flow enhancers for ease of extrusion and/or post-cooking processes ( Alternative ingredients refer to those emerging as novel sources of functional constituents aiming to customize nutrition, such as proteins and fibres isolated from insects, algae, fungi, bacteria, among others ( Meat and its by-products are fibrous materials non-printable by nature ( Nonetheless, no published data exists regarding the printability of beef meat and thus comprehensive informative data concerning the desirable rheological and mechanical properties of the meat paste in order to be printed is still required, whilst considering the safety issues of meat products and the most suitable printing conditions. Three-dimensional printing, also known as additive manufacturing (AM), is a process that generates freeform structures by introducing a prototype into a computer aided design (CAD) software, which is then converted into a .STL file by a slicing software to be recognised and processed by 3D printers ( 3DP offers an alternative technology with sustainability benefits such as reduced demand of raw materials, workforce, energy and transportation ( Most commonly used materials for conventional 3DP are polymers, metal, ceramics and their composites ( Through the combination of diverse food materials and 3D printing methodologies, the design of novel food products offering unique textures, nutritional value and eating experiences is conceivably unlimited. In this way, besides waste conversion through the added-value chain, the development of health and well-being products, as well as novel food interactions may be triggered. For instance, meat trimmings and off-cuts can be further processed into a paste and 3D printed with varying structural arrangements in order to make it suitable for dysphagia patients with chewing, swallowing and digesting difficulties. While, at the same time, allowing the design of personalized food and eating experiences through the targeted addition of supplementary ingredients. However, in order to manufacture a printed food product with desired design and nutritional value, several aspects needed to be taken into account to ensure the required printing precision and accuracy. Some of these aspects, as reported in the literature, include but are not limited to the printing machines, methodologies, prototype design and software, food ingredients and additives, processing parameters, and post-processing suitability ( In the last decade, 3DP technology for food products has increasingly developed through its application to a wide range of food materials. Chocolate ( For 3D printed foods that do not require post-processing operations (e.g. cooking), such as chocolate and cheese, the studies commonly assess how the rheological and mechanical properties of food materials affect the printability ( To date, only a small number of studies account for the printability of fibrous-meat materials, through the assessment of the rheological properties of the meat “ink”, as well as the post-deposition and post-processing properties of the printed object. In addition, during the 3D Food Printing Conference Asia-Pacific, Furthermore, aiming to develop pureed foods for people with swallowing difficulties, tuna puree was obtained by blending tuna in spring water for 5 min, and was further 3D printed into a tuna shape with pressure-controlled extrusion at 20 °C ( The basic components of a 3D food printer stage include a motor-driven print-head and a platform, commonly attached to a stage with Cartesian configuration ( New 3D printing approaches are still under development aiming to overcome the existing challenges of suiting meat materials into the additive manufacturing process, so called Food Layered Manufacture (FLM), which requires standardized flow and setting properties of food materials ( Nonetheless, adjustments of 3D food printers are still required in order to fulfil meat-processing conditions, like storage capacity of the hoppers or cartridges, and temperature control during the printing process, on behalf of safety issues. Current 3D printers focus on the nozzle temperature, which is particularly designed to control the physico-chemical behaviour of limited types of materials, such as chocolate. However, when printing meat, the temperature should be controlled in an uninterrupted manner, throughout the feeding system, the hopper, the nozzle and the platform itself. With the intention of meeting adequate temperatures for perishable foods, both, the feeding system and the stage are suggested to maintain temperature-controlling devices in the range of freezing and cooling temperatures. For example, when printing meat and seafood products, it is crucial to maintain processing temperatures below 4 °C to prevent microbial growth. However, some previous studies on meat and seafood printing focused on the extrusion and printing process ( Several studies demonstrate the effect of varying printing processing parameters on the printability of food materials and hence, the quality of the final printed objects. The component settings that include nozzle speed, nozzle height (layer height), nozzle diameter, extrusion rate, and infill percentage, are suggested as critical parameters affecting the geometry accuracy of the printed construct ( In this way, the selection of the nozzle diameter should take into account the desired accuracy of the printed structure and the food components within the meat paste. A nozzle diameter >2 mm may facilitate the extrusion of the paste containing bigger particle size components, such as connective tissue but the printing precision may be compromised by the deposition of thicker streams. Whereas a nozzle diameter <2 mm allows the production of more accurate and intricate objects but the formulation may be compromised, as fine emulsion-like pastes are required for the extrusion through the narrow nozzle without the occurrence of clogging. Similarly, an optimal nozzle height determines the accuracy and dimensions of the printed meat product, and it is suggested to be equivalent to the dimension of the nozzle diameter. Due to the extrudate swell phenomenon ( Likewise, dragging, under- and over- deposition on the meat paste stream may be observed if the nozzle speed and extrusion rate are not properly set. The nozzle speed determines the movement rate of the print head, and needs to be adjusted with preliminary trials or by calculating the optimal nozzle speed ( Similarly, varying infill percentages will affect the total amount of deposited material in the internal part of the printed structure, affecting the void fraction within the final 3D printed meat product and thus the post-processing conditions. For instance, the void fraction would determine the cooking conditions for a specific degree of doneness since as more porosity remains within the structure, less heat transfer occurs during cooking, affecting the moisture and fat releases and thus the texture of the cooked meat product. In addition, the setting of the infill pattern actuates the stability of the printed meat product. For instance, a rectilinear or honeycomb pattern will provide more anchor points within the structure to allow the meat paste deposited as infill to bind with the vertical shell or perimeter due to the particular stickiness of the meat paste. On the contrary, unless an 80–100% infill percentage is used, the concentric pattern lack of anchor points between the infill material and the vertical shell in which the meat paste can bind to provide stability to the structure. In general, while adjusting the above reviewed parameters essential for geometrical accuracy during 3D printing of meat, the economical aspect should also be considered. For instance, lower printing speed and nozzle diameter, as well as increased infill percentage, may result in higher accuracy, but longer printing times and energy consumption. The in-software design for a determined 3D printed meat product sculpts its nutritional and sensorial profile. Through the combination of countless types of cross-sectional patterns, varying formulations and the combination of meat paste with different feed materials, 3D printing allows the development of new textures, mouthfeels, and nutritional composition ( For instance, meat paste can be printed with a multi-head printer to include different ingredients in target locations/layers within the printed paste ( Likewise, diverse food designs can provide those with chewing and swallowing difficulties with alternatives for the “ice cream-scooped” pureed food commonly served in age care facilities and hospitals ( In order to do so, the expected final product has to be schemed as a CAD model first, and then converted into .STL format by a slicing software to be recognised by 3D printers. The model is sliced into 2D cross-sectional layers, according to the required design and printing settings ( A variety of 3DP methods has been used for food printing, such as extrusion, inkjet printing, binding deposition, and bioprinting ( 3DP by extrusion is the most applicable technology for food materials, which consists of ejecting the material through the nozzle in a digitally controlled way. The stream is deposited through cross-sectional stacking layers according to a previously designed pattern, until a 3D solid structure is obtained ( 3D printing of meat products consists of building the desired geometry from a slurry material, which requires controlled temperature below 4 °C, calling for liquid-based methodologies, such as extrusion and/or inkjet printing. However, due to the limitation of inkjet printing for the construction of complex structures ( Bio-printing is a novel technology based on tissue engineering, still under development for food applications. Modern Meadow aims to obtain raw meat tissue by printing cultured stem cells. In this approach, an inkjet printer deposits cells into an agarose gel support structure, to be fused and form engineered meat ( 3DP by extrusion requires non-Newtonian fluids showing shear-thinning behaviour in order to retain the desired printed shape ( Although several studies reveal the assessment of different methodologies and foodstuffs in order to 3D print food products with diverse properties, one of the biggest challenges is the development of printable food formulations. A fine combination of an appropriate food formulation with suitable processing parameters must hinder the printability and structure stability issues. Meat ingredients, which fit in the category of non-native printable traditional food materials, require a modification into a meat paste with suitable viscosity in order to be extruded from the nozzle and still be able to hold its structure upon deposition. Therefore, the expected printability, stability, and post-processing conditions need to be taken into account when designing the formulation. First, as a fibrous material, the raw meat needs to be finely comminute into a paste form with controlled particle size to enable the extrusion through the nozzle of mm to micron size. The degree of comminution will depend on the type of the product to be printed and its textural characteristics. Meat mincing aids the extractions of myofibrillar proteins that assists the formation and stability of the batter emulsion through its interaction with other emulsion constituents. When working with off-cuts as raw material, the amount and particle size of connective tissue, as well as other non-meat tissues have to be considered, since it may affect the printability of the paste. In general, the particle size of the paste ingredients needs to be lower than the intended nozzle diameter for the printer to avoid clogging. Additives, such as plasticizers may be required for the meat paste to be easily extruded, as well as binding components to adhere the subsequent layers once deposited. For instance, gelatine was added to a chicken, pork and fish slurry to enhance its printability ( The viscosity of the paste has to be low enough to flow easily through the nozzle and high enough to maintain the deposited shape ( The use of cold-set binders allows producers to lower the amounts of salt components (salt/phosphate technology) in meat product formulations and restructure lower-value pieces of muscle into value-added products, such as “restructured meats”. For the addition of cold-set binders into the meat batter, the formation of a heat-resistant gel may be required, depending on the intended post-processing conditions of the 3D construct. If a thermo-reversible gel is obtained, the structure of the construct could be lost. However, the addition of thermo-reversible gelling agents may be overcome with the combination of irreversible-gel producer heat-induced binders. Some cold binding systems producing heat-resistant gels include the enzyme system (TGase), calcium/alginate system, and plasma protein system (fibrinogen/thrombin). TGase is an enzyme obtained from animal blood or bacterial fermentation which catalyses cross-linking of proteins and peptides, and thus is commonly known as meat glue ( The presence of constituents with water holding capacity, such as gelatin, may enhance the viscosity of the paste to make it extrudable, while the addition of TGase shortly before printing would help retain the shape of the 3D construct during deposition and post-processing. Although the moisture release upon gelatin melting may represent a challenge. On the other hand, the calcium/alginate system is composed of sodium alginate, a source of calcium (e.g. calcium carbonate) and an acidifier (e.g. lactic acid) to aid the slow-release of calcium. When in contact with meat products under moulded shaping, it slowly forms an irreversible gel taking from 2 to 48 h at 0–5 °C for the gel to set, depending on the solubility of the calcium source ( Fibrinogen/thrombin (FT) (10:1 or 20:1) is a plasma protein system derived from the blood clotting mechanism in which fibrinogen is enzymatically converted to fibrin by thrombin. The two components in the system are packed and frozen individually and require thawing until a temperature of 26.6 °C is reached before contact with the meat pieces. The mixture is rapidly moulded since it takes around 10 to 15 min before reaction starts, requiring a minimum of 5 h for maximum gel strength with a typical usage dose of 5–10% depending on the dimensions of the meat pieces ( Cold-swelling hydrocolloids, such as xanthan gum, guar gum and gum tragacanth may act as viscosity and extrusion enhancers through the stabilization, thickening and emulsification of the paste, however, they do not act as gelling agents independently ( Restructured meat products are traditionally dependant on the extraction of myofibrillar proteins by means of ionic strength through the addition of salts, followed by thermal gelation to maintain the moulded shape of the product ( Blood plasma proteins (BPP) represent 6–8% of plasma weight and are used in meat products as binding agents for having gelation, emulsification and solubility properties, which can be mainly accredited to its albumin (up to 60%), globulin (40%) and fibrinogen (around 3%) content ( Consequently, in order to modify the rheological and mechanical properties of the meat paste for 3DP, the emulsifying and gelling properties are of primary importance, respectively. Cold-set binders that provide heat-resistant gels may be used to attain the modification of both, rheological and mechanical properties. While, heat-set binders can be added to the paste to enhance its mechanical properties mostly during post-deposition and post-processing operations. Other hydrocolloids such as polysaccharide gums modify the viscosity of the paste through water retention and gel formation. Such ability to retain water serves as a lubricant that simulates the sensorial perception of fat and thus polysaccharide gums are known as fat replacers in low-fat processed meats ( In general, the addition of different food hydrocolloids to the meat paste can provide modified rheological and mechanical properties through varying binding mechanisms, enhancing its printability and post-processing viability. Although 3DP technology has been widely applied for several types of food materials, very few studies refer to the printability of fibrous meat materials, such as pork, turkey, chicken and fish, while no data is available for beef meat. Information regarding the formulation to adjust the rheological and mechanical properties for beef paste is required for a better understanding of its printability, as well as the 3DP settings and post-processing conditions of the printed product. With the existence of such comprehensive data, further research may be conducted with beef materials in order to improve its nutritional value and sensorial profile by means of addition of bioactive ingredients and including complex internal structures, respectively. Furthermore, an adequate 3D printer for meat products is suggested to be extruder-type consisting of screw conveyor or syringe system with uninterrupted temperature control throughout the feeding system, the hopper, the nozzle and the platform itself in order to reduce food safety risks and controlling the material's rheology during the printing process. None to declare. None. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.