The Pulang ore deposit, one of the largest porphyry copper deposits in China, is located in the Yidun continental arc, SW China. The alteration zones in the deposit transit upward and outward from early potassium-silicate, through quartz–sericite, to later propylitization. The wallrock near the porphyry stock was mostly changed into hornfels. The former two alterations host the main orebodies, constituting the core of mineralized zone; the later two alterations only develop weak mineralization surrounding the core. In this paper, various fractal indices, including the exponent of lacunarity, multifractal spectrum, correlation dimension and Hurst exponent, are applied to characterize the Cu spatial distribution in 114 drillcores in the Pulang ore deposit, with the aim to correlate the element spatial pattern with its dynamic drive. Compared to fractal indices in the propylitic zone and hornfels, the exponents of lacunarity in the potassium-silicate and quartz–sericite zones exhibit lower and more stable values, the correlation dimensions are higher and more consistent; yet the values of height difference of multifractal spectrum are lower and largely varied, and the Hurst exponents show little difference. Variations of the former three indices suggest that the core of mineralized zone has more homogeneity, stronger compactness of high concentrations, and greater proportion of high concentrations in the Cu distribution compared to the other parts of the deposit. More importantly, the correlation dimension, indicating the complexity of controls underpinning the system, is closely correlated to the exponent of lacunarity, which represents the homogeneity of spatial pattern. This correlation between those two indices implies a genetic link, that is to say the greater complexity of controls results in a more homogeneous spatial distribution of Cu in the porphyry deposit. The stability of the two indices is considered to reflect the development of thick orebody, providing a new perspective to understand the genesis of porphyry ore deposit. This interpretation from the fractal perspective is consistent with the geological understanding for the formation of porphyry deposits, which is considered to be subject to the complexity of ore fluid evolution with multifaceted physicochemical conditions. For a pragmatic use, these two fractal indices are successfully applied in the delineation of the core of mineralized zone in the plane view.Quantitative description of the spatial distribution of ore-forming elements in mineral deposits is significant for the mineral exploration and understanding of ore-forming processes. The concentrations of metallogenic metals in mineralized zones often exhibit skewed statistical distributions and similarities in spatial distributions across a range of scales of several magnitudes of difference, and can be described by various fractal models ( Self-similar models are used to describe systems with self-similarity, meaning that each portion of such systems can be considered a reduced-scale image of a whole system of interest ( The Pulang ore deposit, one of the largest porphyry copper deposits in China ( The Pulang porphyry copper deposit is located at the south end of the Yidun continental arc, SW China ( The outcrop strata in the Pulang ore deposit are dominated by Upper Triassic Tumugou Formation clastic rocks and andesite, and Quaternary sediments ( Porphyry-type alteration zone within the porphyry intrusions was delineated in light of microscopic identification and drillcore scanning Exploration in the Pulang ore deposit has been carried out by the Diqing Nonferrous Metal Company Ltd. of Yunnan. A total of 114 drillcores along 22 exploration lines across different alterations, with at least 40 samples in each drillcore, were selected from drilling data from the exploration report. Out of the 114 drillcores, 73 mineralized drillcores are dominated by potassium-silicate alteration, 20 mineralized and 2 non-mineralized drillcores by quartz–sericite alteration, 4 mineralized and 8 non-mineralized drillcores by propylitic alteration, and 5 mineralized and 2 non-mineralized drillcores by hornfels ( The Cu ore is delineated according to a cutoff of 0.2% Cu in this study. The ranges of orebody thicknesses in potassium-silicate, quartz–sericite, propylitization and hornfels are 34–709.4 The Cu concentrations in each drillcore were firstly converted from vector to raster format using cell size of 1 The gliding-box algorithm, proposed by As shown in The correlation dimension and multifractal spectrum from the multifractal model were calculated using the box-counting method ( The moment The mass exponent The generalized dimension The values of The The variation of fractal indices in exploration line 2 across various alterations is shown in From the whole deposit scope, the values of As for mineralized drillcores in potassium-silicate alteration, the In terms of relationships among fractal indices, In order to more examine the relationship between Based on the more stable distributions of The In the case study of the Beiya skarn–porphyry ore deposit, SW China, According to the various fractal indices, the mineralized drillcores in the quartz–sericite zone have more homogeneity, stronger compactness of high concentrations, and greater proportion of high concentrations in the Cu distribution than the non-mineralized drillcores. This result can be explained as follows. Copper concentrations in both mineralized and non-mineralized drillcores in quartz–sericite are elevated during the mineralization process. Mineralization in quartz–sericite zone has induced the relative evenness of ore-forming element and compactness of high concentrations in porphyry copper deposit. As for the propylitic zone and hornfels, the distributions of Cu in mineralized drillcores are more heterogeneous, showing weaker compactness of high concentrations, and smaller proportion of high concentrations than in non-mineralized drillcores. That is because the sparse distributions of high concentrations have changed the structure of the dataset, leading to the greater proportion of low concentrations. This collectively suggests that the mineralization process experienced changes of first increase and then decrease for indices The distributions of Cu in potassium-silicate and quartz–sericite alteration zones are more homogeneous, and have stronger compactness of high concentrations and greater proportion of high concentrations compared to those in the other alteration zones. The higher In this study, the relationships among fractal indices show that the We compared the variations of This study arrived at the following conclusions with regard to the application of fractal indices in the Pulang porphyry copper deposit. In the potassium-silicate and quartz–sericite alteration zones, the correlation dimension and the exponent of lacunarity are stable and well correlated. This implies that greater complexity of controls, as reflected by higher correlation dimension, results in more stable orebody and more homogeneous elemental distribution, as indicated by lower exponent of lacunarity, in the core mineralized zone of the Pulang porphyry ore system. The joint application of correlation dimension and exponent of lacunarity is effective to discriminate the core of mineralized zone in this porphyry ore system. We appreciate the valuable comments and careful revisions from two anonymous reviews and John Carranza. Special thanks are extended to Yunnan Bureau of Geology and Mineral Resources and the Diqing Nonferrous Metal Company Ltd. of Yunnan for supporting in field work and providing raw data. This work was funded by the