Gibbsite is generally precipitated from sodium aluminate liquor in the presence of huge quantity of gibbsite seed at a temperature between 60 and 70 °C. This gibbsite is then calcined to produce alumina. Boehmite is a stable phase at higher temperature (>100 °C) and formation of boehmite below 100 °C in supersaturated sodium aluminate liquor is unusual. In the present study an attempt has been made to produce boehmite under atmospheric pressure conditions. Effect of various parameters such as temperature, alumina/caustic (Al2O3/Na2O) ratio, seed size, amount of seed, organic additives, precipitation time, etc., on boehmite formation has been investigated. At higher temperature and low alumina/caustic ratio, boehmite is found to be precipitated under atmospheric pressure by adding boehmite seed. The optimum quantity of seed required for precipitation has been found to be 300 g L−1. Reduction in precipitation temperature could be achieved by using different organic additives. Tartaric acid has been found to be highly effective in reducing the temperature of boehmite precipitation to 50 °C. Increase in precipitation time increased boehmite production.Boehmite (Al It has been observed that boehmite precipitation depends on mainly alumina/caustic ratio of the aluminate liquor and temperature. At higher alumina/caustic (A/C) ratio boehmite can be precipitated at higher temperature and at lower A/C ratio boehmite precipitation is possible at lower temperature but at the expense of boehmite yield. At lower A/C ratio alumina supersaturation is low thereby yielding less boehmite. At A/C ratio of 1.0–1.1, the precipitation temperature of boehmite is more than 85 °C, which is higher compared to gibbsite precipitation temperature in actual plant practice. At lower temperature (65–70 °C) the available supersaturation is high. Boehmite precipitation at lower temperature would therefore increase the precipitation yield. However precipitation of boehmite at lower temperature is a challenging task because there is every possibility of gibbsite to be co-precipitated. The activation energy of gibbsite precipitation in sodium aluminate liquor is 50–59 kJ/mole and that of boehmite is 89 kJ/mole ( In the present study, effect of various parameters such as seed quantity, seed size, organic additives, and duration of precipitation on boehmite production was investigated. Various organic additives such as Polyacrylamide (PAA), Carboxy-methyl cellulose–sodium salt (Na-CMC) and organic acids such as tartaric acid (TA), succinic acid, glutaric acid etc. were investigated. All the experiments were carried out using synthetic supersaturated sodium aluminate solution. The boehmite seed preparation was carried out in a PARR autoclave (model no. 4542). Boehmite seed prepared through hydrothermal route is most suitable because of its crystalline nature. To find out the hydrothermal condition for boehmite seed preparation, a study on optimization of boehmite seed preparation was carried out. The boehmite seed was prepared from gibbsite seed material collected from M/s NALCO, Bhubaneswar. The pH of the pulp was maintained at 10. The boehmite transformation temperature was found to be 195 °C. After each experiment in autoclave the pulp was allowed to cool down and then it was removed from the autoclave and was filtered. After filtration the residue was dried in an oven at 110 °C for overnight. The dried seed was taken further for boehmite precipitation studies. Theoretically, the weight loss during gibbsite to boehmite transformation is 23%. In the present study also a weight loss of about 23% was observed, thus confirming to the formation of boehmite. Formation of boehmite was also supported by X-ray diffraction study ( The supersaturated sodium aluminate liquor was prepared by dissolving required amount of aluminium granules in sodium hydroxide solution. The liquor was prepared for different alumina/caustic ratios. In general 150 g L Precipitation was carried out in a 300 mL capacity stainless steel reactor with lid. The lid had provisions for accommodating a stirrer, a thermometer and an opening for sampling. Agitation of the liquor was performed with a laboratory model Remi stirrer having variable speed control. Stirring speed of around 250 The required volume (100 mL) of aluminate liquor with preadjusted Al Particle size measurements were carried out in a Malvern Particle size analyser model 3600E. All precipitates were analysed by X-ray diffraction (XRD) to know the crystalline phase. XRD was run on a Philips powder diffractometer model PW 1830 X'pert system using a Cu target. Analysis of Al Precipitation of boehmite was carried out under atmospheric pressure conditions taking synthetic sodium aluminate liquor of different A/C ratios. Organic additives were added to find out the possibility of precipitation of boehmite at lower temperatures when A/C ratios are higher. Various parameters studied are discussed below.   The effect of seed size on boehmite yield (  Tartaric acid was found to be the most effective additive in inhibiting gibbsite nucleation and favouring boehmite precipitation. Initially experiments were conducted at 90 °C with a solution of A/C ratio 1.0 and then temperature was decreased. Without tartaric acid, boehmite was precipitated at 85 °C but below this temperature gibbsite was precipitated ( Various other organic acids such as succinic acid, salicylic acid, glutaric acid, citric acid, formic acid etc. were tried but results were not satisfactory in reducing the boehmite precipitation temperature below 80 °C. Experiments were conducted for precipitating boehmite at different time period starting from 8 h to 48 h to see the effect of time on boehmite yield. To find out the effect of various parameters such as seed amount, A/C ratio and temperature on boehmite yield at longer precipitation time a series of precipitation experiments was carried out taking 400–600 mL of sodium aluminate solution in a stainless steel reactor for 24 h and 48 h. From The study carried out on precipitation of boehmite from synthetically prepared supersaturated sodium aluminate solutions has revealed various aspects of boehmite precipitation. (i) It has been found that boehmite precipitation mainly depends on temperature and the liquor supersaturation. Higher temperature and low supersaturation are favourable for boehmite precipitation. (ii) The seed size and amount has positive impact on precipitation of boehmite. The yield of boehmite precipitation is increased with finer seed size and higher seed quantity. (iii) Addition of PAA and Na-CMC could reduce the boehmite precipitation temperature to 70 °C but below this temperature gibbsite is precipitated. (iv) Effect of tartaric acid is found to be most beneficial. It reduced the boehmite precipitation temperature to 50 °C at all the A/C ratios tested such as 1.0, 1.1 and 1.2. A substantial increase in boehmite yield was obtained when precipitation time is increased to 24 or 48 h. Work on developing an alternative additive which can be used in a small quantity for boehmite precipitation is in progress. Use of organic acids such as succinic acid, glutaric acid, formic acid etc. could not reduce the boehmite precipitation temperature below 80 °C. The authors are thankful to M/s Nalco, Bhubaneswar, for the financial support. They are also thankful to the Director, IMMT, Bhubaneswar, for giving permission to publish this work.