A total of 100 hundred femoral fractures in 97 patients were treated with the Marchetti–Vincenzi universal bundle elastic nail; six of the fractures were open. Closed fractures were classified according to AO and Winquist; open fractures were classified according to Gustilo. A total of 91 fractures united (average 12 weeks) and six led to non-union. There were two deep and one superficial infections. In three cases, the secondary nails protruded from the anterior cortex of the femoral condyle; in two cases intraoperatively and in the third case 2 months postoperatively, due to severe osteoporosis. The cylindrical part of the nail did not fail, whereas all the secondary nails failed in one patient as well as one secondary nail in another patient at the level of the fracture; these two cases exhibited non-union. We consider the absence of distal screws the major advantage of this particular nail, followed by position of the entry point and the limited reaming. We believe that the absence of a pin guide is a disadvantage. The elasticity of the nail has a positive effect in certain cases while in other cases it acts negatively, resulting in a relatively high proportion of non-unions as in our series. Therefore our conclusion is that this nail is not appropriate for the treatment of femoral shaft fractures.Attempts to treat limb shaft fractures with thin elastic nails began in the middle of the 20th Century. Lambrinudi The contribution made by flexible intramedullary rods to callus formation in fractures of long-bone shafts has been studied for many years The Marchetti–Vincenzi elastic nail consists basically of a combination of classic locking nails (central part) and an Ender's (peripheral part), which increases substantially the mechanical stability. The femoral nail has a proximal, cylindrical, tapered component, inclined laterally by 8° and threaded proximally to host the impactor, with holes for one transverse screw ( The femoral nail is available in one diameter of the cylindrical tapered component (13 mm) and two distal diameters, 10 and 11 mm, and in 12 lengths (from 32 to 48 cm), incrementing by 1.5 cm. The proximal transverse screw is self-tapping, has a diameter of 6.35 mm, and its length ranges from 5 to 9 cm. Between November 1993 and December 1996, we treated 100 femoral shaft fractures in 97 patients. A total of 67 of these patients were men and 30 were women, with an average age of 31.3 years. Among these patients, 20 had multiple injuries and five of those had thoracic trauma. The main cause of the injuries was a road accident, in 83 cases. In five patients, there was also a tibial fracture that was managed with an elastic intramedullary nail. Of the 97 patients, one patient had a Gustilo Topographically, according to the AO zones, there were 13 fractures of zone I, 68 of zone II and 17 of zone III, whereas in two fractures there was more than one zone involved. At the time of initial admission of the patients to the emergency room, transkeletal traction from the femoral condyles was put in place. The average time from admission to operation was 4 days. The equipment, the placement of the patient on the orthopaedic surgical table and the reduction of the fracture were all identical to those for typical closed intramedullary nailing with a locked nail. The entry point is the tip of the greater trochanter. The guide with olive is inserted into the proximal femur and reaming follows for the first 12 cm of the bone, up to 13 mm in diameter, so that it will receive the cylindrical part of the nail. The rod bundle is introduced without previous reaming; the introduction of the nail follows. After fluoroscopic verification that the distal end of the nail has transversed the focus of the fracture, the bundle of preloaded rods is unlocked by simple traction on the locking wire. The secondary nails are opened and the nail is advanced up to 2 cm from the synovial surface of the knee. Finally, a central screw is placed through the impactor (when static nailing is performed). The indications for static or dynamic nailing remain the same. In 74 fractures, closed intramedullary nailing was performed, whereas in 26, due to difficulties in reduction and in advancing the nail afterwards, a small skin incision was made above the focus of the fracture and, with a very few detachments made with the help of the finger, we facilitated the advancement of the nail into the distal part of the fracture. Blood loss with the closed technique was 350 ml, whereas with the open technique it was ∼500 ml. The X-irradiation time ranged from 6 to 12 s; the average operative time was 45 min (25–70 min). On the first postoperative day, the patient undergoes isometric exercises for the quadriceps and on the second day stands up, without loading or with a partial load, according to the type of the fracture, if his or her general condition permits. Full loading is according to the nailing type: with dynamic nailing we encourage the patient to place full loading from the first week; with static nailing the loading is related to the radiographic imaging of the visible callus. The average duration of hospitalization for isolated fractures was 8 days, whereas for patients with multiple injuries it was 17 days. All the patients were assessed clinically and radiologically every month at least until the fractures had healed. Of 97 patients, three died from causes unconnected with the fracture. Of the 97 fractures, 91 healed between 8 and 19 weeks (median 12 weeks) ( Six fractures progressed to non-union, five of which were hypertrophic (one was septic) and one was atrophic in an open fracture of grade II. In four of the six non-unions, open reduction had been used ( Certain intraoperative complications were encountered. In five cases, at the stage of advancement of the nail to the distal fractured part, the protruding wired lock was positioned at an angle and it was impossible to unlock the nail. The nail was removed temporarily, the lock realigned and then repositioned. In three other cases, the lock was withdrawn during the same stage of the operation and the nail unlocked automatically before being advanced. Again, the nail was removed temporarily and was relocked and repositioned. In three more cases, during the same stage, the locking rings of some rods of the nail broke, making it impossible to reposition the nail. In all three, a new nail was used. After our 10-year experience in the treatment of femoral shaft fractures with locking intramedullary nails It is known that the presence of micromovement and the transfer of loads in the area of a fracture favour callus formation It seems that Marcetti–Vicenzi nails with five secondary nails do not offer the appropriate stability and that the nail is not adequate for fractures of the distal third of the femur. The outward gradient of 8° in the cylindrical part of the nail permits its introduction just lateral to the tip of the trochanter without fear of a varus deformity in cases of subtrochanteric fractures, resulting in easier access, which is of greater importance in obese patients and especially when a supine position is used. Also, the possibility of aseptic necrosis of the femoral head The avoidance of distal locking, which is for many operators the most difficult stage of intramedullary nailing In conclusion, we believe that this elastic nail is not to be recommended for the treatment of femoral shaft fractures.