Humanly modified ground covers a large proportion of the ice-free terrestrial surface of the Earth. It consists of settlement debris, dumped waste, landfill, reclaimed land, cut features, earthworks, cultivation soils, and other kinds of ground significantly modified by humans. Considered as a single entity, it is expanding at accelerating rates as human population increases and is still in the process of formation and transformation. Technically part of the geosphere, it has aspects that are unprecedented in earlier geologic strata. It contains an abundance of artifacts and novel materials, as well as bones of humans and domesticated animals.Humanly modified ground is known by various names including artificial ground, man-made ground, made ground, and anthropogenic ground. It is classified differently, depending on the discipline, so that what geologists call artificial ground, for example, might be identified by soil scientists as anthrosols and technosols, by architects and civil engineers as made ground, and by archaeologists as archaeological strata. Each discipline brings its own methods and perspectives to bear upon it, perceiving it through the prism of its specific conceptual frameworks. But as the ground beneath our feet, humanly modified ground cannot be “claimed” by any one specialism, since it is wider than all of them. It is a transdisciplinary phenomenon manifesting, in one form or another, as matter relevant to a range of scientific, humanistic, artistic, and practical fields—not least to the study of the Anthropocene. The story of the discovery of humanly modified ground starts in cities. Cities are built on platforms of their own debris, rising up over time so gradually that city dwellers hardly notice its vast presence. The first to take stock of this phenomenon were civil engineers working on large urban infrastructure projects in the mid-19th century. One of these was Eduard Suess, the well-known Austrian geologist. As a civil engineer who brought a supply of fresh water to Vienna from the Alps, he was actively involved in the physical transformation of the city from a medieval stronghold to modern urban center. In the 1850s, ancient ramparts surrounding the historic core were removed and replaced by boulevards and parks of the Ringstrasse, a process that involved cutting great cliff faces through urban strata. It was during these groundworks that Suess observed the platform of accumulated occupation debris upon which Vienna was built, which he called the Schuttdecke or “rubble blanket.” This layer of humanly modified ground varied greatly in thickness but was up to 10 Meanwhile, other European cities were undergoing transformations on a similar scale. In London, Joseph Bazalgette was engaged in the construction of a modern sewer system and associated river embankments. During the works, he systematically recorded the thickness of what he called “made ground.” It contained, among other things, large quantities of human bones from numerous burial grounds cut through by the trenches. In the center of London, the layer was 5–8 The paradox is that in uncovering and recording the existence of humanly modified ground, 19th-century engineers were simultaneously transforming it—and on a massive scale. In cutting through the existing formations, they were extending these even deeper into the ground. In raising the level of the ground through the building of river embankments and other earthworks, they were adding yet more humanly modified material to ancient accumulations of it. Their works left substantial traces, which inevitably became integral parts of newly configured and transformed versions of humanly modified ground. In the 1920s, geologist Robert Sherlock noted that made ground tends to be much thicker in older parts of London, decreasing in thickness the further one goes away from the historic core. He observed local thickenings of it where older towns and villages had been absorbed into the expanding metropolis, thereby hinting at processes of coalescence of previously separate formations. Such findings apply to the development of historic towns and cities throughout the world. However, Sherlock was concerned with all types of humanly modified ground, not just accumulations of urban occupation debris. He realized that humans were agents of denudation and agents of deposition, comparable to wind or water in their erosive power. Mines and quarries, railway cuttings, canals, and so on are all examples of human denudation. But whereas natural forces of erosion tend to wear away softer material and surfaces first, the human activities of mining and tunneling often remove hard rock from deeper strata to leave the surface relatively undisturbed ( Sherlock's great insight was to make the connection between processes of denudation and deposition, and his approach was to study both together as part of the overall impact of humans on the Earth's surface. Examine any area of humanly modified ground that is raised up, and there is probably a roughly equivalent hole or set of holes cut into the Earth's surface, from where the material was originally obtained. The same applies the other way round. Wherever there is a created void in the ground surface, there is likely to be some accumulation of material elsewhere. The correspondence is not exact, but as a general rule of thumb, it is extremely useful to bear in mind. We might think in terms of flows of material, human-induced, from one geologic context to another. Take for example Grant Park in Chicago. Covering over 300 The essential point about raised ground being connected with holes, voids, and cuts—and vice versa—could be illustrated with examples from every country in the world. Cities like San Francisco, Mumbai, and Mexico City—to name just a few—are built in part on substantial landfill deposits. An important research question to ask is where did that material come from? The answer is different in each case but always illuminating. In London, one of the largest engineered structures is the Thames Embankment, constructed by teams of navvies led by Joseph Bazalgette. Millions of tonnes of earth fill were required, and this was mostly obtained by dredging gravel from the bed of the river. A deepening of the river and its estuary was inextricably connected with the building up of the banks in the city. At the same time in London, engineers constructing the world's first metro system had the opposite problem—how to dispose of millions of tonnes of spoil. Here, the question might be asked, where did this material go? Some of it was used to make railway embankments on overland stretches of line. Some was used to fill in quarries or mines or gravel pits where mineral extraction had taken place. Much was taken by barge downriver to be dumped on the shores of the Thames Estuary, to reclaim land for agriculture. Some of it was even used to make the terraces of Chelsea's football ground. More recently, during the construction of Crossrail tunnels, over 5 million tonnes of earth were dumped at Wallasea Island in Essex to create a bird sanctuary and wildlife reserve. Any future geologist studying the stratigraphic signature of metros would have to consider not only the tunnels but also the numerous places of deposition of spoil throughout the country. To complicate matters further, material was imported into metro tunnels and exported out from them, in a kind of geologic exchange. Hundreds of millions of bricks were used in the construction of early metro tunnel linings, for example. Some of these came from the very clay that had been excavated from the tunnels themselves, but most were manufactured from material quarried from clay pits in and around London. These clay pits, then, are also part of the overall stratigraphic signature of early metros. Some of those pits were subsequently filled with spoil from further tunneling activity. Large clay pits of south Bedfordshire, the United Kingdom, were dug by giant dragline excavators from the early to late 20th century, cutting deep down into Jurassic clays. The pits are situated in a rural location, but there are at least two senses in which they might be regarded as giant trace fossils of the city. First, the clay extracted was used to make bricks for the construction of houses in London suburbs. Secondly, some were subsequently used as containers for landfill, much of it consisting of household rubbish generated from the same suburban housing. The compacted landfill is up to 70 In Berlin, immense amounts of rubble were created by wartime bombing, and there were no convenient holes in the ground nearby to dump it. The solution was to spread it over available open areas and to use the raised ground for parks or airports or alternatively to heap it up into great mounds, forming artificial hills. The greatest of these is the Teufelsberg or “Devil's Mountain.” At 80 It is now known that the annual volume of human-induced flows of materials is at least three times greater than the amount of sediment eroded, moved, and deposited by the world's rivers. But whereas rivers tend to carry their sediment loads in a downward direction, humans and their machines can raise material up against the force of gravity, constituting a form of geologic uplift. Geologists studying humanly modified ground along the east coast of Japan found it behaves differently from nonmodified geologic strata when placed under stress by extreme events such as earthquakes and tsunamis. It is subject to liquefaction and fluidization or liable to shear off along its lower bounding surface. Geopollution can be caused by contaminated substances migrating along pathways within it ( It might be thought from the aforementioned examples that humanly modified ground is only a recent phenomenon. But while the advent of steam-powered and petrol-fueled engines accelerated the rate of landscape modification, land has been extensively modified by people using simpler technology for thousands of years. Humanly modified ground includes these more ancient strata and more recent deposits. All are part of a single, growing entity, which has also been called the “archaeosphere.” ( This archaeosphere layer may be shallow and patchy, like a well-worn carpet, but it occupies a crucial interface zone. It is in active interchange with the atmosphere, for example, in the absorption or release of carbon dioxide by plants and microbes in cultivation soils depending on farming regimes (large amounts of CO Multiple small-scale local modifications of land, such as terracing of hills and valleys, when viewed over large areas and long periods of time, amount to landscape transformations on a vast scale. Terraces formed by building low walls act as dams for flows of sediment moving downhill, with gravity and flowing water being harnessed to do most of the work in moving material. Sediment trapped behind the walls is used to form the terraces of level fields. Huge tracts of land have been terraformed in this way. Agricultural production throughout much of Asia and other parts of the world is based on this long-established and still evolving material infrastructure. The growth of humanly modified ground in urban settings, noted by Suess and others, is prefigured by accumulation of occupation debris in “tells” or ancient settlement mounds. In the earliest protourban centers in the valleys of the Tigris and Euphrates, mud bricks fired in the sun were used to build houses. When these decayed, the material from which they were made formed part of the ground on which subsequent houses were built, raising the height of the settlement mound. Surrounding the mounds are the stratigraphic traces of quarries and hollows from which clay for the mud bricks was taken. Some of these were used as dumps and infilled with settlement rubbish—the world's first landfills. The Teufelsberg in Berlin, discussed earlier, was not the first dump of wartime rubble. When Carthage was destroyed by the Romans in 146 BCE, for instance, demolition rubble was spread over a wide area and can still be found as a substantial destruction layer in the ground beneath the later Roman city. There is no difference in principle between these ancient deposits and the recent or contemporary ones, though the latter may have been created by machine and contain plastic and ceramic artifacts. In many places, they can be found together in the same stratigraphic sequences, with later layers and features overlaying or cutting through earlier ones. The archaeosphere did not stop forming at some point in the past. Its features got bigger and its accumulated layers accelerated in their rate of formation. Isolated deposits coalesced into larger conglomerations, which were themselves expanding. Cities continued to rise up on their platforms of occupation debris, burying rivers and streams in the process. There was also an extension of humanly modified ground downward, as mines and metros and deep tunnel sewers and other subterranean tunnel systems were built deeper into the ground. Such processes are ongoing. The archaeosphere and its humanly modified ground are still forming. “Archaeo” means old, but there is no contradiction in applying the term to an entity which contains recent and contemporary, as well as ancient, things. The appropriateness of the term derives from the fact that extensive modern human modifications of the ground leave stratigraphic traces, which will form the archaeology of tomorrow. Significantly, the archaeosphere has a lower bounding surface, which can be located in the ground. It varies from being clear-cut to very diffuse. Archaeologists sometimes informally refer to it as “the surface of the natural.” Geologists in Japan call it the Jinji unconformity, which when loosely translated means the conjunction of human and natural. Its key characteristic is that it is a diachronic boundary, changing in date of formation from one part of its surface to another ( Despite early work on humanly modified ground by geologists such as Suess and Sherlock, it was only from the 1980s that geologists started to systematically record it as a geologic layer, now more usually referred to as “artificial ground” ( This classification system works well for large-scale mappings of landscapes where the required level of detail is low. But for more fine-grained description, it would be necessary to switch to archaeological methods of identification and recording. What is the difference between artificial ground and archaeological stratigraphy? The material entity in question is essentially the same no matter what it is called. But there are disciplinary differences in perception and method. Thus, geologists generally map artificial ground as a single entity relative to other strata, with only basic subdivisions noted within it, while archaeologists record it in much more detail as a complex set of deposits made up of multiple layers, cuts, features, lenses, and so on. There are many advantages in taking a multidisciplinary approach to the study of humanly modified ground. It is useful to shift between scales of analysis—to zoom in from the bigger picture to the detail and zoom back out again. To get an overall grasp of scale of human impact on the stratigraphy of the Earth, the more general geologic characterizations may be most appropriate. To pinpoint the first appearances, developments, and spreads of novel materials (such as ceramics, metals, concrete, or plastics) or specific types of artifact (such as iPhones) in the stratigraphic record, the more detailed focus and method of archaeology becomes relevant. Humanly modified ground is a multiscalar phenomenon. The closer it is examined, the more information it can reveal, but it is also crucial to step back to study it as a global-scale entity. It is estimated that humanly modified ground in some form covers about half the ice-free terrestrial surfaces of the Earth, with this area expanding rapidly as the population of humans (and their domesticated animals) increases. However, mapping of surface extent needs to be supplemented by data on the crucial third dimension of depth. To capture its growth and transformation in the fourth dimension of time, furthermore, it would also be necessary to map it at periodic intervals. The so-called rubble blanket of Vienna, for example, now covers an area several times larger than it was when Suess mapped it in the 1850s. Its time-transgressive character should be recorded. “Humanly modified ground” is used here as a broad term, which can be easily transferred across disciplines. It is important to be critical of terms still in common usage such as “man-made ground.” Needless to say, all humans of whatever gender or age are responsible for the formation of this material entity, and the name should reflect this. Similarly, the term “artificial ground” might be taken to imply that it is wholly human-made. Yet, even the most humanly shaped ground is subject to a range of biological and geologic forces—activity of soil microbes, tunneling of ants or termites, burrowing of earthworms and small mammals, delving of plant roots, groundwater percolating through, and so on—which may play significant roles in its formation and transformation. In his early encounter with the Schuttdecke, Eduard Suess perceived it mainly as a single entity. But he was also aware of its internal differentiation and presciently remarked that within it could be found the whole poignant history of Vienna. The implication was that if one learned to read the configuration of physical traces and placement of objects it contains, that history could be unraveled. In the 150 years since Suess made those observations in Vienna, archaeologists have honed geologic principles of stratigraphy to the specific character of humanly modified ground. There are aspects of humanly modified ground that are unprecedented in earlier geologic strata. One difference is the prevalence of large numbers of cuts and recuts, some of which are intentionally placed and embody elements of intentional design. Another difference is the presence of architectural formations such as wall foundations within strata. Geologic principles alone are not sufficient to explain such configurations of evidence. However, by treating cuts and other interfaces as stratigraphic entities, it becomes possible to disentangle sequences of layers, structures, cut features, and their fills. Of particular relevance is the Harris matrix ( Unlike ancient deposits used to define the beginnings and ends of previous geologic time periods, humanly modified ground is still in the process of formation. The cutting and deposition of it can be observed in real time. Another remarkable aspect is that even the scientists who study it are agents in those formation processes. This is expressed in the material stratigraphy itself. Within the configurations of strata are the cuts and fills of archaeological trenches and geologic boreholes. Any subsequent investigation by means of excavation or drilling will inevitably leave further traces. The layer is likewise unusual in being found not only on Earth but also, in incipient form, on Earth's moon and on other planets in the solar system, where humans or their remotely operated robotic vehicles have left traces ( Perhaps the main distinguishing characteristic of humanly modified ground is the abundance of artifacts and novel material inclusions. Artifacts are trace fossils of humans, sometimes called “technofossils” for that reason. But these are very different from fossils of biological organisms, which when alive were subject to forces of natural selection. Artifacts, in contrast, are subject to cultural and technological processes of development but only indirectly influenced by forces of natural selection. A similar observation can be made in relation to the remains of domesticated animals and plants often found in the same assemblages as artifacts and novel materials. Unlike organisms that lived in all previous geologic periods, domesticated species have been subject to human selection alongside forces of natural selection. This subtle difference marks something quite new in the history of the Earth. For a stark illustration of the difference in stratigraphic terms, consider the clay quarries filled with landfill mentioned earlier. Because the quarries were cut down deep into Jurassic clays, the lower boundary or cut is formed of material containing the fossilized remains of ammonites, belemnites, It might be objected here that some artifacts, such as hand axes, are found in earlier geologic strata. This is true, but these are made out of natural materials like stone. Humanly modified ground, however, contains materials completely unprecedented in earlier strata. Pottery, glass, brick, tile, metal alloys, and plastics are examples of such novel materials. Then, there are the “anthropic rocks” ( It is interesting to follow the thought experiment of  The totality of humanly modified ground considered as a global entity. Objects made by humans, bearing traces of manufacture and use. Of more than one time, varying in date of formation. Manufactured materials (such as ceramics, concrete, glass, and plastics) that are unprecedented in earlier geologic strata. The study of rock and soil strata and their patterns of layering in the ground. Artifacts considered as potential trace fossils of humans. Settlement mounds formed from the accumulation of occupation debris.