The division of gas/liquid flow at a large diameter T-junction has been studied experimentally. The misdistribution of the phases has been quantified for horizontal semi-annular flow. Film thickness variations about the circumference of the inlet and outlet pipes have been obtained using conductivity techniques. In addition, liquid depth profiles within the junction have been measured. The data have been compared with available theoretical models.Multiphase flow, primarily liquid–gas flow, exists in chemical, power, oil/gas production and oil refining plants. These flow are very complex. However, observation has shown that when such flows divide at T-junctions there is an added level of complexity with an almost inevitable maldistribution of the phases ( The maldistribution which occurs when a gas/liquid flow divides at a T-junctions can have both negative and positive consequences. On the negative side, the maldistribution can result in a fall in efficiency in downstream equipment. There is anecdotal evidence to support this. A bank of four air-cooled heat exchangers (fin–fan coolers) was operated in parallel as condensers. The feed arrived partially condensed at the inlet manifold connecting the exchangers. This consisted of a series of side pipes off a main header, i.e., a series of dividing junctions. In operation the fourth exchanger significantly underperformed. Simple laboratory trials using four pipes connecting the inlet and outlet headers quantified the routes taken by the two phases and showed that the first three side arms each took approximately 30% of the gas and ∼10% of the liquid. The final pipe received most of the liquid. It then became obvious why the fourth condenser was underperforming; it was overwhelmed with liquid. Another example of phase maldistribution has been reported from offshore platforms in the UK North Sea. Here, it had been decided to install two main (phase) vessel separators in parallel. This would enable production to continue albeit at a reduced level if there was a need for maintenance or modification of a separator. To ensure an even split of the phases, an impacting T-junction was employed, i.e., one in which both outlet pipes were at right angles to the inlet. When the system was started up it was found that one separator received most of the gas whilst the other got most of the liquid. Inspection of the pipework upstream of the junction showed that a bend had been positioned at the worst possible place. This bend was centrifuging the phases and presenting each outlet with substantially one phase. A more positive note has been struck recently by There have been a large number of studies of the phase split. As noted by These models require information about the film flow variation about the inlet pipe. Secondary flow in the gas phase, pumping action in the disturbance waves and entrainment /deposition have been suggested as the mechanisms which balance the draining effect of gravity and maintain the liquid film at the top of the pipe. The diameters of pipelines in the oil/gas production industry are usually in the range 0.1–1 m. They handle gas superficial velocities in the range 0–20 m/s and liquid superficial velocities of 0–2.5 m/s. In this paper flow split data for (semi) annular flow approaching a horizontal T-junction of 0.127 m diameter are presented. For these inlet conditions, film thicknesses around the pipe circumference in all three legs of the junction have been measured. The liquid depth variation within the junction itself has also been obtained. For the same inlet flow rates data of phase split were also obtained. Measurements are reported which characterise the film distribution around the junction, within the T-junction, in the inlet and outlet pipes, and upstream of the T-junction near the mixing section. The effect of gas and liquid inlet flow rates and of the phase split are considered. The apparatus employed in the experiments reported here is the same as that used by The T-junction was positioned 3.5 m downstream of the mixer. There is a further 3.5 of 0.127 m diameter tubing, which is followed by a 120° bend. Beyond the bend is a further 0.5 m of piping, containing a butterfly valve, which leads to a cyclone. The side arm consists of 1.5 of 0.127 m-diameter tubing leading to another butterfly valve and a second cyclone. The T-junctions used in the present experiments had a main bore and side arm both 0.127 m in diameter and was machined from an acrylic resin block with the outside machined to a square cross-section (0.2×0.2 m) to minimise refraction problems during observation. It had carefully machined sharp corners so as to eliminate the radius of curvature as a possible variable in the experiments and had flanges at the three ends so as to mate with the rest of the test section piping. The air and water leaving the test section are separated in the two cyclones. Calibrated venturi meters or orifice plates on top of the cyclones are used to measure the airflow rate. The water flow rate is determined by diverting the flow from either cyclone to a weigh tank mounted on a calibrated load cell and measuring the timed discharge. In a recent comprehensive review of measurement methods for film thickness, Conductance probes are defined as the arrangement of two electrodes, extremities of a circuit, which is closed by the liquid film bridging between them. Three probe configurations have been used for film thickness measurement in pipes. These are needle probes, parallel wires and flush mounted pins.    A composite type, a combination of the flush mounted and wire probes was used by The types of probe employed in this study were chosen on the basis of the characteristics described above and visual observations of the flow regime in the inlet pipe. A semi-annular flow was observed with a thick film at the pipe bottom, and a much thinner film at the top. Therefore, wire probes were used at the pipe bottom and flush mounted probes at the top. The method employed for the measurement of film thickness at the bottom of the pipe is the same employed by The electronic circuit to apply voltage and is subsequent filtering is the same as used by The system was calibrated by mounting the ring containing the probes between two short pieces of acrylic resin pipe. The ends were sealed with transparent plates and scales were placed on each. Water was added or removed via a small hole. The cylinder was mounted horizontally and the liquid height measured. Calibration of the probes at the periphery of the pipe cross-section proved more difficult. The curvature of the pipe caused a difference in height of ∼6.4 and 2.1 mm between the bottom of the two electrodes for the most external (A and E) and intermediate (B and D) probes, respectively, Because the electrical conductivity of water was seen to vary with temperature and salt concentration the calibration was carried out with solutions of de-ionised water and sodium chloride of three different conductivities in the expected range for steps of ∼50 μS/cm. This permitted a calibration curve to be produced for each probe correct for the conductivity of the liquid being used. Two electrode spacings were incorporated into the same test section, Pairs of pins, from the series mounted around the pipe were selected by using a set of switches. This was arranged in such a way that intermediate electrodes could belong to two probes in sequence, one with a spacing of 5 mm and the other of 10 mm. The sequence is shown in Calibration was carried out using slots machined out of an acrylic resin cylinder with the same diameter as the test section. At one end, a length of 60 mm, the cylinder was notched progressively for steps of 51°, cutting 0.3, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2.25, 3 and 5 mm off the original surface,  A third test section was designed and constructed to measure film heights within the T-junction. Stainless steel wires were fitted in the locations shown in The same circuitry was employed as for the ‘harp’. Calibration and measurements were taken in sets of five starting from the first row seen by the splitting flow down to the 5th. Finally, the signals from the row F–F were acquired. Calibration was obtained by placing the T-junction on a horizontal plane and blanking off the three exits. The pipes and the junction block were carefully designed and manufactured to ensure that there were no abrupt changes in diameter, which would disrupt the film. The harp and pin-ring test sections were positioned successively in each of the three pipes of the junction. They could be positioned within 10 mm from each other and 125 mm from the centre of the junction. Because of flange design, the harp was upstream in the run and side arm and downstream of the pin-ring in the inlet pipe. Tap water, which was used in the experiments, was found to have a conductivity between 500 and 650 μS/cm. If not replaced the water quickly became fouled and mineral deposits begun to show, particularly on the wires. To avoid large variations of conductivity within the same experimental run and to reduce fouling of the electrodes, fresh water was fed continuously to the storage tank and discharged to drain. Within twenty minutes of start-up, the conductivity was seen to settle out to a constant value with fluctuations <1%. Conductivity was checked throughout each session of experiments by collecting water ∼6 m downstream of the measuring station. The conductivities determined during the measurement were used to interpolate between the calibration curves to obtain the signal/film thickness relationship. Calibrations were repeated periodically without any cleaning of the electrodes. It was observed that the variations of the calibration curves caused changes in the film thicknesses, which were well within experimental error. The largest discrepancy recorded was 3.5%. From the gradient of the signal/film thickness curve and the accuracy of the signal measurement the uncertainty in film thickness at the top of the pipe is about 10%. The value for thicker films at the pipe bottom is much lower. The inlet flow rates at which data were taken are shown in Phase split data have been obtained for these inlet conditions. Different fractions of the flow were diverted through the side arm by altering the degree of closure of the butterfly valves on the two downstream legs. One of the first tests to be carried out was to compare the present film thickness data with those obtained by Film thickness measurements were taken for the same inlet conditions as the phase split data. The results are plotted as film thickness/pipe diameter. Logarithmic plots are used to cope with the large range of values. The abscissa is the angular position of the probes and the convention is anti-clockwise for the observer travelling with the direction of the flow. The effect of phase split on the film distribution for this case can be seen in   The data collected can be used to understand the variation of film distribution with gas and liquid superficial velocities. Because of the large number of stations at which measurements have been made within the T-junction, it is convenient to use a simple code identifying the rows and columns of the matrix of positions. To appreciate the effect of different split conditions, it can be significant to plot for low, medium and high gas take off, the film contour along the side arm, As with the results of the harp/pin test sections, it is interesting to compare results obtained for similar split and for either a constant gas or constant liquid superficial velocity, varying superficial velocity of the other phase. The present experimental data have been used to validate models for the prediction of film flow variation around the pipe circumference and of the phase split. Two levels of model are considered. The first is essentially one-dimensional and uses the ideas of The models give a reasonable prediction of the film thickness variation upstream of the T-junction. The models give reasonable predictions of the phase split. The results of From the material presented above it can be concluded: The phase split of semi-annular flow at a large diameter T-junction is liquid dominated. Less than 20% of the liquid is taken off for 80% gas take off. The liquid at the entry to the T-junction is concentrated in the bottom 30% of the pipe with a thin film on the remaining, top part of the pipe. The film thickness distribution just inside the side arm is characterised by two peaks at ∼120° and ∼230° from the top of the pipe. The film distributions are not sensitive to take off up to 80% gas take off and to gas and liquid inlet flow rate. This work was funded by EPSRC, Grant GR/K82741. The authors would like to thanks Dr. R. Issa and Mr. D. Adechy (Imperial College), Dr. L.C. Daniels (Hyprotech Ltd), Mr. P. Gramme (Norsk Hydro) and Mr. D. Dick (BP) for their helpful comments.