Multiferroic materials have attracted the attention of scientific community all over the world due to smart functionality and attractive applications such as in magnetoelectric memory and magnetoelectric sensors. In this paper, we report on the ferroelectric, magnetic and magnetoelectric properties of microwave sintered BiFeO3 (BFO) and Bi0.90La0.10Fe0.95Mn0.05O3 (BLFMO) ceramics. The ferromagnetic and paramagnetic components have been deconvoluted using standard magnetization equation. The ferromagnetic saturation and paramagnetic susceptibility for BFO are found to be 0.046 emu/g and 1.17 × 10−5 emu/g·Oe respectively. The magnetization in BLFMO increases enormously as compared to BFO due to suppression of cycloid spin. The magnetoelectric voltage coefficient for BFO is 3.37 mV/cm·Oe, while for BLFMO it is 10.11 mV/cm·Oe. As compared to BFO, BLFMO exhibits improved ferroelectric, magnetic and magnetoelectric properties.Materials combining two or three properties such as ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, and/or ferroelasticity are called multiferroics. Multiferroic materials have drawn huge interest in the last decade due to their attractive physical properties and applications in sensors, spintronics and memory devices In recent years many new oxide multiferroic are investigated like REMnO Caicedo et al. were the first to observe a magnetoelectric behavior of more than 6.5 mV/cm.Oe measured in longitudinal mode at 7 kHz The motivation of this paper is to study the magnetoelectric properties of BFO and Bi Pure and single-phase mono dispersed nanoparticles ( The room temperature X-ray diffraction pattern of microwave sintered BFO and BLFMO ceramics is depicted in BFO is antiferromagnetic, due to a G-type canted spin structure. This prevents the observation of magnetic properties in BFO and hinders the magnetoelectric property. The magnetic hysteresis (M-H) loops of microwave sintered BFO and BLFMO studied at room temperature with the maximum applied magnetic field of ±50 kOe are exhibited in To demarcate the contribution of ferromagnetic and paramagnetic components, the The ferroelectric polarization-electric field (P-E) hysteresis loops with polarization current of BFO and BLFMO measured at room temperature at a frequency of 10 Hz are depicted in The magnetoelectric effect can be established experimentally by measuring the change in the electrical field in the presence of a magnetic field or vice versa. The change of dielectric constant with the magnetic field is called as a magnetodielectric effect. However, as reported by Catalan et al., the magnetodielectric effect can also arise due to the contribution of magnetoresistive phenomena in addition to Maxwell-Wagner effect The variation of magnetodielectric coefficient versus magnetic field is depicted in The thermodynamic potential ϕ for a multiferroic material can be defined as, Magnetoelectric materials experience stress in the presence of a magnetic field, and as a result, it gets strained. This strain induces stress on the piezoelectric phase, which generates the electric field. This field could then orient the ferroelectric domains, leading to a higher polarization value. This effect is called as a magnetoelectric coefficient. The magnetoelectric coefficient is given by, The variation of the magnetoelectric coefficient (α To investigate the leakage current behavior, electric field dependence of leakage current density for the BFO and BLFMO ceramics is plotted in Electrical, magnetic and magnetoelectric properties of microwave sintered BFO and BLFMO have been investigated. The co-doping of La and Mn in BFO ceramics causes a distorted rhombohedral structure. BLFMO exhibits a drastic change in the remnant magnetization due to octahedral tilt and suppression of cycloid spin. The magnetodielectric coefficient is improved by three times with La and Mn co-substitution. The magnetoelectric voltage coefficients are 3.37 and 10.11 for BFO and BLFMO respectively. La and Mn co-doping reduces oxygen vacancies and improves leakage behavior. Thus, BLFMO exhibits an improvement in electrical as well as magnetic properties over BFO and can be a promising candidate for magnetoelectric applications. The authors thank IRCC, IIT Bombay for providing vibrating sample magnetometer and broadband dielectric spectrometer facilities.