The photoelectro-Fenton degradation of 2.5l of solutions containing herbicide mecoprop (2-(4-chloro-2-methylphenoxy)-propionic acid) up to 0.64gl−1, 0.05M Na2SO4 and 0.5mM Fe2+ of pH 3.0 has been studied using a flow plant with a one-compartment filter-press electrolytic reactor with a boron-doped diamond (BDD) anode and an O2-diffusion cathode, both of 20-cm2 area, coupled to either a UVA or solar photoreactor. Electrolyses performed in batch at low constant current density yield overall mineralization in both methods, although the process is much faster and less expensive with solar light. Under these conditions, the degradation rate and efficiency increase strongly with rising mecoprop content. The kinetics for the herbicide decay follows a pseudo-first-order reaction. Mecoprop reacts rapidly with hydroxyl radical (OH) produced from Fenton's reaction between Fe2+ and H2O2 electrogenerated at the cathode to yield 4-chloro-o-cresol, 2-methylhydroquinone and 2-methyl-p-benzoquinone as primary reaction products. Fe3+-oxalato and Fe3+-acetato complexes are detected as the most persistent final products. Overall mineralization is attained because Fe3+-oxalato complexes are efficiently photodecomposed by solar irradiation, whereas Fe3+-acetato complexes are slowly destroyed by OH formed at the BDD anode from water oxidation. The initial chlorine is released as Cl−, which is slowly oxidized to Cl2 on BDD. Photoelectro-Fenton with solar light appears to be a viable method to remove chlorophenoxy herbicides in wastewaters at industrial scale.An increasing accumulation of chlorophenoxy herbicides in US and European ground waters and surface waters at relatively high contamination levels has been recently documented Mecoprop (2-(4-chloro-2-methylphenoxy)-propionic acid or MCPP) is a translocatable postemergence chlorophenoxypropionic herbicide, widely used for control of cleavers, chickweed and other weeds in cereal crops. It has been detected as minor pollutant in US and European soils, as well as in ground waters and surface waters, being the most often found herbicide in drinking water The recent use of indirect electrooxidation methods such as electro-Fenton (EF) and photoelectro-Fenton (PEF) for water remediation has attracted great interest The EF treatment of several chlorophenoxy herbicides, including MCPP, has been reported by Oturan et al. Previous work at laboratory scale of 100 MCPP (95% purity) from Lancaster was recrystallized in a 50:50 (v/v) ethanol/water mixture before use. 4-Chloro- The concentration of accumulated H Comparative treatments of 2.5 The ability of the electrolytic system to accumulate H In the PEF process, however, H A solution of 2.5 Although the intensities of UVA and solar irradiation, as well as the geometry of their corresponding photoreactors, are different, a similar action of oxidants BDD( Ion chromatograms of the above treated solutions exhibited a well-defined peak related to Cl The above results allow establishing that the mineralization of MCPP gives carbon dioxide and Cl  The effect of current density and Fe The above findings evidence that the use of a low current density of 50 The decay of MCPP concentration in the different treatments was followed by reversed-phase chromatography, where it displayed a well-defined peak at retention time ( The decay kinetics for MCPP was comparatively studied by treating 100 The influence of herbicide concentration on its decay kinetics in PEF with solar light was further investigated. Reversed-phase chromatograms of 100 The attack of Ion-exclusion chromatograms of the above treated solutions showed a large accumulation of carboxylic acids such as oxalic ( In the AOPs tested Fe It has been demonstrated that PEF with UVA or solar light yields complete mineralization (>96% of TOC removal) of mecoprop at pH 3.0 using a one-compartment cell with a BDD anode. The herbicide undergoes a similar degradation pathway in both treatments, but solar light allows a much faster and less expensive decontamination. Experiments carried out in a flow plant with an electrochemical reactor coupled to a solar photoreactor show a strong enhancement of the degradation rate and efficiency with rising herbicide concentration. MCPP and its aromatic products are rapidly converted into final Fe The authors acknowledge the grant given to C. Flox and financial support for this work from MEC (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, Spain) under project CTQ2004-01954/BQU.