A new process was provided for decomposition of ilmenite by concentrated KOH solution under atmospheric pressure. The significant effects of reaction temperature, KOH concentration, stirring speed, particle size, and alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratios on titanium extraction were studied. The temperature and initial particle size showed significant influence on titanium extraction. The experimental data of the extraction rates under the relevant operating variables were well interpreted with the shrinking core model under chemically controlled process. The apparent activation energy of the reaction was evaluated using the Arrhenius expression. Approximately 80–85% of the titanium could be leached from the ilmenite ore under the optimal conditions.It is well known that China owns the huge reserves of titanic minerals. However, most of these titanium-bearing minerals belong to the low-grade minerals such as ilmenite, and there are many difficulties in utilizing them due to the high content of impurities. As sources of high-grade titanic minerals decrease worldwide, many studies have been performed on upgrading of ilmenite in recent years, which can be summarized into two categories: pyrometallurgical and hydrometallurgical methods. In the pyrometallurgical route, ilmenite is partially reduced by anthracite at elevated temperature to obtain a cast and a slag with high titanium ( In the present study, a new process for the decomposition of ilmenite has been proposed. In this process, ilmenite is decomposed in fluid medium of concentrated KOH solution under atmospheric pressure and an intermediate with high in titanium and low in iron is obtained by separation, which can be converted into pigment grade titanium dioxide after further treatment. In comparison with the conventional process of upgrading of ilmenite, this process requires relatively mild reaction conditions and high decomposition rate of ilmenite can be fulfilled at relatively low temperature under atmospheric pressure. Therefore, the energy consumption of the new technology is lower than the existing those and may have strong potential applications. The purpose of the present investigation is to obtain essential information on the kinetic of the concentrated KOH solution decomposition process for ilmenite with respect of the reaction mechanism. Moreover, the phase identification and transformation of the products were also investigated in the present study. The solid KOH was reagent grade and the deionized water was used in the experiment. The ilmenite used as raw material to produce pigment grade titanium dioxide through the sulfate method was supplied by the Yuxing Chemical and Industrial Company (Shan Dong province, China). The ilmenite was dried, and screened into four particle size fractions to examine the effect of particle size on titanium extraction. The detailed chemical composition of the ilmenite with different particle size fraction was examined by ICP-OES and the analytic results are shown in The batch reactor used in this study was a 300 ml SUS316 stainless steel container, whose inner diameter is 60 mm, and equipped with a thermometer, a mechanical stirrer and a reflux condenser. The reactor was heated by a heating furnace to reach and maintain the desired temperature within ± All the experiments were conducted in batch. For each run, 160 g solid KOH and the required amount of deionized water were first charged into the reactor. After that, the reactor was heated under continuous stirring. When the temperature reached the preset value and kept stable, a certain amount of ilmenite was added to the reactor. Then, the mixture of the reactants was stirred at specific stirring speed under atmospheric pressure. At appropriate time intervals during a run, approximately 2 g sample was taken out and analyzed for titanium content by ICP-OES. The reaction of ilmenite with concentrated KOH solution led to the formation of potassium titanate (K The titanium extraction was calculated by dissolving the sample in HCl, and the dissolution took place according to the following reaction: After the complete dissolution of the sample, the chloride solution was filtered off and analyzed for its titanium content, and then the extent of titanium extraction was calculated. In order to improve the decomposition rate, many decomposition processes for fine particles required intense agitation to exclude the influence of external mass transfer (diffusion through liquid boundary layer). The effect of agitation on the extraction of titanium was investigated in 80 wt.% KOH solution with the 160–180 μm size fraction of the ilmenite at 200 °C, using alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratio of 7:1. The stirring speed was varied from 500 to 1200 min The dependence of particle size on the extraction of titanium was carried out in 80 wt.% KOH solution at 200 °C with alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratio of 7:1, using the four particle size fractions: 160–180, 109–160, 75–109 and 58–75 μm. The results presented in The effect of alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratios on the extraction of titanium was investigated in 80 wt.% KOH solution with the 160–180 μm size fraction of the ilmenite at 200 °C, using the alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratios of 5:1, 7:1 and 9:1. The solids concentration of the alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratios of 5:1, 7:1 and 9:1 are approximate 288.0, 205.7 and 160.0 g/L, respectively. The results in The dependence of KOH concentration on the extraction of titanium was investigated at 200 °C using the 160–180 μm size fraction of the ilmenite with the alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratio of 7:1. The KOH concentration used are 70, 80 and 84 wt.%. The extraction of titanium vs. time plots for the different KOH concentrations can be derived from The effect of temperature on the extraction of titanium was carried out in 80 wt.% KOH concentration using the 160–180 μm size fraction of the ilmenite with the alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratio of 7:1. The temperature is in the range of 180–220 °C. From the results shown in The extraction of titanium was analyzed with the shrinking core model under the consumption that the ore is homogeneously spherical solid phase ( For determining the kinetics, two established kinetic models were used, expressed by the following equations: To determine which kinetic equation mentioned above is applicable, the data presented in The relation between the overall rate constant from Eq. The apparent rate constant was determined from the straight lines of To identify the phase of the potassium titanate obtained in the reaction process, the products (Ti–Fe cake) was firstly dispersed in ethanol, and the potassium titanate present in the upper solution was separated from the unreacted ilmenite and other impurities due to their different sedimentation rates. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the separated potassium titanate shown in The phase transformation of potassium titanate was carried out by hydrolyzing the potassium titanate in acid solution (pH Systematic experiments were carried out to study on decomposition of ilmenite by concentrated KOH solution under atmospheric pressure. The experimental data indicate that the temperature and particle size have a significant effect on the rate of titanium extraction. Based on the experiment, it can be concluded that approximately 80–85% titanium could be leached from the ilmenite ore when the reaction conditions are: temperature 220 °C; KOH concentration 80 wt.%; size fraction of the ilmenite 160–180 μm and the alkali-to-ilmenite mass ratio 7:1. The results also indicated that the shrinking core model for spherical particles is applicable, and the reaction is controlled by chemical reaction process. The activation energy of the reaction is calculated to be 55.5 kJ mol The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from The National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50574084) and the Key Program Project of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 50234040).