Discontinuity shear strength plays a critical role in many problems encountered in rock engineering, especially in the design of rock slopes. Since its precise estimation is generally not possible, it is crucial that the errors and uncertainties associated with its estimate be quantified and reflected in the design procedure. In this study, the uncertainties underlying discontinuity shear strength are thoroughly examined and an uncertainty analysis model is developed for the estimation of in situ discontinuity shear strength with a special emphasis on rock slopes. An extensive literature survey on shear behavior of unfilled rock discontinuities has been carried out and the necessary data for the quantification of uncertainties are extracted from this survey. These uncertainties stem from the discrepancies between laboratory-measured and in situ discontinuity shear strength values, as well as from the inherent variability of shear strength within a rock medium. The main causes of discrepancies, namely, scale, anisotropy and water saturation are considered. For each source of discrepancy a correction factor, treated as a random variable, is assigned and guidelines for the quantification of the statistical parameters of these correction factors are presented within the framework of the proposed uncertainty analysis model. The proposed uncertainty model provides an analytical tool for the systematic treatment of uncertainties involved in the estimation of the in situ value of peak friction angle from the laboratory test results.Graphite Gneiss Sandstone Design in rock engineering involves numerous uncertainties, resulting from insufficient information and inadequate knowledge of the properties of rock masses. Properties of rock generally vary from location to location and also may change with time. Since, rock exploration and testing is always limited in number, our estimates will involve some degree of uncertainty. Additional uncertainties are introduced due to the estimation of the in situ rock properties from the laboratory test results, since in such tests the actual conditions in the field would not be simulated perfectly. Hence, rock engineers dealing with rock masses should consider and account for these uncertainties. These uncertainties can be analyzed systematically and incorporated into the estimation of in situ properties of rock masses only through the use of statistical and probabilistic concepts and techniques. It is to be noted that the probabilistic approach also provides the necessary tools, through the Bayesian methods, for the incorporation of subjective judgment and expert opinion. This study presents a comprehensive statistical model for the estimation of in situ shear strength of rock discontinuities and for the evaluation of the various uncertainties involved in this estimation process. Different sources and types of uncertainties associated with the discontinuity shear strength are identified and their overall effect is aggregated according to the first-order uncertainty analysis format. Guidelines are provided for the quantification of these uncertainties based on data compiled from an extensive literature survey. The compiled data are processed and presented in a suitable format, so that the required inputs of the statistical model can directly be extracted and used. In the case of rock slopes, the discontinuity shear strength is the most critical slope design parameter due to the vast amount of uncertainties involved. This parameter has two components, namely, friction angle and cohesion. In this study, because of several ambiguities on the existence of cohesion for rough rock discontinuities Sources of uncertainties affecting the rock properties over a rock medium can be considered to be composed of three components, namely, inherent variability, statistical uncertainty and systematic uncertainties. The inherent variability results from the fact that even in a homogeneous rock medium the rock properties exhibit variability by nature. Due to limited field sampling and laboratory testing, the statistics (such as mean, standard deviation) of a rock property will be subject to uncertainty. This type of uncertainty is called statistical, because it will decrease with increasing number of samples. The systematic uncertainties stem from the discrepancies between the laboratory and in situ conditions, due to factors such as scale, anisotropy and water saturation. Additional sampling may not necessarily reduce this systematic discrepancy uncertainty, because the same kind of test conditions is likely to persist and consistently yield high or low property values. In implementing the statistical concepts to a rock medium, the mean or expected value is considered as the “best” estimate of the unknown value of a rock property and the uncertainties are quantified in terms of variance or standard deviation or coefficient of variation (c.o.v.). Coefficient of variation is equal to the ratio of standard deviation to the mean value. It is a dimensionless measure of uncertainty and is very commonly used in engineering. The different types and sources of uncertainties explained above can be analyzed and combined in a systematic way by adopting the uncertainty analysis model proposed in The statistical uncertainty resulting from insufficient number of samples lies mainly in the estimation of the mean rock property. In the case of Hence, combining The mean value of the correction factor associated with the statistical uncertainty, The uncertainties stemming from the test discrepancy errors depend on the rock property, in situ conditions and the types of laboratory tests performed. In cases where more than one discrepancy factor is involved, then the overall mean correction factor, Methods for calculating the statistical parameters of the test discrepancy correction factors depend on the form of available data and information. If sample data, in the form of direct measurements on the effects of discrepancy causes are available, then common statistical estimation techniques [similar to If one believes that any value of Of these distributions, both uniform and symmetric triangular distributions as well as the normal p.d.f. implicitly assume that there is no bias within the prescribed range of values. On the other hand, if there is a bias towards larger or smaller values, the skewed distributions, such as the upper and lower triangular ones will be more suitable. If there is a bias towards the higher values within the specified range, the upper triangular p.d.f. would be the appropriate one. On the contrary, if there exists a bias towards the lower values of the range, the lower triangular distribution (LTD) will be selected. The uniform and the triangular distributions belong to the beta family of statistical distributions. Expert opinion will also provide an important source of information for the quantification of the correction factors. An experienced engineer's opinion on the ranges of the correction factors is as valuable as the test data and these two sources of information can systematically be combined by using the Bayesian statistical concepts. In the Bayesian approach, any information based on subjective judgment or expert opinion is taken as the prior probability and combined with the information extracted from the data modeled as a likelihood function to obtain the posterior probability distribution. In the analysis of uncertainties in the discontinuity shear strength, only the peak friction angle is considered and the cohesion component is ignored due to the reasons stated in In the following sections data for the assessment of various sources of uncertainties relative to the peak friction angle will be presented and guidelines for the quantification of the statistical parameters of the correction factors will be provided. The peak friction angle develops due to the material strength of rock and can ideally be considered as the combination of the basic friction angle and the contribution of roughness on the discontinuity plane. Since the rock material contains some heterogeneity over the rock discontinuity, natural variations in the basic friction angle exist. Hence, these variations on the peak friction angle are reflected by the variability in the basic friction angle component. Moreover, rock discontinuity surfaces show different roughness characteristics throughout the whole discontinuity profile. These heterogeneous surface characteristics cannot be duplicated exactly in the laboratory due to sampling disturbances and also due to the fact that sufficient number of samples cannot be extracted from the different parts of the discontinuity area. The resulting uncertainties will be computed in two different ways depending on the type of test data as explained in the following. If it is possible to obtain samples from the discontinuity on which the slope is to be constructed, then the test samples will contain the roughness of discontinuities. Accordingly, both components of the peak friction angle, which are the resistance due to material strength reflected by the basic friction angle and the resistance due to the roughness of the discontinuity planes, will be encountered in the laboratory. Then the inherent variability, On the other hand, The second case arises when it is not possible to acquire samples containing roughness profiles in the field or the samples comprising roughness surfaces collected from the field are not sufficient in number. In such a situation, tests are usually performed on planar surfaces of rock, and give only the basic friction angle, Now the critical issue is the classification of the The data in In this second case, where the peak friction angle is estimated based on the measured value of the basic friction angle, the inherent variability, The discontinuity shear strength recorded in the laboratory may differ from the field strength because of various discrepancies between the laboratory and in situ conditions. The major factors contributing to these discrepancies are scale, anisotropy, water saturation, loading rate, weathering, etc. Among these factors, scale, anisotropy and water saturation are examined, since sufficient data were available only for these three factors. However, the methodology proposed in this study can directly be applied for other discrepancy factors whenever sufficient data become available. The uncertainties due to the discrepancies between the laboratory-measured and in situ peak friction angle values are incorporated into the uncertainty analysis model through the use of correction factors ( The strength of discontinuity wall and the roughness of the discontinuity surface are the two main factors contributing to the scale effect on peak friction angle. The discontinuity wall strength is determined from the compressive strength, which in return depends on size. The magnitude and the degree of roughness on the discontinuity surface is the second cause of scale effect. For rough and undulating discontinuities, scale effect is expected to be maximum, whereas the minimum scale effect is associated with almost smooth planar discontinuity types The prediction of the in situ peak friction angle from laboratory test results has been investigated by many researchers over the years Consistent with the uncertainty analysis model presented in It is inferred from Generally, the shear strength of rock discontinuities is estimated by using direct shear or push and pull or tilt tests without taking into account the shearing direction. However, studies on the effect of anisotropy on the shear strength of rock discontinuities The effect of anisotropy on the shear strength of rock discontinuities is typically studied by carrying out shear tests in several shearing directions on the same discontinuity surface. The test specimens are normally cores cast on natural joint surfaces. The shearing directions are determined by taking one orientation as the 0° shearing direction or a reference orientation. Then other directions are established by constructing various angles to the reference orientation in clockwise or counter clockwise directions, such as 30°, 60°, 90°, etc. In this way, tests are actually performed on a line, which is constructed by the use of symmetric directions, such as 0–180°, 60–240°, etc. This in fact, leads to performance of tests on a line in backward and forward directions. For example, if the 0° is the forward direction, 180° corresponds to the backward direction. Thus, two friction angle values are obtained for one testing line, usually one is smaller than the other one or both values are the same. The achievement of equal friction angles means that the discontinuity has a uniform roughness profile on the tested line. On the other hand, the different friction angles designate an asymmetric rough surface. In this study, the direction in which the friction angle is greater than the other direction is named as Hence, in the rock slope design, the first step is to determine whether there is a difference between the laboratory and in situ shearing directions. Then if such a difference is noted, the uniformity or the regularity of the considered roughness surface should be stated. If the discontinuity has a uniform or a regular roughness profile, implying insignificant difference between the laboratory and the in situ directions, the mean value of In rock slope design, the presence of water on the discontinuity surface or in a tension crack intersecting the slope is handled by adding an uplift force, which favors sliding. In addition, the rise in the water table bisecting the rock slope is accommodated by using saturated rock density in the design procedure. If the test specimens collected for shear strength tests are dry samples and if there is a possibility of saturation of discontinuity surface by rainfalls or rising of water table, the probable change in shear strength of rock discontinuity should be incorporated into the uncertainty analysis. For this purpose the correction factor The effect of water on shear behavior of rock discontinuities is two-fold. The water saturation can increase or decrease the discontinuity shear strength. In Based on the above reasoning, if any saturation of a rock discontinuity is probable, then the peak friction angle obtained from dry samples in the laboratory should be reduced due to the adverse effect of water. The range for the correction factor, In the case of rougher discontinuities, water saturation effect has greater influence on shear strength. Hence, the values closer to the lower limits should be chosen for very rough undulating discontinuities if there is a possibility of water saturation. On the contrary, the values closer to the upper limit is recommended for smooth planar discontinuities, since the reducing effect of water on the shear strength is relatively low. In order to show the implementation of the proposed model and to check its validity, an example based on real-life data is presented. Direct shear test results obtained on natural bedding planes in slightly metamorphosed sandstone of Sir and Düzkesme Dam sites in Turkey In Sir and Düzkesme Dam sites, three additional in situ direct shear tests were performed on 70×70×35 A probabilistic model is presented for the estimation of in situ discontinuity shear strength based on the laboratory-measured value of shear strength. The model presents a very simple procedure for the quantification of the mean biases and the different types of uncertainties involved in this estimation procedure. Random correction factors are used to account for any source of uncertainty and error, and the effect of various types of uncertainties and errors are combined according to the first-order uncertainty analysis format. Peak friction angle is considered as the main component contributing to the shear strength and throughout the study cohesion is neglected. Scale, anisotropy and water saturation are among the main factors creating discrepancies between the laboratory-measured and in situ discontinuity peak friction angle values and are considered in this study. However, the proposed model can be used to model and quantify any other type of test discrepancy, provided that sufficient data become available. An extensive literature survey is conducted for compiling the available research results on the discrepancy factors considered in the study. These data are then analyzed, classified according to the level of the test discrepancy and appropriate ranges for the correction factors are established. Finally, guidelines are tabulated for each factor and these can be used by practicing engineers for the quantification of the statistical parameters of the corresponding correction factors. The in situ peak friction angle for discontinuities at Sir and Düzkesme dam sites are estimated based on the data reported in The incorporation of all types of uncertainties and errors associated with different input parameters is quite important in order to obtain a realistic estimate of the reliability of designs involving rock masses. The proposed methodology provides a systematic and simple procedure for the accomplishment of this goal. However, we believe that, although the data provided in this study for the quantification of the statistical parameters of the discrepancy correction factors is based on a very comprehensive literature survey, the proposed values should be supported by additional research results and expert opinion and if necessary should be updated. Furthermore, the effect of other factors, such as rate of loading, weathering, amount of filling, level of normal stress, should also be taken into consideration in a similar way by defining the appropriate correction factors. In this study, the discrepancy correction factors are assumed to be independent of each other. In future studies this assumption should be checked and if necessary the proposed model should be modified in order to accommodate this type of correlations. It is also necessary to investigate the degree of spatial correlation in the peak friction angle in a rock medium.