Enhanced corrosion resistance is always an obligatory property in biomedical applications. For this purpose, the surfaces of NiTi alloy were duplex coated both by Hydroxyapatite (HA)/Silver (Ag) and BioGlass (BG)/Silver (Ag) using the sol-gel method. The surface morphologies, and corrosion behaviours of the coatings were examined via SEM, EDS, XRD, and mechanically, by means of hardness as well as adhesion and corrosion tests. SEM analyses showed that the homogenous and crack-free structures were obtained in the biocomposite coatings. Spherical-like structures in the coatings were observed and pitting type of corrosion was formed in the biocomposite coated NiTi surfaces. After the corrosion tests, enhanced corrosion resistance was observed in both HA- and BG- based coatings. However, HA-based HA/Ag coatings on NiTi alloys were obtained to have higher adhesion strength as well as higher corrosion resistance compared to the BG-based biocomposite coatings. The findings in the present study can help the design of future implants with higher corrosion resistance.Biological NiTi alloys have the potential of being commonly used to determine or fix parts such as short bone parts, fractured jawbones and skulls due to its reversible deformation properties. The biological NiTi alloys are also commonly used in the maxillofacial surgery, living tissue prosthesis, removal of stenotic vessels or urinary tract systems Some unwanted biological and mechanical damages may occur due to insufficient corrosion resistance of metallic implants. In this context, studies are conducted to ensure the functionality of the biomaterials enabling the long-term use of these materials after the implantation Enhancing the tissue-implant interaction is another objective of the metallic implant coatings and various contributions have been made to improve the mechanical, corrosion and biocompatibility properties of the coatings NiTi plates ((Allotech Ind, ASTM F2063-05) with chemical compositions of 45 (wt%) Ti and 55 (wt%) Ni were used as the substrate. The samples having different dimensions at 20 NiTi substrates were double coated with (HA/Ag) and (BG/Ag) as group S Secondly, the HA and BG coated samples were HA/Ag and BG/Ag coated. For this, Sol–Ag was prepared for HA/Ag double-layered coatings (S2). The Sol–Ag (10% Ag (w/v)) was prepared by using AgNO The adhesion strength of the coatings was measured by shear test. DP460 epoxy (3 Corrosion test samples were joined by copper wires (1.7 The surface morphologies and film thickness of the coated samples were analysed by scanning electron microscope (SEM, JEOL JSM 7001 In biocomposite coatings, it is desirable that the coating have biocompatable and homogeneous surfaces with low crack insidence to improve osseointegration [   Through the mechanical tests; microhardness and shear tests were performed in the coated surfaces of NiTi alloy. Hardness tests results of HA/Ag coatings and BG/Ag coatings were measured as 327 It is also important to show whether the coatings had adequate adhesion between the metal and biocomposite coatings. In order to show the adhesion strengths of the HA/Ag and BG/Ag coatings of the NiTi substrates, a shear test was performed. The results of the tests shown in Some previous research confirmed that by deposition of HAp coatings onto metallic biomaterial an improvement performance occurred   Moreover, sample S The similar trends were also obtained for the samples in S  The surface of a NiTi shape memory alloy was modified by executing multifunctional coating layers consisting of (HA/Ag) and (BG/Ag). Crack-free surface morphologies were achieved in HA/Ag compared to BG/Ag biocomposite coatings. The adhesion strength of the HA/Ag coatings was found to be statistically significant and measured as 79% higher than BG/Ag biocomposite coatings. The surface hardness (327 Some deep pitting defects on the uncoated NiTi surfaces were formed with the effect of corrosion, however, BG/Ag coating have been seen to have little effect in the corrosion resistance compared to HA/Ag coatings. In addition, it was determined that the corrosion resistances of HA/Ag and BG/Ag coatings on NiTi substrates increased with respect to the adhesion strengths. Future works should be focused on studying the tendency of layers to corrosion in a simulated body fluid, with their in vitro biocompatibility and cytotoxicity antibacterial tests. Such future works will provide to constitute the basis of more specialized cell lines e.g. human osteoblast lines via in vivo tests. No funding to declare. No need any ethical approval. All authors declare no conflict of interest.