We reported a novel indolium salt -based colorimetric and fluorescent probe N1 for cyanide. The probe N1 showed a bleaching solution and fluorescence quenching toward CN− in 100% aqueous solution over other anions. In UV-vis and fluorescent spectrometry method, a large blue shift (261 nm), color bleaching and fluorescence quenching was observed. The minimum detection limit on fluorescence response of the probe N1 towards CN− was 3.34 × 10−7 mol/L. This probe N1 operates via intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) mechanism, because the nucleophilic attacking of CN− to the indol CN, the ICT progress was blocked with color changed and fluorescence quenched, which is further confirmed by 1H NMR, MS and DFT studies. Therefore, the synthesized probe would be a promising device for the detection of cyanide.Cyanide plays a critical role in several industries such as organic synthesis, metallurgical engineering, electroplating technology and other fields due to its special characteristics. However, it is still extremely damaging to human beings even at very low concentrations for 0.5 mg per kilogram of body weight, which leads to cellular asphyxiation and death [ Up to now, several traditional detection methods, such as titrimetric, electrochemistry and spectroscopy [ The above probes had been designed on the basis of various chemical reaction mechanisms, nucleophilic addition reaction [ Herein, we synthesized a novel colorimetric and fluorescent dual-channel probes N1 with carboxylated indole as an electron-withdrawing group and dimethylamine as an electron-donating group ( All reagents and solvents were analytical grade and obtained commercially without further purification. The ultrapure water was used throughout the experiment. Tetrabutylammonium salt of anions (CN The schematic illustration of synthesis methods for probe N1 is shown in   The Gaussian 09 program was performed. The optimization of the molecular configurations of N1 and N1-CN in the ground state and excited state were implemented using the density functional theory (DFT) with the b3lyp methodology containing 6-31G(d) basis sets. Compound N1 was synthesized by the aldol condensation reaction of 5-carboxy-1-ethyl-2,3,3-trimethyl-3H-indol-1-ium iodide (1) and In order to obtain the optical properties of N1 for detection of anions, the UV-Vis and fluorescence titration experimentations of N1 were performed. The absorbance of N1 in H In order to obtain more information of the To study the selectivity of N1, competition experiments were carried out in the presence of other anions. The addition of 50 equiv. of CN To examine the possible mechanism of interaction between N1 and CN The geometry of N1 was optimized using Gaussian 09 program, B3LYP methodology, 6-31G(d) basis sets. As shown in In this study, we have successfully designed a simple colorimetric and fluorescent probe N1 based on indolium-derived for detection of cyanide in 100% H This study was supported by the The following are the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at