Wood biomass is turned into industrial fuel through chipping. The efficiency of chipping depends on many factors, including chipper knife wear. Chipper knife wear was determined through a long-term follow-up study, conducted at a waste wood recycling yard. Knife wear determined a sharp drop of productivity (>20%) and a severe decay in product quality. Dry sharpening with a grinder mitigated this effect, but it could not replace proper wet sharpening. Increasing the frequency of wet sharpening sessions determined a moderate increase of knife depreciation cost, but it could drastically enhance machine performance and reduce biomass processing cost. Since benefits largely exceed costs, increasing the frequency of wet sharpening sessions may be an effective measure for reducing overall chipping cost. If the main goal of a chipper operator is to increase productivity and/or decrease fuel consumption, then managing knife wear should be a primary target.Many countries support the increased use of energy biomass, for its potential contribution to climate change mitigation and rural development Optimization of chipping operations requires improvements on logistics Wear occurs in the knife's edge, which is in direct contact with the processed material. Wear is the result of a complex combination of mechanical, thermal, electrical and chemical processes After sharpening, knife angles must be back to the original values of about 30° for the front angle and 35° for the rear angle ( Knives are made of high-grade tool steel, or of structural steel with high-grade tool steel edges. Manufacturers generally use high-grade cold working alloy steel of different types, and typically 1.2631, A8 and D2 DIN grades. Knives are normally hardened to between 55 and 60 HRC (Rockwell scale). During service, knives are generally sharpened with a wet sharpener, after removing them from the chipper. Knives can also be honed manually with a portable electric grinder, without removing them from the chipper (dry sharpening). The result is not as good as with a wet sharpener, because manual grinding is not accurate enough and it cannot restore a proper front angle. In fact, dry sharpening is normally used to improve knife performance on the fly, between two wet sharpening sessions. Dry sharpening was never meant to replace wet sharpening, but just to integrate it. Regardless of sharpening technique, knives become shorter after each sharpening session, because grinding removes part of the knife material. For this reason, knife offset must be adjusted after sharpening. Knives are then moved forward, in order to maintain the correct clearance between knife and anvil. That is crucial for efficient shearing action. Clearance is generally comprised between 0.5 and 0.8 mm, and is checked with a spacer gauge. The anvil itself is made of high-grade steel similar to that used for knive manufacturing. Furthermore, the anvil edges can be layered with wear resistant alloy. Anvils are also subject to wear, and they are turned when their edge has a curvature radius of about 5 mm. When all four sides are worn, then the anvil must be discarded. In turn, knives are discarded when they become too short for safe operation. The goals of this study were: 1) to gauge knife and anvil service life; 2) to determine the effect of knife wear on chipper productivity and chip quality; 3) to highlight the eventual benefits of dry-sharpening between wet sharpening sessions. The chipper used for the experiment was a Biber 70 model, manufactured by the Austrian company Eschlböck The tests were conducted between April and November 2012 at the wood yard of the Mondi Group cellulose plant in Stamboliyski, near Plovdiv in Bulgaria (coordinates: 42°09′03.66″N, 24°31′01.70″E). The machine was run in two shifts: from 06:00 to 14:00, and from 14:00 to 22:00. Three kits of knives were employed in turns. Each kit was used for 3 shifts. At the end of the third shift, the knife kit was removed for wet sharpening, and another sharp kit was installed. The chipper was used to process wood residues, trucked to the plant from a number of sawmills located within a radius of about 100 km from Stamboliyski. Sawmill residues consisted of slabs, with a length between 1 and 4 m; main species were pine, spruce, fir, poplar and aspen. Water mass fraction varied from 18 to 40% on wet base. The chipper also processed small quantities of pulpwood logs, rejected for different reasons. The annual chip production amounted to about 100 dam Wear was determined for a kit of new knives put into operation on April 11th, 2012. Total knife length was measured with an electronic calliper after each wet sharpening sessions, occurring every third shift. Length was recorded individually for each knife, and the knife was then installed exactly on the same mount as before. This was done specifically for the experiment. In common practice, knives are always rotated from shift to shift (central knives to the sides and vice versa) in order to obtain even wear. The experiment lasted 7 months, until November 1st, 2012, when the last of the 12 knives was worn out and had to be scrapped. At this date, we also measured wear on the anvil, which was brand new at the beginning of the experiment. During the experiment, the anvil was turned 3 times. Wear was determined as the length difference between one measurement and the next. Anvil wear was measured as the reduction in the length of its diagonal section. This was determined with a calliper at 10 cm intervals along the anvil ( The impact of blade wear on productivity was determined through time studies. For three consecutive shifts, we determined total mass output and total time input. Chip output was measured by taking to a weighbridge all truck loads processed in a shift. Time input was reported on the chipper electronic hour metre. This procedure was repeated six times (or 18 shifts), each three-shift unit counting as one repetition. During the experiment there were no major delay events, capable of biasing the results. During the test, the machine was fed with the same sawmill residue from conifer tree species. The effect of dry sharpening was determined in a similar way, by repeating the same procedure on 18 more shifts, with the only difference that the knives were dry sharpened at the end of each shift. Repetitions for the two treatments (with and without dry sharpening) were alternated in a random fashion. Chipper cost was calculated with the method recently developed within COST Action FP0902 Finally, the effect of knife wear on chip quality was gauged by determining chip size distribution after each of the three shifts spanned by the same knife kit, before wet sharpening. This test was repeated three times, covering nine shifts. No dry sharpening was performed at the end of the first and second shifts. Chip size distribution was determined on an 8 L chip sample per shift. Each sample was placed in an oscillating screen, using four sieves to separate the following five chip length classes: >63 mm (oversize particles), 63–46 mm (large chips), 45–17 mm (medium chips), 16–3.15 (small chips) and <3.15 mm (fines). Bark was separated from the rest and considered as an additional class. Each fraction was then weighed with a precision scale. Knife service life depends on the position on the drum. Knives in the two side sections lasted 1440 scheduled machine hours (SMH) or 180 shifts. In contrast, knives in the two central sections lasted only 1056 SMH or 132 shifts. The number of times they could be wet sharpened amounted to 60 and 44, respectively. The average amount of knife length removed per sharpening session was 0.6 mm for side knives and 0.8 mm for centre knives. In common practice, knives are rotated among positions in order to obtain even wear of the original knife-set. In that case, one can assume the average duration and wear values of 1176 SMH, 147 shifts, 49 sharpening sessions and 0.73 mm per sharpening session.  Anvil wear was somewhat slower. Although installed new with the test knife set, the anvil was worn on three sides when all knives were fully worn. The last knives were discarded after 1440 h, and therefore the anvil can be expected to last about 4/3  The analysis of variance showed that many of these differences were significant, but that the effect of wear was twice as strong as the effect of dry sharpening ( Using the knife duration and chipper productivity data, we estimated the potential savings obtained by removing and sharpening the knives at the end of the second shift, rather than at the end of the third shift ( Knife wear also resulted in a visible decay of chip quality, resulting from the increase of oversize (>63 mm) and fine (<3.15 mm) particles, as represented in The incidence of oversize particles was 5 times higher at the end of the second shift than at the end of the first shift. At the end of the third shift, the incidence of oversize particles was 15 times higher than at the end of the first shift. The proportion of fine particles was 2 times higher at the end of the second and the third shifts, than it was at the end of the first shift. Non-parametric tests were used to test the statistical significance of differences between mean values of the same size class for different shifts. Significance was highest for the extreme size classes and shifts ( To our knowledge, no other studies offer a detailed follow-up of chipper knife wear all along its service life, nor they present shift-level information about chipper performance decay, as caused by knife wear. The amount of wood processed between two wet sharpening sessions is comparable with the figures reported in other studies. These indicate that a new set of knives can process up to 300 tonnes The higher wear in the central sections of the drum and the anvil is a well-known fact, and depends on feeding technique. Loads are systematically fed to the centre of the infeed opening, so that the central portion of the drum tends to process more wood than its lateral portions. The productivity figures reported in this study are compatible with those reported in other studies for this type of machine and material Other studies report of the significant productivity losses consequent to blade wear. These are estimated to 20% However, none of those studies explored the effect of dry sharpening, which is applied by several operators, but is not in general use. This study shows that dry sharpening can mitigate the effect of knife wear, which remains dominant. In fact, dry sharpening cannot restore the correct blade angle. Operators resorting to dry sharpening state that it slows down chip quality decay, containing the incidence of oversize particles. However, this study could not test this assumption, which therefore remains anecdotal evidence. Further studies should explore the effect of dry sharpening on chip quality, as well as on knife service life. Our calculations show that increasing the frequency of wet sharpening may offer some financial benefit. In fact, such benefit might be underestimated. Our calculations assume that wear and fuel consumption remain the same for both options (i.e. replacing knives every 2 shifts or every 3 shifts). Fuel consumption is lower when working with sharper knives, and it should soar in the third shift. Similarly, the amount of knife material removed with each wet sharpening session is likely smaller after working 2 shifts, than after working 3 shifts. Hence the possible underestimate of knife service life for the 2 shifts replacement option. This said, we believe that making unsubstantiated assumptions about fuel consumption and service life is worse than underestimating the benefit of a more frequent sharpening. At this stage, we can say that increased sharpening frequency is cost-effective, even under prudential assumptions. Knife wear is known to affect chip quality, and especially to increase the incidence of oversize particles and fines Knife wear has a dominant effect on chipper productivity and product quality. Dry sharpening with a portable grinder can mitigate this effect, but it cannot replace proper wet sharpening. Increasing the frequency of the wet sharpening sessions may be an effective measure for reducing overall chipping cost. Ideally, knives should be replaced when the savings in sharpening and knife cost match the losses incurred through lower productivity and higher fuel consumption. Such break-even point is likely reached before knives are fully worn, and future studies may try to determine its position along a chipper knife service cycle. This study was conducted within the scope of the EU INFRES project, which has been funded by the