Marginal lands could be utilized for increasing energy biomass production independent of industrial roundwood procurement. Dedicated energy biomass production systems on such sites would be based on low stand establishment cost, clear-cutting at an early stage, and coppice regeneration. Harvesters designed for the processing of industrial roundwood are inefficient or too costly to use in small-diameter and dense stands, while insufficient cutting capacity and uneven space distribution of trees limit the use of modified agricultural harvesters developed for short-rotation woody-crop plantations (e.g. willow). We constructed time consumption models for clear-cutting and forwarding of whole trees from un-thinned, small-diameter stands. The data originated from naturally afforested downy birch-dominated stands located in a cutaway peat production area in northern Finland. Stand age varied from 14 to 29 years and stand density was 5150–160,250 trees per hectare. In clear-cutting, a medium-sized forest harvester equipped with an accumulating felling head fitted with a circular saw disc was used, and subsequent forwarding was done using a modified medium-sized forwarder. Cutting productivity was 3–11oven-dry tons (ODt) per effective hour (E0-h), and was highly dependent on stand characteristics (e.g. mean whole-tree volume). At a distance of 300 m, for example, the productivity of forwarding in the time study plots was 6.7–10.4 ODt E0-h−1. Our study indicates that energy biomass can be harvested from young downy birch thickets efficiently by clear-cutting with appropriate machinery.Mitigation of climate change by reducing greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is the main target of international climate policy Downy birch ( The stand data for the feasibility study above In the present study, we measured the productivity of whole-tree cutting and forwarding of small-diameter trees from clear-cuts of mixed birch-dominated stands with machinery used in conventional energy wood harvesting. The data were used for constructing time consumption models for cutting and forwarding to be used as a basis for cost calculations. The studies were performed in a former peat production area in Liminka, northern Finland (64°48′N, 25°24′E). In all, 17 rectangular time study plots with an average area of 794 m The wood harvested from the time study plots was weighed by a crane scale of the forwarder (Ponsse LoadOptimizer) within an accuracy of 1 kg. Mean lengths of the extracted tree sections were measured at the roadside from the piles accumulated from each time study plot. From each forwarder load, a moisture sample of 15–41 kg (fresh mass) was taken from a grapple load representing the diameter distribution of the tree sections in the load. Three sections of ca. 30 cm in length were cut with a chainsaw from the grapple load. One section was taken from the middle of the bunch, another 0.5 m from the butt end, and one 1.0 m from the top. The samples representing each time study plot (1–3 per plot) were combined, crushed into smaller particles with a hammer mill, and homogenized. Thereafter, four moisture samples were taken from each batch, and the wet basis moisture contents of these samples were determined as described in SFS-EN 14774-2/SFS-EN ISO 18134-1. Mean whole-tree volume of a tree was one of the independent variables used when modelling harvesting productivity. Therefore the biomass removals from the time consumption study plots were transformed into dry masses based on their moisture contents, and solid volumes were obtained using the biomass-weighted basic densities of the whole-tree material. The biomasses were derived from the pre-harvesting stand data and biomass models listed in Jylhä et al. Residual biomass from cut trees was inventoried after forwarding from one randomly selected time study plot in each stand. Prior to cutting, biomass shed down from the trees was removed from 12 systematically located sample plots of 3 m × 1 m. After forwarding, residual biomass accumulated on these plots was weighed, and two representative composite samples of 0.7–1.6 kg were taken from each time study plot for determining moisture content as described above. Since some of the sample plots were destroyed during harvesting, it was only possible to measure the amount of residual wood biomass from 9 to 12 sample plots per time study plot. This residual biomass was not included in recoveries used when modelling cutting productivity. Time and motion studies were carried out 4–11th November 2014, when the soil was not frozen. Cutting and forwarding were recorded with a digital video camera. All time study plots were included in the cutting experiment which took place during daylight hours, while three plots were excluded from the forwarding study due to scarcity of light ( A six-wheeled Valmet 911.3 harvester with a mass of 17 t, manufactured in 2006, was used for cutting. Its engine power was 170 kW. The bogie tires were fitted with tracks and the rear tires with chains. A Cranab crane with a reach of 11 m was equipped with the Bracke C16.b accumulating biomass felling head. The cutting solution was comprised of a self-tensioning standard ¾” chain fitted with a circular saw disc capable of cutting trees up to 26 cm in diameter. The operator had several years of experience in conducting thinning cuts with this type of felling head. The harvester moved in the middle of the rectangular time study plots. Its route was slightly undulating, in particular on the widest plots, where the crane's reach limited cutting of trees growing on the edges. The head has no feeding function, and therefore two techniques for bucking trees to forwarding lengths were applied: tops or topped poles of standing trees were cut and gathered into bunches, or piles of full length trees lying on the ground, were cross-cut, and their top sections were moved onto the pile. The average number of trees accumulated in a bunch during a crane cycle was calculated by dividing the total number of trees harvested from the time study plot, obtained from the pre- and post-harvesting stand inventories, and the associate number of crane cycles recorded in the time study. The number of crane cycles per plot was based on the number of feed in –stages in each time study plot (elements 6–7 in The forwarder was a modified Ponsse Buffalo S16 with a total mass of ca. 21 t, manufactured in 1998. It had ten wheels equipped with tracks, and its load space was heightened by 15 cm. The cross-sectional area of the load space was 4.7 m The videos were analyzed by continuous timing method with a Microsoft Excel-based application that utilizes the time code of the video. The effective work times (E0) of the harvester and forwarder were partitioned in work phases as described in Stand variables were used as predictors when constructing models associated with cutting productivity and time consumption of forwarding phases. The effective work time excluding delays (E Removal of trees was almost complete as only a few undergrowth trees were found in the post-harvesting inventory. The number of remaining trees (h > 1.3 m) after harvesting was on average 197 per hectare (0–1400 trees ha Cutting and bunching (including work elements no. 3–5, Multi-tree handling was applied to a great extent ( Cutting productivity was on average 7.3 ODt E The average effective work time consumption of forwarding (excl. driving unloaded and loaded) was 3.65 E Unloading work time (T The time consumption of the total forwarding work (T The forwarder reaches a productivity of 6.9–9.9 ODt E The felling head used in the present study was capable of felling and bunching a wide size range of downy birch, from 13-year-old thickets to nearly 30-year-old stands. However, it was operated close to its maximum cutting capacity in the oldest stands. Cutting productivity varied from 2.8 to 11.4 ODt E Our study shows that the efficiency of a feller-buncher in unthinned young downy birch stands can be modelled accurately using easily attainable stand variables. Even a model with stand age as an independent variable would have explained 90.8% (p < 0.001) of the variation in cutting productivity. The stands were the first, naturally afforested tree generation with relatively even space distribution. The felling head used in our study was capable of cutting and accumulating trees with a continuous movement (sweeping), but utilizing this feature is limited to cutting of small-sized trees within short distances to each other. When harvesting coppiced stands, the trees are clustered at the stumps of mother trees. Clustered distribution could reduce crane movements. However, depending on the type of felling device, the distance between the trees, their size, and crookedness of stems at cutting height, clustered distribution can also increase time consumption due to the need for repositioning the head during the cutting cycle. Thus, clear-cutting of birch coppice stands of the first and subsequent generations may require different cutting technology. In general, an increase in the number of work elements or assortments increases time consumption, in both cutting and forwarding e.g. Ref. Besides diverging harvesting methods, the great disparities in cutting productivities can partly be explained by differences in stand characteristics. Stand densities in the present study were remarkably higher than in Laitila et al. Multi-tree handling was utilized to a great extent. In the youngest thicket, the average number of trees in a bunch was as high as 150, while in the oldest stands with the largest trees, on average 1.7 trees were accumulated in the felling head during a crane cycle. The clear-cutting study by Laitila et al. The estimate on forwarding productivity in the feasibility study of short-rotation production of downy birch The greatest green mass of the loads was 11.5 t, which is well below the load capacity of 14 t of the forwarder used in the experiment. Bergström and Di Fulvio A large proportion of trees in the oldest stands were cut into lengths while still standing, which increased the need for vertical crane movements. Efficiency of bucking and ergonomy of the operator could be improved by incorporating a feed roller system in the felling head, however this would reduce productivity as biomass is shed on the ground in the process Robust forage harvesters modified for short-rotation coppice are capable of cutting trees up to 15 cm in butt diameter Due to high harvesting cost, the production of fuel chips from small-diameter trees originating from thinnings is highly dependent on financial incentives The felling head studied in the present study enables efficient harvesting of energy biomass from dense, small-diameter stands. Adopting clear-cutting of young downy birch stands for energy biomass in the form of whole trees may increase significantly the profitability of wood production compared to traditional stand management based on selective thinnings and longer rotations the Nordic conditions. The cutting models constructed in the present study can be applied to unthinned birch stands but also other dense stands with trees having comparable wood properties and biomass allocation. Additional research is required for identifying the most cost-efficient harvesting systems for clear-cuts of dense small-diameter stands, both first-generation and coppice stands. We thank Vapo Oyj for providing the study sites; Jorma Issakainen for locating the experimental areas; Jaakko Miettinen, Taisto Jaakola and Soini Ala-Kuusisto for the fieldwork; the laboratory staff of the Kannus unit of Luke for analyses; Seppo Vihanta for biomass calculations; Kjell Törnqkvist and Ivar Amcoff for cooperation; Jyrki Hytönen for feedback during the study; Sari Elomaa for graphic design, and Aaron Bergdahl for proof reading the article. The fieldwork was facilitated by funding Vapo Oyj, Swedish Forest Technology Cluster, Bracke Forest AB, and the INFRES project. We acknowledge the reviewers for providing valuable comments on the manuscript. The COST Action EuroCoppice offered platform for knowledge exchange about the coppice systems.