In this study, cellulose nanofibers are used as a template to synthesise magnetic nanoparticles with a uniform size distribution. Magnetic nanoparticles are grafted on the surface of nanofibers via in situ hydrolysis of metal precursors at room temperature. Effects of different concentrations of nanofibers on the morphology, the crystallite size of magnetic nanoparticles, and the thermal and magnetic properties of the membrane produced from the cellulose nanofibers decorated with magnetic nanoparticles are examined. The sizes of magnetic nanoparticles produced in this study are below 20 nm, and the crystallite size of the nanoparticles is in the range of 96−130 Å. The flexible magnetic membranes containing a high concentration of magnetic nanoparticles (83−60 wt%) showed superparamagnetic behaviour with very high magnetic properties (67.4–38.5 emu g−1). The magnetic membrane was then used as an environmentally friendly, low-cost catalyst in a sulphate radical-based advanced oxidation process. The membranes successfully activated peroxymonosulphate (PMS) to remove Rhodamine B (RhB), a common hydrophilic organic dye applied in industry. 94.9 % of the Rhodamine B was degraded in 300 min at room temperature, indicating that the magnetic nanocellulose membrane is highly effective for catalyzing PMS to remove RhB.Magnetite (Fe In this work, we have demonstrated the synthesis of magnetic nanoparticles on the surfaces of flexible cellulose nanofibers in a colloidal suspension, which can be formed into a relatively uniform flexible nanocomposite membrane containing a very high amount of magnetic nanoparticles. Performance of the magnetic membrane was then tested for application in water purification. Several approaches have been reported for removing organic impurities from wastewater, including the absorption technique ( The raw sugarcane used in this study was received from Sugar Research Australia Ltd (Brisbane, Australia). Materials employed in this study include chemicals for pulping sugarcane: sodium hydroxide (Chem-supply), glacial acetic acid (Merc), and sodium chlorite-Technical Grade 80 % (Sigma-Aldrich); chemicals for For preparing cellulose nanofiber, purified sugarcane pulp was first produced using the method reported before ( Iron oxide nanoparticles (Fe The membrane samples were made from suspensions of iron oxide decorated cellulose nanofibers or pure cellulose nanofiber via vacuum filtration followed by drying at 110 °C for 1.5 h in a hydraulic hot press under no pressure. 100 mg PMS was added into a 100 mL aqueous solution of 20 mg/L RhB at neutral pH while stirring (400 rpm) until the PMS completely dissolved. Then, 20.0 mg of MGCNF membrane was added to the solution. A 2.0 mL sample was taken out every 10 min. These samples were quenched by methanol, filtered and analyzed using an ultraviolet-visible (UV–vis) spectrophotometer ( Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to characterise the morphology of CNF and MGCNF. 1 μL of 0.005 wt% dispersion was spotted onto a Formvar-coated 200 mesh copper/palladium grid (ProSciTech, Queensland, Australia) and allowed to dry at room temperature. The sample was then stained with a 2 % (v/v) uranyl acetate aqueous solution for ten minutes in the absence of light. The grid was examined on a Hitachi HT7700 at 100 kV. Attenuated total reflectance (ATR) Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was performed on a Thermo-Nicolet 5700 ATR-FTIR spectrometer equipped with a Nicolet Smart Orbit single bounce, diamond ATR accessory (Thermos Electron Corp., Waltham, USA). Membranes were directly pressed onto the diamond internal reflection element of the ATR accessory. Spectra were recorded in the wavenumber range of 4000–460 cm X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis of membranes was conducted on a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer (Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany) with a 0.2 mm slit. Graphite-filtered Cu-Ka radiation was generated at 30 kV and 20 mA. Samples were put into the sample holder and scanned over a range of 2 Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was conducted on a thermal analyser (Mettler Toledo TGA/DTA851) in the range of 40–550 °C at a heating rate of 10 °C min Magnetic measurements of nanoparticles were performed using a Quantum Design MPMS-5 T SQUID magnetometer. Magnetic hysteresis loops Production of magnetic nanoparticles using co-precipitation of an aqueous Fe The morphology of cellulose nanofibers and nanofibers decorated with iron oxide nanoparticles are shown in the TEM images in It has been observed that the bonding between the nanoparticles and nanofibers is very strong, and the nanoparticles did not separate from nanofibers after an extended period (5 months). This resistance against separation indicates that the iron oxide nanoparticles were grafted on the surfaces of the nanofibers during the formation of nanoparticles. By simple vacuum filtration of an MGCNF dispersion, a wet gel of entangled nanofibers was formed, and after complete removal of water and drying, a flexible thin membrane with a thickness of 50 microns was obtained. Despite having a very high content of iron oxide nanoparticles on each membrane, all the membranes are highly flexible. FTIR spectra of CNF and MGCNF samples are presented in Thermal decomposition of CNF paper and MGCNF papers analysed by TGA is shown in   The Fe Sulphate radical-based advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have been demonstrated as an efficient technology for environmental treatment, owing to their fast reaction rate, strong oxidation capability, and wide applicability for organic pollutant removal. In order to achieve a high-performance AOP system based on activating peroxymonosulphate (PMS), a significant amount of active component is needed to degrade the pollutant. Iron oxide nanoparticle is an efficient heterogeneous catalyst towards activation of PMS for the oxidation of organic pollutants through the decomposition of PMS anions to produce SO To represent the catalytic performance of MGCNF, Fenton-like catalytic oxidation of RhB was chosen as the model catalytic reaction. In the sulphate-radical-based advanced oxidation process, peroxymonosulphate (PMS) was used to generate the sulphate radical SO4 The mechanism for the catalytic effect of iron oxide nanoparticles is proposed by ( In the presence of PMS, Fe Cellulose nanofibers were successfully used as a template to synthesise magnetic nanoparticles with below 20 nm in diameter with a narrow size distribution by using a simple co-precipitation method. The magnetic nanocellulose samples containing different concentrations of cellulose nanofibers were further characterised by XRD and FTIR to understand the mechanism of nanoparticle formation on the surfaces of cellulose nanofibers. It was shown that the nucleation and growth of magnetic nanoparticles first take place on the surface of nanofibers and then on the Fe  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Mislav Mustapic acknowledges an internal funding project of the