The phenomenon of magnetoacoustic emission (MAE) has been ascribed usually to one of two origins: either (1) motion of non-180° domain walls or (2) creation or annihilation of domains. In this paper, we present strong evidence for the argument that the only origin for MAE is motion of non-180° domain walls. The proof is evident as a result of measurements of zero MAE for a wide range of stress in the isotropic zero magnetostrictive polycrystalline alloy of iron with 6.5% silicon. We also explain why it was that the alternative origin was proposed and how the data in that same experiment can be reinterpreted to be consistent with the non-180° wall motion origin.Magnetoacoustic emission (MAE) refers to elastic waves generated by time-varying magnetic fields induced in a ferromagnetic material The phenomenon of MAE has been ascribed usually to one of two origins In this paper, we present strong evidence for the argument that the only origin for MAE is motion of non-180° domain walls. In the non-180° domain wall (DW) motion origin, the MAE mechanical waves are initiated because of the mechanical energy associated with the non-180° spin flip as the domain wall moves through the lattice. This DW movement introduces magnetostrictive strain due to the swept area, as seen in the diagram in External stress For a 90° wall, in general The applied stress can change the magnetic domain structure due to the movement of non-180° domain walls. Static external stress modifies magnetic domain structure introducing magnetic anisotropy If the specimen tested is a zero magnetostriction material, such that We have tested this concept by examining MAE in an iron alloy containing 6.5% silicon, for which material the saturation magnetostriction is nominally zero for all crystallographic directions at room temperature. The Fe–6.5% Si alloy material was provided by the Metallurgical Engineering Department of the University of Sao Paulo, which had obtained the specimen from Wolfson Centre for Magnetics at Cardiff University. Measurements of MAE were performed at Gdansk University of Technology. A sample 0.1 The upper side of the austenite bar (2) is shown in (a) with the specimen (1) glued to it, whereas (b) is a side view of the bar, and (c) shows the entire measuring set, including the four-point loading rig. Both tension and compression could be applied to the specimen. Strain was measured with standard strain gauges with resolution of ±1×10 The sample was magnetized along the main axis with an electromagnet (Magnaflux type Y-6). A driving current of triangular waveform was produced by a current source, resulting in a triangular field waveform The MAE emission from Fe–3% Si non-oriented (NO) sheet, 0.3  It is seen that the In order to provide a reference, we show here also the MAE signal which was obtained for the Fe–3.0% Si, which is not ‘zero-magnetostrictive’. In The proposal of a second mechanism for MAE due to creation and annihilation of domains was made by Guyot and Cagan The 6.5% Si iron alloy is isotropic in its zero magnetostriction response. That is, it shows zero magnetostriction regardless of field direction. An explanation of Guyot and Cagan's result is that the Mn-substituted YIG is not isotropic in its zero magnetostriction response. A polycrystalline specimen of Mn-substituted YIG thus would not exhibit zero MAE. As it turns out, domain studies show both 180° and non-180° domain wall motion accompanying creation and annihilation of domains According to arguments given in No MAE is found in polycrystalline 6.5% Si iron alloy, which has isotropic zero magnetostriction. This proves that the mechanism for MAE requires We acknowledge partial support from NSF DMR 0306108, from CPNq in Brazil, and from the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council under Grant No. EP/D057094. One of us (M.J.S.) also acknowledges an International Research Collaboration Travel Award from Cardiff University.