Geratric patients who are treated operatively or nonoperatively for acetabular fractures may develop posttraumatic arthritis. Performing delayed total hip arthroplasties (THAs) in this patient population may be more technically challenging. Previous operative reports, radiographs, and computed tomography scans may help with preoperative planning. Scarring of the sciatic nerve from previous surgeries may warrant the use of nerve monitoring. Special surgical considerations include choosing a surgical approach, especially through preexisting incisions; deciding whether or not to remove hardware; and removing heterotopic ossification (HO). Multiple fixation options should be available in light of possible acetabular deficiency, including autograft, allograft, structural augments, and acetabular cups offering different fixation options. The postoperative management may differ from primary THAs performed for osteoarthritis because these patients may require protection of weight-bearing status and may require HO prophylaxis. By using the techniques described in this article, delayed THAs after acetabular fractures have demonstrated good outcomes in the geriatric patient population.Patients who sustain acetabular fractures are more likely to develop posttraumatic arthritis of the hip, especially in the light of residual articular incongruity, articular cartilage damage to the acetabulum or femoral head, avascular necrosis of the femoral head, or the presence of preexisting arthritis. Even with adequate reduction, 20% to 30% of patients develop posttraumatic arthritis. Many acetabular fractures may be treated nonoperatively. Indications for nonoperative treatment include a congruent hip joint, an intact weight-bearing dome, a stable hip, a fracture involving <20% of the posterior wall, and a roof arc angle of >45° in 3 views. Nonoperatively management may be used more often in the geriatric population because it may not be feasible to treat acetabular fractures with open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) because of medical risks or poor bone quality. These patients are either treated in traction or treated by limiting their weight bearing status. The trauma to the articular cartilage in these acetabular fractures predisposes patients to posttraumatic arthritis. Acetabular fractures treated with ORIF may reduce the risk of posttraumatic arthritis. The indications for the operative treatment of acetabular fractures include displaced fractures, subchondral impaction, intra-articular fracture fragments, fracture comminution, and the location of fractures, specifically anterior wall or posterior wall and posterior column fractures. When performing THAs in these patients, it is important to pay attention to the bony anatomy. Patients treated nonoperatively may have altered anatomy secondary to remodeling and may have increased bone deficiency requiring bone graft. Timing of the delayed THA surgery is crucial, and adequate time should be allowed for complete fracture healing. The amount of time required to complete healing will require clinical and radiographic evaluation by the surgeon. These findings are certainly subjective, and it is preferred to err on the conservative side. It is far easier to surgically manage a healed fracture than a nonunion at the time of THA. When an acetabular fracture has been treated without surgery, the approach is completely dependent on surgeon preference. Some surgeons prefer the posterior approach if large augments or grafts are required to reconstruct a posterior defect. Tissue scarring may be present because of fracture healing, but there is often less scar than a hip that underwent a prior ORIF. Reconstruction can be performed through a gluteus medius splitting approach, a transtrochanteric approach, or a posterior approach. Minimally invasive approaches, such as the direct anterior approach or the 2-incision approach, may not adequately address all surgical issues that might arise, and it is not recommended to use these approaches when performing THA after acetabular fractures. The surgical approach to a THA may or may not differ after a previous acetabular ORIF. A decision must be made to use the previous incision, incorporate a portion of the previous incision, or use an entirely different incision. After a previous Kocher-Langenbeck approach for fracture fixation, some surgeons believe that the posterior approach to the hip should be used. This has the advantage of simplifying hardware removal. However, there is a risk that there may be increased scarring around the sciatic nerve. When exposing the hip using the posterior approach, some advise a cautious dissection of the sciatic nerve to protect it. Other surgeons ignore the previous incision and use the incision that they are most accustomed to using. Part of the previous skin incision may be used if it is in a reasonable location. If the previous incision is used only in part, the new incision should diverge from the old 1 at a 60° angle. Smaller angles (<60°) separating the 2 incisions will lead to very thin areas of skin separating the new and old incisions, and this can lead to necrosis of the skin bridge between the incisions. When using a different approach, such as the anterolateral approach to the hip, less scarring may be present. Performing a THA through native tissue would decrease some of the difficulties of working through the scarred tissues from acetabular fixation, but there still can be heterotopic bone and scar from the trauma to the hip. In all cases, exposure may be larger than performing primary THAs for osteoarthritis because scar tissue must be mobilized and the exposure must be large enough to visualize the hip. This is not dissimilar from any revision THA surgery. The surgeon must be comfortable with and be capable of extensive soft-tissue dissection as needed. Surgery after prior ORIF of the acetabulum is a maximally invasive surgery. Hardware removal is only necessary in cases in which the hardware impedes with insertion of the THA components. There can be both femoral and acetabular hardware. The most common hardware are posterior column and posterior wall plates. Sometimes, hardware may be used to fix trochanteric osteotomies performed for access to the hip joint for acetabular fixation that may need to be removed before performing THAs ( Patients with posttraumatic arthritis who had undergone previous ORIF have a higher likelihood for developing heterotopic ossification (HO). It is not uncommon to see extensive HO form with ORIF of an acetabular fracture. Examples of patients with HO after previous acetabular fixation can be seen in Patients who have previous acetabular fractures often have bone loss, which can compromise the fixation of the acetabular component. The Paprosky classification is a useful guide for reconstructing the acetabulum when there are bony deficiencies. One advantage that the surgeon has when performing THA after acetabular fracture as compared with revision THA is that the femoral head is still intact. This bone that is normally discarded in primary THA can be used as structural bone autograft. If structural grafts are not needed, the head can be sectioned and reamed into cancellous autograft material. For contained defects, the autograft can be reverse reamed to fill these defects. If there is inadequate material from the head, an allograft (demineralized bone matrix or cancellous chips) can be used. The final goal is to provide a concentric bone bed for the placement of the acetabular cup. It is a mistake to rely on grafting material alone for an ingrowth cup. The cup must have adequate contact with native healthy bone to achieve ingrowth. Impaction grafting is another technique to fill contained defects. Sometimes, wire mesh can be used to contain the bone graft. Once a concentric bed of cancellous bone has been created, the cup is cemented in. The cup does not need to contact native bone using this technique, but it does need concentric support. Structural grafting is needed to address wall deficiencies in which the cup lacks adequate support. The autograft femoral head can be fixed to the pelvis with screws to reconstruct a wall deficiency. Once a supportive wall is established, the acetabulum with the new graft is then reamed as usual. The allograft can also be used in a similar fashion to reconstruct the acetabulum. Newer metal augments that can be fixed to the pelvis are an alternative to structural grafting using bone. These augments come in a variety of sizes and shapes to fill specific defects. Historically, acetabular cup fixation after acetabular fractures was attained by using cemented cups. One study using bone impaction grafting and cemented acetabular cups for THA after acetabular fractures showed 100% survival at 10 years and 80% survival at 15 years. In addition to the method of fixation, it is important to consider the acetabular component. Using a multihole cup for fixation allows for more screw options for improved acetabular cup fixation ( Although less frequently used than in the past, a gap cup should be available in surgical cases with a compromised pelvis. A gap cup can be used in cases of bony deficiency and when a nonunion is found at the time of revision surgery. There are a variety of options for this type of acetabular implant. They offer the ability to fix the acetabular device to the pelvis with plate-like extensions on the side of the pelvis by fixing it to the ischium or tear drop with screws, a blade plate, or a hook. These cups allow for temporary support of an acetabular component while the underlying bone graft heals. The acetabulum is bone grafted, the cage is fixed to the pelvis, and the liner is usually cemented into the cage. Although some constructs have ingrowth options, these implants are usually designed as a temporary measure to allow bone graft to heal. With adequate healing time, a later revision can be performed into a healthier bed of bone. There are multiple intraoperative complications that may occur when performing delayed THA for posttraumatic arthritis, most of which are similar to the complications from a THA performed for osteoarthritis. With the presence of remodeling or significant HO, it may be difficult to dislocate the femoral head from the acetabulum that may result in fractures ( Posttraumatic arthritis patients often present with significant limb-length discrepancies. Performing a THA may result in nerve damage by increasing traction on the sciatic nerve, especially if there is significant scarring. Using somatosensory-evoked potentials may be beneficial for monitoring nerve damage. Postoperative management after THA in patients with previous acetabular fractures may differ. Weight-bearing status depends on the procedure performed and on the type of graft used during arthroplasty. Often, patients are made partial weight bearing or touchdown weight bearing to decrease the forces across the hip without putting full weight on the leg. The duration of restriction should be adequate to allow for healing of the implants to bone, which is approximately 8 weeks. Hip precautions should also be instituted after THA to decrease the dislocation risk, depending on the type of approach used. Excessive flexion, adduction, and internal rotation of the hip should be avoided if the hip is posteriorly unstable. Postoperatively, one may consider irradiating or treating patients with indomethacin for HO prophylaxis. The development or recurrence of HO will compromise a good outcome by limiting function and motion of the THA. THAs after acetabular fractures have generally good outcomes. Older studies by Boardman and Charnley The time from acetabular fractures to THAs ranges from 36 months to 15 years. Careful surgical planning and management of previous acetabular fractures can result in improved outcomes for primary THAs. A preoperative computed tomography scan can assess fracture healing and determine the location of previous hardware that may need to be removed before performing a THA. Leg-length discrepancies >2 cm may require somatosensory-evoked potential monitoring in the operating room. Intraoperatively, adequate exposure is necessary to place implants and remove HO, and good soft-tissue dissection is important given increased scarring after acetabular fractures, especially around the sciatic nerve. In light of acetabular deficiency, it is necessary to have a variety of fixation options available for surgery. Having adequate allograft, metal augments, jumbo cups, gap cups, cages, and mesh available are beneficial in case the amount of bone loss is greater than anticipated. Finally, the postoperative management consists of altering the weight-bearing status, using hip precautions, and possibly irradiating the patient to prevent HO. Performing a delayed THA for posttraumatic arthritis in the geriatric patient after fractured acetabulum may be a difficult undertaking. However, midterm follow-up studies have shown that THAs after acetabular fractures have low complication rates and high patient satisfaction.