The stress in rotor impact mills is characterised by impact processes in the rotor and in the milling gap. A distinction can be made between particle impacts with the impact beaters, particle–particle impacts in the milling gap and particle–stator impacts.
                  The main influences on the milling result are produced by the rotor circumferential speed, the particle acceleration in the rotor and the conditions in the milling gap.
                  The fineness of the milled material can be significantly influenced amongst other things by the impact frequency. Integrated classification in particular is a suitable means of selectively increasing the impact frequency for the large particles due to the longer dwell time.
                  By means of the model presentation and empirical values, rules will be developed for the scaling-up of rotor impact mills.
                  Finally, the most important designs will be described, such as universal mills, pin disc mills and classifier mills.radial acceleration (m/s impact rail width (m) speed (m/s) relative speed (m/s) energy utilisation (m kinetic energy, impact energy (kJ) scaling-up factor (–) stress force (N) penetration depth (m) length of milling gap (m) mass (kg) mass flow (kg/s) mechanical drive performance (kW) contact radius (m) radius (m) particle braking path (mm) path, milling gap width (mm) time (s) radial speed (m/s) volume flow (m circumferential speed (m/s) particle size (μm) particle ejection angle (°) penetration angle (°) porosity (–) free path length (mm) angular speed (°/s) external internal particle rotor The term Rotor impact mills cover a wide fineness range, which extends from a final particle size in the area of a few millimetres, down to less than about 10 The common feature of all rotor impact mills is the usually centrally arranged rotor, which is equipped with tools of different shapes. Static milling elements can be arranged concentrically around the rotor. Classification of the milled material can be achieved by means of grills, screens or integrated classifiers. The main area of application of rotor impact mills is the crushing of brittle materials with a Mohs-hardness of up to 3. Cold milling processes are available for special purposes (milling of plastics, spices etc.). The air is usually warmed for drying during the milling process. Further special versions include the pressure shock resistant, gas-tight (for circulating gas operation) or sterilisable design. Rotor impact mills represent a universally used type of mill. The following systematic description of rotor impact mills cannot claim to be comprehensive, in view of the wide existing variety, so that only little space is devoted, for example, to pin disc mills. The article deals essentially with rotor impact mills using impact beaters as the rotating tools, for which the most comprehensive research results are also available. The most common form of rotor impact mills makes use of plate-shaped milling tools on the rotor, with a central milling material feed into the interior of the rotor ( The milling material, together with the air, which is carried along by the centrifugal force in the rotor, is fed through the inlet pipe (1) arranged centrally with the rotor (2) and is carried by the air into the area of the impact beaters (3). The crushing is carried out by impacts with the beaters and other particles in the milling gap (4) or with the stator (5). For the impact of one particle against another or against a surface, the following types of impacts can be distinguished ( Direct impact, the angle between the direction of impact and the direction of movement is zero. Angular impact, the angle between the direction of impact and the direction of movement differs from zero; this type also includes direct eccentric impact. Edging impact, in which the centre of the particle lies outside the surface volume. The highest level of energy transfer usable in the crushing process is achieved in the case of direct impact; in the case of angular or edge impact, rotation or slippage also occurs. In addition to the type of impact, the point of application of the stress also largely determines the milling result. In rotor impact mills, there are two main stress points: Impact processes on the broad side and the edges of the impact beaters (in the rotor) and Impact processes in the milling gap and at the stator. As already described, the milling material enters the interior of the rotor together with the milling gas transported by the mill. The radial acceleration of the particles, apart from wall influences, is provided by the drag force of the milling gas; the particle movement is essentially radial A group of particles of approximately During this time, the particle  A particle which penetrates into the impact circle immediately after passing the impact beater “1” therefore achieves a maximum penetration depth of 1.85 The typical particle diameter for the feed material in rotor impact mills lies in the range from 1 Using the following assumptions: friction-free particle movement acceleration path=width of impact rails= radial speed of particles prior to impact we can derive the movement equation for the acceleration process as follows: By integration within the limits Under the further assumption that the particle circumferential speed It can easily be seen that for The particle ejection angle can finally be calculated as Following the acceleration process, the particles enter the ring-shaped area between the impact beaters and the stator. In this milling gap, the milling material rotates in a cloud. The average free path length λ and the particle braking path For particles >1 In the size range from 100 For particle sizes between 10 For particles below 5 Finally, for even smaller particles, the braking path In addition to particle–particle impacts and the impact with the stator, impacts with the outer edges of the impact beaters can also be observed. Particles from the rotating material ring re-enter the area of the impact beaters due to momentum transfer with other particles or with the stator, although in this case, the intensity of the stress is usually lower, since only speed difference between the surrounding ring and the rotor circumferential speed is effective. From Depending on the fineness range and the selected operating and geometrical parameters, the main impact events taking place are particle–particle or particle–plate impacts. For both cases, the maximum stress force for the central, elastic impact can be estimated according to the Hertz–Huber theory The following applies for the impact of a spherical particle with a plate: For the impact of two spherical particles of the same size, this gives: If one compares equations There are three possible procedures (or combinations of these) for the control of fineness in rotor impact mills: Influence of the impact type, Selection of the stress speed, Influence of the impact frequency (dwell time). The influence of impact type can largely be concluded from the preceding chapter, according to which particle–plate impacts are preferable to particle–particle impacts. Over and above all other considerations therefore, it will have a favourable effect on the achievable fineness, if the volume concentration of the milling material and the milling gap are low. In order to initiate rupture, a particle must be supplied with a certain minimum stress energy If the stress energy lies below a critical limit, no rupture or crushing will take place, and the energy utilisation is therefore 0. With increasing stress energy, the energy utilisation rises to a maximum value, which corresponds largely to a rupture probability of 100%. After exceeding the optimum stress energy, the energy utilisation declines again. It will have a favourable influence, both with regard to the energy requirement and the fineness achieved, if the stress speed, and thus also the stress energy are selected so that the energy utilisation is in the area of the optimum. If a finer milling result is required, increasing the impact frequency It can easily be shown that the balanced energy of one individual impact corresponds to that of several impacts at reduced relative speed  In order to influence the impact frequency, the dwell time of the milling material in the mill is usually changed, using the following methods: In rotor impact mills with a profiled grinding track (stator) and an outlet gap (see A further possibility is the use of so-called closed rotors. If one assumes that the milling material is evenly distributed over the length This results in an average effective milling gap length of The disadvantage with all these procedures is its non-specific effect; even particles which have already attained the required final particle size will be subjected to further impacts, and therefore use up energy unnecessarily. Finally, there is no complete probability of rupture even for coarser particles; instead, quite a wide particle size distribution is generally observed. Classifying processes are generally characterised by the fact that only the coarse proportions are subjected to further stress. The fine proportions can leave the mill by suitable means and no longer affect the energy balance. The particle distribution curves of the milled products are therefore generally narrower than in the case of non-classifying processes (no large particles, lower fine proportion). One possibility of classifying the output consists in the equipment of rotor impact mills with grills or screens. Depending on the angle of incidence of the particles on the screen, the available perforated surface, the perforation dimensions and the thickness (plate thickness) of the screen, the likelihood of penetration can be expressed as a function of the particle size ( The disadvantage of grills or screens as a stator is that profiling of the stator, such as would favour the maximum possible efficiency of the milling, is only possible to a limited extent (see “Milling jaws” in These disadvantages are avoided by rotor impact mills when combined with a classifier The separation between milling and classifying enables the rotor and stator to be optimised solely for the task of milling. The fineness of separator mills is limited in the coarse range by the classifier (to approximately 200 It will only rarely be possible to perform a scale-up without being forced to compromise with regard to individual criteria. In the scaling-up of rotor impact mills, two parameters in particular present difficulties: The working length of the rotor If a screen is used as the stator, care must be taken to ensure that the product is distributed evenly along the working length When using a grinding track with outlet gap as the stator, the dwell time of the milling material in the milling gap must also be taken into account, which under otherwise similar conditions will depend on the working length The size of the milling gap The milling gap When using a grinding track as the stator, the through-flow and the product transport take place axially. For the same axial speed in the milling gap, the ring surface [( This needs only to be noted however for very fine milling ( The scaling-up model described below has been derived partly empirically, and partly from the models and observations described previously in equal product fineness, equal energy utilisation, equal ratio of milling material mass flow to milling air volume flow, equal circumferential speed at the impact beaters outer edge. From the point of view of the mill designer, the scale-up factor These requirements give The further scaling-up is performed by means of the following steps: From experience, one approach has proven itself, which links the radius ratio at the impact beater outer edge with the scale-up factor:  The exponent of this equation was determined empirically. Manufacturer's data published in the literature Starting from the basic mill, the impact circle radius The impact beaters width   The impact beaters number In order to achieve similar impact conditions, the total of the impact beaters lengths   The milling gap can be kept approximately constant for rotor impact mills using a screen as the stator (radial through-flow of the milling gap). If a grinding track is used as the stator, the gap width must be determined in accordance with The classification of rotor impact mills according to only one feature (e.g. central/tangential milling material feed, with/without classification) is almost impossible: the known types and designs are too varied. The distinction is therefore often made according to the achievable fineness. The basic features of These are generally equipped with the grill and/or screens, and can produce finenesses of approximately. <1 Wing beater mills, blast rotor mills and pin disc mills with a rotating disc are today generally classified together as so-called universal mills. These allow the use of different milling tools (rotors and stators) in the same housing ( The milling material feed for universal mills generally takes place centrally. The rotors are equipped with wing beaters, rigid impact beaters with open (  Thanks to the different rotation directions of the rotors, relative speeds of up to 250 Rotor impact mills with integrated classifiers (see also In the group of rotor impact mills, the maximum finenesses ( Another design worthy of peripheral mention are rotor impact mills with so-called The milling gap can be set very narrow (