Today, large size mechanical flotation cells of 100–300m3 are used in rougher operation in different flotation industrial plants, in Chile and worldwide. However, in spite of the advances in fundamental research and the notable growing in equipment size, with more complete instrumentation systems, there are still a lack of reliable data for industrial flotation modeling and simulation to advance in better control systems design. In this work, a procedure for modeling and simulation of rougher flotation banks, based on operating variables and parameters fitted from industrial data, is presented in condensed form. Recently, a new methodology for describing the industrial flotation, separating the collection and froth zones, has been developed. A non-linear distributed model to simulate rougher flotation circuits was developed, based on measurements of the main operating variables. The simulator was calibrated and tested using experimental data from the rougher operation at El Teniente Division, Codelco-Chile. The simulator was first used to sensitize the effect of changing the froth depth profile on target variables, and then to find out the best profile to reject common disturbances coming into the plant, considering some operating constraints. The flotation circuit simulator was then redesigned to incorporate an expert system following the proposed control algorithm. Several tests were performed by simulation to evaluate the control responses to different correlated series of input variables, such as feed grade, tonnage, particle size distribution, and solid percentage. Control alternatives based on the circuit simulator are discussed.A typical flotation plant, shown in The overall control strategy of a flotation plant relies first on good control of local objectives (pulp levels and flow rates), usually as controllers implemented on a distributed control system (DCS). When these local objectives are satisfactorily achieved, then the next level is to be able to modify the operation of each circuit (rougher, cleaners and scavenger) in order to obtain specific concentrate and tailing grades. This demands the capability of changing the set points of the local controllers in such a manner that the operation of the circuit is corrected every time. Then the specific knowledge on how the target variables are related to the local inputs is needed. If this second level of control is possible, then to satisfy the overall target of the plant (final concentrate grade in a specific band and plant recovery over a minimum value) one needs to know what to ask of each circuit. Which is the best combination of circuit targets to maximize the benefits? How will it depend on the feed characteristics and plant constrains? Bergh and Yianatos In this work, the control problem of rougher flotation circuits is analyzed based on a detailed phenomenological and distributed model for each cell. In the next section the model development is presented in a condensed form, and the procedure to obtain the necessary experimental data to fit the model parameters for an industrial flotation circuit is discussed. Then, the procedure and results about model parameter estimation from industrial data is discussed. Then, an independent validation test comparing model predictions with two sets of plant measurements is presented. Afterwards, a section is dedicated to analyze the effect of changing the level profile set points on the circuit recovery and the concentrate characteristics, namely the copper grade, by simulation. From these experiences a set of logic rules are proposed to maximize recovery while the grade concentrate is at least over a predetermined value. Then, the process under the proposed expert control is tested by simulation under different and common disturbances coming into the plant. The behavior of a flotation bank has been typically modeled as a set of tanks in series with the same properties, i.e. the same residence time distribution, flotation rate and froth characteristics in each cell. At present, important efforts have been addressed for characterizing flotation circuits as distributed systems. Maldonado et al. The distributed character of a flotation rougher bank requires mass balances around each cell for solid and liquid phases in order to describe the operating conditions downward the bank, i.e. mean residence time per cell, froth depth, entrainment, and solid liberation, among others. In addition, the performance of each flotation cell in terms of mineral recovery and concentrate grade depends on the flotation rates in the collection zone and the cleaning effect controlled by the froth depth. On this subject, Finch and Dobby Several approaches for flotation process simulation have been proposed in literature which typically simplify or remove the froth phase. For example, Sosa-Blanco et al. Currently, there exist several commercial simulators such as: the JK Simfloat mineral processing simulator In spite of the wide commercial application of the aforementioned simulators, in general the software is closed for the user, with limited information about the process modeling. An exception is the JK Simfloat (Schwarz and Alexander The simulator reported in this work is focused in a detailed phenomenological description of the flotation process where the rougher bank has been characterized considering a distributed system, i.e. each cell is an independent unit which consists of two different zones, collection and froth. Thus, in order to obtain a representative description of the actual flotation process, the variation of collection flotation rates and residence time, as well as froth transport characteristics and froth recovery downstream the bank of cells, was considered. For modeling, scale-up and analysis purposes, two zones are distinguished in a flotation cell: (a) collection zone, where the particle-bubble aggregate (true flotation) is formed and carried to the pulp-froth interface, and (b) cleaning zone (froth), located between the pulp-froth interface and the concentrate overflow, where entrained particles have the chance of drop-back to the collection zone. This zone is now described by the froth recovery. The global cell recovery The mineral recovery In order to consider the degradation of the flotation rate distribution of mineral class The cleaning zone was characterized by means of the froth recovery, which can be estimated from bubble load measurement together with a mass balance around the cell. Thus, the froth recovery, It has been shown that Eq. The empirical evidence showed that the froth stability is reduced in each cell downstream the bank. Therefore the Water and gangue recoveries estimation are discussed in The primary flotation SAG plant of El Teniente, Codelco-Chile, was considered. The primary circuit consists of four banks with seven self-aspirated Wemco cells of 130 For the implementation of the simulator, a set of measurements were carried out at a steady state in the rougher flotation SAG plant The first result is an adjusted mass balance per size class, characterizing each cell, and then the circuit. Using the described information, an estimation of froth and collection recoveries, and kinetics constant per size class were obtained, following the model equations of Section In order to evaluate the contribution of each individual cell in the bank recovery, the collection zone recovery by true flotation, The global recovery of mineral Also, the concentrate grade, Note from Eq. The global recovery of the valuable mineral, Also, the global grade across the rougher bank is expressed by: The general procedure for developing and calibration of the simulator includes the following steps: Sampling the first, second and third cells of the bank together with sampling the flotation bank as a whole. Characterize the streams in terms of solid percentage by weight, and mass and grades (Cu, Mo and Fe) per size class. Carry out mass balance adjustment per size class and estimate mineral recoveries. Using the feed sample, conduct batch test to determine the Estimate froth recovery, Eq. Using results from steps (iii) and (v), obtain the collection zone recovery per size class from Eq. Estimate the flotation rate parameters per size classes from Eq. Characterize the decrease of the flotation rate distribution per size class along the rougher bank using Eq. From Eqs. Estimate gangue recovery from water recovery. First, obtain water recovery using the mass balance results together with the solid percentage by weight. Second, following Based on the previously adjusted parameters (by regression), the overall mineral recovery and the concentrate grade can be computed from Eqs. For the simulator calibration, measurements of feed, tail and concentrate grades per size class, superficial gas rate, bubble load, solid percentage, gas hold-up, residence time distribution and froth depth profiles along the rougher bank were carried out in the rougher flotation SAG plant  The validated simulator was used to find a pattern on how the level profile setting is affecting both the concentrate grade and recovery in the rougher circuit. Concentrate grade, mass flow rate and particle size distribution of concentrates are key issues for regrinding and cleaning and scavenger circuits performance, affecting both the plant recovery and the quality of the final concentrate. For most plants, using self aspirating cells, the selection of a profile of set points for the froth depth controllers is the main resource to accommodate the operation of a flotation circuit when disturbances are coming, with the feed, into the plant. In some other cases, the air is forced into the cells, and then the profile of set points for the air flow rate controllers becomes another resource that can be used to modify the compromise between recovery and grade concentrate, in a given flotation circuit. As an example, in this paper we assume that the target for a rougher circuit is to maximize the recovery while the Cu concentrate grade is at least 5%. This Cu grade is a typical value for El Teniente rougher circuit, but in general a different grade can be stated as a control objective. The mathematical model to predict the circuit metallurgy was implemented in Microsoft Excel. The input variables are: Cu, Mo and Fe feed grades, feed flow rate, solid percent and +100# percent, and the froth depth of banks 1, 2, 3 and 4. The outputs are: the copper rougher recovery, the concentrate and final tailings copper grades, the concentrate Cu/Fe ratio, the concentrate under 325# and the concentrate solids percent. Cu and Mo concentrate grades and Cu and Mo recovery are plot for each cell (one to seven). The concentrate mass flows for fine, medium and coarse sizes are also plot for each cell. The simulator can be run either as open circuit, that is, without changing the froth depth profile, or under an expert control system, to be described later. Using the simulator calibrated for El Teniente rougher circuit, the sensitivity of recovery and concentrate grade to changes in the froth depth profile was studied. The aim is to find some pattern on how to set a froth depth profile to obtain the best possible compromise between circuit Cu recovery and Cu concentrate grade. It is important to note that different froth depth profiles will lead to different Cu recoveries achieving the same Cu concentrate grade. For a typical feed (800 From Considering the practical difficulties found in controlling the froth depth in bank 1, where most of the flow rate disturbances have to be absorbed, it is unrealistic to keep a froth depth set point less than 8 Keep the froth depth in first bank as low as rejection of feed flow disturbances permit it, avoiding pulp overflow (e.g. 8 Keep the froth depth in the second bank as low as possible (e.g. 5 Regulate the concentrate grade by increasing the froth depth of the last bank while froth overflows. If the concentrate grade is below the target, then increase the froth depth in the penultimate bank as before. Continue increasing the froth depth upstream until the target is met. The controller performance in the first bank and the collapse of froth in later banks can both be detected by using cameras and image analysis. An alternative form of setting the froth depth set points is to set the froth discharge velocities from high to low along the banks of the circuit. However, as flotation cells become larger, new arrays for concentrate discharge are designed to improve the collection of froth. These new arrays change the froth discharge velocity from one place to another in the surface of the froth. In other words, the discharge velocity is now a spatial distributed variable, and one camera can only get the image of a reduced froth area. Thus, which velocity is taken as a reference is not clear. In the next sections, this algorithm is used to illustrate how to respond to some common disturbances by finding the appropriate profile of set points. The general idea is to use the simulator to test if the proposed algorithm is able to find a different froth depth profile when the feed conditions are changed, in order to obtain a similar result both in Cu recovery and Cu concentrate grade as before. The effect of the PSD in the cumulative chalcopyrite recovery and the incremental grade along the flotation bank was studied. Since usually a coarser feed is produced along with a larger tonnage, a simultaneous change in feed PSD (from 18 to 25% The effect of decreasing the copper feed grade from 0.98 to 0.7% was evaluated. In this case, the following variables were kept constant: feed tonnage 700 The success of any control algorithm implementation depends heavily on the general conditions of equipments and instrumentation. Most supervisory control systems become degraded over time because of inappropriate mantenance plans, which failed to ensure the quality of key measurements and actuations. To evaluate the real contribution of any control strategy it is an absolute need that a complete characterization of equipments and instrumentation is previously done, in order to avoid some basic and frequent problems found in practice. Key measurements, such as grades and froth depths, must be calibrated frequently. The generation of air bubbles, especially in self aspirating cells, must be checked for the right size and superficial velocity. The conditions of lips for efficient froth discharge must be chequed. The level control performance for each bank, must be tuned to efficiently reject feed flow rate disturbances. The distribution of feed flow rate in two or more circuits usually is uneven and solids may be classified by the distribution system. Once all these problems are properly solved, then the effect of a control strategy can be isolated and evaluated. Once a model has been developed, it can be used in different ways to modify the operation of a process. When the model represents the process accurately in a wide range of operating conditions, and the key measurements that are the input variables for model predictions are accurate enough, there are well known optimization techniques that can be used to find an optimal solution, depending on the characteristic of the model. If dynamic models were available a model predictive control algorithm can be used. If the model parameters are changing over time then some adaptive control algorithm can be used. A steady state model, as the one implemented in the simulator, can also be used as part of a mathematical optimization problem to find out which froth depth profile will lead to a better metallurgical result. However, how robust will be this solution to model-plant missmatches is an issue. In any case the operators will need an optimizing application that uses the model to solve the problem and a set of measurements characterizing the process feed. The model obtained and used in this work will follow the general trend of changes in target variables for given input variables from one steady state to another. The idea is to probe by simulation that the proposed algorithm, following the proposed logic rules, will be able to find a better froth depth profile. Then, in practice, the model is not intended to be used on-line to control the process. The operators can use the rules any time they detect that the flotation circuit response to the actual feed characteristics is under the expectations and therefore they do not need the model. To help them to follow the rules an application in the form of an expert system is welcomed. The steady state simulator can also be used to test an expert system, that following the proposed logic rules, can show how to set a new froth depth profile when the metallurgical targets are not met. The simulator inputs are a series of correlated values (autoregressive order two) for the feed tonnage, solid percentage, +100# percentage and copper grade. The calculated control outputs are the level of each of the four banks, and the process output are the concentrate and tailings copper and molydenum grades. The expert control system has a set of parameters for proper tuning: a dead band around the concentrate grade target, and the amount that each level may change, and the minimum and maximum values allowed for each level set point. In To advance in the holistic control of grinding – flotation plants, a capability for adjusting flotation plant operation to feed characteristics is needed. To control the whole flotation plant, it is necessary that each circuit can be under control, and specially the rougher circuit, since plant recovery depends heavily on this operation. Furthermore, the operation of cleaning and scavenger circuits will depend on the characteristics of the rougher concentrate. In this sense, a simulator for rougher circuits has been developed and calibrated for a specific flotation plant, by estimating parameters to fit collection and froth recovery models, from a set of designed experimental data. The simulator has been used to sensitize the effects of changing the froth depth profile on targets (concentrate grades and recoveries along the cells and for the circuit). A set of logic rules has been proposed and successfully tested for main disturbances coming into the plant. Installed cameras can play an important role in on-line estimating when control performance or froth quality may become constraints. This information can be considered in decision systems to avoid operating problems and to enhance the evolution of the operation to the desired targets. The process under expert control was simulated for both a particular disturbance and a sequence of disturbances coming into the plant and the proposed control was able to change the froth depth profile to satisfy the targets every time it was required. In a near future it is expected to validate these results in an industrial application, as well as to develop similar models for regrinding, cleaning and scavenger circuits. After then, a control strategy for the whole flotation plant can be developed. The author would like to thanks