The ongoing development of new advanced technologies, created increasing demands for rare earth elements (REEs) in the international market. The available conventional technologies for concentration and recovery of REEs are expensive making biosorption an efficient and low-cost technology for the recovery of REEs from aqueous solution. Thus, the biosorption and desorption of multi-component solution containing Y(III), La(III), Sm(III), Dy(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Gd(III) were investigated using dried or 250 °C and 350 °C carbonized parachlorella. Evaluating the effect of pH with respect to contact time indicated a dependency of the system with those parameters. The optimum pH for dried and 250 °C carbonized parachlorella was 7 whereas 350 °C reaches it maximum uptake at pH 4. Rapid adsorption within the first 5 min of contact followed by a slight variation in the following 20 min characterized the sorption processes onto parachlorella by-products. The mechanism of the biosorption is explained by a combination of complex reactions occurring simultaneously in the biosorption process.
                  In addition, desorption process has been investigated using various concentrations of HCl, HNO3, and H2SO4 at different temperatures. It was found that the reversible process is rapid, less temperature and pH dependent with high desorption percentage. Moreover, only light REEs were desorbed regardless of the kind of acid and the solution temperature. Parachlorella is found to be good and low-cost biosorbent for the recovery of above REEs from aqueous solutions.Dried and carbonized parachlorella are used for biosorption–desorption of rare earth elements. Rapid adsorption within the first 5 min characterized the sorption process. Combination of four kinds of reactions explained the biosorption mechanism. The reversible process is less temperature and pH dependent, high recovery rate. Parachlorella is a good and low-cost adsorbent to recover rare earth from solution. Rare earth elements (REEs) are often referred as the “seeds of technology” because of their uses in high-tech strength permanent magnets, lasers, automotive catalytic converters, fiber optics/superconductors, electronic devices, and green energy sectors [ The designation “rare earths” refers to the 15 elements of the periodic table known as “lanthanides” with yttrium and scandium, further divided as a function of their atomic number into two categories. Light rare earth elements (LREEs), which accounted for 66.8% of global demand in 2010 [ Several expensive methods exist to recover REEs from ores including pyrometallurgy, hydrometallurgy, etc. processes in case of REEs rich ores. In addition, different methods have been proposed for separation and preconcentration of REEs including precipitation, liquid–liquid extraction, solid–liquid extraction, super critical extraction, electro-winning, electro-refining, etc. [ Therefore, in this study parachlorella, an alga used by PANAC Co. Ltd. to enhance the bio-energy production efficiency, was used as biosorbent. In addition, a solution of REEs containing a mixture of Y(III), La(III), Sm(III), Dy(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), and Gd(III) under various concentrations was prepared from Vietnamese rare earth ore and used for the experiment. Thus, In order to improve the sorption efficiency of parachlorella, the alga is carbonized at 250 °C and 350 °C and the REEs uptake of carbonized parachlorella is compared to the dried one. Desorption process was also evaluated and the mechanism was clearly described. Thermogravimetric differential thermal analysis (TG-DTA) (Thermo plus EVO TG 8120, Rigaku) was carried out under nitrogen condition. The carbonization of parachlorella was made out using electric furnace (HPM-0G/AS ONE). The surface texture of the biosorbent before and after experiment was investigated using SEM (scanning electron microscope JSM-6510LA/JEOL). The zeta potential was measured by electrophoresis analysis (LS-2000E, Photal OTSUKA Electronic). The reciprocal shaking bath (FTB-01, AS ONE) was used for the batch experiment process. The pH of the solution was measured with pH meter (HM-25R, TDA DK) previously calibrated. The REEs content in treated solution was analyzed using ICP-OES (inductively coupled plasma-optimal emission spectrometer, PerkinElmer, Optima 5300). In order to point out the structure of the biosorbents and the functional group involved in the adsorption process Fourier transform infrared spectrometer (FT/IR 4100/DR410/ATR PRO 450-S) was used. Parachlorella was received from Panac. Co. Ltd. in dried form (the sample was subject to spray dried for 3 days). One part of the material is subjected to the thermal decomposition analysis under N A solution containing the mixture of Y(III), La(III), Sm(III), Dy(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), and Gd(III) rare earth ions and others elements as Mg, Si, K, Ca, Mn, and Fe in diverse concentrations and initial pH = 5.63 at 30 °C is shown in Batch studies were conducted to investigate the parametric factors such as pH, solution temperature, biosorbent dosage and contact time for both biosorption and desorption processes. The pH of the solution was adjusted by using 1 mol/L of HCl or NH The percentage of removed rare earth ions or others was interpreted as: 0.05 g of the prepared sample was mixed with 10 mL of HCl, HNO The desorbed amount of rare earth ions using solution As an organic material, parachlorella is mainly composed of hemicelluloses, cellulose, lignin and others minerals [ Generally, carbonization also called slow pyrolysis or conventional pyrolysis is characterized by a slow heating rate (6–60 °C/min), and the formation of pyrolysis product occurs in the temperature range of 275–675 °C [ Many researchers have worked on the thermal decomposition of cellulose, hemicelluloses and lignin. For instance, it was previously reported that the decomposition of cellulose occurs in a flexible range of 200–400 °C, lignin decomposed in the range of 150–750 °C (900 °C as maximum). Characterized by low thermal stability, hemicellulose is decomposed in the range 180–240 °C [ The weight loss measurement of parachlorella can be well understood by considering the rate of raw material transformed (burned) with increasing temperature calculated from In other world, It should be noted that, due to TG-DTA machine program setting, thermograms of Furthermore, PA, PA250 and PA350 were subjected to FT-IR analysis in order to understand the functional groups governing the biosorbents. Results are summarized in In addition, X-ray fluorescence (XRF) was used to determine the chemical composition of dried and carbonized parachlorella. The results are shown in Furthermore, the scan electromagnetic images of dried and carbonized parachlorella have been carried out and shown in pH is one of the most important and predominant factors to be considered when assessing the biosorption capacity of a biosorbent as it influences the biomass adsorptive sites as well as the solution chemistry of REEs. The pH of the system controls the sorption capacity due to its influence on the surface properties and metal speciation [  As pH increased, surface positive charges decrease, leading to interaction between positively charged rare earth ions and negatively charged biosorbent sites [ As we described in the precedent sections, carbonyl functional group may be presents in 350 °C carbonized parachlorella. The maximum uptake of rare earth ions observed at pH 4 using PA350 may be explained by the reaction of carbonyl functional group which p For PA and PA250 the maximum uptake of rare earth ions observed at pH 7 may be explained by the electrostatic interaction between rare earth trivalent ions and biosorbent surface charge which is negatively charged ( Moreover selectivity in terms of ions uptake and type of biosorbent is observed at optimum pH. Consequently, PA and PA250 are found to be more efficient for biosorption of Sm and La than PA350. PA is more efficient for Pr and Nd than others biosorbents. PA250 is the best biosorbents for Dy, Gd, and Y. Then, the following experiments are done based on the optimum pH observed for PA and PA250, means pH 7. REEs uptake onto PA, PA250 and PA350 was investigated with respect to contact time in the range of 0–120 min, while keeping other parameters constant. Adsorption kinetics describes the solute uptake rate as a function of residence time of adsorbate at the solid–liquid phase including the diffusion process [ The pseudo second-order kinetic model is expressed as (  The Arrhenius equation for calculating activation energy is known as (  Arrhenius equation parameters were evaluated using the pseudo second-order kinetic constant obtained based on temperature controlled data (30 °C, 50 °C, and 70 °C). Sorption of REEs onto parachlorella species increases with temperature showing the temperature dependency of the process. The value of activation energy is obtained by using the pseudo second-order kinetic equilibrium rate constant In the present study the values of activation energy It can be concluded from Sorption density of PA, PA250 and PA350 as a function of biosorbent dosage was investigated in the biosorbent dosage range of 1–250 g/L while keeping REE initial concentration constant. The amount of adsorbed REE ions increased with increasing biosorbent dosage, emphasizing the dependency of biosorption density of the system on the biosorbent dosage. In order to describe the interactive relationship between biosorbent and adsorbate and design the biosorption system, Langmuir model was examined using ( Langmuir isotherms ( Generalizing the above result to the case where j sorbates compete for the site we obtained: The recovery of adsorbed REEs is an important step to obtain the metals in their pure forms. Desorption process may help to decrease the operating cost and diminish the dependency to continual supply of the biosorbents. Thus, more the desorption percentage is high more the process is efficient and biosorbent useful [ Since biosorption occurs at weak alkali pH, desorption of REEs from parachlorella by-products may occur at acidic pH. Variation of acid concentration affected the solution pH. Results have proved that pH ( Moreover, the kinetics of REEs extraction were very fast ( The present study investigated the biosorption/desorption of Y(III), La(III), Sm(III), Dy(III), Pr(III), Nd(III), Gd(III) present under various concentration in Vietnamese ores aqueous solution, onto dried and 250 °C and 350 °C carbonized parachlorella. Experiments performed as function of solution pH and contact time revealed that biosorption of above cited rare earth are highly dependent on those parameters. Moreover the uptake of rare earth ions was inhibited at low pH due to the protonation of the biosorbents sites. Selectivity of rare earth ions for one biosorbent than others characterized the biosorption process which was found rapid. The mechanism of the biosorption processes is explained by the combination of four reactions; electrostatic interaction between rare earth ions and biosorbent charges, biosorption onto functional groups of the biosorbents, ion exchange between rare earth ions and Mg and K present on the biosorbent sites and, surface complexation within hydroxide forms of rare earth ions and biosorbents; occurring simultaneously. In addition the sharing of the same biosorbent adsorptive sites by all the rare earth ions tested results in the low maximum biosorption density observed. Moreover, pH and temperature had slight effect on desorption process of rare earth ions resulting on high desorption percentage. The kinetics of REEs desorption were fast with less than 10 min to reach terminal extraction regardless of acid type via bath agitation. The extraction efficiency of REEs from parachlorella biosorbents adsorbed sites at 30 °C using HCl, H None. Financial support from the