Magnesium aluminate spinel (MgAl2O4) is known for its excellent deformation behavior at high temperatures. By retaining nanocrystalline grain size after densification, the extent of deformation can be further enhanced. In this work, nanocrystalline MgAl2O4 and composites were densified by hot isostatic pressing (HIPing). One of the objectives of this paper is to report the phase content and microstructural characteristics of these dense nanocomposites. Another objective is to investigate room temperature as well as high temperature mechanical properties of these materials. The present data were compared with the existing literature for coarse grained materials. The hardness values ranged between 2.89 and 7.79 GPa and fracture toughness ranged between 2.5 and 5.82 MPa√m. Hot hardness results showed that at least in one composition, a significant reduction in hardness occurred at 1000 °C.It is has been argued that, by decreasing grain size, traditionally ductile metals can be made hard, strong and brittle Mechanical behavior of spinels at room as well as high temperatures has been reported in the literature. Stewart and Bradt The present authors reported the synthesis of in situ mixed nanocomposites by an auto-ignition process The powders used for the consolidation were synthesized by auto-ignition processing It was found that the as-synthesized powders were loosely agglomerated. In order to break up the agglomerates and improve the homogeneity of the powders, a slip casting method was adopted. The powders were crushed lightly and placed in a glass bottle with Al After CIPing, the samples were encapsulated in a pyrex glass tube of diameter 15mm and sealed at one end. In order to prevent the interaction of the glass and the samples, BN spray was used. The tubes were subsequently necked about 2 in from the bottom. The evacuation of a tube continued until a vacuum level of 10 After HIPing, the samples were mounted and polished with 9, 6, 3, 1 and 0.5 μm diamond polish to a mirror finish. For grain size and grain structure determination, the samples were thermally etched in a furnace at 1100 °C for 0.5 h. The microstructures of the as-polished and as-etched samples were examined by a scanning electron microscope (SEM model (AMRAY 1830) equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer. The phases and grain sizes of the samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction patterns of the product and were recorded by a Siemens diffractometer (D5000) using Cu The samples were tested for hardness and fracture toughness by an indentation fracture technique using different load values. Vickers hardness testers were used for indentation (Zwick hardness tester: model 3212 and Leco M-400-G). Room temperature hardness data were measured on at least ten distinct areas of the sample. In some compositions, 10 kg of load was tried, but chipping around the indentation impaired accurate measurements. One and 5 kg loads were used. For the fracture toughness measurement, the equation derived by Evans and Charles Hot hardness was measured using a Nikon QM-1 hot hardness indenter with a diamond pyramid indenter. The samples were mounted on a molybdenum holder. The temperatures of the indenter and the specimen were controlled separately. All tests were performed in vacuum up to 10  The microstructures of as-HIPed materials were characterized using scanning electron microscopy. Dense samples of compositions A–D were subjected to indentation tests at room temperature. For the calculation of toughness, the Young's modulus was evaluated using the rule of mixture for composites. Independent evaluation of Young's moduli using a Knoop indenter was not successful because of piling of materials around the corner. For the fracture toughness calculation of composition A, the Niihara et al.  It is important at this point to compare the present results with those in the literature. Typically, the hardness of coarse-grained MgAl  Both room temperature and high temperature mechanical properties of dense nanocrystalline MgAl This work is supported by NSF grant No DMII-9800009.