The operation of ironmaking blast furnaces (BFs) involves several minerals such as iron ore, coals and flux. The practice of injecting a coal blend is widely employed in ironmaking BFs, typically binary blend or ternary blend. It is desirable to understand the overall performance of a coal blend and their individual behaviours of component coals. In this paper, a three-dimensional CFD model is described to simulate the flow and combustion of a ternary coal blend under simplified BF conditions. Three component coals in the ternary blend are tracked separately and undergo chemical reactions individually. The overall performance of ternary coal blend and individual behaviours of three component coals are analysed over the entire domain and quantified along the chamber axis, respectively, with special reference to flow, temperature, gas species and coal combustion efficiency. The simulation results show that generally, an inclined high-speed gas jet and coal plume are formed along the axis followed by an expansion and recirculation near the wall, resulting in the higher temperature and lower O2 at the lower part of the chamber. Individually, the coal of higher VM content devolatilises faster, shows larger particle size downstream, and reaches a higher burnout and a slightly higher particle temperature in the end. The non-addition is observed in predicting the burnout of the ternary coal blend due to the interactions among three component coals. The model provides an effective tool for ternary blend’s design and operation optimisation in ironmaking BFs.BF ironmaking is the dominant route to produce liquid iron from iron ore because of its high productivity and competitive cost compared to other ironmaking technologies ( Notably, as coke cost increases rapidly and PCI coal resources are depleting, most BF plants have to use various coal blends (mix of different coals) in PCI operation, rather than one single coal, to minimize the cost of PCI operation and to improve coal selection flexibility ( In the past, binary coal blends (mix of two different coals) were studied experimentally ( In this paper, a three-dimensional CFD model is extended to simulate the combustion of a ternary coal blend under simplified BF conditions. The devolatilization reaction model is improved for better applicability to a wider range of different coals. The model is validated against the experimental results from a pilot-scale combustion test rig. The overall performance of ternary coal blend and the individual behaviours of their component coals are analysed at two locations: over the entire domain and quantified along the axis, respectively, in aspects of flow, temperature, gas species and coal combustion. Then the burnout of ternary blend is compared with single coal combustion to investigate burnout enhancement. The model was developed for binary coal blends under simplified BF conditions ( The model is modified by employing the so-called multiple fuel-gas treatment for VM considering its better applicability to a wider range of coals, covering from low volatile coals to high volatile coals ( In this study, as the ternary coal blend may consist of different coals varying in a wider range of VM contents, VM is assumed to consist of a range of gases, as a result VM For simplicity, hydrocarbon was fixed to be methane CH Three different pulverized coals, denoted as Coal A, Coal B and Coal C, are blended and used as the ternary coal blend in this study. The proximate and ultimate analysis shown in The model is applied to a pilot-scale PCI test rig ( The PCI model was validated against burnout measurements from the pilot scale PCI test rig, for single coal cases ( In this section, the flow and combustion characterises of a ternary coal blend along the coal plume are analysed and quantified, including overall performance of the blend and individual behaviours, respectively.      In this model, as the model limitation, the coke bed is not considered and the simulation conditions are from a pilot-scale PCI test rig. In the future, this limitation will be overcome by employing the so-called “in-furnace model” to coal blend injection where both pulverized coal and coke bed will be included in the model, together with their reactions and interactions. The real BF conditions will be employed. This will be reported in the future studies. A three-dimensional CFD model is extended to simulate the flow and combustion of a ternary coal blend under simplified BF conditions. Three component coals in the blend are tracked separately and undergo chemical reactions individually. Devolatilization reaction model is extended for better applicability to a wider range of coals widely used in the blends. The overall performance of ternary blend and individual behaviours of components are simulated. The simulation results indicate that, The overall performance of ternary coal blend and the individual behaviours of their component coals are analysed over the entire domain and quantified along the chamber axis, respectively, in aspects of flow, temperature, gas species and coal burnout. Overall, a high-speed gas jet and coal plume are formed along the axis, followed by expansion and recirculation near the wall. The higher temperature and lower O The burnout enhancement is observed for the ternary blend, compared to the according single coal combustion case. The underlying mechanism is explored: the relatively high volatile coal devolatilizes earlier and generates a high temperature field, which enhance the coal combustion of relatively low volatile coal and thus the blend. The model provides a cost-effective tool to understand the combustion of ternary coal blends under BF conditions and optimise its design and BF operation. The parametric study of effects of key variables such as blending fraction and initial particle size distribution will be reported elsewhere in the future. The authors would like to acknowledge