Surfactants significantly influence froth stability. Detailed theoretical analysis of this influence is deficient at present. This paper presents an experimental investigation into the influence of surfactants on froth stability measured by the foam lifetime. The surfactants studied include sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) and the Dowfroth frothers. The foaming experiments were carried out in a laboratory flotation column by blowing air through a sparger. The physical properties of the foaming systems versus the surfactant concentration were experimentally determined for the surface tension, bubble size, and interfacial viscosity. The pendant drop method was used for surface tension measurement for various concentrations of SDS and Dowfroth frothers. The bubble size was determined using a photography technique. The interfacial viscosity was determined with a deep-channel interfacial viscometer. The obtained physical parameters of foams were not able to describe the dependence of the foam lifetime on the surfactant concentration. As the interfacial shear viscosity, which significantly influences the liquid drainage in foam, is not directly correlated with the foam lifetime it is possible that the froth stability is to a great extent controlled by the rupture of the intervening liquid films residing between bubbles.Froths, foams, and emulsions are well known to scientists as well as the general public in every day life ( Foam is a dispersion of gas bubbles in a relatively smaller volume of liquid with surface-active agents (surfactants). Typically, it is composed of polyhedral gas bubbles with liquid films residing between bubbles, Plateau borders where three films meet, and vertices, which are the junctions of four Plateau borders ( The added surfactants play an important role in foam stability. They adsorb at the gas–liquid interface, changing the gas–liquid interfacial properties and resulting in different behaviour of the liquid drainage and liquid film rupture. Therefore, the gas–liquid interface in foams can be considered as not a monolayer but an additional phase, properties of which have a decisive effect on the stability and instability of foams ( The surfactants used in the control of foam production significantly influence the gas–liquid surface tension. However, the effect of surfactants on the foam stability cannot be explained just by a decrease in surface tension. The stability or instability of foams is significantly determined by the interfacial rheological properties of the gas–liquid interface with adsorbed surfactants. In the present work, the influence of surfactants on the foam stability was studied in terms of the foam lifetime. The dependence of surface tension, bubble size, and interfacial viscosity on the surfactant concentration was experimentally determined. These characteristic properties were used in the analysis of the influence of the surfactant concentration on the foam lifetime. All water used in the experiments and for preparing the solutions was cleaned with a (Millipore) Milli-Q Plus system. All chemical reagents used were of analytical grade. Sodium dodecyl sulphate of 99% purity was obtained from BDH Laboratory Supplies, England. SDS has molecular formula C The surface tension for the surfactant solutions was determined as a function of concentration using the pendant drop technique. The apparatus used was the Optical Contact Measuring Device (DataPhysics Contact Angle System OCA 20, Germany). The pendant drop method involves forming a drop of the test liquid at the lower end of the dosing needle into the surrounding medium, in this case air. The drop experiences two forces. The gravitation elongates the drop and the surface tension attempts to hold the drop in spherical form to minimise surface area. A characteristic curvature of drop shape is achieved for the equilibrium state and the Young–Laplace equation linking the surface tension and gravity forces defines the drop shape. The drop shape was experimentally determined using a CCD camera and then was digitised using an image analysis software. The surface tension was determined by the best fit of the Young–Laplace equation to the digitised profile of the liquid drop. A deep-channel surface viscometer ( The interfacial centreline motion is experimentally monitored by a tracer particle. The analysis can be simplified under the experimental conditions where In all measurements, 250 ml of deionised Mill-Q water was introduced into the dish. This gave a depth of 19.5 mm in the channel. The temperature of the solution was recorded. A small piece (large enough to visualise with the naked eye) of Teflon thread seal tape was used as the tracer particle. The time taken for this particle to complete one revolution was measured visually using a stopwatch. A relatively low angular velocity of the dish was maintained for all measurements (approximately 1.37 rpm). Upon addition of a small amount of high concentration surfactant solution to the dish the solution was stirred and the measurements were repeated. Thus, measurements for various surfactant concentrations were obtained by repeating this procedure. The bulk viscosity required in the determination of the interfacial viscosity by Eq. A laboratory flotation column (height 31 cm, I.D. 4 cm) made from Perspex was used as the experimental apparatus for foam lifetime measurement ( The superficial air velocity was maintained at 4.4 cm/s for all measurements except in the case of low foam production (i.e. at very low surfactant concentrations) when the superficial gas velocity was increased to higher values (not greater than 13 cm/s). Test solutions were prepared in a 2 l volumetric flask and added to the foam column. The liquid level was just below the base of the cylindrical column section. The solution temperature was recorded. Time of aeration was usually very quick (60 s), and the air was ceased immediately as the foam reached the top of the column. The time taken for the foam to collapse entirely to the base of the column section was determined as the foam lifetime. Determination of the average bubble size was made using photography. Photographs were taken of the foam near the base of the column using a digital SLR camera (Olympus E-10, 4.0 Mega pixel CCD). This enabled determination of the average bubble size using a bubble sizing software program. The number-mean bubble size was determined directly from the photograph, with the only correction being for optical magnification. Approximately 200 bubbles were counted for each photograph in order to determine the mean bubble radius. The influence of surfactant concentration on the bubble size in the foam is shown in Surface shear viscosity versus surfactant concentration is shown in The experimental data for foam lifetime is shown in Foam lifetime is determined by many parameters and it is not realistic to expect a simple correlation between foam lifetime and surface shear properties. It is known that interfacial dilational properties control the rupture of the liquid films and also have a substantial influence on the stability of foam ( A study was conducted on the inter-relationship between the foam stability measured by the foam lifetime and the physical properties of the foaming systems versus surfactant concentration. The physical properties included the bubble size, surface tension, and surface shear viscosity. The bubble size decreased with increasing surfactant concentration, reaching constant values at high concentrations. The non-ionic Dowfroth surfactants exhibited the most significant increase in surface shear viscosity and reduction in surface tension. The Dowfroth surfactant that had the most significant influence on these interfacial properties also produced the most stable froth (i.e. Dowfroth 400) at similar surfactant concentrations. The anionic surfactant SDS yielded no significant surface shear viscosities and had a relatively small influence on surface tension values, however, it produced the most stable foams out of the surfactants tested. This complex behaviour shows that foam stability is controlled not only by the liquid drainage process, which is a function of surface shear viscosity, but also by the process of the liquid film rupture that is a function of other interfacial properties. It will be the point of future work to investigate such interfacial properties. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Australian Research Council for financial support.