In this study, the optimization of some parameters on agglomeration performance of Zonguldak bituminous coal by oil agglomeration was discussed. A three-level Box–Behnken design combining with a response surface methodology (RSM) and quadratic programming (QP) were employed for modeling and optimization some operations parameters on oil agglomeration performance. The relationship between the responses, i.e., grade and recovery, and four process parameters, i.e., amount of oil, agitation time, agitation rate and solid content were presented as empirical model equations for both grade and recovery on oil agglomeration. The model equations were then optimized individually using the quadratic programming method to maximize both for grade and recovery within the experimental range studied. The optimum conditions were found to be 14.61% for amount of oil, 8.94min for agitation time, 1554rpm for agitation rate and 5% for solid content to achieve the maximum grade. The maximum model prediction of 0.650 grade at these optimum conditions is higher than any value obtained in the initial tests conducted. Similarly, the conditions for maximum recovery were found to be 20.60% for amount of oil, 5min for agitation time, 1800rpm for agitation rate and 19.48% for solid content with a prediction of 96.90% recovery, which is also higher than any other recovery obtained in the initial tests conducted.Nowadays, fine coal production increases continuously due to the increase in mechanization in coal mining and demands in its related fields of application (i.e., liquefaction and slurry with water). These fine particles usually contain large amount of mineral matter due to non-selective caving of the coal seams. Therefore, the mineral matter must be removed to exploit these fine coals. In addition, the concentration of fine fraction is necessary for the prevention of environmental pollution and several economical reasons One of the methods to be applied in removing inorganic impurities from fine coals is oil agglomeration. In this method, a binder functioning is used as a bridge between the coal particles. Most of liquid hydrocarbons, In the oil agglomeration technique, addition of an immiscible liquid to the coal water mixture causes adhesion of the coal particles by capillary interfacial forces. The oil agglomeration process depends on the difference between the surface properties of organic and inorganic particles. The carbonaceous constituent of fine coals can be agglomerated from the mixture in the presence of immiscible oils known as collecting or bridging liquids. Mineral-rich matter normally remains in the mixture and is rejected Various studies show that some parameters affected agglomeration performance in the oil agglomeration. These parameters can be listed as oil amount, oil type, particle size, agitation rate and time The general practice for determining the important process parameters for agglomeration is by varying one parameter and keeping the others at a constant level. This is the one-variable-at-a-time technique. The major disadvantage of this technique is that it does not include interactive effects among the variables and, eventually, it does not depict the complete effects of various parameters on the process This study involved modeling and optimization of some parameters affecting agglomeration performance in the oil agglomeration. Response surface methodology (RSM) and quadratic programming (QP) are used to model and optimize the influence of some parameters affected agglomeration performance in the oil agglomeration. The parameters selected in this investigation are amount of oil, agitation time, agitation rate and solid content. Turkish bituminous coal from Zonguldak colliery was chosen for the investigation. The coal (run of mine, ROM) was first crushed to less than 5 Agglomeration tests were carried out in a 1000 Firstly, 270 At the end of experiment, it was observed that the agglomerates collected on the surface of the water and the tailings (residue consisting of mainly mineral matter) settled to the bottom of the vessel. The agglomerates and tailings in the vessel were poured over a 160 Both the agglomerates and mineral rich material were washed with acetone (25 Experimental design is widely used for controlling the effects of parameters in many processes. Its usage decreases number of experiments, using time and material resources. Furthermore, the analysis performed on the results is easily realized and experimental errors are minimized. Statistical methods measure the effects of change in operating variables and their mutual interactions on process through experimental design way In this study, the Box–Behnken experimental design was used for finding out the relationship between the responses, i.e., grade and recovery, and four process parameters, i.e., amount of oil, agitation time, agitation rate and solid content. Box–Behnken design requires number of experiments according to Using Box–Behnken design based on RSM, the optimum oil agglomeration condition having performance can be arrived with minimum number of experiments without the need for studying all possible combinations experimentally. Further the input levels of the different variables for a particular level of response can also be determined. The variables chosen for the study are designated as The coefficients, i.e., the main effect ( Using the Box–Behnken experimental design method, 27 sets of tests with appropriate combinations of amount of oil ( The experimental results in The observed grade and the predicted values obtained using Eq. The experimental results in The observed recovery and the predicted values obtained using Eq. In order to gain a better understanding of the interaction effects of variables on grade and recovery, three-dimensional (3D) plots for the measured responses were formed based on the model equations (Eqs.  Eq. In order to verify the predictive capacity of the model, one extra agglomeration test was conducted at these optimum conditions. The results, which were 0.648 and 78.07 for grade and recovery, respectively, confirm the predictability of the model equation for grade. In the same way, Eq. In order to verify the predictive capacity of the recovery model, one more agglomeration test was also conducted at these optimum conditions. The results, which were 96.39% and 0.541 for recovery and grade, respectively, confirm the predictability of the model equation for recovery. In this study, a three-level Box–Behnken factorial design combining with response surface methodology was employed for modeling and optimizing four operations parameters of the agglomeration for coal. Four variables of the model investigated in this study were: amount of oil ( Predicted values obtained using the model equations were in very good agreement with the observed values ( The optimum variables were found to be 20.60% (+0.56) for amount of oil, 5