A new measure for froth stability is introduced in this work, based on a dynamic stability test for non-overflowing froth columns. The dynamic stability factor represents the lifetime of a bubble in the froth, and is defined as the ratio of the total volume of froth at equilibrium to the volumetric gas rate introduced into the system. Experiments have been carried out at laboratory scale to measure the dynamic stability factor under different operating conditions. Air flowrate and frother concentration were the key operating variables. It was found that the equilibrium height and the dynamic stability factor depend significantly upon both the air flowrate and the frother concentration. Also, the dynamic stability factor and the fraction of air overflowing as unbroken bubbles in batch flotation tests were related and can be used to establish a stability criteria. These measurements will also allow a clearer quantitative link to be formed between froth stability with froth structure and flotation performance.The froth flotation process used for separating mineral ores depends on the establishment of a carefully controlled and stable froth. Previous work has been carried out to determine the relationship between flotation variables, performance and froth structure. From these studies, it has become clear that froth stability plays a major role in flotation performance. Previously, several parameters have been used to account for the stability of dynamic mineral froths, such as the rate of bubble bursting in the top surface of the froth, the froth velocity, and the amount of solids loaded onto the bubble lamellae ( There still exists a need for a stability criteria for mineral froths, so that the relationship between stability and operating variables can be better understood, allowing the development of control strategies for flotation performance. This work aims to develop a technique to measure froth stability that can be linked to other stability parameters as well as flotation performance. For this purpose, the dynamic froth stability originally proposed by A multiplicity of methods have been developed to assess the stability of foams. In general, two types of tests can be identified: dynamic tests and static tests. A dynamic test is one where the foam has reached a state of dynamic equilibrium between rates of formation and decay. It is a measurement of foamability. A static test is one in which the rate of foam formation is zero: the foam, once formed, is allowed to collapse without regeneration by further agitation or input of gas (  Other researchers ( Although in two-phase systems several techniques have been used to measure foam stability, their immediate application in three-phases systems might not be possible since the presence of solids also affect the stability of the foam (    In this work, a dynamic test is used to measure froth stability. It is worth noting that the dynamic test comes closest to the dynamics of a real flotation system, for several reasons: the air is continuously introduced in to the solution, the foam starts forming at the bottom and then moves upwards. The liquid drains downwards so that the quality of the foam varies with height. The top of the foam then reaches the breaking condition and the top layer collapses. Those similar features make the dynamic method more likely to give a true indication of the froth stability during a flotation test. Besides, the method is more reproducible, accurate and convenient to apply ( The standard method originally proposed by The dynamic foam stability ( A modified Bikerman’s test was used in this work to measure dynamic froth stability. Experiments were carried out using a modified Denver laboratory flotation machine and a specially constructed cell designed to hold up a pulp volume of approximately 3 l. The agitator was lengthened from 34 to 64 cm, and operated at a constant speed of 1500 rpm. The flotation cell is shown in The ore used for the experiments was a Platinum Group Metal ore from Amandelbult (Merensky reef), South Africa. The particle size distribution was 40% passing 74 μm. The experimental conditions and reagents used match the industrial flotation conditions. The manipulated variables that affect the froth in a flotation cell considered in this study were air flowrate ( The experiments were carried out as standard batch flotation experiments. Weir bars were added so that the froth column did not overflow. The total equilibrium height of the froth, and the associated froth volume were determined for a given frother concentration as a function of the air flowrate. Also flotation experiments were performed at different froth heights, which were selected as a fraction of the maximum froth height previously measured, to determine the fraction of air overflowing the cell under those conditions. The equilibrium volume of froth It can be seen that at low surfactant concentrations (30 and 40 g/ton), the equilibrium froth volume generally increases when increasing air flowrate. However, at high frother concentrations the froth stops growing, tends to collapse and does not further increase in volume with an increase of aeration.  The dynamic stability factor ( When the rate of froth growth is recorded, it is observed that the froth volume increases exponentially with time until it reaches the maximum height or equilibrium volume. If the cross-sectional area of the cell is constant, the volume and the height of the froth are equivalent measures. For clarity, it is more convenient to show the rate of growth in terms of froth height. It is clear that in all cases the rate of froth growth is exponential with time and increases more rapidly as the air flowrate increases. The froth height varies with time as: In previous work the fraction of air that overflows the weir as unbroken bubbles ( The fraction of air overflowing the weir was estimated by image processing ( The strong correlation between the fraction of air overflowing the weir and the froth height ratio leads us to postulate that the expected fraction of air overflowing the weir,  The dynamic stability factor, defined as ratio of the volume of froth to air flowrate in the system, was used to measure froth stability in minerals flotation systems at laboratory scale. The rate of froth growth and the maximum equilibrium height reached were measured for different air flowrates and frother concentrations. The maximum equilibrium froth height was found to increase when increasing air flowrate and frother concentration, however at high aeration rates and frother concentration the maximum equilibrium height decreases. Under these conditions, the froth is no longer stable and collapses. Consequently, it was also found that the dynamic stability factor is affected by air flowrate and frother concentration. The maximum equilibrium height and dynamic stability factor were used to predict the expected fraction of air overflowing below the maximum froth height. The actual fraction of air overflowing the weir, measured by image processing, was determined for different froth heights and air flowrates. It was found that the actual fraction of air overflowing the weir is very similar to the fraction of air expected to overflow when operating at froth heights below the maximum. These findings indicate that if a relationship between the fraction of air overflowing the weir and flotation performance is known it is possible to manipulate the froth height to produce the optimal froth stability and flotation performance.