Introduction
                  Non-union following interlocking nailing is a troubling complication in treatment of shaft femur fractures. There is no clear consensus on the treatment of this problem. This research was undertaken to study the role of augmentation plating combined with exchange nailing in such cases.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  A prospective clinical study was undertaken from January 2010 to December 2015. Patients with aseptic femoral shaft non-union, with or without implant failure following intramedullary nailing were included in the study. Augmentation plating combined with Exchange Nailing with a 4.5mm LCP was done.
               
                  Results
                  Fifteen patients (nine male and six female) with an average age of 43.7 years (range 18–67 years) were treated. Average timing from the first surgery was 7.3 months. Complete clinical and radiological union was achieved in all cases in a mean duration of 5.2 months. Average duration of follow up was 12.6 months. All the patients retained the preoperative hip and knee range of motion till the last follow up.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Augmentation plating combined with exchange nailing in non-unions following intramedullary nailing of femur shaft fractures is a reasonably good and effective procedure with a very high success rate.Interlock nailing is a standard and accepted method of treatment of acute femur shaft fractures with a reported success rate of more than 90% Exchange nailing in non-unions has not shown consistent results across literature This study presents experience in augmentation plating combined with exchange nailing for femoral non-unions initially treated with intramedullary nailing. A prospective clinical study was undertaken from January 2010 to December 2015. Fifteen adult patients with aseptic femoral shaft non-union with or without implant failure following intramedullary nailing were included in the study. Non-union was considered when the patient had pain on weight bearing, or there was gross motion and pain at the fracture site on physical examination with obvious radiographic signs of bone healing cessation at 6 months postoperatively. Written informed consent was obtained from all the patients. The patients were operated under spinal anesthesia on a traction table. Exchange nailing was carried out first. The Implant was removed by means of its extraction devise. In cases with broken implant, a special broken nail extraction set was used. After removal of the nail a guide wire was inserted into the medullary canal. The canal was reamed by progressively increasing sized reamers with a goal of inserting the nail which has a diameter of 2 Eight holes to twelve holes, a 4.5 Patients were put on knee and hip exercises from the next post operative day. All patients received thromboprophylaxis for a period of 6 weeks (low molecular heparin). Weight bearing was allowed as tolerated from the second post operative day after removal of the suction drainage. Clinical follow-up was conducted at 2 weeks, 6 weeks, and then monthly until union was achieved. Union was defined clinically by absence of pain at the non-union site and radiologically by the appearance of satisfactory bridging callus across three cortices in two different views. Fifteen patients (nine male and six female) with an average age of 43.7 years (range 18–67 years) were treated by augmentation plating with exchange nailing for non-union following intramedullary nailing of fracture shaft femur. Eleven out of 15 patients had been primarily treated by close antegrade femur interlocking nail, one by K nail, and the remaining three by proximal femur nail for accompanying pertrochantric and shaft femur fractures with mini incision technique (<5 Intramedullary nailing is the treatment of choice for acute femoral shaft fractures, with a low complication rate Various biological or mechanical factors such as poor bone quality, comminution, bone loss, soft tissue damage, infection, insufficient mechanical stabilization, multiple surgeries, or smoking may lead to non-union A concern of combining exchange nailing with plate augmentation was the loss of vascularity of the fracture ends. Cole All cases showed complete clinical and radiological union at an average of 5.2 months. Exchange nailing alone has shown variable results in the hands of different researchers It is quiet common to find cases of femur shaft non-unions with the nail or its interlocking screws broken. Retaining such implants may not be possible or may jeopardize the stability of the construct. Rigid immobilization with or without bone grafting is the essence of treatment of non-union The present study suggests that augmentation plating combined with exchange nailing for non-unions following intramedullary nailing of femur shaft fractures, is a reasonably good, effective and safe procedure with a very high success rate. Further multicenter studies may be needed to validate the claim. None declared.