A flow-through hydrothermal cell for the in situ neutron diffraction study of crystallisation and phase transitions has been developed. It can be used for kinetic studies on materials that exhibit structural transformations under hydrothermal conditions. It is specifically designed for use on the medium-resolution powder diffractometer (MRPD) at ANSTO, Lucas Heights, Sydney. But it is planned to adapt the design for the Polaris beamline at ISIS and the new high-intensity powder diffractometer (Wombat) at the new Australian reactor Opal. The cell will operate in a flow-through mode over the temperature range from 25–300°C and up to pressures of 100bar. The first results of a successful transformation of pentlandite (Fe,Ni)9S8 to violarite (Fe,Ni)3S4 under mild conditions (pH∼4) at 120°C and 3bar using in situ neutron diffraction measurements are presented.Diffusion processes at low to moderate temperatures (25–250 The design and fabrication of a low-temperature flow-through cell was a major part of a study on Fe–Ni sulphide mineralogy and more specifically the transformation of pentlandite, (Fe,Ni) The experimental assembly is illustrated in The cylindrical reaction vessel has an internal diameter of 19.4 The pumping circuit and reservoir unit are designed as a pressurised system. The pumping and reservoir circuit (see To test the hydrothermal cell efficiency and stability for in–situ neutron diffraction measurements on MRPD, successive tests were made using a number of reference samples including silicon to verify peak positions, shapes and intensities. The neutron diffraction pattern of stainless steel (type 316) consists of five main peaks at Preliminary in–situ tests of the hydrothermal cell were performed at operating temperatures up to 120 The hydrothermal cell was successfully used in the transformation of natural and synthetic pentlandite into violarite. Preliminary X-ray diffraction measurements show that pentlandite progressively transforms to violarite at 120 Thus, the pentlandite to violarite transformation has successfully demonstrated that the flow-through cell provides a means to study such reactions in situ. However, refinements to the apparatus design and specifically the reaction cell and sample holder configuration are needed to improve the peak to background ratios for better performance. We acknowledge the financial assistance of the ARC and AINSE. We wish to thank Michael Prior and Maxime Avdeev for their assistance with data collection at ANSTO.