Lightweight metal-matrix nanocomposites (MMNCs—metal matrix with nanosized ceramic particles) can be of significance for automobile, aerospace, and numerous other applications. There are some problems in obtaining suitable mechanical properties of MMNCs, including weak bonding between reinforcement and matrix, non-uniformity of reinforcement nanoparticles and high porosity content. In this study, aluminum/alumina nanocomposite was fabricated by stircasting method. Subsequently, cross accumulative roll bonding (CARB) process was used as an effective method for refinement of microstructure and improvement of mechanical properties. The microstructural evolution and the mechanical properties of the nanocomposites during various CARB cycles were examined by the Archimedes method, X-ray defractometer, scanning electron microscopy and tensile testing. The results showed that the microstructure of the nanocomposite after eight cycles of CARB had an excellent distribution of alumina nanoparticles in aluminum matrix without any remarkable porosity. The X-ray diffraction results showed that the crystallite size of the nanocomposite was 71nm by employing eight cycles of CARB technique. Mechanical experiment also indicated that the ultimate tensile strength and the elongation of the nanocomposite increased as the number of CARB cycles increased. After eight CARB cycles, ultimate tensile strength and the elongation values reached 344MPa and 6.4%, which were 3.13 and 3.05 times greater than those of as-cast nanocomposites, respectively.Metal-matrix composites (MMCs) have been extensively studied in the last two decades for many demanding applications in aerospace, automobile, military industries, etc. However, MMCs tend to fracture easily due to their poor ductility and low fracture toughness, hindering their widespread use In this study, commercial aluminum alloy and alumina with average sizes of less than 100   The XRD pattern and Williamson–Hall plot of the eight cycles CARBed nanocomposite are shown in Engineering stress–strain curves of the as-cast and CARBed nanocomposites are shown in As seen, the curve of four and eight cycles CARBed nanocomposites are located above the as-cast one, indicating a higher mechanical behavior. The same behavior was observed in all other nanocomposites processed by the CARB method. It is also obvious from In this study, the CARB process was used as a secondary mechanical processing to improve properties of the cast aluminum/2 Increasing the number of CARB cycles greatly improved the uniformity of alumina nanoparticles in the aluminum matrix so that the microstructure of the produced aluminum/alumina nanocomposite after eight CARB cycles showed a totally uniform distribution of alumina nanoparticles without any particle free zones. When the strain increased during the CARB process, porosity decreased. During the CARB process, as a result of the strip rotation between successive passes, sheet elongation mechanism existed in normal and transverse directions. The XRD analysis showed that the crystallite size of nanocomposite processed by eight cycles of CARB was 71 The ultimate tensile strength of the nanocomposites improved when the number of CARB cycles increased. The aluminum/alumina nanocomposite after the eighth cycle of the CARB process had higher ultimate tensile strength (344 When the number of cycles was raised, the elongation value improved. The aluminum/alumina nanocomposite after the eighth cycle had a much higher elongation (6.4%) value compared to the as-cast composite (2.1%), registering 205% increase.