A reverse shoulder arthroplasty is a consideration for the treatment of comminuted four-part proximal humerus fractures in elderly patients. While a reverse TSA should not replace other treatment modalities, it is indicated in elderly patients with fractures that are not amenable to fixation. Immediate stability and relative independence from tuberosity healing are clear advantages, but the complication rate is substantially higher. Larger studies are necessary to clarify appropriate indications.Proximal humerus fractures result in substantial disability, especially in the elderly population. Proximal humerus fractures account for nearly 10% of all fractures in the elderly Options for surgical treatment include open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) with periarticular locking plates, hemiarthroplasty, or, more recently, reverse total shoulder arthroplasty Complex three-part and four-part fractures, fracture-dislocations, and humeral head-splitting fractures may be contraindicated for ORIF due to high risk of nonunion, malunion, or osteonecrosis ( Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty has been traditionally indicated in low-demand, elderly patients with rotator cuff arthropathy Surgical technique for a reverse total shoulder arthroplasty in the setting of proximal humerus fractures utilizes either the standard deltopectoral approach or the superolateral approach After glenoid implantation, the humerus is prepared. Sequential reamers are used until cortical contact is obtained. Humeral stem height is adjusted depending on the amount of proximal metaphyseal bone loss, with the goal being to restore appropriate tension of the deltoid and conjoint tendons Reverse humeral stem implantation can be either cemented or non-cemented Post-operatively, patients are immobilized in a sling for 4 weeks. Immobilization allows for healing and resolution of swelling and may prevent tuberosity migration Outcomes of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures are generally described in small-patient-number case reviews or cohort studies Bufquin et al. Cazeneuve and Cristofari A few comparative retrospective studies evaluated the outcomes of hemiarthroplasty versus reverse shoulder arthroplasty Boyle et al. According to the registry data, a higher proportion of reverse total shoulder arthroplasties were performed by high-volume shoulder surgeons, but this was not found to be associated with better outcome scores To attempt to consolidate the data comparing hemiarthroplasty to reverse total shoulder arthroplasty and to compensate for the relatively small number of patients in most studies, Namdari et al. In their analysis, Namdari et al. compared 232 reverse total shoulder arthroplasty patients to 263 hemiarthroplasty patients. They found that the reverse shoulder arthroplasty group was significantly older (average age 77.0 versus 71.1 years) and included fewer men (9.4% versus 18.0%). Outcome scores were not found to have statistically significant difference, and there was no difference in terms of active forward elevation, abduction, or active external rotation. Cost of a reverse prosthesis was almost double that of a fracture-specific hemiarthroplasty stem Interestingly, the analysis did find a significantly higher clinical complication rate in the reverse total shoulder arthroplasty group (19.4% versus 5.6%) and determined that patients undergoing reverse shoulder arthroplasty had four-times greater odds of developing complications A recent study by Chalmers et al. Reverse total shoulder arthroplasty provides surgeons with yet another option to treat elderly, low-demand patients with proximal humeral fractures that are not amenable to open reduction and internal fixation Namdari et al. found nearly equivalent subjective and objective outcome measures in pooled data comparing fracture-specific hemiarthroplasty to reverse shoulder arthroplasty With equivalent outcomes found, the significantly higher clinical and radiographic complication rates reported in reverse total shoulder arthroplasty are a matter of concern. The most common clinical complication of neurologic injury and development of pain syndromes can impart a large disability on patients The cost of implants and the general cost following treatment are also of importance. Reverse total shoulder prostheses are significantly more expensive that locked plating constructs and hemiarthroplasty prostheses In conclusion, the decision to proceed with arthroplasty for proximal humeral fractures must be reserved for patients in whom ORIF is not a feasible option after careful consideration. A risk–benefit analysis and discussion must be had by the surgeon and patient to decide between hemiarthroplasty and reverse total shoulder arthroplasty, given the higher cost, significant high rate of complications, and potential catastrophic outcomes following failed reverse shoulder arthroplasty. The authors’ preference regarding for whom reverse total shoulder arthroplasty should be considered include the elderly patients, extremely low-demand patients, rotator cuff-deficient patients, or those with tuberosity comminution. In the future, prospective long-term follow-up studies comparing similar demographic groups are needed to allow patients and surgeons make informed decisions regarding the use of reverse total shoulder arthroplasty in complex proximal humeral fractures.