The residency time of grinding balls inside grinding mills has been calculated in the present work assuming an abrasive wear mechanism without breakage. From the ratio of total weight of balls in the mill to the daily addition weight of balls, the ratio of the grate openings size of the mill to the original ball size, and the rotation rate of the mill, the residency time of grinding balls can be determined numerically. The influence of these parameters on residency time was studied in detail. The existence of grate openings was shown to reduce the residency time significantly. The calculated results were fairly consistent with two experimental observations in both mills with and without exit grates.Grinding balls, which are extensively used to make powder in the mining and mineral processing industry, are subjected to serious wear and impact inside grinding mills. The world consumption of grinding balls is 50–60 millions tons each year, and replacing them costs billions of dollars For some small grinding mills, it is possible to stop the mills and replace all of the old grinding balls with new experimental balls. For large mills, such an exchange would be inconvenient and expensive. An alternative test method is usually adopted, i.e. replacing the old balls gradually, as they wear out, with the new test balls. Once the old grinding balls are gone, the experimental begins. To perform such a test, we need to know how long the old balls will last inside the grinding mill, which is usually difficult to determine by experiments exactly. This prompted the present work, whose goal is to make a calculation of residency time of grinding balls inside grinding mills. From the theory of grinding ball wear processes, the weight loss rate of a grinding ball in a grinding mill is expressed as The weight of a ball is related to its diameter as In some grinding mills, when the size of the grinding balls is reduced to a given value ( From An actual calculation was done on a mill with a 5.5 For the mills with exit grates of diameter  The calculation was applied to a practical mill with grate openings of 75 From the above calculation, we can conclude that a simple but relatively accurate calculation is possible in determining the residency time for grinding balls inside a grinding mill, based on the following assumption: the breakage of grinding balls is negligible; the total balls’ weight inside a mill keeps constant; the wear difference between balls of different alloy compositions is ignored so as to conform with an identical amount of balls added daily; no ball smaller than the exit grate size remains in the mill. The necessary parameters (all of which are normally available in an operating mill) for such a calculation are the total weight of balls in the mill, the weight of the balls added per day, the ratio of the exit grate size to the original ball size, and the rotation rate of the mill. The calculated residency time was several times longer than the value of