Solvent extraction separation and recovery of copper from liquors from sulphate leaching of synthetic Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte using oxime based extractants such as LIX 84 and LIX 973N in kerosene was studied. Parameters such as feed pH, extractant concentration, phase ratio, counter current extraction and stripping were optimized. Influence of feed pH on copper extraction indicates that leach liquor acidity was adequate to achieve maximum extraction. Comparison of the extraction behavior of extractants for copper at 40 vol.% concentrations showed 10% more extraction with LIX 973N. Extraction isotherm data with 40 vol.% LIX extractants (barren of copper) at unit phase ratio indicated 3 stages of extraction with LIX 84 and 2 stages of extraction with LIX 973N, are necessary to achieve >95–99% copper extraction. The co-extraction of Ni, Co and Fe was <2 mg/L. Stripping of copper from loaded organic phase at unit phase ratio using a synthetic spent electrolyte (SE) solution containing 35 g/L Cu and 180 g/L H2SO4 from Cu-LIX 84 loaded organic (LO) was ∼ 81%, whereas from Cu-LIX 973N LO, it was ∼ 10%. Two stages of stripping of copper from LIX 84-LO at O/A ratio of 1.3 with SE indicated 85% stripping. Recycle of spent organic for further use in copper extraction circuit showed a decrease in efficiency by ∼ 3–4%. Semi-continuous countercurrent extraction (∼ 96%)–stripping (∼ 85%) studies for 4 cycles on lab scale and bench scale mixer settler equipment for 30 h of operation confirmed almost similar extraction–stripping percentages with high purity copper sulphate solution.Copper is primarily produced from sulphide ores/concentrates by pyrometallurgical smelting and electrorefining. Leaching/solvent extraction (SX)/electrowinning (EW) has been a commercial process since 1968 for oxide ores and since the mid 70s for mixed oxide–sulfide ores. Today about 30% of world copper is produced by acid leach (AL)–SX–EW technology ( Worldwide efforts are in progress for the last three decades to develop processes based on pyrometallurgical, pyro–hydrometallurgical or hydrometallurgical routes to recover three (Cu, Ni, Co) or four (Cu, Ni, Co, Mn) metals from manganese nodules ( Leaching, solvent extraction, electrowinning processes have been increasingly important to concentrate, purify and separate metal ions. The largest commercial application of these processes is in the copper industry ( The aim of the present study is to optimize conditions on a lab scale for the solvent extraction separation and recovery of copper from concentrated sulphate leach liquor obtained by the dilute sulphuric acid pressure leaching of synthetic Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte similar to the matte generated by the reduction roasting and smelting of Pacific Ocean nodules ( A Varian model SpectrAA 400 Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer (AAS) and an Orion expandable ion analyzer EA 920 equipment were used for the determination of metal concentrations and pH of the aqueous phase. The typical composition of leach liquor generated from synthetic Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte leaching (10 vol.% H Suitable volumes of aqueous and organic phases were contacted for 5 min (initial experiments showed that equilibrium was reached within 1 min) in separating funnels. The phases were separated and the metal concentration in the aqueous phase determined by AAS. The loaded organic (LO) phases were stripped three times with 2 M HCl wherever necessary, and the combined strip solutions analysed by AAS. All the experiments were carried out at room temperature (25 Continuous mixer settler runs for copper extraction–stripping were conducted for 30 h. Each mixer settler unit, in which the volumes of the mixer and the settler were 200 and 600 mL, respectively, was counter currently connected and flow rates of aqueous and organic phases were maintained according to lab scale data (extraction: Initial experiments on single stage extraction of copper from leach liquor (pH: 2.2) without pH adjustment at unit phase ratio with 30 vol.% LIX 84 and LIX 973N dissolved in kerosene indicated about 75 and 93% extraction, respectively. In order to improve the percentage extraction of copper, leach liquor pH was adjusted to different values from 1.45 to 3.1 and extraction tests were carried out with 30 and 40 vol.% LIX 84 and LIX 973N ( To find out the theoretical number of stages and possibility of enriching the copper concentration in the loaded organic phase during extraction stage, the extraction isotherm was obtained. Using 40 vol.% extractants (barren of copper), extraction was carried out at varying Based on the McCabe–Thiele plot, a three stage counter current extraction simulation (CCES) test was carried out at A sufficient quantity of loaded organic phase (Cu: 10.61g/L for LIX 84 and 10.67 g/L for LIX 973N) was generated for carrying out the copper stripping studies with a spent electrolyte containing 35 g/L Cu and 180 g/L H Considering copper stripping of 81.5% from the loaded organic in a single stage with SE (35 g/L Cu and 180 g/L H As the stripping tests of copper from loaded organic phase reported in the previous section did not yield quantitative copper stripping, semi-continuous counter current tests were carried out (2 cycle extraction using 1st cycle SO and so on) for 4 cycles (extraction: The raffinate after copper extraction contained about 0.4 g/L copper, 0.07 g/L iron, 16.8 g/L nickel and 1.85 g/L cobalt at a pH of ∼ 1.0. This solution would require processing to remove Cu and Fe before cobalt–nickel separation. Results on impurities removal from raffinate adjusted to different pH values in the range from 5.3 to 7.7 with dilute alkali solution (50 wt.%) indicated quantitative removal of Cu and Fe around 7.5 pH where the loss of Ni and Co was 2.2–2.7% ( A bench scale mixer settler run was conducted under the optimum lab scale conditions (extraction: Extraction of copper from sulphate liquor of synthetic Cu–Ni–Co–Fe matte using 40 vol.% LIX 84 and LIX 973N in kerosene at unit phase ratio indicated percentage extraction of 83 and 95% respectively. Stripping using spent electrolyte (35 g/L Cu and 180 g/L H BRR express sincere thanks to Dr. J. S. Yadav, Director, Indian Institute of Chemical Technology (IICT), Hyderabad, India for permission on deputation and to Korea Federation of Technology and Science (KOFTS), Seoul, Korea for the financial support under Brain Pool Program.