The osteoblast generation from Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) is tightly coordinated by transcriptional networks and signalling pathways that control gene expression and protein stability of osteogenic “master transcription factors”. Among these pathways, a great attention has been focused on p53 and its physiological negative regulator, the E3 ligase Murine double minute 2 (Mdm2). Nevertheless, the signalling that regulates Mdm2-p53 axis in osteoblasts remain to be elucidated, also considering that Mdm2 possesses numerous p53-independent activities and interacts with additional proteins.
                  Herein, the effects of Mdm2 modulation on MSC differentiation were examined by the use of short- and long-lasting inhibitors of the Mdm2-p53 complex. The long-lasting Mdm2-p53 dissociation was demonstrated to enhance the MSC differentiation into osteoblasts. The increase of Mdm2 levels promoted its association to G protein-coupled receptors kinase (GRK) 2, one of the most relevant kinases involved in the desensitization of G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs). In turn, the long-lasting Mdm2-p53 dissociation decreased GRK2 levels and favoured the functionality of A2B Adenosine Receptors (A2BARs), a GPCR dictating MSC fate. EB148 facilitated cAMP accumulation, and mediated a sustained activation of extracellular signal–regulated kinases (ERKs) and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB). Such pro-osteogenic effects were not detectable by using the reversible Mdm2-p53 complex inhibitor, suggesting the time course of Mdm2-p53 dissociation may impact on intracellular proteins involved in cell differentiation fate. These results suggest that the long-lasting Mdm2 binding plays a key role in the mobilization of intracellular proteins that regulate the final biological outcome of MSCs.Bone homeostasis results from the delicate balance between bone formation and resorption processes [ Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent stromal cells with self-renewal ability that are also capable of forming multiple cellular types [ MSCs differentiation into osteoblasts is controlled by different “master transcription factors”, including Runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and Osterix (Osx) [ In contrast, Mdm2 has been shown to promote MSC differentiation into adipocytes [ However, the signalling that regulates p53-Mdm2 axis in osteoblast differentiation remains to be elucidated, also considering that the E3 ligase, Mdm2, actually possesses numerous p53-independent activities and interacts with additional proteins and/or ubiquitination substrates [ Recently, indol-3ylglyoxyldipeptide derivatives have been rationally designed to dissociate the Mdm2-p53 complex [ In the present paper, the effects of the modulation of Mdm2-p53 complex were evaluated on MSC differentiation program towards osteoblast phenotype. In particular, the differential effects of short-term versus long-lasting inhibitors of Mdm2-p53 complex in driving MSC fate were compared, exploring the contribution of Mdm2 in the regulation of intracellular signalling pathways involved in MSC differentiation. The Mdm2 inhibitor, Nutlin-3 (NUT-3, Sigma Aldrich, Milan, Italy, When indicated, Pifithrin-β (PFT-β, Sigma Aldrich, Italy) was used as p53 inhibitor [ Human bone marrow MSCs and cell culture medium were from Lonza (Milan, Italy). The cell line was monitored for DNA profiling and used until passage 5, for fewer than 6 months after resuscitation [ MSCs were seeded in 96-well microplates (5 × 10 MSCs (9 × 10 MSCs (1 × 10 MSCs were cultured in osteogenic medium in the absence (control) or presence of EB148 (1 μM), EB54 (1 μM) or NUT-3 (10 μM) for 2, 7 or 14 days. Following treatments, mRNA was extracted, and the expression levels of MDM2, p53, p21 and PUMA were quantified by real-time RT-PCR, as previously described [ MSCs were treated with DMSO (control) or with EB148 (1 μM) for 2 or 14 days, and then lysed by the addition of RIPA buffer containing proteases' inhibitors (100 μl). Equal amounts of the cell extracts (30 μg of proteins) were diluted in Laemmli solution, resolved by SDS-PAGE (7.5%), transferred to PVDF membranes and probed overnight at 4 °C with primary antibody anti-p53 (diluted 1:500; 70R-31561, Filtzgerald) or anti-A To test Mdm2-GRK2 association, a co-immunoprecipitation assay was performed. MSCs were incubated in osteogenic medium alone (control), or in the presence of EB148 (1 μM), EB54 (1 μM) or NUT-3 (10 μM) for 2 or 7 days. For the determination of GRK2-Mdm2 heterocomplexes, cells were lysed following treatments, and incubated with anti-Mdm2 antibody (sc-5304, Santa Cruz Biotechnology; 3 μg/sample) overnight at 4 °C under constant rotation, and then immunoprecipitated with protein A-Sepharose (2 h at 4 °C) [ For GRK2-A MSCs (5 × 10 Following incubations, cells were fixed with 4% formaldehyde, and the levels of ERK1/2 (total and phosphorylated) or CREB (phosphorylated) were determined by immunoenzymatic assays [ MSCs (2 × 10 MSCs (2 × 10 MSC cells (4 × 10 GraphPad was used for graphical presentation. Statistical analyses were performed using a one-way ANOVA study followed by the Bonferroni test for repeated measurements [ In previous papers [ As a first step, the ability of the compounds to affect MSC proliferation/viability was assessed ( The reference compound NUT-3, tested at 10 μM concentration, significantly decreased MSC proliferation at both 48 h in proliferating medium ( Once established the toxic concentrations of Mdm2 ligands, MSCs were cultured in osteogenic medium and challenged with stated compound concentrations for different days, in order to determine if the inhibition of Mdm2-p53 complex may potentiate cellular differentiation. MSC differentiation into osteoblasts was verified by quantitative mineralization assay ( As depicted in EB148 significantly enhanced cell differentiation in osteogenic medium at 7-day treatment yet ( A real time RT-PCR analysis on MSC differentiating markers was assessed to confirm the data obtained by the mineralization assay. As depicted in Of note, a weak induction in ALP and Runx2 mRNA was noticed challenging MSCs with EB54 ( The osteogenic induction was evaluated upon p53 blockade to understand the extent of p53-dependent effects on EB148-differentiating capability. For this purpose, MSCs were challenged with EB148, EB54, or NUT-3, in the presence of PTF-β, which blocks p53 nuclear activities [ The results ( Having confirmed that p53 decreases MSC differentiation into osteoblasts, we investigated the extent of p53 reactivation in response to the long-lasting ligand EB148. In particular, the accumulation of p53 protein and p53-target gene mRNA levels was evaluated upon cell treatment with EB148. As a first step, a real-time RT-PCR analysis was performed to evaluate the kinetics of p53 transcriptional activity, i.e., the transcription levels of p53 target genes (i.e., Mdm2, p53 itself, PUMA and p21) following 2, 7 and 14 days of treatment. Challenging cells with EB148 for 2 days caused a statistically significant increase in the mRNA levels of p53 target genes ( Notable, a lower but significant induction of Mdm2 transcription was observed upon cell incubation with EB54 (Supplementary Fig. 2). In contrast, NUT-3 did not induce long-term induction of Mdm2 transcription, consistent with previous data [ Conversely, mRNA level of p53 raised up significantly following 7 days of EB148-treatment only ( As depicted in Overall, the results demonstrate that, upon MSC treatment with EB148, p53 is still activated to some extent, but the p53-independent effects of Mdm2 overcome the p53 dependent effects in our experimental model. Once demonstrated the p53-independent effects of Mdm2 overcome the dependent ones in our experimental model, we investigated the molecular mechanisms at the basis of Mdm2 actions in MSCs. Mdm2 has been demonstrated to act as a E3-ubiquitin ligase on several substrates different from p53 [ In MSCs, we demonstrated EB148 induced a significant decrease in GRK2 levels following 7-day treatment ( Since several proteins targeted to the proteasome pathway go through poly-ubiquitination [ EB148 and EB54 induced a significant GRK2 association to Mdm2 following 7-day treatment ( Nevertheless, a real-time PCR analysis was performed in order to determine if the observed regulation in GRK2 levels could involve, at least in part, a transcriptional mechanism. The results showed that challenging MSCs with EB148 and EB54 significantly reduced the expression of GRK2 mRNA after 7 days of differentiation ( GRK proteins play a crucial role in regulating the functional responses of a plethora of GPCRs. Among these membrane receptors, the A Western blot analysis was used to confirm the observed data at a post-transcriptional level. The A Nevertheless, when MSCs were challenged with EB148, a significant decrease of A Considering the pivotal role of GRK2 association to a GPCR in determining its functionality, functional experiments were performed to disclose if EB148 can modify A In cAMP assays, A The intracellular pathways putatively linked to MSC differentiation upon the dissociation of Mdm2-p53 complex were analysed. Among these signals, the cAMP accumulation in MSCs was investigated as the major intracellular mediator that is linked to GPCR and to GRK activities. As depicted in Neither EB54 nor NUT-3 modified the kinetic pattern of cAMP accumulation during MSC differentiation in culture ( To reveal the contribute of cAMP signalling in MSC fate, osteoblast differentiation was assessed in the presence of EB148 upon AC inhibition by SQ22536. AC inhibition induced “per se” a significant decrease in osteogenic differentiation (Supplementary Fig. 3). Consistent with our data, activation of cAMP signalling alters the lineage commitment of MSCs, favouring osteogenesis [ The kinetic pattern of ERK activation can regulate the final biological outcomes of these kinases. In particular, a transient kinase activation is commonly associated with a proliferative effect, whereas their sustained phosphorylation over time triggers differentiation signalling pathways [ Consistent with the data observed for ERK kinetics of activation, the ratio of phosphorylated/total CREB was significantly higher than control cells upon MSCs incubation with EB148 only (Supplementary Fig. 4A). CREB activation observed in the presence of EB148 was significantly reduced upon ERK inhibition with PD184352 (Supplementary Fig. 4B), suggesting that CREB activation is a cAMP-ERK dependent mechanism. All together, these data suggest that the cAMP-ERK-CREB axis might play a role in the effects of the long-lasting Mdm2 inhibitor. Since ERK signalling has been shown to interact with and to control Mdm2 ubiquitin ligase activity [ To disclose if ERK activation may be independent to the increase in cAMP levels, immunoenzymatic assays were repeated upon AC inhibition. The results showed that EB148-elicited ERK phosphorylation was significantly and completely reduced in the presence of the AC inhibitor SQ22536 ( Surprisingly, PTF-β, which blocks p53 transcriptional activity, partially prevented ERK activation following 7 days of cellular treatment with the Mdm2 ligands EB54 and EB148 ( Furthermore, to investigate if a direct connection between ERK and MSC differentiation can exist, osteoblast differentiation was assessed in the presence of Mdm2 ligands upon ERK inhibition by PD184352. ERK inhibition induced “per se” a significant decrease in osteogenic differentiation, confirming that ERK signalling is required for MSC driving to osteoblasts [ In the present study, we demonstrated that the regulation of Mdm2-p53 axis in MSCs by the means of a long-lasting inhibition is an unexplored and effective strategy to direct these cells towards a differentiation program. Long-lasting dissociation of Mdm2-p53 complex caused a significant increase in Mdm2-mediated degradation of GRK2 protein. As a consequence, the drop in the levels of this kinase in an active form reduces the physiological desensitization of Gs-coupled receptors, such as A Mdm2 has been characterized as the key negative regulator of p53; actually, recent studies have shown a p53-independent role of Mdm2 in the ubiquitination and regulation of several proteins that contribute to main aspects of cell proliferation, apoptosis, and differentiation [ The role of Mdm2-p53 axis in MSC differentiation has been extensively investigated both in vitro and in animal models. In particular, p53 signalling pathways are known to negatively regulate bone formation and MSCs lineage commitment [ Herein, by the use of different disruptors of the Mdm2-p53 complex, we investigated the effects of Mdm2 modulation on MSC differentiation into osteoblasts, focusing in particular on the Mdm2-regulated modulation of intracellular signalling pathways involved in MSC differentiation, such as ERK, cAMP and MAPK. Specifically, we compared reversible and long-lasting disruptors of Mdm2-p53 complex, which have been demonstrated in human glioblastoma cells to induce peculiar kinetic pattern in the regulation of p53 target genes, Mdm2 protein, and ERK signalling [ As first step, MSC proliferation/viability was examined following incubation with the Mdm2 ligands. The standard Mdm2 ligand, NUT-3, tested at 10 μM, significantly decreased MSC viability, consistent with the data reported for the drug in CD34 When MSCs were grown in osteogenic medium, a significant enhancement of osteogenesis was evidenced in the case of the long-lasting inhibitor EB148. A slightly increase in mineralization and in the transcription of osteogenic genes were evidenced for its analogue EB54, but not for the standard drug NUT-3. The Mdm2 ligands, and in particular the long-lasting one, were demonstrated to reactivate effectively p53 transcriptional activity. Nevertheless, upon MSC treatment with EB148, the p53-independent effects of Mdm2 overcame the p53-dependent effects promoting osteogenesis. Actually, the induction of the osteogenic process elicited by EB148 was enhanced significantly upon blockage of p53 nuclear activity. According to our evidences, Mdm2 has been shown to play a key role in MSC differentiation into adipocytes [ Based on these evidences, we focused our attention on the putative mechanisms that could be linked to Mdm2 actions in MSCs. In particular, looking for Mdm2-substrates different from p53 [ The long-lasting Mdm2 ligand only induced a significant decrease in GRK2 levels; consistent with literature data [ The Mdm2-mediated decrease of GRK2 levels has been linked to an enhancement of GPCR availability/functionality, including β–adrenergic receptors [ Likewise, GRK2 has been shown to interact with a variety of signalling proteins and to have ‘effector’ functions beyond receptor desensitization [ Besides the nature of GPCR involved in such regulation, cAMP accumulation in MSCs was investigated as the major intracellular mediator linked to GPCR and to GRK activities. The cAMP levels of unstimulated MSCs (i.e., control cells), grown in osteogenic medium, gradually raised up during the process of cellular differentiation, reaching a peak following 14 days in culture decreasing in the final part of the differentiation process (i.e., 21 days). Our data support the hypothesis that duration, rather than the strength, of the signal, is involved in the differentiating properties of cAMP [ Moreover, consistent with the hypothesis that activation of cAMP signalling alters the lineage commitment of MSCs, promoting osteogenesis [ As Mdm2-mediated regulation of GRK2 has been suggested to influence the GPCR-mediated MAPK cascade [ Co-immunoprecipitation assays demonstrated that ERK regulation was ascribed to a direct interaction between ERKs and Mdm2, as reported previously [ The MAPK activation elicited by EB148 was demonstrated to be linked to cAMP signalling, and, surprisingly, to be partially dependent from p53. The latter contribution may be ascribed to p53-dependent Mdm2 transcription that may enhance AC activation. Supporting the key role of ERKs in osteogenesis [ Finally, EB148 induced an ERK-dependent CREB phosphorylation, confirming that the CREB pathway is involved in osteogenesis [ In this paper, it was demonstrated that the long-lasting dissociation of Mdm2 from p53 potentiated MSC differentiation into osteoblasts, with the involvement of the following intracellular mechanisms ( Of note, the experiments showed that, despite a reactivation of p53 functionality, the pro-osteogenic effects of the long-lasting ligand were mainly ascribed to Mdm2 actions, independent from p53. Thus, these results highlight the importance of the target residence time in the recruitment of signalling proteins dictating the final outcome of MSCs. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This work was supported by the SD, MLT, LM, EN and CM were involved with the conception, design, and interpretation of data. SD, CG, DP, RP performed the experiments. EB, VLP, ST, FDS synthetized compounds and were involved with data analysis. CM and LM acquired funding. CM, LM, FDS, EN and MLT provided general overall supervision of the study. All authors contributed to the drafting and critical revision of the manuscript and gave final approval of the version to be published.  The  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at