The impact of several surfactant species employed in the suspension photopolymerization of water-borne thiol-ene polymer microspheres is reported. The focus of analysis was on how different surfactant species and the surfactant concentrations affected particle size and particle size distributions. Surfactants used included sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS), dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB), tetradecyltrimethylammonium bromide (TTAB), and hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (HTAB), Tween 20, Tween 40, Tween 60, Tween 80, Lutensol XL 70, Lutensol XP 70, Pluronic PE 6400, and Pluronic F108 Pastille. Using stabilizing agents or surfactants is necessary to prevent extensive aggregation and agglomeration of crosslinked thiol-ene polymer. All surfactants used in this study for particle stabilization and development produced spherical thiol-ene polymer particles. The chemical structure and concentration of the surfactants influenced the final particle size and size distribution of particles obtained. In general, it was found that smaller particles are obtained with higher concentrations of stabilizing agent, especially for ionic surfactants.The development of colloidal polymer particles with an assortment of shapes, sizes, and chemical properties has been greatly enhanced with advancements in material synthesis and characterization In all methods of heterogeneous polymerization the stabilization of monomer droplets and/or polymer particles is a particularly important factor, and often determines the many outcomes of the reaction and product. During particle growth, there must be a balance between the phenomena of droplet comminution and coalescence as well as the attractive and repulsive forces associated with the polymer particles. The use of emulsifying agents or surfactants We have recently demonstrated that spherical, crosslinked polymer particles can be made using thiol-ene chemistry in a water-borne photopolymerization Given the significant influence that surfactants play in heterogeneous polymerizations it is important to evaluate surfactant influences on our newly developed suspension thiol-ene photopolymerizations. Our previously published work The photoinitiator 1-hydroxycyclohexyl phenyl ketone as well as monomers 1,3,5-triallyl-1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6(1H,3H,5H)-trione (TTT) and pentaerythritol tetrakis (3-mercaptopropionate) (PETMP) were obtained from Sigma Aldrich. Toluene was purchased from Fisher Scientific. Anionic surfactants sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) and sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS) were obtained from J.T. Baker and Sigma Aldrich, respectively. Cationic surfactants dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB), tetradecyltrimethylammonium bromide (TTAB), and hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (HTAB) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich. Nonionic surfactant species Tween 20 and Tween 40 were obtained from Sigma Aldrich, Tween 60 from Acros, and Tween 80 from Amresco. The nonionic surfactants Lutensol XL 70, Lutensol XP 70, Pluronic PE 6400, and Pluronic F108 Pastille were obtained from BASF. Structures of each surfactant can be found in the All reactions consisted of 10 ml aqueous solutions with 10 wt. % monomer content relative to water. The concentrations of surfactant were between 0.1 and 5 wt. % (relative to water). The TTT (23.6 wt. %) and PETMP (34.6 wt. %) were combined with the 1-hydroxycyclohexyl phenyl ketone (0.1 wt. % relative to amount of monomers). Toluene (41.7 wt. %) was added in a 1:1 volume ratio relative to the monomers. Reactions were homogenized using magnetic stirring in a glass vial (20 ml, O.D. × H 25 mm × 57 mm) and Teflon-coated micro stir bar (12.7 mm × 3 mm). Upon combination of the organic phase and aqueous phase, the reaction was allowed to mix for 5 min and then cured under UV light (365 nm, 11 mW/cm Analysis of product particles was performed using an Olympus optical microscope, where samples were prepared by simple air-drying or drying in a vacuum oven. Quantitative analysis of particle size was done via laser diffraction using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000. All product particles were washed with distilled water and ethanol and then dried prior to analysis. Each sample was examined at 50% sonication and 1750 rpm stirring. The zeta potential analyses were conducted using a Brookhaven Instruments Corporation ZetaPALS – Zeta Potential Analyzer. This instrument uses phase analysis light scattering (PALS) in the measurement of electrophoretic mobility (EPM) and the calculation of zeta potential ( Our approach in developing water-borne thiol-ene polymer particles uses heterogeneous suspension polymerization Because of the significant role that surfactants play in particle development and stabilization, we investigated their effect on thiol-ene suspension polymerization. Furthermore, changes in surfactant or stabilizing species Our work has focused on two specific anionic surfactants, the alkyl sulfate SDS and the alkylbenzene sulfonate SDBS. Particle stabilization is achieved through electrostatic interactions due to the charged portion of the surfactant molecule The general trend in particle size that is observed in these reactions with the anionic surfactant SDS is that smaller, spherical particles are formed at higher surfactant concentrations ( The distribution width is based on the difference between the diameters ( The zeta potential of sub-micron sized polymer particles made using SDS was measured on samples that were sonicated (in the manner we previously reported The most common cationic surfactants are quaternary ammonium compounds, specifically alkylammonium halides and tetra-alkylammonium halides. The cationic surfactants that were investigated here were DTAB, TTAB, and HTAB, with the latter two being structural analogs of DTAB. Optical microscope images of thiol-ene polymer particles prepared using these surfactants are shown in The zeta potential was measured on particles made using DTAB as the stabilizer (sonicated in order to reduce the particle size, as discussed for SDS above). Using reagent concentrations described above, a 10 ml reaction stabilized by 5 wt. % DTAB was sonicated for 1 min prior to photopolymerization in concurrence with magnetic stirring. In this case, the zeta potential was +6.71 mV for particles with a volume average particle diameter of 359.4 nm at pH 8.47. Again, this is expected and is comparable to other DTAB-stabilized polymer colloidal systems Many common nonionic surfactants are block copolymers known as polyoxomers or Pluronics, which consist of a central hydrophobic chain of poly(propylene oxide) flanked by two hydrophilic poly(ethylene oxide) chains. Other prominent nonionic surfactants contain groups like simple saccharides or fatty acid residues that exhibit no charge Based on the optical microscope images of the spherical product particles ( Because nonionic surfactants have no charge within the molecular structure, stabilization is largely based on steric and osmotic interactions On the other hand, each of the Pluronic species studied consists of a similar poly(ethylene oxide)- We report here experimental results from suspension thiol-ene polymerization reactions that contain different stabilizing species including anionic, cationic, and nonionic surfactants. Using stabilizing agents or surfactants is necessary to prevent extensive aggregation and agglomeration of crosslinked thiol-ene polymer particles. The chemical structure and concentration of the surfactants influenced the final particle size and size distribution of particles obtained. We found that, in general, smaller particles are obtained with higher concentrations of stabilizing agent, especially for ionic surfactant species. For most reactions stabilized with nonionic surfactants, particle size is strongly influenced by variation in surfactant structure. The type and concentration of the stabilizing agent is important in developing stable polymer dispersions, although as is typical for suspension polymerizations, agitation energy has a greater impact on particle size The authors thank the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at