 where purely formally in order to find the equation describing most accurately of the experiments, and the variables of the equations do not have any specific physical meaning; by means of kinetic relationships based on the defined models of the reaction of the volumes of the solid substances, and the variables of these equations correspond to the nature of the processes taking place. The formal kinetic equation is based on the application of the law of the effect of the mass with may be presented in the form:  The values of the parameters Using the experimental values of The general rate equation where and the function on the left-hand side can be expanded into a binomial series Comparison of the relationships Since at low values of  Another possibility of determining the values of The possibilities of the differential method are restricted by the low accuracy of determination of the rate of transformation d Formally, the values of The reaction order may be determined using several procedures:   After two measurements with different initial concentrations After comparison and taking the logarithm:    If the rate is proportional to different powers of the concentrations of several substances, it is necessary to find the dependence of the rate on the concentration of each substance and the reaction rate is given by the equation: The overall order of the reaction is ( The Arrhenius equation shows that, in a general case, the values of the rate constant  The difference of the logarithms is their ratio and since they are constants, are the result is again a constant Comparison of the relationships The graphical representation of this function in However, in practice the two values of the rate constants of a guarantee that the determined value of the activation energy is accurate, because of two reasons: to determine the optimum course of the straight line it is necessary to optimise this relationship by one of the available methods, for example, the method of least squares. As the number of available points increases, the accuracy of the form of the straight line also increases; as mentioned later, the activation energy also represents the main mechanisms of the reaction, i.e., whether the reaction is controlled by diffusion (external or internal), or whether it is controlled by the kinetics of the chemical reaction and, in both cases, in which temperature range. If the reaction mechanism changes, this is reflected in the form of the Arrhenius function by an inflection point at the temperature at which the reaction mechanism also changes. For these reasons, it is always necessary to carry out experiments in order to determine the rate constant of the reaction in relation to temperature in the largest possible number and, in the ideal case, they should be repeated several times to ensure reproducibility.  where In order to eliminate of the effect of other variables, they must be present in a sufficient surplus amount, and the effect of a single variable is investigated. This is a very important fact which is often underestimated because otherwise the effect of another variable may also be present. For example, the leaching rate at room temperature is usually low so that when using the low leaching concentration, this has no effect. The increase of temperature usually increases the leaching rate several times and the initial concentration of the leaching agent, sufficient for leaching at room temperature, becomes a limiting factor, instead of the leaching temperature. The result will then be confusing. Also, large surpluses of the reagents may not be suitable. For example, large surpluses of the leaching agent in comparison with the amount of the sample (for example, litres in comparison with the grams) to appear as suitable for maintaining of the constant concentration difference, but it could happen that of the analytical be determined amount of the investigated leached metal in the solution will be very low in relation to dilution and, a systematic analytical error would be caused. Usually, it is therefore necessary to determine the minimum required amount of the reagent by calculation from the course of the expected chemical reactions, and the investigated variables are varied around this value. Another For example, the leaching reaction in the investigations of the leaching of chalcopyrite using ferric chloride is: At a mass of the specimen of 5 Generally, it would be necessary to construct a matrix of experiments which would consider all the investigated effects and then it would be necessary to change gradually all the variables, whilst the other variables would be maintained constant. However, this is unacceptable both from the time viewpoint and financial considerations. There are sophistical approaches in which the significant effects on the processes may be determined using and acceptable number of experiments. These are the methods of factorial experiment design [ Therefore, the experimental plan is determined on the bases of the requirements for investigations. In leaching, the main requirement is usually the determination of the kinetic equation, the effect of temperature, reagent concentration, the effect of the slowest reaction stage and, consequently, the determination of the overall reaction mechanism. It is not known in advance whether the process is controlled by some type of diffusion or by the rate of the chemical reaction. The procedure may be used in, for example, One of the most important stages of research is the development and construction of suitable equipment. Equipment must be prepared taking into account the conditions of the investigations, and must be capable of maintaining all essential conditions for the course of the experiment in order to maximise the elimination of all systematic and random experimental errors. The diagram of basic leaching equipment is shown in  This type of equipment enables continuous control of the process In the experiments using a gas atmosphere, it is necessary to supply the atmosphere to the leaching reactor. If the gases used in the experiments are corrosive, or dangerous (O   High-energy fields may be applied using equipment shown in The principle of equipment in which leaching is investigated in the extreme Of course, these systems are always universal to a certain   The dissolution rate in diffusion-controlled dissolution is described by the equation of convective diffusion [ where ω is the angular speed of the stirrer. The value The experiments, formulated in this manner, were carried out at constant temperature and concentration conditions are shown in   The individual curves are used to determine the rate constants as a tangent to the curves of the given point using a suitable mathematical procedure. Of course, this must also have a physical The investigations of the effect of the grain size are fundamental and it is well-known [ Comparison of the typical leaching curves of chalcopyrite with different grain size is shown in Despite the objective result according to which the apparent leaching rate decreases with decreasing interfacial area, Comparison of the difference of the copper yield into the solution for the individual fractions gave the value of approximately 4%. In the curve of the fraction − In addition to the previously mentioned fact of the presence of The presence of acid in the leaching medium in acid oxidation leaching has a single role: prevent hydrolytic precipitation of iron from the solution. A certain minimum amount is sufficient for this and a further increase of the acid concentration in the leaching medium causes problems, especially in production and ecology. In order to determine the effects of the acidity of the solution on the leaching kinetics, leaching experiments were carried out at 70 The dependence of the leaching rate of chalcopyrite on the concentration of the ferric ions is shown in In general, oxidation leaching of chalcopyrite in the acid medium is characterised by the increase of the leaching rate with increasing temperature, as indicated in The determined value of the activation energy indicates that, in this case, the process takes place to some extent in the kinetic regime, although close to the boundary determining the interface between the kinetic and diffusion regime. In this case, the temperature is sufficiently high for a fast chemical reaction resulting also in the formation of elemental sulphur on the leached surface, as indicated by the measurements of X-ray diffraction phase The formed sulphur is also permanently ‘attacked’ in movement of the pulp and by milling. It appears that the overall process contains another possible partial process which has not so far been considered. External diffusion of the reactants is eliminated and this obviously results in the regime to which the chemical reaction of the formation of elemental sulphur S In the investigated concentration range of the leaching medium 0.5 However, this may not always be the case. The reaction mechanism may change from diffusion-controlled to chemically- controlled, and vice versa. This change may take place as a result of the change of the concentration of the reagents in the solution, pressure or temperature. In chemical or electrochemical reactions, the rate of the chemical reaction at of the low concentration of the reagents in the volume of the solution is low and, consequently, may determine the overall rate of the process. The increase of the reagent concentration also increases the rate of the chemical reaction and the slowest stage changes to the diffusion of the dissolved ions from the interface into the solution through the boundary layer. In graphical representation of the kinetic curves, this is also reflected in their non-linear form. In a relatively large number of cases, the regime of the heterogeneous reactions at low temperatures is different from that at high or higher temperatures.   In the investigated temperature range, 20–90 The change of the mechanism of chalcopyrite leaching in ferric sulphate depending on temperature is a completely new observation. On the other hand, it is not in any contradiction with the published results because no results have been published on leaching in such a wide temperature range. It is generally known that low temperature greatly reduces the rate of the leaching process and this is obviously the main reason why the authors working in this area have considered the temperature range interesting for commercial application. The activation energy determined in the temperature range 20–40 The apparent activation energy This example of the examination of leaching is not exhausting, and it cannot be. It is always important to know which type of reaction should be studied, which investigations are possible, and the type of equipment available. The formulation of the experiments will differ if both the liquid and solid phase will contribute to the reaction, and also the fact when only non-oxidation reactions will take place, and also differ if electrochemical reactions out to be studied, etc. Analysis of the results may also be purely Other methods include electrochemical methods for measurement of the changes of the electrochemical potential in situ in the process (cyclic voltametry, chronopotentiometry, etc). Each method has its advantages and enables the process to be examined from a specific angle, but all these methods are available only in a small number of cases and the time and financial viewpoint is also very important. Examples of the published results of leaching of sulphide will be discussed in the following sections, in which different investigations methods are used. As already mentioned, the course of the hydrometallurgical processes is usually more favourable at higher temperatures. Of course, due to this, it is necessary to measure the parameters of variables of the process. With the exception of temperature and, possibly, the redox potential, it is the actual value of pH. These measurements were taken in most cases using a glass electrode in the temperature range up to 110 Measurements were taken using a measuring hydrogen electrode and an Ag-AgCl electrode as the reference electrode immersed in a potassium chloride solution. Three different concentrations for each buffer were used. The considered cell was: where Pt was replaced by Pd or In, if necessary. These experiments yielded sufficiently accurate values of with the potentials of the half cell or the potential of the entire cell is: The value {Cl  and it is assumed that for where Seven standard buffer solutions are presented in  