In the present study, oxidized and high sulphur fine coal was subjected to oil agglomeration process after ultrasonic treatment. Power and time of ultrasonic treatment were selected as variable. Combustible recovery, ash rejection, pyritic sulphur rejection, ash separation efficiency and pyritic sulphur separation efficiency of the agglomeration process with and without ultrasonic treatment were determined. In addition, calorific value of the clean coal produced by agglomeration process was measured. In the agglomeration process without ultrasonic treatment, calorific value, combustible recovery, ash rejection and pyritic sulphur rejection were obtained to be 6518kcal/kg, 63.78%, 75.19% and 92.64%, respectively. Ultrasonic treatment enhanced the performance of oil agglomeration process. By the application of ultrasonic treatment before agglomeration process, calorific value, combustible recovery, ash rejection and pyritic sulphur rejection were increased to maximally 6939kcal/kg, 66.13%, 87.24% and 97.44%, respectively. In the study, changes on the surface structure of the coal after ultrasonic treatment were also examined. Particle breakage, formation of cracks and cavities, and altering of surfaces into fresh-clean surfaces were observed. Increase in time and power of ultrasonic treatment had slight positive effect on ash and pyritic sulphur rejections.Ultrasonic treatment causes cavitation, that is, the formation, growth and collapsing of bubbles in a liquid. Collapsing of bubbles produces small areas of high pressure differences, resulting in micro turbulence As with flotation, oil agglomeration of coal relies on the differences in the surface properties of hydrophobic coal particles and hydrophilic inorganic gangue Recently, several studies have been carried out to determine the usability of ultrasonic pre-treatment in coal processing. Majority of these studies are focused on increasing the flotation ability of coal by using ultrasonic pre-treatment A coal sample from coal deposit located in Muzret (Artvin, Turkey) was used in this study. Proximate and sulphur analysis, and X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis were performed. Proximate and sulphur analysis of the sample showed that Muzret coal had high ash and pyritic sulphur contents ( At first, agglomeration test without ultrasonic treatment was undertaken. Cylindrical glass vessel (11.7 Secondly, coal–water mixtures (solid ratio: 10%) were subjected to ultrasonic treatment in order to determine the effect of ultrasonic treatment on surface properties of coal and performance of the agglomeration process. A laboratory type, high intensity ultrasonic generator (750 Finally, agglomerates were analysed for ash and pyritic sulphur contents by using standard methods of analyses. The details of the methods of analyses can be found elsewhere  As seen in SEM–EDS analysis ( Ultrasonic treatment changes the pulp nature considerably Results of the agglomeration tests are shown in Combustible recovery of the agglomeration process that was obtained to be 63.78% at agglomeration process without ultrasonic treatment was increased to maximally 66.13% by using ultrasonic treatment applied for 0.5 Maximum ash and pyritic sulphur separation efficiencies were obtained to be 42.67% and 60.41%, respectively. In general, ash and pyritic sulphur separation efficiencies decreased after an ultrasonic power of 28.5 Depending on improved ash removal from coal by using ultrasonic treatment, calorific value of the coal was increased considerably ( The success of the oil agglomeration process after ultrasonic treatment on coal cleaning can be clearly seen from polished section examination under ore microscope. As seen from Even though no study on agglomeration after ultrasonic treatment of coal has been reported previously, effect of coal–ultrasound interaction on flotation whose mechanism is similar to that of agglomeration has been reported before. Kang et al. Ultrasonic treatment had crushing effect on the coal particles, causing size reduction and cracks on the surface. Oxidized layer on the coal surface was removed from the surface by ultrasounds, and clean-fresh coal surfaces and cavities were produced. While carbon content on coal surfaces increased, oxygen content decreased. Decreasing of contents of some other elements such as aluminium, iron, calcium, silica, potassium showed that clays and some other gangue minerals were also removed from the surface as well as oxidized layer. Ultrasonic treatment applied before oil agglomeration enhanced the ash and pyritic sulphur rejection from the coal and increased the calorific value of the coal. By using ultrasonic treatment before oil agglomeration, ash rejection increased from 75.19% to 87.24%, and pyritic sulphur rejection increased from 92.64% to 97.41%. Increase in power and time of ultrasonic treatment had a little positive effect on ash and pyritic sulphur rejections. Calorific value of the coal that was increased from 5084