This paper presents a study of the kinetics of the leaching of tetrahedrite in FeCl3–NaCl–HCl solutions for temperatures between 60°C and 104°C and ferric ion concentrations of 0.001 to 1 M at atmospheric pressure. The shrinking core model was applied to the results. The calculated activation energy is 65±6 kJ/mol; the order of the reaction with respect to ferric ion is 0.35±0.03; and the apparent rate constant is proportional to the inverse of the mean particle size. These results show that, for temperatures below the normal boiling point of the solution, the leaching of tetrahedrite is reaction controlled. From the analyses of the solutions and X-ray and microprobe analyses of the solid residues, it was concluded that the leaching of tetrahedrite involves the complete breakdown of the sulphide structure.Pure tetrahedrite has the general chemical formula of Cu Copper concentrates produced by the classical flotation processes established for chalcopyrite can also contain tetrahedrite/tenantite, because this family of minerals is floated together with chalcopyrite. Hence, the copper sulphide concentrates produced by flotation from ore bodies containing tetrahedrite will contain impurities, such as antimony, arsenic and mercury, which decrease the value of the concentrates. Somincor, the company that owns the Neves-Corvo mine in Portugal, studied the possibility of separating chalcopyrite from tetrahedrite using different flotation conditions, producing a clean copper concentrate rich in chalcopyrite that can be sold without smelter penalties, and other dirty concentrates rich in tetrahedrite/tenantite Most of the literature on tetrahedrite leaching refers to the use of alkaline leaching with Na Some authors have studied the leaching of tetrahedrite in sulphate media. Caldon There is also some work done on the leaching of tetrahedrite concentrates in chloride media. Scheiner et al. Finally, some authors have investigated the bacterial leaching of tetrahedrite. Thus, Frenay Leaching reactions are heterogeneous processes and so most of the models used to describe them are similar to those used for other non-catalytic-heterogeneous processes, such as the shrinking core model  The tetrahedrite used in this investigation was prepared from a concentrate obtained from the Monte-Avanza mine (Trieste-Italy), containing mainly tetrahedrite dispersed in a carbonate and silicate matrix. The concentrate was washed with dilute hydrochloric acid in order to remove the carbonate matrix, followed by heavy liquid separation with bromoform to remove the liberated particles of silicate. This latter operation was not totally effective and the final sample still contained around 7% silicate. The purified sample was examined by optical microscopy and electron microprobe. The results of the electron microprobe analysis of four different tetrahedrite particles are presented in The results presented in The leaching tests were carried out in a five-necked round bottomed, reactor (500 mL) heated by a thermostatted oil bath. The leaching solution (200 mL) was added to the reactor and when the temperature was reached, the solid was added and the stirring speed set at 700 min The experimental leaching conditions used were: pulp density — 0.5%(w/v); temperature — 60, 80, 90, 105°C; [FeCl The determination of the amount of ferrous ion produced in the leaching reaction enables the stoichiometry of the leaching reaction and the final oxidation state of antimony, arsenic and sulphur to be estimated. Taking the chemical composition of the tetrahedrite presented previously and assuming that the sulphide sulphur is oxidised only to elemental sulphur and not to sulphate, that the cuprous ion in the solid is oxidised to cupric, and that antimony and arsenic are oxidised to the pentavalent state, the leaching of this sample of tetrahedrite can be described by the equation:    Applying   Most of the leaching solutions used in this work were 3 M in sodium chloride and so the metals in solution should be complexed with chloride ions. Ferric iron, for instance, is distributed between five different species The influence of the addition of sodium chloride to the leaching solution is presented in X-ray diffraction analysis of the residues obtained in the leaching tests done without NaCl did not enable identification of the antimony precipitate. However, electron microprobe analysis showed that the precipitates contained Fe/Sb/Cl/Na and infrared analysis indicated the presence of HSbO   By assuming that The results of this study show that the leaching of tetrahedrite with ferric chloride, sodium chloride and hydrochloric acid solutions involves the breakdown of the tetrahedrite crystal structure with the simultaneous liberation of all of its components. No sulphate is formed in the leaching reaction and antimony precipitates at chloride concentrations less than 3 M. The leaching of tetrahedrite can be described by the shrinking core model and the leaching rate is controlled by a surface reaction. For temperatures below 104°C, the calculated activation energy is 65±6 kJ/mol; the order of the reaction with respect to ferric ion is 0.35±0.03; and the apparent rate constant is proportional to the inverse of the mean particle size. Introducing the effect of these variables on the rate constant into the shrinking core equation, the following equation was obtained, which describes the leaching of tetrahedrite in chloride solutions for temperatures up to 104°C. To M. Graça Gomes for her help in doing part of the experimental work. 