Introduction
                  The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy of ibuprofen, viscoelastic bite wafers, and chewing gum in reducing orthodontic pain.
               
                  Methods
                  This randomized clinical trial included 50 girls between the ages of 13 and 18 years classified into 5 groups of 10 each: placebo, ibuprofen (400 mg), chewing gum, soft viscoelastic wafer, and hard viscoelastic wafer. The patients in each group received 1 method immediately after placement of the initial archwires and every 8 hours if they experienced pain. Pain perception was recorded by the patients while chewing, biting, fitting front teeth, and fitting posterior teeth at 2 hours, 6 hours, bedtime, 24 hours, 2 days, 3 days, and 7 days after archwire placement, using a visual analog scale. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey tests were used for data analysis.
               
                  Results
                  There were significant differences in pain perception of chewing function between the placebo group and the chewing-gum group at 24 hours and 7 days, and between the placebo group and the hard-viscoelastic group on the day 7 (P <0.05). Also, there were significant differences between the placebo group and the soft-viscoelastic group, and between the placebo group and the hard-viscoelastic group in pain severity when fitting posterior teeth at 6 hours (P <0.05). At other times and with other functions, no significant differences were recorded.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Both chewing gum and viscoelastic bite wafers are effective for pain reduction in orthodontic patients and can be recommended as suitable substitutes for ibuprofen.Pain is a common experience in orthodontic patients, and fear of pain and discomfort is a concern for many. Orthodontic pain arises from ischemia, inflammation, and edema in the compressed periodontal ligament. Various methods have been suggested for pain control in orthodontic patients, including low-level laser therapy, However, in recent years, the side effects of NSAIDs such as thrombocytopenia, skin rashes, headaches, and so on, have been considered issues of concern, particularly in young orthodontic patients. Consequently, nondrug methods of pain control such as chewing gum or plastic wafers have been recommended. This study was designed because of the scarcity of research evaluating the efficacy of nondrug methods in orthodontic pain control. The aim of this study was to compare the efficacy of ibuprofen, chewing gum, and viscoelastic bite wafers in pain reduction during the first week after initial archwire placement. This was a randomized placebo-controlled clinical trial approved by the research ethic committee of Mashhad University of Medical Sciences in Iran. The study took place at the orthodontic clinic of its dental school. Fifty female orthodontic patients between 13 and 18 years of age, scheduled for fixed orthodontic treatment, participated in this research. The patients had no systemic diseases and were not receiving analgesic therapy. They had moderate crowding (4-8 mm) according to Little’s irregularity index. All patients needed extraction of the 4 first premolars for orthodontic reasons, and the extractions were scheduled to be finished at least 2 weeks before the placement of the orthodontic appliances. The patients and their parents were informed about the details of the study, and informed consent was obtained from each patient. The subjects were randomly assigned to 1 of 5 parallel groups in a 1:1:1:1:1 ratio according to their clinic entrance number and a random number table. In all groups, the orthodontic appliances, including bands, brackets (0.018-in standard edgewise system) and archwires (0.016-in nickel-titanium) were placed during 1 appointment. In the placebo group, the patients were asked to take a B In the ibuprofen group, the subjects took a 400-mg ibuprofen tablet immediately after archwire placement and at 8-hour intervals for a week if pain persisted. The subjects in these 2 groups were blinded about the drug that they took. In the chewing-gum group, the patients chewed a sugar-free gum (Orbit; The Wrigley Company, Chicago, Ill) for 5 minutes immediately after archwire placement and at 8-hour intervals for 1 week if they experienced pain. In the soft-viscoelastic and hard-viscoelastic groups, the patients used horseshoe-shaped viscoelastic bite wafers with moderate and low toughness, respectively. These blocks were made of polyvinyl siloxane, and their mechanical properties are shown in The subjects were asked to complete a visual analog scale questionnaire at 2 hours, 6 hours, and bedtime on the day of archwire placement, and at 24 hours, 2 days, 3 days, and 7 days after the first appointment. The format of the questionnaire was a 10-cm line, and the patients were expected to mark a location on the line corresponding to the amount of pain they experienced, with 0 indicating no pain and 10 indicating unbearable pain. The severity of pain was recorded during 4 oral functions including chewing, biting, fitting back teeth, and fitting front teeth. For fitting the front and back teeth, the patients did not eat anything and were instructed to bring the front teeth edge to edge with light force and to fit the back teeth with light force, and then score their pain in each function. For the biting and chewing functions, the subjects used a slice of a yellow apple; they bit and chewed the slice and scored their experienced pain. The patients were instructed not to use any additional analgesics. All patients returned their questionnaires, and none had used any analgesics. After data collection, the normal distribution of variables was confirmed by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, and the differences between the groups were analyzed with analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey tests using SPSS software (version 11.5; SPSS, Chicago, Ill). The level of significance for all tests was determined at ANOVA demonstrated no significant differences in the mean ages among the groups. The descriptive statics for the 5 groups are shown in Chewing. The 1-way ANOVA showed significant differences in pain at chewing at hour 24 and day 7 after initial archwire placement ( Biting. Based on ANOVA, there was no significant difference in pain at biting between the groups at any time interval. Fitting front teeth. The 1-way ANOVA demonstrated no significant differences between the groups in pain at fitting front teeth at any time interval. Fitting back teeth. The 1-way ANOVA showed significant differences in pain at fitting back teeth at hour 6 after archwire placement ( In this study, the effects of viscoelastic bite wafers, an anti-inflammatory drug (ibuprofen), and chewing gum on pain perception after initial archwire placement were compared with a placebo group. In all groups, the intensity of pain during the 4 major oral functions increased from 2 hours after archwire placement and reached its maximum intensity at night or at 24 hours. This finding agrees with the results of Bernhardt et al, According to Davidovitch and Shanfield, Furstman and Bernik The experienced pain in the viscoelastic groups and the ibuprofen group showed no statistical differences in any oral functions and time intervals. When these groups were compared with the placebo group, no significant difference was found between the ibuprofen group and the placebo group in any oral function at any time interval. However, the hard-viscoelastic group showed a significant difference compared with the placebo group in pain at chewing on day 7, and the hard-viscoelastic and the soft-viscoelastic groups had significant differences compared with the placebo group in pain at fitting back teeth at hour 6 after initial archwire placement. Chewing gum was also effective in reducing pain in the chewing function at 24 hours and 7 days compared with the placebo group. According to Otasevic et al The limitation of this study was that all participants were girls; we suggest conducting another study of male patients with larger group size. Our findings suggest that viscoelastic bite wafers can be good substitutes for NSAIDs in orthodontic pain reduction. Chewing gum can also be recommended for orthodontic patients to reduce pain at chewing function.