It is very much necessary to properly manage and screen the most optimal data, avoiding redundancy in the place of necessity. In this chapter, we are examining gene interaction of Alzheimer’s disease (AD) using a string database. Through molecular docking analysis, we studied binding energy, binding residue, bond name, and bond length of the interaction between the proteins that are most targeted with drugs for AD. In this chapter, we have tried to demonstrate some of the approaches that can be implemented for screening of genes and proteins related to a common human genetic disorder. Using virtual screening, we have collected a list of the most appropriate drugs for the targeted disorder. Finally, we studied the interaction between drugs and each protein, which was carried out using the molecular docking process. We found the TYR 134 is involved in a conventional hydrogen bond in GSK3B and an alstertaullone interaction. Both ILE62 and ASP200 are involved in a π-sigma and π-anion bond, respectively. Between GSK3B and I-5, LYS 85 and ARG141 residue are involved in a hydrogen bond. The residue TYR 134 is involved in a π-π stacking bond.S. Sahu and S. Martha are grateful to OUAT Bhubaneswar. M. Moharana expresses her gratitude to the Department of Science and Technology (DST) Government of India for financial support through grant number SR/WOS-A/CS-135/2016. S. K. Pattanayak is grateful to the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Raipur. Big data is very popular in bioscience and other fields and it plays an important role in data analysis technology. In recent times, the use of big data is growing rapidly in the healthcare sector Besides other sources, there is currently an open source data processing platform called Hadoop. It is capable of processing a large amount of data, which allocates portions of the datasets to servers, each of which resolve the various parts of bigger problems Big data analysis provides better policies not only to the government sector but also to industrial sectors, including the manufacturing sector, agriculture sector, and healthcare sector. In the healthcare sector, big data are not only managed by volume but it also depends on the type of data and the speed Data is defined as a collection of entities. If entities come from a biological experiment, it is called biological data. The processed data is known as information. A database is a structure that can be used to store information about multiple types of entities, relationships among those entities, and attributes. An entity is a portion, place, object, or event for which we want to store processed data. Constraints are certain terms in the database that protect the integrity of the database. The schema is various view of the database for the use of the various system, components of the database management system (DBMS), and for application security. DBMS is a program or collection of programs through which the user can interact with the database In biological research, sectors have implemented the advantages of sequencing technologies, based on next generation sequencing (NGS). A sequence is a single, continuous molecule of nucleic acid and proteins. The process of sequencing a nucleotide was first discovered by Frederick Sanger. This process is called Sanger sequencing. More economical sequencing technologies known as NGS were developed De novo assembly sequencing is the genome of a particular organism that doesn’t have a reference genome sequence. De novo assembly helps obtain a good understanding at the level of the genome and it assists in prediction of coding of protein regions and the different pathways NGS technology started with the introduction of second-generation sequencing. The second-generation sequencing platforms include Hiseq, Miseq, and GA from Illumina; 454 from Roche; Ion torrent and SOLiD from Life Technologies; Heliscope from helicos Biosciences; and the RS system from Pacific Bioscience The hash length of 59, 75, and 89 showed better performance through the Velvet software whereas the hash length of 85, 87, and 89 showed better performance through the SOAPdenovo2 software. As can be seen by the above results, the present study suggests that the hash length of 89 provided the better performances. Our study covers the comparison of assembly tools using the bacterial genome of Within this work, we are aiming to examine gene interaction of Alzheimer’s disease (AD), which is analyzed using a string database as well as finding the binding energy, binding residue, bond name, and bond length of interaction between the proteins that are most targeted with drugs for AD through molecular docking analysis. AD is characterized by the presence of amyloid β mediated extracellular amyloid fibrils, which effect neuronal synaptic activity and antioxidant response To further investigate the The most significant genes for AD were 28 genes and 25 genes as depicted by genemania and string software respectively. For the gene SNCA, we discovered seventy interactions using genemania software and fourteen interactions using string software. For GSK3B, we discovered forty-six interactions and ten interactions by genemania software and string software respectively. For CDK5, forty-three and eighteen interactions were found through genemania software and string software respectively. We found the common genes within these two subsets and selected ten genes that were highly associated with AD. This final subset of ten genes was thereafter taken as genes that encode the target proteins for which we made the search for the drug compounds. We collected all the necessary information for our ten selected genes along with their three-dimensional structures from the protein data bank (PDB). The PDB contains the protein structural information obtained from XRD crystallography, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy, and theoretical modeling After assimilating the structures of the ten selected proteins from the PDB database and the list of all the corresponding drugs from the drug bank, each protein was thereafter interacted (docked) with all its drugs through virtual screening of AutoDock software. By observing the binding energies of all the interactions obtained through virtual screening, the best interactions can be selected and the drugs interacting with the highest or lowest binding energies are identified as the best drugs for AD. Auto dock is an important tool capable of accurately predicting the different conformation and binding energies of ligands with macromolecular targets. Docking methods are classified into different categories depending on their search algorithms, which are explained by a set of parameters and rules to analyze the conformations. The docking algorithms are classified into two major groups: one is flexible docking and another is rigid docking. In the flexible docking algorithm, the receptor and ligand are flexible or freely identify the conformation binding side whereas the rigid docking algorithm does not consider the flexibility of the receptor or ligand. In the rigid docking algorithm, the ligand flexibilities are not capable of identifying binding sites for several proteins. Search algorithms are required to predict the conformations in the docking application that are defined by set of parameters and rules. In rigid docking, geometrical matching between two molecules is needed The Shape matching algorithm (SMA) The shape matching algorithms are methods that consider the structural overlap between ligand and receptor. This approach may discover conformational binding sites of protein using a macromolecular surface search. Simulated annealing algorithm (SAA) The simulated annealing algorithm is used for prediction of protein structure studies as well as conformational analysis. In this method, the entire bimolecular system undergoes a specific kind of dynamic simulation. The temperature is decreased gradually at regular intervals of time. Genetic algorithm (GA) and distance geometry (DG) algorithms The genetic algorithm is applied to bimolecular systems to find the closest conformation with minimum global energy. It is based on the genetic operator. Compared to other algorithms, in DG algorithms a smaller set of distance constraints is used Docking algorithms anticipate many orientations of the ligand in the binding pocket of the receptor. In docking simulations, the process shows small molecules based on the database. Docking results are ranked depending on the degree of binding energy between the ligand and receptor. The correctness of docking depends on the quality of scoring function In order to get a deeper understanding of the effects of binding between proteins and drugs, we performed a docking analysis. The intermolecular interactions of the alpha-synuclein, major prion protein, threnine-protein, transcription factor AP-1, glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta, and cyclin-dependent-like kinase5 were studied with different drugs. The interactions between most of the targeted proteins with drugs for AD are given in The binding energy of alpha-synuclein, major prion protein, serine/threonine-proteinphosphatase 2B catalytic subunit alpha isoform, transcription factor AP-1, glycogen synthase kinase-3 beta, and cyclin-dependent-like kinase 5 were found to be − In the GSK3B and alstertaullone interaction, the TYR 134 was involved in a conventional hydrogen bond. ILE62 and ASP200 were involved in a π-sigma and π-anion bond respectively. Between the GSK3B and I-5 interaction, LYS 85 and ARG141 residues were involved in a hydrogen bond. TYR 134 was involved in a π-π stacking bond. A schematic representation of the interaction between CDK5 and alstertaullone is shown in The active site between CDK5 and SU9516 is shown in Big data analysis is an important method that is applied to most fields including the healthcare sector. By considering the different sources of big data generation that forms a suitable platform, we can create new opportunities for modern society. Big data analysis holds great assurance for uncovering the patterns of data as well as the heterogeneities, which is not possible to see on the small data scale. Big data enforces new challenges on programming. Nowadays, a vast amount of data is continuously generated in the healthcare sector by all systems and on a day-to-day basis. Within this work, we studied the gene interactions of Alzheimer’s disease, which were analyzed using a string database as well as finding the binding energy, binding residue, bond name, and bond length of the interactions between the proteins that are the most targeted with drugs for AD through molecular docking analysis. From the docking result, it was found that the alpha-synuclein interacted with resveratrol with GLY36, GLY41, VAL40, and LYS43 residues. They are involved in hydrogen bonds, having bond lengths of 2.4729