In this study the influence of highly concentrated reagents (NaCl, 22.36%; HCl, 20%; NaOH, 32%) on the mineralogy (e.g. structure and mineral chemistry) and NH4
                     +-exchange capacity of a natural zeolite (clinoptilolite) is investigated. Treatment was executed in packed bed columns and accompanied by liquid and solid analytics (ICP-MS, XRD, EPMA, BET, ion exchange). Ammonium uptake was tested in batch experiments with model solutions using different concentrations of NH4Cl and real effluents from mechanical sludge dewatering (sludge liquor). It turned out that the Si/Al-ratio of the zeolite minerals measured by EPMA changes to some extent because of dissolution of Si and Al during treatment. Acid treatment leads to a remarkable increase in the specific surface (from 16 to 77 m2 g-1 after treatment). NH4
                     +-exchange isotherms revealed a significant decrease in equilibrium loadings with HCl-treatment and an increase with NaOH-treatment (+25%) at concentrations > 1300 mg NH4
                     + L−1 compared to untreated zeolite. At lower concentrations (<1300 mg NH4
                     + L−1) treatment with NaCl is best. Basic treatment leads to the formation of an altered outer rim on zeolite particles enriched in Na and depleted in K. Compared to model solutions, ammonium uptake from sludge liquor (712 mg NH4
                     + L−1) was significantly lower for NaCl treated zeolite but higher for HCl and NaOH treated samples, probably as a result of the complex composition of real effluents leading to potential cross-interactions that influence NH4
                     + ion exchange on treated zeolites.Natural zeolites are extensively used as ion exchangers in environmental applications such as soil remediation and restoration, wastewater treatment and gas purification. Geological settings and conditions during mineral formation and geological time influence rock parameters like mineralogy, zeolite type, modal zeolite content, rock porosity/permeability and thereby the applicability of natural zeolites in technical applications. Hence, profound mineralogical knowledge and a detailed characterization of natural zeolites are essential for tapping their full potential in any practical application. Natural zeolites are promising materials for cation and NH Zeolites are commonly used in different industrial applications and cleaning processes. Recently, the removal of ammonium from various effluents via ion-exchange and adsorption processes on natural and modified zeolites has become a topic of interest [ Many modifications and treatments have been developed in order to overcome these limitations. The already high cation and NH Geology influences the quality of zeolites (e.g. the quantity and type of gangue minerals in the natural material), wherefore natural zeolite applications need profound knowledge about the raw material, its natural variations and quantitative mineral composition. As detailed mineralogical characterizations are elaborate they are often neglected in favor of bulk chemical analyses (e.g. XRF), which are, however, of limited informative value. Due to the heterogeneity of natural zeolites, the mineralogical characterization is very important to understand and control performance and behavior during utilization and modification prior to any practical application [ The enormous diversity of investigated zeolites from different countries and deposits, varying experimental setups and measurement methods as well as different applications make it difficult to compare the results regarding ion exchange characteristics of different studies especially when the proposed applications are not standardized. Therefore, cation exchange in complex solutions has to be investigated by individual experiments using the respective material and the particular solution. The objective of this study was to compare the effects of both alkaline and acid treatments and salt solutions on natural clinoptilolite. The present paper is part of a wider research activity in the field of nitrogen recovery from sludge liquor using zeolites in a 500–1000 L h Natural zeolite from Romania, dried and sieved to 0.5–2 mm, was used in this study. A detailed material characterization is presented in Stocker et al. [ The real effluent sample used in this study was sludge liquor from mechanical dewatering of anaerobically stabilized sewage sludge at a municipal wastewater treatment plant in Austria. Treatments of zeolite were carried out in column experiments (diameter of the column 120 mm, maximum flow rate 2.5 L min Residual and leached ions in the treatment solutions were analyzed before and after treatment by an Agilent 8800 Triple Quadrupole ICP-MS at the Chair of General and Analytical Chemistry, Montanuniversität Leoben. Sludge liquor was analyzed by ICP-OES using an Agilent Axial 730-ES at ActLabs, Canada (Code E6 ICP-OES). Phase analysis was conducted by XRD using a Philips X'Pert System, Goniometer Type PW3050/60, with CuKα radiation installed at the Chair of Petroleum Geology, Montanuniversität Leoben, Austria. The sample was manually powdered in an agate mortar to a grain size < 2  μm. The accelerating voltage was 40 kV and the current 40 mA. Scans were run five times with a minimum step size of 0.01 2Theta between 2.5° and 65° 2Theta and a scan velocity of 0.5 2Theta. The qualitative mineral content was determined on a calculated scan out of all five measurements using ICDD-database within the software X'pads. The mineral identification was carried using at least two key peaks allowing for a maximum deflection of 0.2 2Theta for peak matching. R-value (goodness of fitting) of mineral peaks was set below 1.4. Peak intensities of the ( The mineral chemical composition of zeolites was analyzed by electron microprobe (EPMA) with the Superprobe Jeol JXA8200 instrument at the Eugen F. Stumpfl Microprobe Laboratory provided by UZAG at Montanuniversität Leoben. Element mappings were made from carbon-coated polished sections using the same instrument. For quantitative analysis (WDS mode) an accelerating voltage of 15 KV, a beam current of 10 nA and a beam diameter of about 1 μm was used. The elements Si, Al, Na, K, Ca, Mg and Fe were analyzed using the respective Kα lines and the following standards: adularia (Na, K), corundum (Al), quartz (Si), wollastonite (Ca), fluorphlogopite (Mg) and chromite (Fe). Diffracting crystals used were TAP for Na, Mg and Al; PETJ for Si; PETH for K, Ca; LIFH for Fe. The peak and background counting times were 15 and 5 s for Mg, and 20 and 10 s, respectively for Si, Al, Na, K, Ca and Fe. Detection limits were calculated automatically by the JEOL internal software on each measuring point and averaged. Values are (ppm): Si (240), Al (110), Na (150), K (60), Ca (80) and Fe (330). It has to be mentioned that the acquisition of quantitative EPMA data was difficult: the electron beam imparted significant damage to the analysis spots, resulting in partially low-quality quantitative data. Hence, an appropriate amount of WDS single spot measurements was performed on each sample to enable statistical evaluations of the quantitative data (e.g. standard deviation). The specific surface area of the samples was obtained by BET-Method (Micrometrics’ Flowsorb 2300, Chair of Mineral Processing at Montanuniversität Leoben, Austria) with N Ammonium exchange isotherms from model solutions were obtained in batch system by adding 20 g of natural and treated zeolites and 500 mL of a prescribed initial concentration of an ammonium sulfate solution (concentration range 500–5000 mg NH Sorption experiments with real effluent (sludge liquor) and natural and treated zeolites were conducted in batch system using the same experimental conditions and setup as for the model solutions. Removal rates for ammonium were calculated by dividing the difference in the concentrations of the ammonium solutions before and after sorption by the initial ammonium concentration of the sludge liquor. ICP-MS analysis revealed that the composition of the treatment solution did not significantly change during elution with distilled water, although a small increase in the potassium concentration was detected (cf. natural zeolite (Z) in The amounts of cations exchanged by NaCl-treatment reflect the natural cation distribution of the original zeolite (Ca > K > Mg as reported by Stocker et al. [ HCl-treatment of natural zeolite (Z-HCl) causes desorption of the cations Ca Nearly the same amount of dissolved iron is found in both HCl-solutions after 24 h of elution (Z-NaCl/HCl and Z-HCl). Fe is only a minor component of the zeolite minerals neither as tetrahedral iron nor as exchangeable cation as revealed by previous raw material characterization [ Besides Fe, considerable concentrations of aluminum were found in the HCl-solutions (Z-NaCl/HCl and Z-HCl). Increase of aluminum in the solution derives from the dealumination of the zeolite lattice as well as removal of amorphous alumina under the highly acidic conditions applied in this experiment [ Effects of treatment on the zeolite compositions were studied by EPMA. Average chemical compositions calculated on the basis of 72 oxygen atoms of the natural and treated clinoptilolites are listed in Acid and alkaline treatment of the natural material lead to significant changes in the mineral chemical composition of the zeolite minerals compared to the initial composition of the untreated material. The Na Chemical changes of the zeolite material on the grain scale can also be illustrated with EPMA WDS element mappings ( Desilication (related to alkaline treatment) and dealumination (related to acid treatment) as seen in the fluid analyses were confirmed by the results of mineral chemistry ( Mineral chemical composition generally reflects the fluid chemistry; for example higher Na-contents were found in Z-NaOH compared to Z-NaCl and equivalent desilication/dealumination effects are noticeable. On the other hand, K SEM micrographs (not reported) of the natural and treated zeolites (obtained by a Zeiss Leo1525 FEG-SEM at the Erich Schmid Institute of Materials Science in Leoben, Austria) did not reveal noticables changes in the morphology of the different treated zeolites. On the other hand, the results of nitrogen adsorption measurements (BET) on all treated zeolites confirm a considerable increase of the specific surface area compared to the parent sample ( After treatment with NaOH and HCl the specific surface area increased to nearly 170% (Z-NaOH) and 415–485% (Z-HCl & Z-NaCl/HCl), while treatment with salt solution (Z-NaCl) has no significant impact. Acid treatment affects surface area much more than alkaline treatment: the dramatic increase of the specific surface area value in acid treated samples compared to the natural zeolite can be due to the replacement of metal cations by H According to Sprynskyy et al. [ The XRD patterns of the natural and modified zeolites are compared in Nevertheless, there is a slight increase of the amorphous components indicated by a higher background noise between 20° and 35° 2Theta (CuKα-radiation) especially in both acid treated samples and to a minor extent after NaOH-treatment. We assume, that zeolite minerals are partially transformed into amorphous phases upon HCl and NaOH-treatment, probably due to dealumination/desilication. This effect is also indicated by an increase of the half width of the peak at 30° 2Theta, representing the (151) lattice plane of the clinoptilolite crystal structure. Some changes in the intensities of the reflections are observed at 16.8 ( Ammonium exchange isotherms of the zeolite samples in model solutions are shown in Maximum equilibrium loading is around 10 mg NH The results of ammonium exchange isotherms in model solutions indicate that the applied treatments strongly influence NH NaOH-treatment is less effective regarding NH To further characterize the equilibrium sorption of ammonium on the zeolite samples, the adsorption experimental data were fitted to the Freundlich and Langmuir adsorption equations using nonlinear regression (parameters including R The ammonium removal rates of natural and treated zeolites from a real effluent sample (sludge liquor) with a specified ammonium concentration of 712 mg NH The trends in the obtained removal rates of ammonium from sludge liquor roughly correspond to the results of the exchange isotherms measured in model solutions: whereas the natural sample removes around 42.3% of the initial ammonium in sludge liquor after 24 h of overhead shaking, Z-NaCl and Z-NaOH exhibit significantly higher removal rates (55.9 and 48.9%). NaCl-treatment enhances the removal rates for ammonium more than NaOH-treatment in the respective concentration range of ammonium (712 mg NH The noticeable difference in the ammonium removal rates from sludge liquor and model solutions, especially regarding the acid treated samples Z-NaCl/HCl and Z-HCl, indicates the difficulties in the prediction of how different treatments influence ammonium exchange characteristics. Compared to real effluents, ammonium removal from model solutions is higher for natural and NaCl-treated zeolites (homoionization), but lower for the other samples. This inconsistency of sludge liquor and model solution results can be explained by the fact, that ammonium removal is not only influenced by the treatment itself but also by the complex composition of real effluents. The cationic composition of the sludge liquor used in this study is presented in Concentrated acid/base treatments of natural zeolite, a clinoptilolite from Romania, and their influence on the physicochemical properties were evaluated. An increase of the specific surface area was observed in zeolite treated with NaOH and HCl but not after treatment with NaCl solutions. Acid treatment results in dealumination; i.e. dissolution of aluminum prevails over silicon. The opposite was observed upon alkaline treatment. Thus, both the treatment with bases and acids changes the Si/Al value of the zeolite together with its cation compositions. NaCl-treatment and water leaching do not seriously influence Si/Al. Both liquid chemistry and EPMA analysis show that the exchange of monovalent Na The exchange of the natural cation composition as well as the modified Si/Al ratio together with increased surface areas influence the behavior of treated zeolite samples during ammonium ion exchange. Exchange experiments show that the degree of NH Our results show that treatment with concentrated solutions is an interesting option to enhance the ion exchange capacity of natural zeolites like clinoptilolite, which are especially used in wastewater treatment. However, it is a pre-requisite to understand the mineralogical and physicochemical changes going along with different treatments, because they effect the composition, porosity and structure of the treated zeolite minerals in different ways. As shown in our study, treatments with concentrated solution can enhance ammonium removal rates from real effluents like sludge liquor whereas the same treatment reduces the removal rates from model solutions. Hence, it is not possible to predict the effects of different treatments on the ion exchange capacity on the basis of material characterization (e.g. BET-values or XRD-data) and simple experiments with model solutions alone. We recommend to apply elaborate mineralogical and process-oriented chemical analysis (e.g. exchange studies with real effluents) prior to any application of natural or treated zeolites in waste water treatment. The authors would like to thank Reinhard Gratzer, Sandro Pesendorfer and Maik Zimmermann for their valuable support of this work. The work was financially supported by the