The kinetics of dissolution of uranium dioxide particles in 4–8M (M=mol/L) nitric acid by microwave heating has been studied. It is supposed that the UO2 particles dissolve homogeneously in the form of spherical particles. The dissolution process can be dealt with the well-known shrinking core model. The results show that under the 600W microwave field, the dissolution of UO2 particles is controlled by the product layer diffusion at the temperature of 90–110°C. The average activation energy for the dissolution of UO2 particles in 4–8M nitric acid was calculated to be 73.2±1.8kJ/mol from Arrhenius plots.Some studies on the dissolution of UO On the other hand, the applications of microwave energy in mineral processing were widely investigated after 1970. Microwave-assisted leaching has been studied to improve the yield of extracted metal and reduce the process time. The unique microwave heating advantages such as short processing time, direct, selective and volumetric heating, and a more controllable heating process In order to explore a new concept of head-end process for the treatment of spent fuel from high temperature gas-cooling reactor (HTGR), the dissolution of UO The ceramic UO A MARS 5 (microwave assisted reactor system) with the Teflon vessels was used to study the dissolution of UO The concentrations of Firstly, 20 The solution could be rapidly heated to a designated temperature in MARS 5 system. The temperature of the solution is detected by the fiber thermometer which does not absorb the microwave energy and with the accuracy of ±1 The dissolution of UO The experimental program was setup to study the dissolution kinetics of UO The experiments were carried out in 4–8 The plots of the dissolution ratio In the experiments, the dissolution process was under strong stirring, so the film diffusion was eliminated. The data in According to Eq. The activation energy was calculated by the Arrhenius equation. The Arrhenius plots can be obtained from the values of reaction rate constant The plots of Ln( By using the stepwise linear regression method, the values of It can be seen from Eq. In comparison with the dissolution kinetics reported by Taylor et al. The difference of the dissolution rate between conventional heating and microwave heating probably results from the different experimental conditions. For conventional heating, the energy must be conducted through the walls of the vessel containing the solution. However, the microwave heating is different with the conventional heating. It can directly heat the uranium dioxide and the nitric acid solution The dissolution rate of UO The dissolution of UO