Turmeric (Curcuma domestica) powder was produced by conventional grinding and cryogenic grinding processes. The particle size and shape analyses of the ground particles were carried out, utilizing the measurement system based on time-of-transition (TOT) principle. Weight mean diameter of cryo-ground particles are 50-μm finer than conventional-ground turmeric. The size distribution in both grinding methods followed the well known Rosin–Rammler–Bennett (RRB) equation. The shape parameters of the particles of both grinding processes such as perimeter, shape factor (sphericity), average Ferret diameter, aspect ratio were measured. The shape parameters of cryo-ground turmeric were in the lower range than those of conventionally ground turmeric. The analysis confirms the usefulness of cryo-ground process in producing finer particles for heat-sensitive materials such as turmeric.Grinding is a very important unit operation in the post-harvest processing of spices requiring special attention, as it involves the additional problems of volatility and loss of aroma giving essential oils present in them. Most spices have their characteristic aroma, and therefore, their true value as spice is due to enclosed etheric oils that constitute the major ingredient of spice. These oil containers are oil cells or intercellular containers of ball or elongated shape, out of which, in most cases, etheric oils can only be obtained after crushing. This is the reason why almost all spices are marketed in a ground state The optimum size of the grind for each spice depends on its end-use and accordingly conventional grinding methods involve either a hammer mill (coarse grinding), plate mills (domestic use) or pin mills (fine grinding). During conventional grinding, i.e., without cooling the spices, temperature rise to over 90°C can occur, which leads to loss of volatile oil and aroma due to the heat generated Most of the difficulties and degradations experienced in conventional grinding are overcome by grinding of spices using liquid nitrogen. Some main advantages of cryo-grinding are: (i) extreme fine grinding due to brittleness and fine grinding of difficult materials; (ii) more uniform dispersal of flavour, reduced visual speckling, settling rates in liquid preparations; (iii) increased throughput and reduced grinding power consumption; (iv) reduced loss of volatile oils; (v) lower cost of powder when the flavour strength is taken into account There are many techniques for measuring particle size, especially above 1 μm: sieves, optical microscopy, sedimentation, laser diffraction, electrical and optical zone counters. Each technique has its own advantages and disadvantages Most particle size analysers operate on the assumption that the particles under investigation are spherical. The assumption that needles, plate-shaped particles and aggregates are spherical limits the usefulness of the particle size data obtained. The characterization of particle shape is essential to fully comprehend performance of a material or process involving particles. Even though cryogenic grinding produces less particle size range for the product than the conventionally ground material, quantitative results are scarce in literature particularly in the case of turmeric. Information on shape analyses of ground materials is still rare due to non-availability of proper instruments in this regard. Size and shape analyses of the particles, as determined by the TOT principle, ground by conventional method and cryogenic method are analysed in this article. Fresh dried turmeric ( Liquid nitrogen, procured from air separation plant (Mysore Oxygen, Mysore, India), was stored in biological storage liquid nitrogen container known as ‘Dewar’ and kept in cold room maintained at 4°C to prevent evaporative loss of liquid nitrogen. The Dewar consists of an inner vessel containing liquid nitrogen and an outer jacket surrounding it. The inter-space in high vacuum with multi-layer insulation reduces the heat flux to liquid nitrogen to the minimum. Liquid nitrogen in the cryo-grinding process serves two purposes—(i) to cool the raw material and the mill to operating temperatures and (ii) to remove the heat liberated during grinding. The liquid nitrogen supply to the cryo-grinder is done through the Dewar. The Dewar is kept reasonably close to the mill to reduce the losses from the pipe line. A hammer mill (M/s Apex, USA) was employed for this purpose without any cooling arrangement. The hammer mill has a cylindrical grinding chamber which contains six hammers and powered by a 7.5 hp AC motor. A round screen no. AP 0.027 (Tyler series no. 24) was used in hammer mill. On entering the mill, the material is ground by repeated impact against the rotating hammers and the multiple strike back. The speed of the mill is 10 An indigenously designed and developed pilot plant system at Central Food Technological Research Institute, Mysore, India was used. The schematic diagram of the cryo-grinding system is in Five-kilograms batch of turmeric were ground by using conventional mill and cryo-grinder. The ground powder was packed and sealed immediately after grinding in aluminum foil–polythene laminate pouches and stored in the cold room at 4°C for subsequent analysis. Representative samples in triplicate from each grinding method were taken after grinding. An indigenously made sampling glass tube (1-m-long by 0.38-m diameter) was used to collect samples. Computerized inspection system (model: CIS-100, M/s Galai Production, Israel) capable of measuring particles in the range 0.2–3600 μm is employed. The particle size analysis channel uses laser 2 mW HE–Ne with wavelength 632.8 nm. The detector used is silicon PIN photo diode. The reliability of measurement is up to two decimals. For size analysis, the glass cuvette (3.5 ml) is filled with isopropanol and placed in the laser path. A representative sample of the ground material is put in the cuvette. A magnetic stirrer keeps the particles under suspension. The system software automatically generates the particle size distribution in graphical or tabular mode. Acquisition times for size analysis are less than 1 min. Volume mean diameter=∑ ( Photomicrographs of the ground particles were obtained using a scanning electron microscope (Model: Leo 435 VP, M/s Leo Electron Microscopy, UK). Particle size distribution data of turmeric powder obtained by both grinding methods are represented by mathematical functions. These are described below. Among the several commonly used functions to describe the size distribution data, Rosin–Rommler–Bennett (RRB) is a well known equation When the left side of the above equation is plotted against log The Gaudin–Schumann function Another function which has been in wide use for the analysis of comminution is the log-normal distribution function For Shape analysis, the cuvette with the particles suspended in the isopropanol is placed before the close coupled device (CCD) microscopic TV camera to produce images of the particles as they pass through the measurement zone. Shape parameters such as perimeter, shape factor, aspect ratio, etc. of 1000 focused particles are calculated from the system's software. The reliability of measurement is up to two decimals. Mean and standard deviation of the distribution of each parameter are also provided by the system's software. Acquisition times for shape analysis are less than 13 min. Shape parameters are defined as below Ferret's diameter is the diameter of the projections of the object measured at specified angles. Here, the average of four Ferret's diameter is calculated for a particular particle and given as average Ferret's diameter. The aspect ratio is the ratio between the minimum and maximum Ferret's diameter.  RRB plots of the equation for both grinding methods are shown in  Volume mean diameter (or weight mean diameter) of cryo-ground turmeric is 50-μm smaller than conventional-ground turmeric. Maximum particle size is 472 and 296 μm for conventional-ground and cryo-ground turmeric, respectively. One can conclude that RRB function fits the size distribution data better than other functions. The range for the values of each shape parameters (shape factor or sphericity, specific length, specific width, aspect ratio, Ferret diameter) is much less for the particles of cryo-ground process than the conventional grinding process. The entire analyses confirm that the cryo-grinding process produces better particle size range and shape parameters than the conventional grinding process in the case of turmeric.