A simple and versatile electrodeposition method was adopted to prepare nickel oxide (NiO) and cobalt oxide (Co2O3) based mixed oxide supercapacitor material. The mixed electrode was fabricated by electrodeposition of Co2O3 on to NiO substrate at various potentials of 0.8, 1.0 and 1.2V vs Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The NiO substrate was prepared by simple air oxidation of Ni foil at two temperatures of 500 and 700°C for 2 and 6h. Ni-foil/Co2O3 electrode materials were also synthesized by electrodeposition of Co2O3 on to Ni foil under similar deposition conditions for comparative study. The morphology, phase and oxidation states of the composite electrodes were studied using SEM, EDAX and XPS methods. The overall emphasis of this work is to demonstrate the effect of mixed transition oxides in their bulk forms on the supercapacitance behavior of the electrode material. It was indeed observed that NiO/Co2O3 composite electrode showed significant improvement in supercapacitance behavior in their mixed oxide architecture. Cyclic voltammetric (CV) studies revealed that the NiO/Co2O3 composite electrode could attain a very high level of specific capacitance (>400Fg−1) at a scan rate of 20mVs−1, together with excellent rate capabilities. More than 50% retention in capacitance was also observed after 200 continuous CV cycles demonstrating promising stability of the electrode material. On the other hand, specific capacitance observed in the case of Ni-foil/Co2O3 electrodes was drastically reduced compared to the NiO/Co2O3 electrodes. It has been emphasized that the synergistic effect, due to the presence of multiple transition oxides, enhanced the overall capacitance behavior of the electrode material. Further, it was also observed that higher the oxidation temperature of the Ni substrates, lower was the specific capacitance for the NiO/Co2O3 electrode. The oxidation time, however, did not alter the capacitance significantly for the electrode material.As alternative energy storage device, electrochemical capacitors (EC), also known as supercapacitors observe precedence over conventional capacitors because of their higher power density and longer cycle life A good candidate material for supercapacitor must display two most important properties, efficient electronic/ionic conductivity and effective charge storage capability. Various transition metals oxide such as, TiO More recently, emphasis has been given to develop supercapacitor electrode consisting of multiple transition metal oxide/hydroxide phases, specifically binary and ternary phases In line with the above discussion, this work has been undertaken to evaluate if the mixture of Ni and Co oxides, in their bulk form could potentially enhance the capacitance behavior of the composite electrode. A simple potentiostatic electrodeposition method has been presented to fabricate NiO/Co Electrodeposition of Co Microstructural analysis of Ni/Co In order to establish the suitable deposition potential, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was performed on Ni-foil and NiO (500  The chemical composition and the oxidation states of the oxides were further analyzed with the help of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). XPS study was carried out on two samples, Ni-foil/Co The electrochemical charge storage behavior of Ni-foil/Co Knowing the total charge from the CV profiles, the specific capacitance of the electrodes can be calculated as where The CV profiles of the NiO(500 To ascertain the applicability of the electrodes for high charge–discharge operations, the capacitance performance of the electrode at various scan rates of the applied voltage was evaluated. Generally, the specific capacitance of electrochemical capacitors decreases with increase in scan rate Also, the area-specific capacitance (mF Further, the stability of the electrode material was evaluated by conducting repeated CV cycles on the NiO(500 In order to study the effect of annealing temperature and time of the Ni substrate on the capacitative behavior of the NiO/Co In this article, we have demonstrated a simple and economical electrodeposition process to synthesize mixed Ni and Co oxide based supercapacitor materials. The mixed oxide electrodes, NiO(500 The authors acknowledge the support of this work by grant