This paper is concerned with an experimental and theoretical study of dynamics and control of fluidized bed layering granulation with external screen mill cycle. To achieve quantitative agreement between model calculations and experiments an extended dynamic process model is proposed. In contrast to previous work by Dreyschultze et al. [1] specific plant characteristics are taken explicitly into account including a more detailed model of the milling process and a classifying particle withdrawal from the granulation chamber. The model is then used to develop new control strategies. First, a novel bed mass controller is designed and validated. Afterward, a second control loop is introduced to dampen the oscillatory behavior of the particle size distribution. It is shown that the new control concepts achieve stable steady-state operation within a short time and thereby improve the process dynamics significantly. Theoretical predictions and experimental results are shown to be in good agreement.In fluidized bed layering granulation (FBLG), product granules of high quality are formulated by spraying a solid-containing liquid, e.g. a solution or suspension, onto a bed of particles fluidized with a heated gas [ As was shown by means of experiments, presented by Schütte et al. [ This gap is closed in the present paper. Focus is on continuous FBLG with screen-mill-cycle as presented in The remainder of the present paper is structured as followed: In the upcoming The experimental examination has been carried out in a horizontal fluidized bed plant of type The injected solution consists of 35 wt% sodium benzoate dissolved in demineralized water. Per hour of process time 40 kg solution were atomized by three two-fluid nozzles located at the bottom of the granulation chamber. As atomizing gas compressed air was used. The injected droplets sprinkled the particles surface. Due to the enhanced heat exchange between particles and fluidization medium, the liquid phase of the droplets evaporated. The vapor was carried out by the fluidization medium. Because of the evaporation, the temperature of the fluidization medium within the process chamber decreased to 50 °C. Meanwhile, the remaining sodium benzoate solidified on the particles surface inducing the layering-growth. Under the examined process conditions, layering was the dominant granulation mechanism. In accordance with Ennis et al. [ Particles were withdrawn from the granulation chamber by a rotary valve. The utilized valve is shown in To obtain online information about the particle sizes, the process chamber was equipped with the inline probe The following is based on the population balance model (PBM) presented in Dreyschultze et al. [ With these assumptions, the population balance equations of the spraying and the drying zones are Therein,    Following Mörl et al. [ The relative volume of particles within the spraying zone Thus, the condition Characteristic values for Main differences to the model presented in [ The model used in this paper admits a variable total bed mass to simulate the behavior of the bed mass control strategy. In contrast to this, a constant bed mass was assumed in [ In the experiments to be discussed subsequently, it was observed that larger particles are preferably withdrawn from the bed compared to smaller particles. Therefore, the assumption of a representative product removal from the bed in [ The model of the mill is crucial for a quantitative prediction of the process dynamics. Therefore, a more detailed model of the mill was identified from stand-alone milling experiments and added to the plant model. Details of these modifications are given in the following step by step. Particles are withdrawn from the process chamber by a rotary valve. It is assumed that the rotary speed of the valve Thus, in a first step, Based on By screening, the withdrawn particles are further classified into three fractions: Fines Again, the separation functions The milling of oversized particles has a significant influence on the dynamics of the investigated FBLG process [ These quantities are used for modeling the mill as follows (see also The relative mass of each fraction Subsequently, the fractions Finally, it is assumed, that, because of the fluidization conditions presented in Again, the separation function The recycled particles are distributed to the spraying and drying zone with respect to the respective relative volume: The dynamic model was implemented in MATLAB (2018a, MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA, 2018) applying a method of lines approach. Based on a finite volume method approach, the partial differential Eqs. In the first experiment, the pin mill was operated with a constant relative rotational speed as introduced in the previous section and illustrated in The corresponding temporal evolution of the number and volume based normalized particle size distribution Because of the oscillations of the PSD, the related mass fractions of fines In addition, the classifying outlet induced an overgrowing of particles in the further course of the experiment. Particles of product fraction were not withdrawn from the process chamber in a sufficient quantity. In consequence, particle growth proceeded such that the particles entered the oversized fraction. This is illustrated in As illustrated in To enable an even milling of oversized particles feedback control was applied to keep the mill power constant at a given reference value by readjusting the rotational speed of the mill. For this purpose again a PI controller was used. The block diagram of the control loop is illustrated in green in As indicated by experimental findings, the stationary value of the electrical power To study the influence of the milling on the process stability, experiments 2–4 were performed with different reference values of the mill power In experiment 2, the mill was operated with In experiment 3, the reference value of the electrical power of the mill Afterwards, Comparison between experiments and model predictions are also shown in To enhance the dynamics of the process and establish operation with constant PSD as fast as possible, a cascade controller was designed: As illustrated in Based on the transfer function In the next step, the designed P controller was validated with a simulation study. For this purpose, the nonlinear dynamic plant model presented in As the simulation results were promising, the designed P controller was implemented at the plant and tested in experiment 5. The Sauter mean diameter was measured inline with the equipped Parsum probe. Simulation and experimental results are illustrated in In this article, control strategies for stabilizing the bed mass and the particle size distribution of a continuous fluidized bed layering granulation process with sieve-mill-cycle were developed step by step and validated experimentally. For the first time, it was shown experimentally, that the process dynamics can be improved considerably by using even relatively simple control strategies. The theoretical development was based on an extended plant model, accounting for a more realistic description of the product removal, the grinding of the oversized particles and the bed mass control compared to our previous work [ Future work will focus on a rigorous evaluation of more advanced control strategies as described for example in [ The financial support of