A modeling approach of the bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron in batch culture is presented. It is based on the spatial interpolation of experimental data known as kriging interpolation. It is shown that, using the proposed method, the prediction error between model and true system variables is optimal in the sense of minimum variance. The results obtained improve the prediction error associated to the use of the current “knowledge-based” models. Results on modeling the kinetics of the bacterium Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, previously called Thiobacillus ferrooxidans, growing in ferrous iron as energy source in a batch airlift reactor are presented. The prediction error bound associated with the model is deduced theoretically and calculated for the application case.A modeling approach of batch bacterial oxidation of ferrous iron by Different kinds of models describing kinetics of microbial growth of the On the other hand, at present, some research effort is dedicated to obtaining model approaches which are based on the ability to match input/output mapping rules of bioprocesses, called “black-box” or input/output model type. In this field, artificial neural network (ANN) is the most reported procedure In this paper, a novel black-box model formulation is presented. It is based on the linear regression of experimental data, which leads to an optimal estimator in a minimum mean squared error sense. The error bound is theoretically treated in order to show that it is always optimal no matter the number of experimental data available. Therefore, the same model accuracy can be obtained using a reduced number of experimental data with respect to other black/box models. This approach is used to model the oxidation of ferrous iron to ferric iron by  The ability of The great number of phenomena affecting the kinetics of the complex bioleaching batch process can be described by a set of nonlinear differential equations. The different mathematical descriptions of such systems can be expressed using the following general formulation: A simple system ( Assume that a set of Before describing the interpolation method, it is necessary to obtain the values of The interpolation problem can be formulated as follows: based on the data of The mean value of The increments [ These are weak assumptions that can be verified in the special application case using the experimental data Now, the estimated value of The errors of the state variables are defined as: The estimated variables are unbiased: The upper bound of the standard deviation of the errors is given by: The properties described above allow us to build a model that uses the A culture of Three batch kinetic tests were run in the airlift reactor using the following pairs of initial conditions of substrate and biomass [X At specific intervals of time, aliquots of the liquid medium were taken out from the air lift reactor and then free bacterial populations were estimated by counting using a Bausch & Lomb Galen microscope with phase contrast and a Petroff Hausser camera. The number of bacteria per milliliter of solution was converted to milligrams of biomass per liter by means of an empirical relationship [(cell/mL)/3.8 10 The first step was devoted to obtaining the samples of Starting with the initial condition In these figures, the upper bound corresponding to one standard deviation of the error is depicted. Assuming normal distribution of the errors, this upper bound gives a 67% of probability that the true value of The predicted output variables of the model in airlift reactor match the experimental data satisfactory. It is interesting to note that the experimental data lie near the bounds even at the end of the kinetics. This is due to the fact that the chosen criterion to design the model was to minimize the prediction error. The bounds, given by their standard deviation, are easy to obtain. It must be noted that the predicted model variables are appropriate only if the experimental variogram of First, property 1 is proved. Applying derivatives to e Now, the property 2 is proved. Consider the time derivative of the squared error as follows: Taking the expected value on both sides of Using