This paper uses a stochastic translog cost frontier model and a panel data of five key mining industries in Australia over 1968–1969 to 1994–1995 to investigate the sources of output growth and the effects of cost inefficiency on total factor productivity (TFP) growth. The results indicate that mining output growth was largely input-driven rather than productivity-driven. Although there were some gains from technological progress and economies of scale in production, cost inefficiency which barely exceeded 1.1% since the mid-1970s in the mining industries was the main factor causing low TFP growth.The mining sector is one of the most important industries in natural resource-rich Australia which is also one of the largest suppliers of minerals in the world. The Australian mining sector has become increasingly export-oriented as mineral exports have risen from approximately 24% of Australian commodity exports in the 1960s to 60% in 1994–1995. It is widely acknowledged in the literature that one way of securing continued export growth is to improve cost competitiveness via total factor productivity (TFP) growth. Previous studies on Australia's mining sector have often centered on partial measures of labour productivity growth which completely ignore the joint use of other inputs and hence are biased in the evaluation of productivity performance. More recently, the The main contribution of this paper lies in the empirical examination of the sources of output growth and TFP growth of five key mining industries within the mining sector from 1968 to 1969 and 1994 to 1995. This study is an improvement over previous studies in the following ways. First, disaggregated industry level data are used. Second, a stochastic cost frontier model is estimated for each industry, which allows for industry-specific factors to be distinct from random errors in their effect on productivity growth. Thus, it is concerned with industry operation under conditions of disequilibrium where cost inefficiency on the form of technical and allocative inefficiencies prevail. The Tornqvist index used by previous studies assumes long-run equilibrium and does not account for any such inefficiencies. Thirdly, the constant returns to scale condition is relaxed in the model to realistically capture scale effects on TFP growth. Fourth, each of the mining industry's output growth is not just decomposed into input growth and TFP growth but TFP growth is further decomposed to study the sources of TFP growth for useful conceptual and empirical policy analysis. In this study, a stochastic cost frontier is chosen over a stochastic production frontier for the following reasons. First, all mineral exploration is controlled by the Australian authorities. Thus the cost function is appropriate given that it assumes that prices and output are exogenous while input demands and total cost are endogenous ( The paper is organised as follows. The next section discusses the theoretical framework underlying the stochastic cost frontier and the decomposition of output growth and TFP growth. Following The following translog cost function (omitting industry and time subscripts) is estimated to obtain more generalised estimates: In the above model, the time trend was not interacted with input prices in order to reduce the number of parameters to be estimated to lessen the effects of multicollinearity. However, the use of 4 shift and 70 slope dummy variables allowed separate coefficients to be estimated for each mining industry. In addition, symmetry and linear homogeneity in input prices were imposed as follows: By construction, since factor cost shares always sum to unity, one input share equation must be dropped before estimation to avoid singularity. The estimation was carried out following TFP growth can then be decomposed to various components: Thus, A panel data of five mining industries (coal, iron ore, copper, gold, oil and gas) from 1968 to 1969 and 1994 to 1995 were used. Most of the data were compiled from the The coefficients obtained from the maximum likelihood estimation of the stochastic cost frontier model are summarized in All but 12 of the 80 estimated coefficients are significant at the 5% level of significance. The cost frontier model is valid given the statistical significance of the log likelihood ratio test of the one-sided error ( With the estimates from the model, a measure of input factor relations known as Allen/Uzawa elasticities of substitution, can be calculated. Using With regards to mineral output, since the 1970s, Australia has been the world's largest coal exporter and the two oil price shocks have helped boost the demand for coal as an alternative source of energy thus supporting rising coal prices. This prompted large companies in Australia such as BHP (Broken Hill Proprietary Ltd), Mt. Isa Mines (MIM), and Shell to branch into coal production. Hence, output growth as well as input growth was high until the mid-1980s after which falling world demand and prices saw a slowdown in coal production. With iron ore, which is the second most important mineral for Australia, output growth has been in the range of 2–4% but with falling world steel prices, it is unclear if iron ore production would continue to increase. Gold output, on the other hand, can be expected to grow given the strong world demand, while the iron ore, copper, and oil and gas industries’ output growth has increased except during the late 1970s. This is because world demand for most major resource commodities fell in the mid-1970s due to the first oil price shock. But 1987 saw a marked recovery in metal demand and metal prices (except for iron ore) as inventories fell ( However, mineral output growth in general can be expected to pick up if plans and suggestions to increase mineral processing domestically ( The above decomposition exercise also shows that as expected, mineral industries’ output growth was largely input-driven given by the large contribution of input growth. This is due to the capital and energy-intensive nature of mining activities. On the other hand, TFP growth has been very low for the mining industries, barely exceeding 1.5%. With coal, TFP growth has not only been falling but has registered negative growth since the mid-1980s. Although positive, TFP growth for iron ore has also been falling. Copper's TFP growth, on the other hand, has picked up since 1985. With gold, and oil and gas, the TFP growth trend was unclear. In general, the behaviour of productivity growth among the mining industries was varied thus putting doubt on previous aggregate level studies on the mining sector. For instance, the To study the causes of poor TFP growth in each of the mining industries, TFP growth was further decomposed using It can be seen that the returns to scale effect is positive for all the mining industries over the entire period. This is expected to given the need for large-scale production to justify the capital-intensive nature of the mining activities. As most of the capital used in these operations often embodied advanced technology, this allowed the industries to enjoy positive technological progress as evidenced in the table. The falling trend of technological progress for the coal and copper industries indicate that there are limits to the use and access of newer and more advanced technology in these mining activities. The table also shows that the mining industries’ poor TFP growth was caused by declining economic efficiency and the residual price effect. The non-zero price effect is due to deviations in the observed input cost shares from optimal cost shares as a result of allocative inefficiency when the industry does not make the right input choice combination. This can be attributed to the non-perfect competitive market structure characterising the mining sector. Economic or cost inefficiency (which is made up of technical and allocative inefficiency) All the ratios are less than unity implying that none of the industries were operating at the least cost combination of inputs. In fact, they were operating above minimum cost and if economic efficiency can be improved, then on average, cost can be reduced by 24% for coal and 20% for iron ore. In coal production, economic efficiency has declined over time. In the mid-1980s, attracted by rising coal prices, large companies such as BHP, MIM, and Shell entered the market but they would not able to keep costs down initially given the large start-up costs in mining activities. But when coal prices started to fall, these companies left the market to concentrate on their traditional mining activities and the adjustment costs from the entry and exit of these firms contributed to excess capacity, which lowered economic efficiency in the coal industry. Furthermore, the coal industry has been fraught with industrial disputes adding to costs of production. With competition from China and Columbia, there is clearly a need to increase efficiency in this industry to maintain Australian exports given that coal is still a large export earner for Australia. In the iron ore industry, there has been some improvement in lowering costs except for the mid-1980s when the appreciation of the Japanese Yen led to a fall in demand from the dominant Japanese market, resulting in excess capacity. The Steel Industry Plan introduced in August 1983 encouraged large investments in capital ( In copper production, the depressed copper prices until 1986 made it difficult for producers to cut costs and remain competitive. Furthermore, as Japan is the world's largest refined copper producer, the rapid Japanese Yen appreciation in the 1980s also did not help. However, in the 1990s, as the Japanese copper smelting industries underwent considerable structural changes to reduce their refining capacity and expand operations offshore ( The trend of cost efficiency for gold as well as the oil and gas industries is somewhat unclear. Although the trends for the other three minerals have been traced mainly to mineral demand and hence capacity of use affect technical and allocative efficiency, and more conclusive analysis is necessary to empirically and qualitatively investigate the causes of cost inefficiency resulting in poor TFP growth. Are there any internal factors within the control of industry or actions and policies of the government that may help improve efficiency? Although this is beyond the scope of this study, some issues for future research are briefly discussed below. One possible factor affecting cost inefficiency is the lack of skilled labour which has always been difficult to attract due to the risky and long hours of work in the mining sector. This has implications for the use and implementation of advanced technology to cut costs. Also, being extremely capital-intensive, improvements in mining technology via research and development (R&D) is another important factor. The ratio of R&D expenditure in the mining sector to GDP was less than 0.06% in the 1970s and it declined until the late 1980s after which it increased gradually to 0.2% in 1994–1995. These figures lag far behind the corresponding values for the manufacturing sector whose ratio was not less than 0.2% in the 1970s and 1980s and was at 1.6% in 1994–1995. Hence, increased employment of skilled workers as well as increases in R&D expenditure in the mining industries can be expected to improve cost competitiveness. Another area of concern has always been the cost of infrastructure borne by the mining industries given its heavy reliance on infrastructure. This study overcomes the problems of the conventional growth accounting method used in previous studies by using the stochastic cost frontier model which allows output growth to be decomposed into not just input growth and TFP growth but further decomposes TFP growth to enable the study of the sources of TFP growth. Also, instead of using aggregate level data, here, industry-specific analysis is undertaken for each of Australia's five key mining industries using panel data from 1968–1969 to 1994–1995 ( It was found that output growth in all mining industries was input-driven given the highly capital- and energy-intensive nature of mining industries. This allowed the industries to enjoy economies of scale in production and technological progress from the use of advanced technology embodied in capital. But the need for TFP growth for sustainable output growth cannot be overlooked given the limits of input growth due to diminishing returns to input use. In this regard, the low TFP growth which barely exceeded 1.1% since the mid-1970s is of great concern. The main cause of poor TFP growth was cost inefficiency which results from not using the least cost combination of inputs (i.e. allocative inefficiency) and existing excess capacity when inputs are not sufficiently or appropriately used to produce maximum potential output (i.e. technical inefficiency). Although an important exercise, it is, however, beyond the scope of this study to further investigate the factors that affect cost inefficiency in order to draw specific policy implications. This is, however, intended for future research to study the effect of factors such as world mineral demand, R&D expenditure, use of skilled labour, real interest rate, and government policies on efficiency. Arguably, the results for such an exercise would be more robust if firm level data were used.  The cost of labour is defined as the total wage bill (  The cost of energy input was given by the total expenditure on fuel and electricity. However, as no data specific to the mining sector were available, the non-mining-industry-based fuel and electricity price indices were used to calculate a price index for the energy input in mining industries. That is, a translog index of energy price was derived by aggregating the price index of electricity used in manufacturing industries and the price index of fuel used in farming as follows:  For capital, estimates of depreciation and capital stock at the aggregate level of the mining sector were used from The price of the various capital types, on the other hand, were given by the implicit price index of private investment in fixed capital (to be used as price of other fixed assets), the price index of capital expenditure on plant, machinery and equipment, and the price index of capital expenditure on buildings and other construction. The price of capital services,