Trauma to the tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint complex is named after the French surgeon of Napoleon’s era, Lisfranc, who initially described amputation through the midfoot for injuries sustained in battle. Today, Lisfranc injuries encompass a wide spectrum of trauma, from high-energy accidents to lower-energy twisting injuries. Despite advances in treatment, Lisfranc injuries may result in pain, disability, and diminished function for many patients. An overview of the evaluation and treatment for Lisfranc injuries is presented, including a review of the functional anatomy, the mechanism and classification of injuries, and a summary of described treatment recommendations. Lastly, we describe our treatment algorithm outlining a stepwise approach to evaluating and treating Lisfranc injuries. The use of adjuvant imaging studies and stress examination with fluoroscopy are discussed. A comprehensive evaluation, as outlined, allows the surgeon to better understand the personality and severity of each injury, and helps to guide treatment. We believe this approach will help to optimize outcomes for Lisfranc injuries.Injuries to the tarsometatarsal (TMT) joint complex are named after the French surgeon of Napoleon’s era, Lisfranc, who treated these injuries in cavalry servicemen promptly with amputation through the TMT joint. The TMT joints comprises 5 metatarsal bases and their corresponding articulations with the 3 cuneiforms and the cuboid. This joint complex can be divided into medial, middle, and lateral columns. In the coronal plane, the first 3 metatarsal bases are trapezoidal, being narrower on the plantar surface than the dorsal surface ( The bony stability centered about the second metatarsal base is complemented by ligamentous restraints that provide additional support for the TMT complex. There are 3 ligaments from the medial cuneiform to the second metatarsal base. Functionally, the medial and middle columns have unique bony and ligamentous relationships that help to maintain the transverse and medial-longitudinal arches of the foot. These structures are thought to be crucial to allow the foot to transmit loads during weight-bearing as well as to provide a rigid lever-arm for push-off during the propulsive phase of gait. The lateral four metatarsals are connected by intermetatarsal ligaments; however, no intermetatarsal ligament is present between the first and second metatarsals. Conversely, the lateral column is less restrained, has inherently more relative motion, and thereby allows greater accommodation to uneven ground surfaces as well as to allow a cushioning affect from heel-strike to the foot-flat phase of gait. Alterations to the function of the TMT complex resulting from Lisfranc injuries can have a profound impact on the biomechanics and normal function of the foot during gait, as well as with standing. A wide variety of injury patterns can lead to fracture-dislocation of the Lisfranc joint complex. The classic Napoleonic era injury resulted from an individual falling from a horse while the foot was harnessed by stirrups. The forefoot was subjected to a violent abduction force, causing dislocation of the forefoot in relation to the midfoot. Because of the wide spectrum of injuries to the TMT joint, Lisfranc injuries have been classified by Atkin and Poulson as direct or indirect, depending on the mechanism. Indirect injuries comprise the majority of today’s injuries. They may result from torsional forces applied to the midfoot or axial loading of a fixed, plantarflexed foot. Several classification schemes have been proposed to further define these injuries based on location of displacement. Qeunu and Kuss in 1908 described 3 basic injury patterns based on the direction of metatarsal displacement. Clinical diagnosis of Lisfranc injuries can be difficult because often these injuries may be overlooked. In one study, 20% of Lisfranc injuries initially were misdiagnosed. Others have reported missed or delayed diagnosis in as many as 40% of patients of patients with a Lisfranc injury and combined polytrauma. The history may or may not be helpful in diagnosing Lisfranc injuries, depending on the injury. Patients with multiple injuries may be distracted from recognizing the seriousness of the foot injury, especially if weightbearing is delayed. Even in isolated injuries, it often is difficult for patients to recall the position of their foot during injury or the direction the force was applied. Physical examination in the trauma setting often will reveal massive swelling of the foot, especially if the injury is the result of high energy. The physician should consider the possibility of a compartment syndrome, and periodic examinations should be performed. Compartment syndrome of the foot can have catastrophic results if left untreated. In contrast, a patient seen in the office may present days after the injury and have only a limited amount of swelling. In this instance, provocative maneuvers can be helpful. Passive abduction and pronation of the midfoot is usually painful. A careful radiographic evaluation is necessary for definitive diagnosis of these injuries. In those injuries in which other studies are equivocal, stress views may be helpful. Treatment of TMT injuries has obviously evolved from the days of Lisfranc, when patients routinely were treated with prompt amputation. In more recent times, surgeons have described a variety of treatments, including closed reduction and casting, closed reduction and percutaneous pinning, and open reduction internal fixation with K-wires or interfragmentary screws. It generally is agreed that anatomic reduction and stable internal fixation is required to allow bony and ligamentous healing in unstable injuries. However, even with anatomic reduction, outcomes after these injuries continue to be guarded. Closed reduction and casting has been met with concerns based on the difficulty with holding a reduction by casting alone. Closed reduction or open reduction, combined with percutaneous pinning has been described as well. More recently, there has been a trend toward fixation with interfragmentary screws, especially across the highly stressed medial and middle columns. One biomechanical study has shown that screws may provide relatively increased stiffness when compared with K-wires. Because of the frequent need for screw removal after open reduction and internal fixation with small fragment screws, bioabsorbable screw fixation recently has been described for treatment of Lisfranc injuries. Thordarson showed that there were no complications associated with bioabsorbable screws in 14 patients with a 20-month follow-up.  However, if plain radiographs are abnormal, instability is easily demonstrated on stress testing, and/or the injury is the result of a high energy mechanism, we recommend an open technique ( Once the joints are reduced, we then place appropriate cortical screws to maintain the reduction. One or two 3.5-mm cortical screws are placed across the first TMT joint in a nonlag fashion, stabilizing the medial column distally. Next, our “Lisfranc screw” is placed form the medial cuneiform to the base of the second metatarsal. With multiple screws, care must be taken to place screws sequentially in an orderly fashion so as to avoid drilling into previously placed screws. We have found that by keeping the “Lisfranc screw” slightly plantar there is enough space for placement of 2 medial column screws, which we believe is important in stability. We also try to place a screw from the second metatarsal base to the middle cuneiform. Once this is achieved, we again stress the intercuneiform and tarsometatarsal joints. If there instability between cuneiforms, we place another 3.5-mm screw from the medial to lateral cuneiforms. Attention is then focused on the third tarsometatarsal joint, which usually reduces spontaneously after TMT joints 1 and 2 are reduced anatomically. Through the lateral incision, a 3.5-mm screw is placed from the third metatarsal into the lateral cuneiform from distal to proximal. It should be noted that all screws starting in the metatarsals are contersunk to help avoid prominence, to gain mild compression and to avoid fracture of the dorsal cortex with tightening. We then move to the fourth and fifth tarsometatarsal joints. These joints are more mobile and therefore K-wires are felt to appropriate fixation, and can often be placed percutaneously. Multiplanar introperative flouroscopy confirms the reduction and the placement of hardware. The skin is then closed with interrupted nylon sutures and a sterile dressing. A 3-sided splint is applied. Postoperatively, the patient is usually admitted, although select patients can be discharged home with indwelling peripheral nerve block catheters. Instructions are to elevate the foot and maintain a nonweight bearing status. The patient is seen at 2 weeks for suture removal and, at this time, a short-leg cast is applied. At 6 weeks, radiographs are taken, pins are removed, the patient is placed into a removable boot, and range-of-motion exercises are begun. If radiographs are acceptable, weight bearing is gradually resumed over 3 to 4 weeks time starting at 6 to 8 weeks postoperatively. High stress activities are avoided until 3.5 to 4 months, when we recommend screw removal. Posttraumatic arthritis is the most common complication after Lisfranc injury, with approximately 30% of patients developing clinically symptomatic arthrosis and nearly all patients developing some radiographic evidence of arthrosis. Planning for arthrodesis includes determining which joints are involved as well as identifying associated deformities. Determining which joints are involved is often difficult to assess radiographically and clinically, and local anesthetic injections can be helpful from a diagnostic approach. The most common joint involved is the second metatarsal articulation with the middle cuneiform. Results of arthrodesis for post-traumatic arthritis after Lisfranc injury show fusion rates of 87% to 95%. Treatment of Lisfranc injuries has changed since the times of Napoleon, when these injuries were routinely treated with amputation. Today, these injuries represent a broad spectrum of injuries, which can make treatment decisions difficult. Although classifications can be helpful, we believe that it is important for the surgeon to define the individual personality of each particular injury. Preoperatively, every attempt should be made to fully understand the clinical magnitude and location of instability, either through careful preoperative assessment or studies, or stress testing for instability in the operating room. This information, combined with a careful assessment of the soft-tissue injury will allow the surgeon to treat each injury appropriately. We believe this approach will help optimize outcomes for Lisfranc injuries.