Generally, Bond work index is a common method for selecting comminution equipment as well as estimation of grinding efficiency and calculating required power. In the current research, a simple, fast and accurate procedure is introduced to find the rod-mill work index based on the conventional Bond work index. The grinding experiments were carried out on four typical samples of iron, copper, manganese and lead–zinc ore with three test-sieves in specified time periods and aimed to shortening the procedure. Furthermore, the grinding kinetics and mass balance equations were applied to model the standard Bond rod-mill work index. For comparing the standard Bond rod-mill work index and the new modeled method, work index (Wi
                     ) and produced fine particles in a cycle (Gi
                     ) for the four samples determined. The performed paired Student’s t-test results indicated that the Standard Deviation for Gi
                      and Wi
                      obtained by the shortened method are respectively 0.50 and 0.58 in respect of traditional Bond method.The Bond rod-mill work index is used in conjunction with Bond’s third theory of comminution to merely calculate net energy requirements for sizing rod-mills. This test was originally developed in the mid 1930s by F.C. Bond. Though, it was altered in succeeding years, it has essentially remained unchanged since 1961 To calculate the Bond work index ( The standard procedure to determine all Bond work indices is time consuming and needs an available skilled staff and specially prepared feed samples Smith and Lee Ahmadi and Shahsavari The objective of this study was to conduct a rapid determination of Bond work index by considering grinding kinetics of the particles in standard Bond rod-mill as well as size-mass balance equations in the mill. For this, series of experiments were conducted on different ore types to simulate grinding kinetic in a rod-mill. Subsequently, paired Eq. The The test of determining the standard Bond rod-mill work index includes a closed grinding cycle with a screen ( In the standard Bond test at 100% circulating load: The amount of an oversize fraction of mill feed ( Considering Eq. Four different ore samples were acquired for the grindability experiments according to The laboratory rod-mill used here is 305 The four typical ore samples were first blended and divided by riffle. Having prepared the representative subsets, each of them was crushed in the jaw crusher to −12.7 Both the standard Bond process and the shortened method were used to find work indices for the samples in order to compare the results. To evaluate the results, the paired Student’s The procedure for determining the Bond rod-mill work index based on the shortened method is as follows: A crushed feed of 100% passing 12.7 One of the two mixed samples with a weight of To find the total number of revolutions ( After grinding the second mixed sample, the milled sample is sieved and the oversize and undersize are weighed. Due to the fact that shortening grinding cycles causes negligible relative error, the weight of oversize and undersize samples will be approximately equal to  Finally, by finding all the necessary parameters, the Bond rod-mill work index is calculated from Bond equation (Eq. A popular statistical method to compare two methods or measurements is the paired Student’s To calculate Bond rod-mill work indices, the four samples were screened and the particle size distributions plotted in The To compare the shortened method with Chongbo and Bingchen method, the Comparatively, the paired  The work index determination is an important routine procedure in mineral processing, powder technology and cement plants. Additionally, the work index shows the ore hardness and resistance against the grinding process which also can show the required energy for grinding the material. Therefore, to investigate changes in the grinding process of the feed in a mineral processing plant and subsequently applying appropriate controls to adjust these variations, determining the work index in certain time intervals is crucial. Given the multiplicity of these measurements, the shortened method is desirable. In comparison with a standard Bond test which is time consuming, the confidence intervals obtained by the paired In order to ascertain the accuracy and validity of the simulated method as mentioned above, the results were compared with those extracted from Chongbo and Bingchen and standard Bond method, as shown in The grindability experiments was carried out on the four typical samples of copper, lead–zinc, manganese and iron ore in specified time periods in order to model the standard Bond rod-mill test. The plot of cumulative oversize versus grinding time for various test-sieves revealed that the grinding of test-sieve oversize fraction in the Bond rod-mill follows the law of first order kinetics. The experiment results confirm that the introduced method is a rapid and accurate method to determine the Bond rod-mill work index. The Bond rod-mill work indices obtained by this method were compared to those of standard Bond work indices with having different test-sieves. The comparison of two methods based on paired This method can be used in mineral processing and fine powder grinding plants due to its simplicity and applicability. This work was supported by Iran Mineral Processing Research Center (IMPRC). The authors acknowledge financial support from IMPRC.