The feasibility of extracting uranium from natural ores has been studied, using supercritical CO2 and either commercial extractants (PC88A, Cyanex 301®) or an amidophosphonate molecule (named DEHCNPB). The impact of the process parameters has been evaluated. The uranium extraction yield was optimal at the lowest temperature (40°C) and highest pressure (25MPa) tested here. For a given CO2 flow rate, a compromise should be established between the amounts of extractant, acid and oxidant used. Uranium was successfully extracted directly from natural ore using DEHCNPB with a good selectivity over metal impurities such as iron, titanium and vanadium and yields up to 97%. Moreover, using Fe2(SO4)3 as an oxidant allows to minimize the water usage of the process. The mechanism of extraction using supercritical CO2 has been elucidated thanks to electrospray ionization mass spectrometry.Ore extraction processes generally involve several steps, namely crushing, roasting and/or grinding followed by acidic or alkaline leaching, metal extraction from the leaching solution, washing and back extraction, and finally, in some cases, recycling Supercritical CO The choice of a suitable extractant is crucial to ensure efficient metal extraction using supercritical CO Supercritical CO The topic of this study, the extraction of uranium from natural ores using supercritical CO The organophosphoric acid PC88A (C Butyl-N,N-bis(ethylhexyl)-carbamoylnonyl phosphonate (DEHCNPB) was synthesized in our institute (purity >95%), and has previously been used to selectively extract uranium over iron from phosphoric acid media in a liquid-liquid process with a higher yield and selectivity than the reference extractant system based on Alamine 336 Cyanex® 301 (bis(2,4,4-trimethylpentyl)dithiophosphinic acid, Sigma Aldrich; purity: technical grade) is an organophosphoric acid ( Sulfuric acid (Sigma Aldrich, purity >99%), MnO The median particle size (D50, determined by granulometry measurements) in the ore powder, was 107 The dynamic setup used for the extraction process is shown in The extractant was solubilized in supercritical CO The dynamic extraction process lasted until extracts ceased to accumulate in collector C1. This took up to 6 Despite the large number of extraction process parameters to be studied, we decided to study suitable variations of pressure, temperature and {U/extractant/acid/oxidant}molar ratio. The extraction pressure and temperature were respectively set to either 15 or 25 After extraction, the uranium ore was washed with HNO Samples (0.2 The extraction yields were calculated using Eq. The collection yields were calculated using Eq. To quantify the selectivity of the process toward uranium rather than the other metal species present in the ore, extraction and collection selectivity factors were calculated using Eq. Repeatability was ensured on our device during metal supercritical CO  Comparing the efficiency of the extractants under reference operating conditions (MnO Considering the nature of the oxidant, Wang et al. obtained significantly higher extraction yields using Fe The extraction yield and selectivity factors both decrease as the CO  It is noticeable moreover that the selectivity against metal impurities can be tuned by adjusting the CO Pressure and temperature influence the extraction efficiency through their effect on the density and viscosity of CO Comparing the results of runs 4 and 8 in Increasing the temperature from 40 (25 Shimada et al. The extraction yield is higher (84 vs 40%) for the higher PCC8A/U molar ratio tested (308, run 6). Increasing the DEHCNPB/U molar ratio from 7 (run 10) to 35 (run 11) increases the extraction yield from 44 to 96.8% but increasing DEHCNPB/U to 43 offers no further gain ( Decreasing the amount of sulfuric acid used (1.85 In view of scaling up the process therefore, the only two factors that need to be balanced when choosing the sulfuric acid concentration are minimizing water usage and preserving the tank and reactors materials from corrosion. In other words, the amounts of extractant, acid and oxidant used in this process can be minimized while maintaining an optimal extraction yield. The extracts that were the most concentrated in organometallic complexes (run 2) were analyzed by ESI-MS to identify the different species present. In summary, the process of uranium extraction from ore using supercritical CO Supercritical CO The authors acknowledge the financial support of the CEA and the technical assistance of Amélys Venditti. The authors also wish to thank Laurence Berthon and Nicole Zorz (CEA Marcoule, DEN/DRCP/SMCS/LILA) for their assistance recording and interpreting the ESI-MS data.