In addition to inorganic species originating from minerals and process modifiers, residues of organic process chemicals may be present in the liquid-phase of flotation tailings. From the process control and environmental points of view, it is important to be aware of the concentrations of chemicals and certain ions remaining in the tailings waters.
                  In this study, the composition of the liquid-phase of flotation tailings at Pyhäsalmi concentrating plant was analysed on-line with a commercially available process titrator. The potentiometric titration procedures were implemented in the analyser for quantitative analyses of the organic collector chemical, xanthate, and for the sum of the concentrations of calcium and magnesium along with the concentration of sulphate. The variation of the concentrations of these species from tailings waters from pyrite and copper circuits was monitored for a month.The rapid development of automatic process control has created a continuous need for fast and reliable methods for on-line analysis. VTT Mineral Processing is continually developing analytical methods and practices to be used in the on-line monitoring of process waters. Currently, development of titrimetric on-line methods, in particular, is in progress for the purpose of quantitative analyses of ions and chemicals present in the liquid-phase of streams. Prior knowledge of flotation processes indicates that the variations of the concentrations of mineral-originating species, together with the added process chemicals, have a significant impact on the quality of flotation process waters. From the process control and environmental points of view, it is important to know about the concentrations of process chemicals remaining in tailings waters. In our previous study, we performed long-term on-line tests to determine the concentrations of Ca Xanthates are anionic collector chemicals that are the most extensively used collector reagents for sulphide ore flotation. It has been of interest to find a reliable method for the analysis of xanthate. It has been reported that the concentrations of xanthate and its degradation products have been analysed, for example, by ion-chromatographic and titrimetric methods ( In this study, the main aim was to carry out on-line tests by using the process titrator in analysing the residual concentration of an organic collector chemical, xanthate, in the flotation tailings waters. The purpose was to develop a titration procedure for xanthate, implement the method in the process titrator and test the method under concentrating plant conditions at Pyhäsalmi Mine. In addition to the analysis of xanthate, multi-component titrations for analysing the concentrations of the sum of calcium and magnesium along with sulphate were performed. Pyhäsalmi Mine (Inmet Mining Corp.) is located in central Finland. The Mine produces zinc, copper and sulphur (pyrite) concentrates. The Pyhäsalmi ore is massive and coarse-grained containing 75% sulphides on average: 66% pyrite, 4% sphalerite, 3% chalcopyrite and 2% pyrrhotite. The mine has been operating since 1962 and, nowadays, the throughput is approximately 1.3 million tonnes. The estimated amounts of various concentrates each year are: copper concentrate 55,000 tons, zinc 50,000 tons, pyrite 750,000 tons, gold 200 kg and silver 10,000 kg. Copper and zinc concentrates are supplied to the domestic smelters of Outokumpu Company. The pyrite concentrate is sold domestically and abroad mainly for sulphuric acid production. The flotation arrangement at Pyhäsalmi Mine is a direct, selective flotation consisting of three sequential flotation circuits for copper, zinc and pyrite. After crushing and grinding (65% finer than 74 μm), the ore slurry is pumped to the copper flotation circuit. Tailings from the copper circuit are directed to the zinc flotation, the tailings of which are pumped to the pyrite flotation. The concentrates are thickened, filtered and dried to the moisture content of 5–7%. The coarse fraction of the final tailings is separated for mine backfill and the fine fractions are pumped, together with the mine water, into the clarification ponds, where the solids are settled and suspended metals are precipitated by lime in pH 10. The clarified water is led via the reservoir pond to the lake. The quality of the clarified water––except for calcium and sulphate––fulfils the recommendations for drinking water. In the study, the on-line analyses were carried out with a commercially available process titrator Murtac OMT 20 DX by Murtac GmbH ( In order to get representative samples for analyses from tailings slurries, a sampling system needed to be developed. In our previous study at Kemira Phosphates Siilinjärvi Mine, the laboratory-scale CERAMEC filters were used in order to get crystal clear samples for the titration of carbonates ( Quite clear samples at Pyhäsalmi were obtained when the tailings waters were directed through several consecutive clarifying stages. The sampling scheme consisted of a screen mesh, settling tank, lamella clarifier and two bucket clarifiers ( A sample, clarified four times, was eventually pumped to the titrator. Before taking sample, the sampling lines and titration vessel were flushed by pumping the tailings water to be analysed through them into a drain. Before implementing to the titrator, titration procedures for determining the concentrations of the species were tested in a laboratory. The titration procedure for analysing the total concentration of dissolved calcium and magnesium, along with the concentration of sulphate, consisted of the following steps. After taking the sample, barium chloride was added to precipitate all the sulphate and the pH was adjusted to 10 by NH In the beginning of the determination of xanthate, the pH of the sample was adjusted to 5 by adding potassium hydrogen phthalate–NaOH buffer. Nitrogen was bubbled through the sample for several minutes in order to remove sulphides as H At Pyhäsalmi, the titrator was configured to analyse xanthate once an hour and the other species twice in three hours. Variations of the concentrations of free xanthate, sulphate and the total quantity of dissolved calcium and magnesium were monitored for two weeks from the liquid-phase of pyrite circuit tailings and for another fortnight from the liquid-phase of copper circuit tailings. Preliminary tests for analysing the concentrations of the species in the tailings waters had been carried out at VTT a few weeks before the testing period at Pyhäsalmi Mine. A low-gradient curve was observed ahead of the equivalence point of xanthate in the typical titration curve of xanthate titration. According to the literature, this probably results from the degradation products titrated ahead of xanthate ( Before pyrite flotation, the pH of the process slurry was lowered to 5 by sulphuric acid. The main species of xanthate responsible for pyrite flotation has been proposed to be dixanthogen that is formed by anodic oxidation of xanthate ion on the surface of pyrite, coupled with cathodic reduction of adsorbed oxygen ( During the two-week measuring period the concentration of dissolved, residual xanthate in tailings water from the pyrite circuit was observed to vary between 3 and 11 mg/l. Although water samples taken immediately after clarification were, in general, quite clear, disturbances and breaks in the stream caused the mixing of sediment and clarified water. In such cases, titrations failed due to poorly distinguishable inflection points in the titration curves. However, minor amounts of solid in the sample did not seem to influence the results. Tests were made where samples were filtered through a dense filter paper before titration: the obtained results showed equal concentrations of xanthate compared to an unfiltered sample. It has been assumed that both electrochemical oxidation of xanthate to dixanthogen, as well as chemisorption of xanthate on chalcopyrite, are responsible for flotation. In order to prevent the flotation of pyrite during the flotation of chalcopyrite, the pH of the process slurry was raised to 12 with lime milk. Tailings from the copper circuit were pumped to the zinc flotation. The variation of the concentration of free xanthate species from copper tailings water was monitored for a two-week period. Due to the high pH value of the incoming tailings water, the pH of the sample was adjusted with nitric acid and potassium hydrogen phthalate/NaOH––buffer solution to 5 before titration. The concentration level was found to be very low throughout the measuring period, an average of 1 ppm. Although the titration curves of xanthate proved to be distinctly shallower when compared with those measured from the pyrite tailings water, the sensitivity of the Ag-electrode turned out to be fairly good. When considering the concentration of dissolved xanthate measured from the copper tailings, and the concentration of sodium isobutyl xanthate originally fed to the copper circuit, a similar trend between them can be seen ( Comparison tests for xanthate analysis were carried out by ion chromatography that was selected as a reference method due its high selectivity and suitably low detection limits. In addition to the peak characteristic of xanthate, the other strong absorption peak was typically observed in the chromatograms measured from the liquid-phase of the tailings slurries. This was suggested to refer to a degradation product of xanthate that is also active in the titration procedure. The ICP (plasma emission spectrometry) tests carried out at VTT revealed that the concentration of dissolved iron in the tailings water from pyrite circuit was fairly high, about 220 mg/l. Already in the beginning of the measuring period at Pyhäsalmi, a red band was found to appear around the walls of the titration vessel, referring to the formation of iron oxide in the liquid-phase of the tailings. Fe In the case of the tailings water from the copper circuit, the concentration of dissolved iron was negligible which was explained by the formation of iron hydroxides in alkaline reaction conditions. The variations of the concentrations of the total sum of dissolved calcium and magnesium from the tailings from the pyrite circuit turned out to be quite considerable: the range of variation extended from about 500–1000 mg/l. Comparison tests were carried out with the portable laboratory spectrophotometer LASA 100 delivered by Dr Lange. These reference tests agreed well with the titration results. Preliminary tests had indicated that the concentration of sulphate in the pyrite tailings water was high, more than 2 g/l in general. Therefore, it was especially important to make sure sufficient BaCl As expected, the sulphate content of the pyrite tailings was found to be quite high throughout the measuring period at Pyhäsalmi. Sulphuric acid is used as a pH adjustor in the pyrite circuit, which, along with the oxidised sulphides, explains the high sulphate content. Since the titration of sulphate was performed for the same sample directly after the analysis of the sum of calcium and magnesium, failed titrations of the cations were also reflected in the determination of sulphate. During the first week of analysing the tailings water from the copper circuit, the concentration of the total sum of Ca The sulphate species in the tailings originate principally from the ore and from zinc sulphate that is used to deactivate sphalerite. The average sulphate content in the tailings water from the copper circuit was found to be 620 mg/l. Only a moderate variation in the concentration was found during the analysing period. The long-term on-line tests at Pyhäsalmi Mine for determining the concentrations of certain ions in flotation tailings waters turned out to be successful. The Murtac OMT 20 DX on-line analyser proved to operate reliably during the one-month test under concentrating plant conditions. The analyses of the total sum of calcium and magnesium, along with the concentration of sulphate, proved that it is possible to carry out a reliable multi-component analysis for the same sample using the process titrator. The on-line titrations of free xanthate from the flotation tailings at Pyhäsalmi Mine confirmed that, in addition to quantitative analyses of inorganic mineral-originating species, titrimetric methods could be applied to the challenging on-line analyses of organic process chemicals. In future testing, sampling will need careful planning because it seems to have a major effect on titrations. Although the use of several sequential clarifiers turned out to be a practical system for getting sufficiently clear samples at Pyhäsalmi, its weakness could be seen when there were disturbances or breaks in the tailings water stream. A combination of clarifiers and CERAMEC filters may be a reliable concept for sampling in future. This work was carried out under the National Technology programme