Leishmaniasis is cause by To avoid toxicity, premature degradation of drug, drug failure, insolubility and development of resistance, to reduce target effect of antileishmanial drug, supreme technique is required to overcome the problem hence PLGA(poly (lactide-co-glycolide)) PLGA–PEG(poly ethylene glycol) nano carrier has been developed to deliver miltefosine to target the macrophage of infected cells. In this study, we have developed PLGA–PEG encapsulated miltefosine (PPEM) nanoparticles to target the macrophage of infected tissues against Chemical like PLGA, COOH–PEG–NH2, methlyne chloride, N-hydoxysuccinimide, 1-ethyl-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)-carbodiimide (EDC) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, USA and Milli-Q water purification system from Millipore, Billerica, MA, USA. Indian The experimental drugs have been obtained from Sigma-Aldrich, USA and stored at − Copolymer PLGA–b–PEG has been synthesized by the mix of COOH–PEG–NH PLGA–b–PEG NPs (10 For the formation of drug encapsulated carboxylated PLGA–b–PEG NPs nanoprecipitation method was conducted. In various organic solvents which are miscible with water miltefosine was dissolved. Similarly, the drug polymer was also dissolved and mixed. The drug polymer solution was added to water to form Nps. For 6 The characterization of nano-encapsulated antileishmanial compound was carried out by transmission electron microscope (TEM), dynamic light scattering (DLS) and Fourier transform infrared (FTIR). Transmission electron microscope (TEM) measurements were performed using Philips CM 200 TEM in SAIF department of Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay (IITB). Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) measurements were performed using Perkin Elmer in Metallurgical Engineering and Materials Science department of IITB. The average size distribution of the nanoparticle was determined by dynamic light scattering (Beckman Coulter instrument) from IIT, Bombay.   Hamsters were infected, via the tail vein, with 2 The following formulae has been used to calculate the percentage of inhibition Inhibition of amastigotes in vivo values were calculated by using Graph Pad Prism 5 version (La Jolla, CA). By direct encapsulation of PLGA–COOH with NH FT-IR spectroscopic analysis of PLGA–PEG NPs CD14 conjugate demonstrates that CD14 was indeed covalently linked to the PEG via amide bond free carboxyl group on the surface of PLGA nanoparticles through carbodiimide chemistry ( The particle size distributions of the synthesized nanoparticles of PLGA–PEG and PPEM nanoparticle were measured by transmission electron microscope ( The in vitro drug sensitivity assay was performed on Hamster studies of VL remains a challenging disease to treat. The main drugs available for treatment of VL are the systemic agents like antimony, amphotericin, paromomycin and now the oral drug miltefosine. We have reviewed the efficacy and safety of antimony. Newer drugs such as liposomal amphotericin are promising, especially in the single day treatment regimen but need to be tested in different leishmania endemic settings. The experience with paromomycin, where a drug effective in India was not effective in East Africa shows that there are multiple factors to be considered in the development of an effective leishmania treatment program The high cost, specific toxicities, parenteral administration (technical efficiency required) and spread of drug resistance, and relapses in HIV– Improved antileishmanial efficacy and bioavailability of bioactive drug miltefosine in PLGA–PEG were synthesized and it was observed that nano encapsulation and nanoparticle were in a size range of 10 to 20 The authors are thankful to