As in many separation processes, design of flotation systems is governed by kinetics, which is a function of chemical, physical and machine parameters. Several kinetic models have been presented in literature, those based on a homogeneous chemical reactions being the most widespread. In this technical note an alternative approach based on the use of fractional calculus to describe batch kinetic characterization is presented.
                  Batch flotation test data for porphyry ores of copper and molybdenum were used to compare the fractional calculus approach with first-order models. Comparisons include single rate constants as well as distributed rate constants (i.e., rectangular and Gamma distributions). Results showed a derivative order lower than 1, ranging from 0.60 to 0.95, which is related to a retarded flotation response at the beginning of the process. The fractional calculus approach was in all cases superior to the rectangular distributed kinetic constant, but comparable to the Gamma distribution approach. The proposed approach gives acceptable results for slow flotation processes, which is in good agreement with Gamma distributions with high fraction of slow rate constants.Flotation is a major technique for mineral concentration since it allows valuable minerals to be economically processed from complex, low grade ores. Flotation exploits differences in surface properties: interfacial tension and surface charge. The former yields differences in wettability (or hydrophobicity), whereas the latter may determine particle-chemical species and particle–particle interactions. The principle consists of particles suspended in an aqueous solution which are introduced to tanks (e.g., flotation cells) where gas is introduced to form bubbles. Hydrophobic particles will tend to attach to bubbles, forming particle–bubble aggregates. These aggregates will rise in the flotation machine forming the froth zone and the floatable minerals are removed as a concentrate stream. At present, flotation is being successfully applied in other fields including the chemical industry and for environmental engineering ( Flotation variables can be divided into machine (e.g., bubble generation system, gas flow rate and turbulence), chemical (e.g., mineral dissolution, type and dosage of reagents, and surface chemistry of minerals) and physical factors (e.g., particle size, particle–bubble interactions and froth drainage). These variables determine the dynamic response or the kinetics associated with the process, which define the size of the flotation machines ( Significant efforts have been made to develop a kinetic model based on fundamental principles and empirical correlations. For instance, In this technical note, a new approach to describe the flotation rate based on fractional calculus is presented. The proposed model was applied to several batch flotation tests of copper porphyry ores and compared with classical kinetic first-order models (with single and distributed rate constants, namely, rectangular and Gamma distribution). The fractional calculus is proposed as an alternative methodology to represent the flotation rates, where the overall process is characterized by a derivative order along with a rate constant. Kinetic models consider the collection process in flotation machines as a reaction between bubbles in excess and particles. Those models have been widely used based on the analogy with homogeneous chemical kinetics, in which the concentration in a batch reactor is modeled by a first-order differential equation: The classical first-order model of Eq.  Several additional model structures have been proposed to represent Fractional calculus was introduced as an important tool to deal with the analysis and modeling of processes in which memory and/or nonlocal effects are relevant ( Fractional calculus is an extension of traditional calculus considering a non-integer derivative order. The concentration evolution is represented via non-integer derivatives, which are defined as ( which corresponds to the Caputo definition of fractional derivatives, where Ideally an expression like Eq. From Eq. Eq. Samples of copper porphyry ore sourced from different zones of a Chilean mineral deposit were used for this study. Each sample was blended, riffled and split to get an adequate amount for flotation tests. Thiocarbamate MX 7017 C (20 Batch flotation tests were carried out in a 3 Concentrate was removed from the top of the cell every 10 Thirty batch test samples were assayed for Cu and Mo which were mainly present in the porphyry ore as chalcopyrite (primary Cu-bearing mineral) and molybdenite (primary Mo-bearing mineral). Mineral recovery data were fitted to the fractional calculus model Eqs.  The cumulative distribution function of the mean squared error for the overall dataset was obtained,  The correlation between parameters from the Gamma and fractional calculus model is due to their capacity to represent slow flotation processes (larger fraction of material with low floatability). The presence of three phases makes flotation systems very complex. Under this condition, phenomenological models to describe kinetics have proven to be limited, whereas first-order models achieve the limit of their usefulness ( A new approach for describing flotation kinetics that makes use of fractional calculus was presented. This approach was used to model batch flotation data of porphyry ore (Cu and Mo) and then compared to classical first-order kinetic models. All cases presented a derivative order lower than 1 with values ranging from 0.60 to 0.95, which is related with retarded flotation response at the beginning of the process. The proposed approach showed significant advantages over the two-parameter models (single The authors wish to thank to Mr. Patrick Blonde for the professional proofreading of the manuscript. Funding for process modelling and control research is provided by