Rhodococcus opacus, a micro-organism was evaluated as a biocollector for flotation of calcite and magnesite. The electrophoretic behavior of the minerals, before and after R. opacus interaction, was evaluated and showed that the cells adhesion shifted both the minerals zeta-potential curves and the reversal charges in comparison to their original isoelectric points. Adhesion tests suggested a higher affinity of the bacteria for magnesite than calcite. The experiments of the adsorption rate of the R. opacus on calcite and magnesite showed fast kinetics, achieving a maximum of cell adsorption after 5min. Adsorption isotherm curves for magnesite and calcite could be categorized as Langmurian (L) type II. The best bioflotability results for magnesite and calcite achieved, respectively, values around 93% for a R. opacus concentration of 100ppm in the pH around 5.0 and 55% for a R. opacus concentration of 220ppm in the pH around 7.0. The bioflotation experiments were discussed considering the obtained adhesion tests. The fundamental flotation studies showed the paramount potential that R. opacus presents as a biocollector and its possible application in the mineral flotation industry.Flotation is widely used for mineral separation. This unit operation uses modifiers, collectors and depressants that modify the mineral surface properties. Some of these commercial reagents may be either expensive and/or inefficient for low grade ores ( In recent years, several studies have been carried out on the use of micro-organisms as friendly collectors. These micro-organisms act as bioreagents and may induce hydrophobic properties once they can adhere selectively onto the mineral surface ( Like traditional reagents, the micro-organism interacts with the mineral surface and gives amphoteric characteristics to it, ( Application of bioreagents as collectors invokes several fundamental aspects: surface charge, presence of specific hydrophobic groups and polymers compounds which deeply affect their adhesion to the mineral (  Considering the literature about the subject, one can realize that there are very few studies on the use of Pure calcite and magnesite mineral samples were provided by the Centre for Mineral Technology (CETEM) and Magnesite S.A., respectively. The samples were properly ground and sieved for the experimental procedures as shown in  Zeta-potential measurements for Based on previous studies ( Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) studies were carried out with the aim to observe the bacterial attachment onto the mineral particles. After washing and drying, the minerals of the adsorption tests were gold coated under vacuum in a BAL-TEC sputter coater. Secondary electron images were acquired in a Carl Zeiss – DSM 960 scanning electron microscope. The micro-flotation assays were carried out in a modified Hallimond tube. An amount of 0.8 The floated and not floated minerals were thoroughly washed, filtered and weighed. The flotability was then calculated as the ratio of floated and unfloated minerals and the total weighed mineral (floated and unfloated). The growth of the micro-organisms medium plays an important role for biosorption engineering applications (  The zeta-potential curve shows the In which L generally represents that part of the cell wall structure to which the group is chemically bound ( The IEP value of The obtained zeta-potential curves of calcite and magnesite as a pH function are in accordance with equivalent studies by  Observing Nevertheless, changes in the zeta-potential profiles were observed. The IEP displacement for magnesite was bigger than calcite after the The bacterial adhesion experiments establish the affinity of the micro-organism for the mineral surfaces. According with  The results showed that the The magnesite and calcite adhesion studies showed as the cell adsorption was dependent on the pH values. The pH is an important variable which could affect that the  The experiments of the adsorption rate of  It can be observed that the number of  The selected areas of the SEM photomicrographs show the The flotability studies were performed so to evaluate the potential of using   The results may suggest that Mg sites play an important role for the adsorption of the bacteria onto magnesite surface. The results show as  It was noted that the higher flotability is achieved at the  The flotation results of calcite ( Flotation of calcite would be facilitated by bacterial interaction. The biopolymers, present in the The zeta-potential evaluation before and after the The amount of The experiments on The adsorption isotherms curves for magnesite and calcite would categorize as Langmurian (L) type II suggesting that the The most remarkable bioflotability results for magnesite and calcite achieved, respectively, values around 93% for a The authors acknowledge the financial support by CNPq, CAPES and FAPERJ.