Rock masses in underground engineering, such as mining and deep tunnelling engineering, are often repeatedly loaded and unloaded. Here, a series of true triaxial multi-level single cyclic loading tests (σ
                     1 > σ
                     2 > σ
                     3) were carried out on intact and jointed marble (50 × 50 × 100 mm3) to investigate the influence of the stress state and the absence or presence of a joint on the progressive damage process. The test results show that rock damage is directional and anisotropic. The irreversible strains in the σ
                     1 and σ
                     3 directions change linearly with cumulative damage, whereas the irreversible strains in the σ
                     2 direction decrease nonlinearly. The dissipated energy is appropriately linearly related to the equivalent irreversible strains. The damage variables based on the irreversible strains and dissipated energy are closely correlated, as determined by their similar fitted parameters. The stress state (σ
                     2 and σ
                     3), the absence or presence of a joint and the brittleness play a vital role in the rock damage evolution. More specifically, the parameter a has a logarithmic relationship with σ
                     3 and a linear relationship with σ
                     2. The relationship between the parameter a and the joint dip angle β can be fitted by a Gaussian distribution. In addition, the fitted parameter a decreases with increasing brittleness.maximum, intermediate, and minimum principal stresses, respectively maximum, intermediate, and minimum principal strains, respectively cumulative irreversible strains in the maximum, intermediate, and minimum principal stress directions, respectively critical irreversible strains in the maximum, intermediate, and minimum principal stress directions, respectively equivalent irreversible strains critical equivalent irreversible strains total inputted energy elastic energy and dissipated energy critical strain energy damage variables Young’s modulus and post-peak modulus brittleness index dip angle of the joint During the excavation of deeply buried constructions in civil and mining engineering, rock masses are usually subjected to cyclic loading due to disturbances from repeated drilling, blasting and machinery transport. Rock failure under cyclic loading conditions is a progressive fracturing process A large number of researchers have put considerable effort into studying the response of rock to cyclic uniaxial and triaxial loading In underground tunnels, rock masses actually experience true triaxial cyclic loading conditions. Many research investigations focus on the strength and failure modes in true triaxial monotonous loading tests Here, a series of true triaxial cyclic loading tests were conducted on intact and jointed marble collected from the Chinese Jinping underground laboratory project (CJPL-II) The tested intact and jointed marble were taken from two large blocks and cut into a rectangular prismatic shape with dimensions of 50 × 50 × 100 mm The true triaxial tests in this study were conducted using Northeastern University’s true triaxial testing machine designed by Feng et al. The cyclic true triaxial loading tests provide advantages for accurately obtaining the irreversible strains in the three principal stress directions. Here, the equivalent irreversible strains (e The absolute values of  When rock damage occurs, irreversible strains are generated in the corresponding direction. Therefore, the normalized irreversible strains can be used to describe the damage evolution As shown in As shown in Due to the close relationship among the fitted parameters (a, b, c and e The deformation and failure of rock specimens are accompanied by energy conversion. The rock damage process is essentially energy dissipation. The inputted energy (U) during the loading process is transformed to elastic energy (U  A damage variable based on energy dissipation is adopted to describe the damage evolution, and is defined by Based on Eqs. This behaviour is also verified by the similar values of these fitted parameters in Brittleness is one of the most important mechanical rock properties, which is critical to estimating the hydraulic fracturing, the risks of rock bursts and the stability of mining operations. The stress state ( To investigate the influence of the stress state and the joint on the damage evolution, a series of true triaxial multi-level single cyclic loading tests were conducted on intact and jointed marble under various conditions. Some significant conclusions can be drawn: Rock damage processes can be quantified by irreversible strains and dissipated energy. The irreversible strains in the maximum and minimum principal stress directions and dissipated energy are approximately linearly related to the equivalent irreversible strains that represent the loading process. The irreversible strains in the intermediate principal stress direction decrease nonlinearly with cumulative rock damage. Damage variables based on irreversible strains and dissipated energy are closely correlated. The fitted parameters of different damage variables are essentially equal and have intuitive physical meanings. The fitted parameters also have specific relationships with the intermediate and minimum principal stresses and the joint dip angle. The damage variables developed in this paper can be associated with brittleness. The brittleness increases with decreasing fitted parameters of the damage variables. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest as far as the authors are concerned. The authors sincerely acknowledge the financial support from the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: