A generative principle was applied to FeCl3 leaching of galena for the first time in this study. It has been confirmed that a certain quantity of electrical energy, as well as the leached products, could be obtained during the leaching process. The factors affecting the power output, such as electrode structure, temperature, agitation, solution compositions and concentration, and the connections between catholyte and anolyde compartments were investigated by a dual cell system. The experiments indicated that the interior resistance of the leaching system and the activation of the electrode are of key importance. Agitation speeds have little influence over a certain value. The effects of ferric chloride concentration in the leaching are similar to the traditional leaching. The activation energy was determined to be 14.96 kJmol−1 for FeCl3 leaching of galena under the present conditions.In most hydrometallurgical leaching processes, such as oxidation leaching of sulfide, the chemical energy released as heat cannot be fully utilized. If the process performs electrogeneratively, the energy could transform to applicable electrical energy. Although the principle and techniques were developed in the 1960s ( In this work, the electrogenerative principle was applied to FeCl A dual cell apparatus was adopted. The reactor was made of Plexiglas, and consisted of anolyte and catholyte compartments connected by an ion-selective membrane. The electrogenerative leaching cell of galena with FeCl The selected galena was a natural hand-sorted ore from a domestic mine, whose element analysis was as follows: Before preparing the electrode, the ore was mechanically activated and comminuted in a ball mill. Then the powder concentrate (2.0 g) was mixed with carbon paste, which consisted of acetylene black (AB) (0.2 g) and 60% polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) milk (0.062 g) as the conducting medium and binder, respectively. The mixture was then pressed into pellets with a 0.785 cm The solutions used in the experiments were prepared using reagent pure chemicals and distilled water. 2 M HCl catholyte was added to the cathodic solution for preventing the hydrolysis of iron ions. Two mini-stirrers were used for agitation in the anolyte and catholyte compartments, and a water bath for heating. The electrode potentials and the voltage output of the leaching cell (vs. SCE) were measured using a digital voltmeter. The current was measured using a low resistance ammeter. All of the measured instruments were calibrated before each run. The exterior load of the cell varied from infinite to zero. The experiments were carried out in 3.0 M NaCl anolyte and 0.3 M FeCl As the exterior load approaches zero, the current achieves maximum. Although the over-potentials The SEM image indicates that the element sulfur formed on the surface of electrode, due to the oxidation of sulfur ions, and was the main reason for electrode polarization. As expected, the output current and power decreased with the amount of PTFE in the electrode, while increasing with the amount of acetylene black in the electrode. The experimental results show that varying the composition of the electrode just affected the degree of polarization of the anode. The addition of acetylene black increased the conductivity and infiltration of the solution in the galena electrode, while PTFE decreased the conductivity of the electrode, which resulted in the difference in output power of the cell. In addition, the electrode mixed with acetylene black was better than that mixed with graphite. This is because the electrode with acetylene black has a larger electrode surface area than that with graphite. Another reason is that acetylene black is an amorphous carbon in structure. The experimental results show that agitation affected the power output of the cell, by affecting the cathodic polarization caused by diffusion of Fe The experiments show that the maximum current in the leaching cell, using an ion membrane as the connection between catholyte and anolyte, was several times that of using a salt bridge. The capacity for ion transmission in the salt bridge was inferior to that in the ion membrane because of a greater resistance, leading to a lower power output in the system. Up to a concentration of 0.15 M FeCl The power output of the leaching cell increased with increasing NaCl concentration. Similar observations have been made in traditional leaching ( The experimental temperature ranged from 301.0 to 320.5 K. Temperature affects electrogenerative leaching mainly by changing the anodic polarization. Taking the output current as a measure of leaching rate and applying the Arrhenius equation, we can estimate the apparent activation energy for galena ore leaching as 14.96 kJ It is possible to compare the present experimental data to those from Electrogenerative leaching is a new research field in hydrometallurgy. In the present paper, various factors affecting the electrogenerative leaching of galena with ferric chloride have been studied. It was obvious that the low resistance ion membrane and high active electrode of sulfide are of most important in the leaching. The effects of ferric chloride and chloride ion concentration on the rate of generative leaching are similar to those of traditional leaching. Temperature affects electrogenerative leaching mainly by changing the anodic polarization, and the activation energy of the leaching was determined to be 14.96 kJ Changes in agitation speed had little influence on the leaching efficiency when the speed reached a certain value. Studies to determine the feasibility of generative leaching in industry are well under way. The authors express their gratitude to the National Natural Science Foundation of China for financial support (Grant No. 59974033).