Biomass pretreatment aims at separating and providing easier access to the main biomass components (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin), eventually removing lignin, preserving the hemicellulose, reducing the cellulose crystallinity and increasing the porosity of the material. Pretreatment is an essential step towards the development and industrialization of efficient 2nd generation lignocellulosic ethanol processes. The present work reviewed the main options available in pretreatment. Autohydrolysis and steam explosion were then selected for further investigation. Experimental work was carried out on batch scale reactors, using Miscanthus as biomass feedstock: the effects on sugar solubilization and degradation products generation have been examined for each of these two pretreatment systems. A new process using only water and steam as reacting media was then developed, experimentally tested, and results compared to those achieved by the autohydrolysis and steam explosion processes. Products obtained with the new pretreatment contained a lower amount of usual fermentation inhibitor compounds compared to that typically obtained in steam explosion. This result was achieved under operating conditions that at the same time allowed a good xylan yield, preventing degradation of hemicelluloses. The new pretreatment process was also able to act as an equalization step, as the solid material from the pretreatment phase had a similar composition even under different operating conditions. As regards the effect of pretreatment on enzymatic hydrolysis, the new process achieved yields similar to steam explosion on glucans: however, this was obtained reducing the formation of degradation products from sugars, mainly from C5 sugars. These results made the proposed pretreatment system suitable for further development and industrialization on pilot and industrial scale.Autohydrolysis Ammonia Fiber Explosion Biomass To Liquid Consolidated Bio-Process Di-Methyl Ether Furfural Equivalent 5-HydroxymethylFurfural Hugh Performance Liquid Chromatography Liquid Solid Ratio Xyloolygomers Xylan remained in the solid phase Steam Explosion Separate Hydrolysis and Fermentation Simultaneous Saccharification and Fermentation Simultaneous Saccharification and Co-Fermentation Solid Yield Water Insoluble Solid content Equivalent Xylane The production of lignocellulosic ethanol represents one of the main routes for new generation biofuel production. Based on the IEA definition Second generation biofuels have excellent quality characteristics, and these high standards can be better controlled and maintained in time, i.e. a constant fuel quality can be assured. In addition, first generation biofuels are less stable to both biological and chemical decomposition, are more corrosive than fossil fuels and can act as solvent towards sediments in the fuel tank and paint coatings: this especially occurs when blends higher than 5% are adopted Examples for second generation biofuels are those produced either through the biochemical route, e.g. lignocellulosic ethanol, or from the thermochemical pathway. Processes combining both the thermochemical and the biochemical approaches are also under investigation, such as syngas fermentation Schemes summarizing possible routes towards new generation biofuels have been elaborated by various authors (as Bradley Today, the lignocellulosic ethanol chain probably represents one of the most developed route towards industrialization of 2nd generation biofuel production. It can be developed according to different levels of process integration The pretreatment phase in general represents at least 20% of total production costs in all these different approaches, and it can be considered as the single most expensive process step The expected/desired characteristics for pretreatment can be summarized as follows: The more the pretreatment system is able to process biomass pieces of large dimension, the better the energy balance and the overall process efficiency. Pretreatment is a major energy-consuming step in the lignocellulosic ethanol process. Energy demand should be kept at the lowest possible level, while maintaining high process performances. The dimensions of the pretreatment reactor should be limited to reduce volume and costs, the use of expensive materials should be avoided (this is also dependent on process operating conditions, such as temperature and pressure). Optimum design is a compromise between performances and costs. Pretreatment process conditions should minimize sugar losses, especially C5 sugars. Yeasts suffer from the presence of inhibitors and various chemicals formed or added during pretreatment. The use of chemicals should be reduced as much as possible or even totally avoided, since they must be neutralized before hydrolysis and fermentation. This means a further intermediate conditioning step, which add costs and complexity to the whole process, and produce chemicals (to be disposed off). In addition, performances of downstream processes are linked to the pretreatment phase. In fact: Sugars must be concentrated at a sufficient level to operate the downstream steps in the economically efficient way: a concentration of sugars not less than 10% is recommended. Yeasts must be able to ferment both cellulose and hemicelluloses derived sugars. While C6 sugars fermenting yeasts are well known and available, microorganisms able to ferment C5 sugars are still under development. It is desirable to operate the fermentation phase in the shortest possible period, i.e. no more than 5 days (preferably 4 or even 3 days), in order to reduce the capital cost associated to the installation of fermenters. Today, various authors consider that only those pretreatment steps adopting chemicals can be competitive in terms of performances (i.e. yields) and costs (among others, Yang et al. The present research work aims at examining current pretreatment options for lignocellulosic ethanol production, identifying main strengths and weaknesses of the different concepts, and to develop a revised pretreatment solution suitable for industrial scale demonstration. The strategy, validated through the experimental campaign reported here, is to develop an innovative and efficient pretreatment system (two-stage hydrolysis) which is not using chemicals and that can effectively extract C5 and C6 sugars limiting the formation of inhibitors. The new pretreatment approach is compared to autohydrolysis (AH) and steam explosion processes (SE). The fundamental role of the lignocellulosic material pretreatment in ethanol production has been recognized for a long time The purpose of a pretreatment is to efficiently separate and provide easier access to the main biomass components (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin), eventually removing lignin, preserving the hemicellulose, reducing the cellulose crystallinity and increasing the porosity of the material A cost-effective pretreatment process must improve the formation of sugars in the subsequent phase of enzymatic hydrolysis, reducing the degradation of the carbohydrates, and the formation of inhibitors for hydrolysis and fermentation. In fact, apart from sugars, other products generated by the lignocellulosic ethanol technologies are: The acetic acid is produced by the acetyl groups hydrolysis, which is a component of the hemicellulosic fraction, in the shape of substituent of xylose monomers in the solid phase as well as oligomers. Furfural is generated by the dehydration in acid medium of pentoses, such as arabinose and xylose. Hydroxymethylfurtfural (HMF) is the component generated by the acid dehydration of the hexoses such as the glucose. Oligomers are produced by the solubilization of the raw material in mild acidic media. Size reduction of biomass is needed to increase the accessible surface area of the material and reduce cellulose crystallinity. Chipping, grinding and milling can be used to reduce the particle size. Typical size for lignocellulosic materials is 10–30 mm after chipping and 0.2–2 mm after comminution Energy consumption of mechanical process of lignocellulosic material is strictly related to the final particle dimension and the kind of feedstock. Consumption can vary from 130 kWh t A new approach to biomass pretreatment in the lignocellulosic ethanol chain is also under investigation Autohydrolysis consist of hydrolysis of the hemicelluloses component, without significant modifications to lignin, and leaving cellulose in the solid material. Hydrolysis reactions of hemicelluloses take place in aqueous medium at temperatures typically in the range of 150–230 °C. Hemicellulose is depolymerized in the liquid into oligosaccharides and monosaccharides, as well as degradation products as furfural, acetic acid, and 5-hydroxymethyfurfural (HMF). The solid phase is therefore constituted by unconverted hemicelluloses, lignin, and cellulose. Steam explosion is today seen as one of the best and cost-effective processes for pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass. SE technology has been tested in lab and pilot plants by several research groups, and implemented at demonstration scale The process is fed by comminuted biomass: high-pressure saturated steam is added, which initiates the hydrolysis reaction. Pressure is then suddenly reduced, exposing the feedstock to an explosive decompression which opens the biomass structure, increasing enzyme accessibility. Steam at 180–220°C (corresponding to a pressure of 1–2.3 MPa) is used, while the usual retention time range is 2–10 min Steam explosion has been successfully applied for production of ethanol from several lignocellulosic materials. Among others, Ballesteros Steam explosion can be carried out in both batch and continuous systems. Batch reactors are cheap, versatile and simple to manage. They are usually used on lab scale to define the process and investigate the effects of the process on different feedstocks. Relatively small amounts of biomass (0.1–1 kg) are sufficient in each experiment: other variables besides temperature and retention time can be investigated in preliminary studies, such as pressure, size of the material and addition of catalysts. Continuous plants can work with high feeding rates and are typically used at pilot and demo scales. Nevertheless, several disadvantages are associated to steam explosion. Limitations of steam explosion include destruction of a portion of the xylan fraction to volatile compounds, and incomplete disruption of the lignin–carbohydrate matrix. The process, depending on the conditions and the feedstock, generate inhibitors for the downstream phases. In order to increase the recovery of both cellulose and hemicelluloses, SO Depending on the type of treated biomass, the percentage of SO The use of SO As regards corn-stover, by pretreating this biomass in combination with a small amount of SO Carbon dioxide is a stream available from the fermentation process and its importance will probably become even more interesting in the future due to the interest in the de-carbonization of energy production. Carbon dioxide molecules dimension is comparable to water and ammonia and can penetrate into the accessible pores of the feedstock. The explosive release of the carbon dioxide pressure allows the disruption of the cellulosic structure, increasing the accessible surface area of the substrate for enzymatic hydrolysis Several experiences have been carried out to investigate the possibility of using CO The hydrolysis of cellulose was investigated by Park The main drawback to the diffusion of this pretreatment technology is related to its high costs. Nevertheless Zheng The basic concept of the AFEX process is similar to steam explosion. In AFEX the biomass is exposed to liquid ammonia at high pressure and temperature for a certain time: pressure is then reduced. AFEX can modify and effectively reduce the lignin fraction of the lignocellulosic materials, while the hemicellulose and cellulose fractions may remain intact. If optimum conditions are set, AFEX can significantly improve the enzymatic hydrolysis. The operational parameters in the AFEX process are ammonia loading, temperature, water loading, blow down pressure, time, and number of treatments The major advantage of AFEX pretreatment is no formation of some types of inhibitory by-products, such as furans: in addition water wash seems not necessary AFEX process effectiveness depends on the biomass lignin content: AFEX is more effective on low-lignin containing biomass. In addition, AFEX pretreatment does not significantly solubilize hemicellulose, compared to other pretreatment processes such as dilute-acid pretreatment The use of acids for lignocellulosic hydrolysis is a very effective and well known process to obtain a structure suitable for conversion in fermentation. Concentrated acids can be successfully used to pretreat agricultural residues and wood. Sulfuric acid is the most applied acid, while other acids such as hydrochloric and nitric acids were also investigated An important operational parameter is represented by the reaction temperature. Acid hydrolysis can be performed either at low temperature with concentrated acids or at high temperature with diluted acids. The use of concentrated acids is very effective in hydrolyzing the lignocellulosic feedstock; however it requires expensive materials and makes the process potentially hazardous. Acid recovery is needed to achieve a better economy of the process, but it is itself an energy-consuming step. Diluted acid hydrolysis is today a more suitable option and probably the most common method, among the chemical pretreatments Higher temperatures are favorable towards cellulose hydrolysis Weak acids can also be used for acid hydrolysis: acetic acid is today used in the first stages of several processes, and is characterized by the release of hydronium ions from the feedstock. In further reaction stages, the hydronium ions, generated from acetic acid auto-ionization, act as catalysts in the degradation of polysaccharides. In the typical operating conditions of most of the hydrothermal treatments, the formation of hydronium ions from acetic acid is more important than from water The major drawback of acid hydrolysis is the formation of different types of inhibitors such as carboxylic acids, furans and phenolic compounds. Hemicellulose can be degraded into xylose, mannose, acetic acid, galactose, and glucose. At the high temperature and pressures often used in the industrial process, glucose and xylose can be degraded into furfural and hydroxymethylfurfural, respectively. When furfural and hydroxymethylfurfural are degraded, formic acid is formed. Levulinic acid is formed by hydroxymethylfurfural degradation, and phenolic compounds are generated from the partial breakdown of lignin Therefore, the pretreatments at low pH should be selected properly in order to avoid or at least reduce the formation of these inhibitors. Acid hydrolysis pretreatment allows for high cellulose conversion yield, but costs are usually higher than other physico-chemical pretreatment processes such as steam explosion or AFEX The use of high-pH for biomass pretreatment has been also investigated. The application of solutions such as NaOH, Ca(OH) The mechanism of alkaline hydrolysis is related to the saponification of intermolecular ester bonds cross-linking lignin and part of the hemicellulose. The reduction of this cross-linking tends to increase the material porosity Pretreatment can be performed at low temperatures but with a relatively long time and high concentration of the base. Among the chemical pretreatments, alkali hydrolysis proved to be the most effective method for breaking the ester bonds between lignin, hemicellulose and cellulose and avoiding fragmentation of the hemicellulose polymers The aim of the organosolv process is to treat biomass in order to obtain a high amount of cellulose suitable for the downstream biological processes at moderate costs and limiting inhibitor formation. A mixture of organic or aqueous organic solvents is used to decompose and solubilize the constituents of the biomass, in particular the lignin and part of the hemicellulose. In the organosolv process the reactive cellulose remains in the solid phase. Among the solvents suitable for this purpose the most relevant are methanol, ethanol, acetone, ethylene, glycol and tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol Due to the costs of the solvents, ethanol and methanol are preferable over alcohols with higher boiling points: ethylene glycol, tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol The simultaneous optimization of all unit operations is a fundamental task to make cost-effective an organosolv process Biological pretreatment is based on the use of microorganisms able to degrade lignin, hemicellulose and cellulose. Cellulose resulted to be the most resistant component to biological attack. Brown-, white and soft-rot fungi are used to treat biomass and enhancing enzymatic hydrolysis Interesting results were obtained by Hatakka et al. The low energy requirement is the main reason for the interest in this kind of pretreatment. Moreover the absence of chemical requirements and mild environmental conditions are other important advantages of biological pretreatment. The main drawback that is limiting the industrial use of this kind of pretreatment in lignocellulosic ethanol production is represented by the very low process rate. The main conclusion of the above analysis of the existing pretreatment systems indicated that it is not possible to optimize this step simply by using a currently available technology, and possibly without chemical addition and formation of inhibitors: C5 and C6 sugars can be obtained with good yields from the biomass matrix only in different conditions, so that it is not possible to achieve the best results for all sugars at the same time. Based on available literature, a preliminary investigation on two separate alternative systems considered as best candidate, autohydrolysis (AH) and steam explosion (SE), has been carried out. Those processes where considered as promising approaches as they are not using chemicals. Results from these two options have then been compared with a different innovative process. The research was carried out in a 70 L batch system, and Miscanthus was selected as biomass for the test. Miscanthus has been grown at the Cassana Farm, Torre Garofoli (Al), at geo-coordinate 44° 53′ 06.9′’ N, 8° 47′ 39.1‘’ E. It was cultivated in 1 ha plot area. The two years old plantation was harvested using a JOHN DEERE 7400 chopping machine. The chopped biomass was dried in an oven at 60 °C in order to reach moisture content below 15%, and finally stored in big bags before being used. The process was able to investigate both the authydrolysis and the steam explosion. Data obtained with autohydrolysis and steam explosion were then compared with a new pretreatment concept under investigation. The following samples were collected during the tests: fresh biomass, autohydrolised biomass, steam exploded biomass, and material obtained by the new pretreatment. The severity factor was chosen as reference parameter to provide an approximate evaluation for hemicelluloses solubilization and glucose recovery after enzymatic hydrolysis. Severity factor can be calculated with the following equation In literature All the pretreatment processes considered in this paper generate two main products: a liquid and a solid one, with variable composition according to the operating conditions. The following materials were taken from the process and analyzed: Feedstock: weight, moisture content, composition Solids: weight, moisture content, composition on washed solids, water insoluble solid content (WIS) Liquids: weight, dry matter content, composition, density Moisture and extractives in the raw biomass were determined, and quantitative acid hydrolysis with 72% H Mass balances have been evaluated: each compound in the liquid fraction was referred to the raw material from which it was generated Solid Yield (SY), defined as the ratio between the solid recovered after pretreatment and the raw material Liquid Solid Ratio (LSR), as the ratio between the liquid and the solid material obtained by the pretreatment process Xylan remaining in the solid phase (PRX), as ratio between the xylan content in the pretreated material and the xylan content of the raw matter Xylooligomers (OXEP), Equivalent Xylose (XEP) and Furfural Equivalent (FEP), as ratio between xylan converted to xylooligomers, xylose and furfural (respectively) and the xylan content of the raw matter Analogous for glucans Enzymatic hydrolysis of the solid fraction was also investigated in a 3.6 l fermenters at 7.5% of dry matter content controlling temperature and pH and adding an excess of commercial cellulolytic enzymes. Hydrolysis of the solid fraction was carried out for 72 h, samples taken and sugars analyzed in order to investigate the yield of glucose recovering after enzymatic hydrolysis of the pretreated cellulose fraction. The composition of Miscanthus is given in the following Cellulose (glucans) is the largest part of the biomass, accounting for 38.2% of the total biomass dry weight, followed by hemicelluloses, as 27.1%, and the Klason lignin at 26.4%. The molar relation between the four main components of hemicelluloses is Xylose:Arabinose:Galactan:Acetyl groups = 10:0.7:0.3:2.0. This distribution is of particular importance for the process under investigation, as hemicellulose is the biomass component mostly affected during the hydrothermal pretreatment. Xylose is the most abundant monomer in the hemicellulose. Several severity factors were investigated for both the autohydrolysis (AH) and the steam explosion (SE) steps. Severity factors for AH were in the range from 2.94 to 3.72, while for SE from 3.42 to 3.85: due technological limitations, only 200 °C conditions have been tested for SE. The new pretreatment process was instead in the range from 3.70 to 4.02 as severity factor.  Glucans remains in the solid phase, with an average value of 97.8%. Lignin accounts for 23.7%–27.6%, with higher values at higher times and temperatures. On the contrary, xylans and acetic acid content in the solid is significantly reduced by autohydrolysis by high temperatures or long process times.  Furfural formation is very sensitive to AH temperature, and its concentration increased from 0.4 to 0.5 g kg As regards oligomers, soluble xylooligomers were significantly influenced by the temperature (from 80 to 136 g kg The amount (percent) of xylan remaining in the solid after pretreatment (PRX) rapidly decreased, thus showing the significant effect of pretreatment conditions (mainly temperature, and time) on hemicelluloses (xylose solubilization, and corresponding xylooligomers formation). Xylose accumulation in the liquid phase (XEP) and furfural formation (FEP) were almost negligible. Thus, the determination of the optimum conditions allows the solubilization of the higher percentage of xylose into xylooligomers. Finally, approximately 2–5% of the glucan content in the biomass was solubilized: this almost constant fraction can be referred to glucose and/or starch and/or free sugars in cellulose. More important, the solubilization of glucan seems independent from the pretreatment process conditions.   Results obtained by the application of an innovative pretreatment system were the following.   The new investigated pretreatment process is able to reach higher degree of solubilization of hemicellulose fraction reducing the inhibitors formation if compared with SE and AH even if higher severity are used. As for AH and SE an almost constant fraction of cellulose (glucan) was solubilised. Enzymatic hydrolysis of AH pretreated material showed the lowest glucose yield, approximately equal to 50%. The SE process was instead able to largely increase the glucose yield of biomass towards enzymes, up to 80% and 88% for glucan and xylan respectively at the higher severity. The new process achieved similar performances, thus providing a glucose-rich material after enzymatic hydrolysis. The new pretreatment achieved respectively 94% and 97% of glucan and xylan yield. In addition, this result was obtained reducing the formation of degradation products from sugars if compared with SE. This result can be explained by the fact xylan are linked on cellulose and hinders the action of cellulose enzymes A new pretreatment process has been studied and compared to autohydrolysis and steam explosion. Based on the experimental activity, the following conclusions can be drawn. Products from the innovative pretreatment contained a lower amount of furfural compared to that typically obtained from steam explosion process. This result was achieved under operating conditions that allowed at the same time a good xylans yield: furfural was significantly lower than in a steam explosion process, where the measured value increases up to 2.2%. Moreover, the global furfural formation is affected by reaction conditions but remains lower then SE or AH process at the same severity. Another important effect of the developed process is given by its ability of acting as an equalization step: in fact, the solid material from the pretreatment phase has a similar composition even if the operating conditions (severities) are different. Finally, considering the enzymatic hydrolysis, compared to the low yield obtained by the solid fraction after autohydrolysis pretreatment, the new pretreatment lead to a better glucose yield after enzymatic hydrolysis. An almost complete solubilization of the cellulose was observed. Moreover, the new pretreatment allowed a lower degradation of sugar, mainly from hemicellulose, and therefore a better sugar yield of the resulting solid to the enzymatic reactions. It is possible to conclude that the new pretreatment is able to increase the yields in terms of recovered sugars from cellulose and hemicellulose without losses in degradation products and maintaining the same advantage of both AH and SE (i.e. no use of chemicals), and with a minimum requirement in terms of feedstock size reduction (3–5 cm). Authors wish to acknowledge the