This work explores the sonochemical-enhanced carbonation of FBC ash for direct disposal in landfills. Tests have been conducted using four ashes originating from three commercial CFBC boilers. Experiments with additives such as NaCl and seawater have also been carried out. Tests were performed at low (20°, 40°C) and high (60°, 80°C) temperatures. Sonicated samples were analyzed using TGA, TGA–FTIR and XRD techniques to determine the influence of other calcium compounds (OCC). The particle size reduction brought about by sonication was quantified using wet sieving. The ash reactivity displays a strong temperature dependency with almost complete carbonation achieved in minutes at higher temperatures. Additives were found to increase the level of hydration of the ashes, in line with previous work; however, carbonation levels were unaffected. TGA, TGA–FTIR and XRD analysis of the samples indicated participation of OCC, which were also formed during hydration.Fluidized bed combustion (FBC) is an economical and environmentally friendly combustion process that can be used to combust a wide variety of fuels like petroleum coke and high-sulphur coal, while simultaneously providing Several processes have been suggested to solve this problem but none of them have been implemented on an industrial scale. These include the CERCHAR process A more effective way to landfill the bed ash from an FBC would be to carbonate the unreacted CaO to CaCO Carbonation of CaO has recently received significant attention as the process could be used to separate and concentrate CO When hydrated, CaO reacts with water to form Ca(OH) Sonic energy has been successfully used to increase mass transfer in a wide variety of reactions. Ultrasonics requires a liquid medium to transfer energy efficiently. One of the main effects of ultrasound when used in conjunction with a liquid is cavitation. Cavities formed in a liquid are in the form of bubbles. Specks of dust or pockets of gas trapped in the liquid act as nuclei leading to bubble formation. When ultrasonic waves propagate through a liquid they create mechanical disturbances in the form of pressure fluctuations. A reduction in pressure below the liquid vapour pressure causes the bubble to grow while an increase in pressure causes bubble collapse. Due to the rapidity of the collapse, high instantaneous local pressures and temperatures are developed The implosive collapse of microbubbles also results in a variety of mechanical effects. In the case of a heterogeneous reaction, when solid particles are near the cavitation bubble, the implosion may occur symmetrically or asymmetrically, depending on the proximity of the solids. Symmetric cavitations create shock waves, which propagate to the surrounding solids causing microscopic turbulence and/or thinning of the solid–liquid film Jia and Anthony The tests were carried out using four bed ashes from three different sources. Two of the bed ashes, which differ in age only, are from Nova Scotia Power’s 165 MWe CFBC. The aged ash was obtained in 2001, and was stored in closed plastic containers at room temperature, without desiccant. The fresh ash was received in June 2005. It is believed that process conditions at Point Aconi did not change significantly in the interim. The other two ashes are from a CFBC at Piney Creek, USA and from the A/C Power Corporation, USA. The elemental analysis of the four bed ashes is given in The experimental setup, shown in All tests with NSPI ash were carried out using the VCX 600 unit while tests on ashes from Piney Creek and A/C Power were carried out using the VCX 750 unit. For the VCX 600 unit the amplitude was maintained at 50% for all tests, based on previous work Seawater from Nova Scotia and sodium chloride solution (35 Particle size analysis was carried out before and after sonication for the NSPI ash. Mesh sizes of 1.4 The conversion to hydrate of the aged NSPI ash at different temperatures is shown in  When hydration as well as carbonation are considered together it appears that the unreacted CaO undergoes hydration to form Ca(OH)   The effect of additives on the conversion to carbonate is given in Comparisons between stirring and ultrasonics for the aged and fresh NSPI ash are seen in The TGA curves for the fresh NSPI ash are shown in TGA–FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared) tests were also conducted to determinate both the rate of evolution and composition of the gases being evolved.  An XRD analysis of the fresh and aged NSPI bed ash is shown in    The results of the sonication of bed ashes from A/C Power and Piney Creek are presented in The tests carried out indicate the temperature dependency of carbonation for FBC ashes. Temperatures of 60