Background & aims
                  The incidence of hip fractures in Oslo is among the highest in the world. Vitamin D, as well as vitamin K, may play an important role in bone metabolism. We examined if vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D were associated with an increased risk of hip fracture, and whether the possible synergistic effect of these two micronutrients is mediated through bone turnover markers.
               
                  Methods
                  Blood was drawn for vitamin K1, 25(OH)D, and the bone turnover marker osteocalcin upon admission for hip fracture and in healthy controls.
               
                  Results
                  Vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D were independently associated with a risk of hip fracture. The adjusted odds ratio (95% CI) per ng/ml increase in vitamin K1 was 0.07 (0.02–0.32), and that per nmol/L increase in 25(OH)D was 0.96 (0.95–0.98). There was a significant interaction between 25(OH)D and vitamin K1 (p < 0.001), and a significant correlation between total osteocalcin and vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D (rho = 0.18, p = 0.01; rho = 0.20, p = 0.01, respectively).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D are lower in hip fracture patients compared with controls. Vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D are independently and synergistically associated with the risk of hip fracture when adjusting for confounders. Intervention studies should include both vitamins.The incidence of hip fractures in Oslo is among the highest in the world There are two types of vitamin K, named K1 and K2. The dietary source of vitamin K from green leafy vegetables and some vegetable oils is phylloquinone, known as vitamin K1. Vitamin K2 is a series of vitamers and has been extensively studied by Japanese groups because of the high level of vitamin K2 in the soy product Natto. When not specified, vitamin K refers to both compounds throughout this paper. The active compound of vitamin D is 1,25(OH) Bone turnover markers are helpful for evaluating the physiology and pathophysiology of bone metabolism, The association between vitamin D and risk of hip fracture is well described and the role of vitamin K in mineralization of bone has become an area of interest, The aim of this case–control study was to determine whether serum concentrations of vitamin K1 are related to the risk of hip fracture in aged patients in Norway, examine whether there is a synergistic effect between vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D and determine whether our findings can be confirmed through analysis of bone turnover markers. We enrolled hip fracture patients who took part in a randomized controlled trial (RCT) of orthogeriatric care. Missing patients were included in the RCT. Age and BMI was registered, and a pre-surgical blood test was performed according to standard protocol in the missing patients. The control group comprised individuals with no previous hip fracture, and was drawn at random by Statistics Norway from home-dwelling inhabitants aged 60–100 years (median age, 82 years) in the census files of Oslo in 2005. The control subjects were approached by letter and followed up by two phone calls. A total of 73 control subjects (66% women) were recruited. The data were collected by designated project staff for patients and controls. In patients, weight was measured using a class 3 chair scale. Patients wore light clothing on the first possible day after the operation. Height was either measured using a tape measure against a wall or calculated from measured knee height. In the control group, standing height was measured with a tape measure towards a wall. Weight was measured using a class 4 standing scale wearing light clothing. Civil status was categorized as: widowed or non-widowed, (never married or divorced were grouped together with non-widowed because these subjects probably have a social network that is independent of a spouse); residence in home dwelling or institutionalized; education level in elementary school or higher than elementary school; smoking habits in current smokers or non-current smokers; and alcohol consumption in total abstainers and non-abstainers. The number of drugs used was recorded and activity of daily living was measured using the Barthel activity of daily living index (BADL). In patients, blood was collected by venipuncture shortly after admission for hip fracture and prior to operation. Standard preoperative blood analyses for C-reactive protein (CRP) and albumin levels were carried out in all patients by a multianalyzer Cobas Integra 800 from September 2009 to October 2011, and thereafter by the Cobas 800 (both from Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) in the Department of Clinical Chemistry at Oslo University Hospital, Ullevål. In the controls, blood was collected in the morning by venipuncture following an overnight fast. All samples were clotted for 30 min at room temperature and serum was separated by centrifugation. Aliquots were immediately stored at −80 °C, and later analyzed for assays of phylloquinone (vitamin K1) and 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (25(OH)D), total osteocalcin (totOC), undercarboxylated osteocalcin (ucOC), bone specific alkaline phosphatase (BALP), parathyroid hormone (PTH), and insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1). CRP and albumin levels were assayed with a Modular P 800 multianalyzer (Roche Diagnostics) in the Department of Clinical Chemistry at Oslo University Hospital, Aker. Vitamin K1 and ucOC were analyzed in serum by Vitas AS Norway ( The coefficients of variation for the analysis were as follows: vitamin K1, 16%; ucOC, 20%, 25(OH)D, 16%; BALP, 2%; totOC, 7%; PTH, 8%; and IGF-1, 12%. The coefficients of variation remained stable over time. None of the methods were changed, and we used the same laboratories for analyzing patients and controls. Reference samples for vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D in healthy home-dwelling citizens of Oslo were established in 2005. Estimated means ± SD for vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D in hip fracture patients were obtained from a pilot study. Power calculations were based on estimated difference in means between the established reference population and the pilot study as follows: 0.31 ng/ml and 17 nmol/L for vitamins K1 and Data are presented as means (median when data were not normally distributed) ± SD or numbers (percentages). Student's Crude and adjusted odds ratios (ORs) for hip fracture were estimated by logistic regression analyses, thus adjusting for possible confounding factors in a forward stepwise manner adding one variable at the time, and removing them as appropriate. Associations between vitamins and the outcome variables were not adjusted for bone turnover markers because these are regarded as markers of low vitamin K1 or 25(OH)D status, and thus as intermediate variables in the possible causation pathway. To study the interaction between vitamins, data were grouped as high versus low vitamin K1 and high versus low 25(OH)D. The cut-off for vitamin K1 was set to the 50th percentile for the healthy controls because of outliers. The cut-off for 25(OH)D was set to the mean for the healthy controls because 25(OH)D was normally distributed. All The Regional Committee for Medical Research Ethics, the Data Inspectorate, and the Directorate for Health and Social Affairs approved the study protocol. Patients, or the nearest next of kin, gave informed written consent before enrollment. Some patients were included based on presumed consent, confirmed by next of kin shortly after enrolment. The participants in the control group all gave written informed consent. The study was performed according to the Declaration of Helsinki. There were no differences in age, education, or smoking habits, between patients and controls. BMI was significantly lower in patients than controls, with a mean difference in weight of 7.1 kg at Patients used a higher number of medications, a higher percentage lived in an institution, and more were widowed and totally abstinent from alcohol compared with controls. The BADL score and HGS were significantly lower in patients than in controls ( Low serum concentrations of vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D were independently associated ( We also tested for an interaction between 25(OH)D and vitamin K1 in the logistic regression model, adjusting for all other independent and significant covariates. The interaction term was highly significant ( TotOC was significantly lower in patients compared with controls, but there was no difference in ucOC between the groups ( Vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D were positively correlated with totOC (Spearman's rho = 0.18 and 0.20, respectively, In the current study, vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D were significantly lower in hip fracture patients compared with controls, and both were independently associated with an increased risk of hip fracture. The odds for a hip fracture associated with low vitamin K1 status was three-fold increased when 25(OH)D was low, indicating a synergistic effect of vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D. TotOC was lower and BALP levels were higher in patients compared with controls, and both were independently associated with a risk of fracture. Vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D were positively correlated with totOC and negatively correlated with BALP levels. However, even though these correlations were significant, they were low and cannot explain in total why totOC levels were low or BALP levels were high. Our results might have been affected by other dietary factors, co morbidity, or lifestyle factors. BMI was lower in the patients compared with controls. This difference in BMI most likely reflects a pre-fracture nutritional state because weight was measured on the first possible postoperative day. As expected, low BMI was associated with an increased risk of fracture, but vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D were unrelated to BMI. The association of low vitamin K1 and low 25(OH)D and an increased risk of fracture is therefore unlikely to be mediated through general malnutrition. The patients had lower muscle strength (HGS) and reduced function (BADL). Therefore, the patient group was frailer compared with controls. These variables (HGS and BADL) were adjusted for in the multivariate analysis and could not explain our findings. A higher number of patients were widowed, institutionalized, or totally abstinent from alcohol compared with controls. The patients also used a higher number of medications, reflecting more co-morbidities compared with controls. We had insufficiently detailed data on co-morbidity in the controls, and were thus unable to adjust for some known risk factors, such as diabetes, chronic kidney disease, use of antidepressants, sleeping pills, or anti-resorptive agents. Therefore, this limits the interpretation of our data. Increased bone turnover, as measured by the bone formation marker BALP, is frequently reported in osteoporotic patients. The promoter for the OC gene contains a vitamin D-responsive element that directly stimulates the transcription of ucOC. Low vitamin K and 25(OH)D have been reported in hip fracture patients independent of general malnutrition, The recommended daily intake of vitamin K1 is 1 μg/kg body weight (i.e., approximately 65 μg/day in older women). This is thought to be sufficient for normal blood coagulation, but may not be adequate for optimal bone health. The US recommended daily dietary intake is based on a reported intake of apparently healthy US inhabitants of 90–120 μg/day. We did not undertake dietary surveys because as many as 50% of hip fracture patients are cognitively impaired in the acute phase of hip fracture. Whether a fracture itself can induce low vitamin K1 and low 25(OH)D because of a change in bone turnover towards resorption that arises from fracture, or because of increased inflammation, is unclear. Therefore, in our study, blood tests were performed as soon as possible after informed consent was given and prior to surgery. We also adjusted for CRP in multivariate regression analysis. Another potential issue of our study was whether only the healthiest home-dwelling subjects were included as controls. The controls were randomly drawn from inhabitants of the appropriate age range, but this possibility cannot be ruled out. A total of 216 patients were enrolled in the RCT Warfarin, an anticoagulant, acts by inhibiting γ-carboxylase, and inhibits vitamin K-dependent carboxylation, possibly also activating OC. There is some evidence that warfarin-treated patients have an increased circulating ucOC to carboxylated OC ratio, and a decreased BMD at specific sites. In the latest systematic review of vitamin K and prevention of hip-fracture, only one RCT of vitamin K1 intervention was included. Low serum levels of vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D are independently associated with an increased risk of hip fracture. There is a significant synergistic effect between the two nutrients, possibly mediated through OC. Vitamin K1 and 25(OH)D may be important in preventing development of osteoporosis and in treatment of hip fracture patients to reduce the risk of subsequent fracture, especially in patients with pronounced co-morbidity. Good RCTs of supplementation with physiological doses of vitamin K1 and vitamin D compared with traditional bisphosphonate treatment should be carried out. We thank TBW, FF, KS, TB, and MM designed the research. FF and KS were the principal orthopedic surgeons in charge of including hip fracture patients and healthy volunteers, respectively. ACT and LOW conducted the research. ACT analyzed the data and wrote the paper. MM had primary responsibility for final content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None of the authors declare a conflict of interest. We thank Thomas Gundersen at as Vitas, Kari Julien at the Hormone Laboratory, Oslo University Hospital, and Anne Hove at the Nutritional Laboratory, Oslo University Hospital, for performing the biochemical analyses. We also thank Elisabeth Fragaat, Grete Wang, Gunnhild Bærdal, and Gurkirpal Singh for participating in data collection, and Lien Diep for statistical advice.