By adding naphthalene-based mesophase pitch (NBMP) into refined coal tar pitch (RCTP), pyrolysis products were obtained by dry-blending and co-carbonization method. The properties of pyrolysis products were characterized by polarizing microscope, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR), X-ray diffractometer (XRD) and Raman spectroscopy. The result shows the NBMP can obviously change the mesophase development of RCTP because it can promote the formation of mesophase spheres during the pyrolysis process. The carbon yield and aromaticity of pyrolysis products were increased with the increase of NBMP content. The anisotropic texture was wide-area structure when the NBMP content was 5 wt%. However, when the content of the additive is increased to 10 wt%, pyrolysis products will appear coking. The main role of this additive is to accelerate the reaction rate as the “nucleating agent” of the thermal condensation reaction.Mesophase pitch was widely used as the raw materials of some high-end carbon products such as ultra-high modulus or high thermal conductivity carbon fiber Similar to the refined pitch, petroleum pitch with more aliphatic branching chains has low aromaticity, so the process of thermal condensation is slow Therefore, the NBMP are used as additives in this research. And the influences of NBMP on the structure, morphology, thermal properties and optical texture of the pyrolysis products are analyzed and discussed. The purpose of this study is to develop a co-carbonization agent of coal pitch that can promote the formation of high-quality mesophase pitch. The refined pitch was prepared from coal tar pitch by removing quinoline insoluble in our groups. And the refined pitch was named RCTP. The MP-grade naphthalene-based mesophase pitch (NBMP) from Mitsubishi Chemical Holdings was selected as the additives. The basic properties of RTCP and NBMP are shown in  The polarized-light micrograph of NBMP is presented in RCTP and NBMP were subjected to a plurality of short-time comminution and mixing using grinder and agate mortar. The doping ratios of NBMP to RCTP were 0 wt%, 3 wt%, 5 wt% and 10 wt%, respectively. The prepared mixtures as described above were loaded into the steel reactor and the reaction system was heated to 420 °C at the rate of 3 °C in N The optical anisotropy structures of samples were observed by BX51M polarized microscopy (Olympus). Pyrolysis products were placed in abrasive, and epoxy resin and curing agent were injected later. After curing, the samples were polished with sandpaper. Finally, the samples were observed under a polarized microscope A NETZSCH STA 449 C thermogravimetric analysis instrument was used to analyze the pyrolytic behavior of the raw material and pyrolysis products from room temperature to 900 °C under an inert atmosphere. According to the weight loss, the residual carbon value of the sample was also obtained. Elemental analysis was carried out according to Vario EL cube elemental analyzer. The pyrolysis products were separated into three fractions by toluene and pyridine Fourier transform infrared spectra (FTIR) were obtained by using an FTIR-5DXC spectrometer at a resolution of 0.2 cm X-ray diffraction (XRD) test was performed on an X’Pert High-Score diffractometer (XRD-6000, Japan) with Cu Kα radiation. The crystallite size (L Raman spectra were recorded on a LabRAM Aramis HORIBA spectrometer. And the carbon layer arrangement and microcrystalline content of pyrolysis products were mainly determined by the D band around 1350 cm Polarized-light micrographs of pyrolysis products with different contents of NBMP are shown in  The previous section indicates the NBMP additive can accelerate the formation of mesophase pitch. But the mechanism of the NBMP effect on the development of mesophase pitch is unclear. In order to further explore the effect of NBMP on the formation of mesophase pitch, additional experiments were conducted. The uneven mixture with NBMP content of 5 wt% was heated to 420 °C and holding for 3 h to obtain pyrolysis product. According to the analyses, we made a schematic diagram of the mechanism of the NBMP effect on the development of mesophase pitch as shown in  It can be seen from the TG curves that the carbon yield of the pyrolysis products increases with the increase of NBMP content. It can be inferred that MP-3, MP-5, MP-10 have fewer volatile components but more polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, so their thermal stability is improved. The result proves that suitable content of NBMP can promote thermal condensation process. The element contents, group components and softening point of pyrolysis products are listed in The TI and PI content are important data in the research of mesophase pitch, because it can indirectly represent the degree of polycondensation The softening point of mesophase pitch with good processing properties is generally in the range of 250–300 °C. Therefore, we can deduce that the products should have higher mesophase content when 5–10 wt% NBMP additive is added. However, the softening point of MP-10 is too high to be processed. It also indicates the MP-10 is over-condensed. Therefore, adding NBMP of 5 wt% is appropriate, both promoting the formation of mesophase pitch and ensuring its processibility. And the softening point of MP-5 is basically consistent with the softening point of high quality mesophase pitch in other studies  According to reports  Raman spectra of the pyrolysis products are shown in During the thermal condensation process, aromatic hydrocarbon molecules in pitch undergo a series of complex reactions, in which the solubility of the generated mesophase molecules would change  The effect of NBMP additives on the pyrolysis behavior of RCTP is studied in this paper. The NBMP additives can obviously change the thermal condensation process of the pitch. The mesophase content of products first increases and then decreases with increasing NBMP content. When the NBMP content is 5 wt%, the product has the flow domain texture. The NBMP additive mainly influences the thermal condensation process from two aspects. On the one hand, the additive works as nucleating agent. It can provide numerous nucleation cores for the formation of mesophase microbeads, which can reduce the energy required to generate the microspheres. On the other hand, the NBMP make the aromatic molecules arrange more regularly on the surface of planar molecules through the π-π bonds, which can make the products have a better crystal structure. The authors declare no competing financial interest. This work is supported by the