In this work, it has been studied the use of conductive-diamond electrochemical oxidation (CDEO) as a refining technology to assure the quality of the effluents of door manufacturing processes (DMP). To do this, the raw effluents of these factories have been treated by a combination of physicochemical, biological and CDEO treatments. CDEO was found to be a feasible alternative to the refinement of a wooden DMP waste. It can successfully decrease the organic load of the effluents of the biological oxidation with low energy requirements. In addition, in case of incidents in the biological process, CDEO can treat successfully the effluents of the coagulation process. The effluents of the biological treatment have also been treated by CDEO in order to check the possible use of electrochemical technology to increase the biodegradability of the effluents and their possible recycle to the biological treatment. Unfortunately, electrochemical technology was found to be not adequate to increase the biodegradability of the effluents of a biological treatment. The hard oxidation conditions generated during CDEO do not lead to the accumulation of intermediates but to the almost direct formation of carbon dioxide. Lowering the current density or changing the electrodes can not enhance the biodegradability of the effluents of an electrochemical cell.Villacañas is a small town in the centre of Spain that concentrates the 90% of the wooden door-manufacturing of this country, with more than 20 large companies involved in their production. This industrial process generates different flow streams containing high concentrations of organic compounds. Among them, the more significant effluents come from the gluing process, whose purpose is to stick together different wooden pieces with adhesive substances. The removal of the organics contained in these wastes is required prior to the discharge or the reuse of the waste flow. Between the different kinds of adhesive substances, the more commonly used in the industries emplaced in Villacañas are polyvinilyc liquid glue (vinyl polyacetate), resin resorcine glue (resorcine, formaldehyde) and, mainly, urea resin (formaldehyde, urea). Consequently, the main pollutants of these effluents use to be formaldehyde, urea, resorcinol, vinyl polyacetate and/or other additives used in the formulation of glues. Due to the presence of colloids in these wastewaters, a technology that could be used to treat these wastes is the physicochemical treatment (the combination of a coagulation–flocculation process with a later sedimentation or flotation process). This kind of treatment is able to decrease the colloids contained in the waste, and it is also efficient in the removal of some of the soluble compounds that can interact to the coagulation reagents and form low solubility compounds ( Among these oxidation technologies, chemical oxidation ( Conductive-diamond is an emergent material with very good properties for the electrochemical treatment of wastewaters polluted with organic compounds, including great chemical and electrochemical stability ( With this background, the aim of this work was to study the use of CDEO as a refining technology to assure the quality of the effluents of door manufacturing processes. To do this, the raw effluents of these factories were treated by a combination of physicochemical and biological treatments. The effluents of this treatment were treated by CDEO in order to check the treatability and the possible use of electrochemical technology to increase the biodegradability of the effluents and their possible recycle to the biological treatment. Some electrolyses with stainless steel electrodes were also carried out in order to try to generate softer oxidation conditions and then to optimize the increase in the biodegradability. In addition, it was checked the possible use of the CDEO to treat the effluent of the physicochemical process in case of an operation problem in the biological treatment (to assure the quality of the effluent during the long restart-up of the biological unit). Chemical oxygen demand (COD) and biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) were used to monitor the organic load of the wastes. The COD was determined using a HACH DR200 analyzer. The BOD was determined using a HACH-LANGE DR2800. Measurements of pH and conductivity were carried out with an InoLab WTW pH-meter and a GLP 31 Crison conductimeter, respectively. Total nitrogen was measured using a HACH DR200 analyzer. The COD method was used for the determination of the average current efficiency (ACE), which was calculated using Eq. CDEO assays were carried out in a completely stirred cell (0.2 The actual effluents used in this work come from two different door-manufacturing factories with the same main reagent in the gluing process: formaldehyde/urea (effluent 1 and 2). These effluents contain a high concentration of COD (effluent 1: 9650 Coagulation is a very effective technology for the treatment of colloids suspensions. Hence, the high concentration of colloids in the effluent of the DMP factories turns physicochemical technology into a good choice for the pretreatment of DMP wastewaters. In this context,    One important point in both cases (raw and biologically treated influent) is the almost constant value of the cell potential during the CDEO treatment. This clearly indicates that there is no corrosion or formation of passivating layers onto the anode surface during the treatment. This also indicates that no carbonate deposits are formed on the surface of the cathode. Hence, CDEO is a feasible alternative to the refine of a DMP waste and the combination of coagulation, biological process and CDEO can assure the treatment down to any limit fixed for the discharge of the effluents. The electrochemical oxidation is a very effective process. However it is more expensive than the biological treatment. A good alternative to the use of the electrochemical technology as a refining-quality technology could be its use to increase the biodegradability of the effluents of the biological oxidation process. In this way, electrochemical oxidation could be used to break the complex non-biodegradable molecules into simpler ones, which later can be fed to the biological process to complete their conversion to carbon dioxide with this cheaper technology. As a result, the electric current requirements would be lower and the cost of the process would decrease significantly.  To try to change the harder oxidation conditions obtained by CDEO working under typical current densities, CDEO was operated at smaller current densities (37.5 In this context, results obtained in the experiments are shown in Hence, electrochemical technology is not adequate to increase the biodegradability of the effluents although it is a robust method to refine the quality of the effluents of the DMP factories. The financial support of Spanish government through project CONSOLIDER-INGENIO 2010 (CSD2006-0044) is gratefully acknowledged. This work was also supported by the JCCM (Junta de Comunidades de Castilla La Mancha, Spain) through the Projects PBI-05-043 and PBI-06-013.