The effect of iron oxide content on the crystallisation of a diopside glass–ceramic glaze was investigated using a glass–ceramic frit in the K2O–ZnO–MgO–CaO–Al2O3–SiO2 system and a granite waste glass. Measurements by X-ray diffraction (XRD) combined with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and EDX microanalysis showed that the distribution of Fe3+ ions among different crystalline phases such as franklinite (ZnFe2O4) and hematite Fe2O3 depends on the iron content in the original diopside mixture. Thus, the original glaze crystallises to franklinite or hematatite when iron content is greater than 2 and 15%, respectively.The “frit” term points out a glassy mixture melted and sharply quenched in cool water, which is the basis of glazes and enamels used as coatings over ceramic and metallic substrates. There are a wide variety of frits, which have different features such as fusibility, gloss and opacity. Among the wide range of commercial frits, the so-called crystalline frits are of great interest. Crystalline frits, which are glossy, transparent, viscous and with low fusibility, are composed by SiO Glass and glass–ceramics frits have traditionally been made from pure raw materials. The scarcity of many of these has caused a necessity for the use of complementary raw materials. Moreover, a major problem in developed countries is the large quantity of inorganic solid wastes that are generated and which have to be disposed of. Hence, the use of these residues as secondary raw material in glass and glass–ceramic production seem to be the most promising way for its reuse. Thus, several works have been published regarding the fabrication of bulk glass–ceramics from different inorganic wastes, such as red muds from zinc hydrometallurgy, Granite wastes are iron enriched residues composed by SiO Diopside glassy frit was supplied by Fritta S.L. (Castellón, Spain). An iron rich waste originated by a Spanish granite plant was used to prepare an iron glass. The granite waste, which was supplied as a dried mud coming from the sawing processing of granite blocks, was melted in air at 1450 °C for l h in silica-alumina crucibles. The fluid melt was quenched by pouring into water to obtain a glassy frit. No visible corrosion or chemical attack of the silica-alumina crucible by the melt was observed. Chemical compositions of frits were measured by wet chemistry using inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy (ICP). Both diopside and granite frits were crushed and sieved to <65 μm particle size. Different frits mixtures were prepared from diopside and granite frits as explained afterwards. All frits mixtures were mixed with water and organic additives (TPF and DMC) in order to obtain a slip, which was poured onto 80×80 mm The glassy nature of diopside and granite frits as well as the evolution of crystalline phases developed in glaze tiles after heat treatment were determined by X-ray diffraction in a Philiphs X'PERT MPD diffractometer with Cu   The frit mixtures were applied over ceramic tiles substrates as explained earlier. After cooling at room temperature, glaze tiles showed homogeneous and glossy surface. Glaze defects as bubbles or crazing were not detectable.     Finally, Hence, the XRD and SEM/EDX results showed in the present study point out that iron content has a great influence on the oxidation state of iron ions in diopside glass–ceramic glazes. The authors are carried out additional investigations to determine if this iron effect is also showed by others glazes such as zircon-based glazes and high fusibility glazes. The effect of iron content on crystallisation of a diopside glass–ceramic glaze has been stablished. XRD patterns and SEM observations on the surface of glass–ceramic glazes showed that the distribution of Fe On the other hand, the size and morphology of franklinite is also influenced by the iron content in the frit mixture. So, franklinite crystallises as rounded crystals when Fe As for diopside (CaMg(SiO The authors are greatly thankful to Fritta S.L. (Castellón, Spain).The experimental assistance of Mrs. P. Dı́az (IETcc, Spain), Mr. C. Rivera (UC-LM, Spain) and Mr. A. Luna (UC-LM, Spain) is gratefully appreciated.