We report observations of nanoscale microstructural changes in soot from an experimental light-duty diesel engine, produced with varying levels of biodiesel fuel blending. Based on these observations and current information in the literature, we propose a mechanistic hypothesis to explain the effects of biodiesel blending. Our underlying assumption is that particulate nanostructure is closely coupled to the local chemistry at the time the soot is formed. In the context of in-cylinder soot formation, this implies that changes in nanostructure may aid in diagnosing important changes in fuel–air mixing.Soot nanostructure changes with gas phase chemistry It is hypothesized here that fuel pyrolysis chemistry is reflected in the soot nanostructure and that the oxygenated fuel brings about secondary mixing effects that change the path of fuel decomposition Soot nanostructure is then dependent upon formation conditions, but not all nanostructure can be related to specific conditions. Indeed, conditions leading to some nanostructures may be non-unique. The paper only presents evidence and claim for but one specific nanostructure type – curvature. Even this may not uniquely tie to conditions, however there are limited chemical paths by which C5 can form and the composite rates for these paths are known. Those conditions producing significant C5 will lead to curvature in lamella, by analogy with the fullerene family of carbon allotropes. Particulate samples were generated in a 1999 1.7L Mercedes Benz direct-injection common rail diesel engine. This engine has been previously characterized The engine was run at a single steady-state point, 1500 Analyses of soot collected at different durations of engine operation did not show changes in nanostructure. Moreover soot collected is in bulk, inspection of many samples from the same batch did not reveal heterogeneity – to suggest such changes. Finally, separate oxidation studies – results to be reported elsewhere – were conducted at burnout levels ranging from 10% to 50% for all soots. Even 10% oxidation, while producing little change in nanostructure did however produce measureable (and readily recognizable) change in primary particle size and connectivity. Soy Gold™ soy methyl ester biodiesel (B100) was purchased from Ag Processing Inc. (Omaha, NE) and conventional 2007 certification ultra-low sulfur diesel fuel (ULSD) was purchased from Chevron Phillips Specialty Chemical Company (The Woodlands, TX). Volumetric blends of 5%, 10%, 15%, 20% biodiesel in ULSD were splash blended. The blends are designated by “B#”, where the number is the percentage of biodiesel in ULSD. Four of the fuels (ULSD, B5, B20, B100) were monitored for combustion, and all six of the fuels were used to generate particulate samples. The parent fuel properties are given in Powdered particulate removed from the uncatalyzed DPF was used for physical characterization experiments in its nascent state and after partial oxidation in the microreactor, a small-scale flow reactor. A brief description of the equipment and methodology follows. Detailed descriptions of the experimental method can be found in High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images were taken using a Philips CM200 with a Gatan image filter for digital imaging with live Fourier transforms with a 0.14  ULSD – Soot from this fuel possessed the most highly organized lamellae, which were arranged concentrically about the particle center. Yet the lamellae exhibited little stacking order, and their tortuosity suggested turbostratic layering. Of particular significance here is that the soot nanostructure lacked any evidence of fullerenic shells or highly curved lamellae. B5 – This soot clearly showed fullerenic nanostructure, large and small shells being readily evident, as marked in B10 – Several fullerenic nanostructures were apparent with different degrees of curvature at different depths throughout the particles. These were more prevalent than those generated with B5. An increased prevalence of smaller fullerenes was also noted. For both this soot and the B5 soot, the nanostructures were highly heterogeneous. Both fullerenic (highly curved) and graphitic (relatively straight) lamellae were evident. These disparate nanostructural geometries are an important component of our mechanistic hypothesis, as discussed below. B20 – Some fullerenic structures were still present but noticeably less frequent. Compared to the lower biodiesel content samples, the lamellae appear to be longer, and curvature is not prominent as with the B5 and B10 soots. Because of the extended lamellae, the nanostructure was also dissimilar to that of ULSD generated soot. The segregation between the graphitic ribbons towards the particle perimeter was much more apparent than for the other soots, with the particle showing a core–shell structure where the core consisted of disorganized carbon. B100 – This soot lacked graphitic and fullerenic nanostructure. The lamellae were short, often bordering on amorphous (<1 In summary there was a maximum of mixed nanostructure for the B5 and/or B10 soot samples. It has been reported that during thermal pyrolysis, even numbered carbon species dominate, beginning with acetylene In contrast to flat lamella, curvature requires C5 membered rings. As portions of curved units are delivered from the gas phase, curvature on the particle surface can begin. Addition of other species, e.g. C C5 formation from most hydrocarbon fuels is dependent upon partial oxidation for its formation and relatively few routes, highly specific, provide for its formation Current literature indicates that C5 is formed by partial oxidation by two routes. First, oxidative degradation or partial oxidation of the mixture will produce C1 and C3 species from paraffins Using a 1-D spray-mixing model to estimate the mixture fractions in ULSD and B100 fuel jets during a quasi-steady injection period, Genzale et al. generated both the stoichiometric mixture fraction and critical mixture fraction for soot formation as contours, depicted in Consistent with these calculations, as noted by Mueller et al., the critical mixture fraction for soot formation is higher for oxygen-carrying biodiesel fuels than for conventional diesels As for the B100 case, why is this not the most fullerenic nanostructure? With pure biodiesel, all the previously described processes should be maximized. While increased oxygen availability will decrease concentrations of growth species and increase chances for soot and C5 oxidation, beyond a certain limit, we hypothesize that high levels of oxygen availability can lower concentrations of critical species for C5 formation, resulting in loss of fullerenic nanostructure. We suggest that this is the reason for the absence of curvature in the HRTEM of B100 soot shown in By both inhibiting the formation of and promoting the oxidation of soot precursors, fuel-borne oxygen can decrease the soot concentration within the burning fuel plume Though seemingly unrelated, both NO In summary, the levels of soot nanostructural tortuosity and fullerenic structure observed in this study are roughly correlated to biodiesel blend level. This implies that changes in nanostructure may aid in diagnosing important changes in fuel–air mixing associated with biodiesel fueling. Our observations also appear consistent with the established effects of biodiesel on key diesel combustion characteristics such as ignition time delay, lift-off, and flame length. We hypothesize that a primary chemical factor involved in the formation of the observed nanostructural features is the relative amount of C5 precursors present during soot formation. Many diesel combustion strategies have focused upon methods that enhance partial premixing to realize increases in power while minimizing emissions by requiring less fuel and/or lowering temperature. Complimentary to these efforts are studies using oxygenated fuels or additives, which seek to modify fuel chemistry to reduce emissions. Observations here indicate that fuel chemistry might indeed be combined synergistically with in-cylinder fluid mixing to achieve better pre-mixing and reduced emissions. More specifically, fuel oxygenation might be used to promote soot with a more reactive nanostructure. We expect that more reactive soot will tend to be more completely consumed downstream, as long as the soot surface is sufficiently accessible to oxidizer penetration. This work was funded by DOE OVT under contract with Oak Ridge National Laboratory. The authors acknowledge the support of DOE Sponsors Gurpreet Singh, Ken Howden and Kevin Stork.