For the optimization of concrete mixture proportions, multiple objectives (e.g., strength, cost, slump) with many variables (e.g., concrete components) under highly nonlinear constraints need to be optimized simultaneously. The current single-objective optimization models are not applicable to multi-objective optimization (MOO). This study proposes an MOO method based on machine learning (ML) and metaheuristic algorithms to optimize concrete mixture proportions. First, the performances of different ML models in the prediction of concrete objectives are compared on data sets collected from the published literature. The winner is selected as the objective function for the optimization procedure. In the optimization step, a multi-objective particle swarm optimization algorithm is used to optimize mixture proportions to achieve optimal objectives. The results show that the backpropagation neural network has better performance on continuous data (e.g., strength), whereas the random forest algorithm has higher prediction accuracy on more discrete data (e.g., slump). The Pareto fronts of a bi-objective mixture optimization problem for high-performance concrete and a tri-objective mixture optimization problem for plastic concrete are successfully obtained by the MOO model. The MOO model can serve as a design guide to facilitate decision-making before the construction phase.Concrete mixture proportions are conventionally optimized by preparing laboratory trial batches. For instance, to achieve a designed uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), any amount of water, cement, aggregates, and admixtures can be selected to produce concrete samples for testing. This experimental-based method is feasible when there is only one objective (usually UCS) to be optimized. However, in most cases, multiple objectives (e.g., UCS, slump, cost) need to be optimized simultaneously. This will cause an exponential increase in the number of concrete samples to be prepared. Another problem is that experimental-based methods can obtain feasible solutions rather than optimal ones To address the limitations of these experimental-based methods, computational optimization based on machine learning and metaheuristic algorithms has been used to optimize concrete mixture proportions After the objective model is established, the next step is to optimize the mixture proportions using an optimization algorithm. Metaheuristic algorithms have been employed as optimization algorithms because they can solve complicated engineering problems with simple codes and high computational efficiency Therefore, the present study applies multi-objective particle swarm optimization (MOPSO) to optimize concrete mixture proportions. In the following sections, the development of the proposed MOO model will be introduced in As stated in the introduction section, ML algorithms are used as objective functions. Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is used to tune the hyperparameters of the ML algorithms. Backpropagation neural networks (BPNNs) are a popular type of artificial neural networks (ANNs). A BPNN includes one input layer, one output layer, and one or more hidden layers. During the training process, the computed output is compared with the actual output. The errors propagate back to adjust the thresholds and weights so as to improve the prediction accuracy of the BPNN The relationship between the input of a neuron and its output is written as The models perform linearly when operated within nominal parameters (not overdriven). The Purelin transfer function of Matlab ( Support vector regression (SVR) learns the complex relationship between input and output variables by using a kernel to map the data from the sample space into a higher-dimensional character space. SVR is widely employed because it has an outstanding generalization capability, a fast learning speed, and a good noise-tolerating ability Suppose a training data set of This function indicates that the training points within the Some errors are allowed sometimes, and therefore slack variables To address problems with constraints, Lagrange multipliers can be used as follows: In addition, the product between the constraints and the dual variables must be 0 based on the KKT condition at the optimal solution: By solving the above equations, the Lagrange dual problem can be derived as follows: The weight vector can be obtained as The regression tree (RT) algorithm splits the sample space into a set of subspaces, and in each subspace a simple RT model is fitted. If we assume that A random forest (RF) algorithm generates many decorrelated RTs in the training process. Each tree is grown in a randomly split subset from the training set The If The Euclidean distance Assume that Consider a training set Multiple linear regression (MLR) can learn the relationships between the input variables and the output variables using the following equation Particle swarm optimization (PSO) is applied to tune hyperparameters of the ML algorithms. PSO is a global optimization algorithm that was inspired by the behaviors of bird flocking and fish schooling in a swarm A small data set may cause overfitting issues. This problem can be addressed by introducing 10-fold cross-validation (CV) The following performance measures are applied to assessing the predictive performance of the proposed model. RMSE measures the difference between predicted and observed values using the following function  To solve the MOO problem, constraints must be set. The constraints can be divided into three categories It is relatively easy to find the global optimum of a single-objective optimization problem with one objective function by using simple operators. However, these operators cannot be applied to an MOO problem. The following definitions are commonly used to solve an MOO problem  Minimization problem: The minimization problem is defined as  Pareto dominance: Assume that  Pareto set and Pareto front: For a given MOP F(  Pareto optimal set: For a given MOP F(  Pareto optimal front: For a given MOP F( Traditionally, multi-objective problems are solved by converting multiple objectives into a single objective using the As described before, PSO is efficient in dealing with single-objective optimization problems. MOPSO was developed based on single PSO to solve MOO problems Concrete mixture optimization is an MOO problem, and hence it is necessary to introduce a multi-criteria decision analysis approach to obtain a final optimal solution from the Pareto front. To this end, the technique for order preference by similarity to an ideal solution (TOPSIS) is widely used A solution with the highest In this section, two cases are discussed: a bi-objective mixture optimization problem for high-performance concrete (HPC) and a tri-objective mixture optimization problem for plastic concrete. In the design of HPC mixtures, UCS is one of the basic mechanical parameters to be considered in design codes and standards. Another key consideration for proportioning HPC mixtures is that the cost must be as low as possible without compromising the UCS. The economic implications can be enormous in projects that require large amounts of concrete. Therefore, this study optimizes the UCS and cost objectives, i.e., to obtain the largest possible UCS with minimum cost. A widely used concrete data set from the machine learning repository of the University of California Irvine (UCI) ( The UCS of HPC is predicted using PSO-tuned ML models. The cost objective is calculated using a polynomial equation As mentioned earlier, range constraints, ratio constraints, and volume constraints are set. The range and ratio constraints are listed in As mentioned above, PSO is used to search for optimal hyperparameters of the ML algorithms. The RMSE versus iteration curves for the ML algorithms on the validation set at the best fold are plotted in The bi-objective mixture optimization results for HPC are shown in The TOPSIS score (closeness coefficient) obtained for each point on the Pareto front is shown in In many dewatering projects in civil engineering, such as reservoirs and dams, concrete cut-off walls are usually constructed to control water seepage It is known that the four basic components of concrete are cement, water, fine aggregate (sand in this study), and coarse aggregate (gravel in this study) The range constraints and ratio constraints used for the mixture optimization of plastic concrete are listed in The objective functions for UCS and slump are modeled using the ML models. The objective function of mixture cost is calculated by polynomial equations, as follows  For the tri-objective optimization problem, we aim to minimize the cost and maximize UCS and slump under the given constraints. Although optimization of concrete mixture proportions has been studied for several decades, laboratory-based experimental methods are still the main optimization methods. These methods are time- and resource-intensive and sometimes impossible to implement when multiple competing objectives need to be optimized and many influencing variables and highly nonlinear constraints need to be considered. Instead, multi-objective computational optimization methods based on machine learning and metaheuristic algorithms can automatically learn from a variety of experimental data and help design the mixture of concrete. In this study, a MOPSO model is used to balance the competing objectives of concrete, with ML models as the objective functions. BPNN is found to have higher prediction accuracy on continuous UCS data, whereas RF performs better on more discrete slump data. The Pareto optimal solutions of the bi-objective and tri-objective optimization problems can be successfully obtained using the MOO approach, which can serve as a guide for the optimal design of concrete before the construction phase. In future work, a highly accessible, continuously updated, and multinational database must be collected to increase the generalization ability of the MOO model for the mixture design of plastic concrete. In addition, we need to improve the prediction accuracy by incorporating other ML techniques, such as feature engineering and model comparison. In the final step, the MOO model needs to be incorporated into construction systems to facilitate the production of concrete during the early construction phase.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.