Recovery of rare earth elements (REEs) i.e. neodymium (Nd), dysprosium (Dy), and praseodymium (Pr) from waste permanent magnet (WPMs) leach liquor has been investigated using solvent extraction followed by hollow fiber supported liquid membrane (HFSLM). In the solvent extraction studies, optimum parameters have been obtained for 1 mol/L D2EHPA at pH 2 and 2 mol/L nitric acid for stripping agent. In the HFSLM system, the best percentage achieved at 90 minutes for neodymium, dysprosium, and praseodymium was 58.62 %, 98.46, and 85.59 %, as well as for the recovery 63.13 %, 15.21 %, and 56.29 %, respectively. In this study, the optimum transport rate was achieved at 90 minutes, the transport of rare earth’s ion follows the order was Nd > Pr > Dy. The highest transport and permeability coefficient of rare earths ion was achieved by neodymium with values of 0.0083 min−1 (R2>0.94) and 9.34 × 10-8cm s-1, respectively. According to the results, HFSLM system is a promising and feasible technique for the recovery of REEs and separation REEs from iron in WPMs leach liquor. HFSLM system was successfully applied in the lab-scale for the recycling of REEs from industrial waste materials.The rare-earth elements (REEs) have been increasingly crucial in the transition to a recycling economy, because of their major role in various advanced technologies [ The permanent magnet is ascertained as having a significant amount of REEs such as neodymium, dysprosium and praseodymium [ Currently, solvent extraction has been proved to be an efficient technique for the recovery and enrichment of metal ions [ Organophosphorus acid extractants are widely utilized in rare earths extraction [ Supported liquid membrane (SLM) was recognized as the most efficient membranes and advanced technology for the recovery of an element certain due to high selectivity, substantially less inventory of the organic phase, combine of extraction and stripping in one stage [ Currently, SLM advantages could lead to an intensification of the hydrometallurgical process was employed and very useful for expensive carriers like D2EHPA [ The WPMs leach liquor from previous study [ The experimental detail processes for dissolution of the WPMs sample under the optimized conditions were described in the previous study [ Solvent extraction was investigated using organophosphorus extractant viz. D2EHPA and Cyanex 272. Kerosene and isopar-L were used as diluents to required extractant concentrations. The required pH of the aqueous solution was adjusted using sodium hydroxide or sulfuric acid solution. Subsequently, the solution was measured by pH meter (SUNTEX SP-2300, 2018). The extraction of REEs was performed by mixing equal volumes of the aqueous phase and organic phase using an orbital shaking incubator (FIRSTEK S300R) at 300 rpm and temperature (25 ± 1 °C) for 20 min. The two phases solution were separated by means of a separation funnel. The temperature could set up and controlled by an orbital shaking incubator (FIRSTEK S300R). Stripping of element ions from the loaded organic phase was carried out using various mineral acid viz. hydrochloric acid, sulfuric acid, and nitric acid (1−4 mol/L). Stripping was carried out in shake flask with an equal volume of organic and aqueous phase using an orbital shaking incubator at 300 rpm and temperature (25 ± 1 °C) for 10 min. In the solvent extraction study, extraction efficiency (%E), distribution ratio (D), separation factor (β), Stripping ratio (St) are calculated in Eqs. The hollow fiber module was a Liqui-Cel® membrane contractor, Extra-Flow 2.5 × 8 (X-50 microporous hollow fiber membrane contactor purchased from Membrana (Charlotte, U.S.A.). The hollow fiber supported liquid system (HFSLM) consisted of two variable flow rate controllers, two gear pumps, four pressure gauges, two rotameters. The schematic diagram of single module HFSLM apparatus is shown in The transport experiments were carried out using hollow fiber supported liquid membrane (HFSLM). The HFSLM system consists of two mixing tanks; one for aqueous feed phase (waste permanent magnet leach liquor) and another tank for the strip phase contains organic solution (1 mol/L D2EHPA in isopar L) and a stripping agent (2 mol/L HNO RE ions extraction through HFSLM was facilitated by coupling counter-transport using an extractant. The organic extractant dissolved in the organic solvent is stuck in the hydrophobic micropores of hollow fibers as the liquid membrane. The rare earth ions in the aqueous feed and the aqueous stripping are commonly fed counter-currently in HFSLM tube and shell sides, respectively. As shown in Afterwards, due to the concentration gradient between the two interfaces, the complex species diffuses across the liquid membrane phase to the liquid membrane-stripping interface. Later on, the stripping reaction takes place as in Eq. The rate of mass transfer via the liquid membrane can be described by the permeability times the driving force for extraction, which relies on both sides of the membrane concentration. If the driving force is high, only the concentration in the feed phase suffices to describes the process [ C In this study, the recovery percentage of REEs was calculated based on the following equation: The influences of pH on REEs extraction are shown in In the pH range of 1–1.5, the REEs extraction slightly decreases for the extractants in isopar-L. The extraction behavior of LREEs with organophosphorus acid extractants was almost similar to each other but different to the extraction behavior of HREEs. The extraction of HREEs was higher than LREEs. The optimum pH for REEs extraction was occured at pH 2 is D2EHPA in isopar-L as optimum extractant due to its lower extraction of iron as the impurity (less than 60 %). Whereas, Cyanex 272 in its diluents was accomplished more than 60 % of iron extraction (this extraction exceeded REEs extraction). The optimum extractions achieved by D2EHPA in isopar-L at pH 2 of Nd, Dy and Pr were 72.5 %, 81.8 %, and 73.7 %, respectively. The reliance of extraction efficiency of rare earths on the value of pH may be associated with the changes of H Commonly, rare earths ion extraction from aqueous media by cation exchange extractants such as D2EHPA and Cyanex 272 in Eq. RE denotes any elements and A is the organic anion. However, the extraction process is more arduous as the acidic extractants as dimers in non-polar organic solutions and the rare earth complexes formed during extraction may contain undissociated organic molecule as given in Eq. The extraction of REEs from WPMs leach liquor was conducted by ion exchange mechanism. The graphical method was used for identification of REEs solvent extraction reaction. The slope of plots of the logarithmic distribution ratio of REEs versus pH relates to the number of hydrogen ions involved in the exchange reaction. The plots of Log D The distribution ratios of REEs increase as the pH of aqueous phase increases. This is associated with the cationic activity of the extractants and exhibits that REEs are extracted by a cation-exchange process whereby hydrogen ions are released by the reaction [ REEs were extracted by varying the concentrations of organophosphorus acid from 0.25 to 1 mol/L. The extraction experiments were carried out using O/A ratio of 1:1 at temperature of ± 25 °C for 20 min at pH 2. The influences of extractant concentration on the extraction of REEs are depicted in D2EHPA might be feasible for the recovery of REEs from WPMs leach liquor by dint of the REEs extraction being higher than element impurity than when using Cyanex 272 at the same time conditions. The result of present study as also in accordance with the previous study which revealed that D2EHPA is the most effective and propitious extractants for recycling of magnet REEs [ The sequence of extraction of between dysprosium as HREEs and LREEs such as neodymium and praseodymium follows the atomic number, which can be explained by considering the ionic radii and charge density of dysprosium, neodymium, and praseodymium. The ionic radius of dysprosium is smaller than that of neodymium and praseodymium due to the lanthanide contraction [ As shown in Furthermore, the extraction of REEs can be expressed based on the high chloride concentration in the aqueous phase was depicted in Eq. In the present study, the slope value is 1, these indicates the scheme of REEs chelate formation is The loaded organic phase achieved in cases of optimum extraction of REEs was carried out for stripping with various mineral acids viz. sulfuric acid (H The HFSLM system was conducted after optimization of experimental variables from quantitative recovery of REEs in solvent extraction. 1 mol/L D2EHPA in isopar-L with pH 2 of WPMs leach liquor have been chosen to REEs recovery by HFSLM system. The aqueous feed contains 2707 mg/L neodymium, 155 mg/L dysprosium, 857 mg/L praseodymium, and 5991 mg/L iron as impurity. Different behaviors were observed for rare earth ions. As shown in Hollow fiber supported liquid membrane system was found to be an appropriate process for the simultaneous extraction and recovery of REEs from WPMs leach liquor. As can be seen in As shown in Solvent extraction and hollow fiber supported liquid membrane (HFSLM) have been applied and investigated for simultaneous extraction and recovery of rare earth elements (REEs) from waste permanent magnets (WPMs) leach liquor. In the solvent extraction method, D2EHPA in isopar-L was obviously proven to have the best extraction capacity for REEs in WPMs leach liquor under all experimental conditions. 1 mol/L D2EHPA in isopar-L at initial pH of 2 was selected for REEs extraction. Dysprosium, neodymium, and praseodymium extraction was achieved at 81.55 %, 83.5 % and 87.93, respectively with the iron extraction approximately at 56.67 %. It is concluded that D2EHPA diluted with isopar-L is more selective to be used as an extractant for REEs recovery from WPMs leach liquor. The REEs extraction mechanism by slope analysis depicts that one molecule D2EHPA as extractant is involved in the solvent extraction of one molecule for each REEs. The stripping of REEs loaded organic phase was observed by utilizing 2 mol/L nitric acid which was the best concentration for stripping. In the HFSLM system, the extraction of neodymium, dysprosium, and praseodymium in the aqueous feed within 90 min was obtained at 58.62 %, 98.46 %, and 85.59 %, respectively. Whereas, neodymium, dysprosium, and praseodymium recovery were obtained 63.13 %, 15.21 %, and 56.29 %, respectively without co-extraction of iron elements as an impurity. The chemical reactions rate of neodymium, dysprosium, and praseodymium was calculated 0.0083 min The study was financially supported E