Catalytic decomposition of tar is a novel technology to clean the gas produced by biomass gasification. The purpose of the present research work was to develop strong and porous pellets of dolomite catalyst for tar decomposition. Porous dolomite pellets of 3 mm in diameter and 4 mm in height were prepared with dolomite, carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC) and clay. The mechanical strength, the pore rate and the catalytic effect of porous dolomite pellets on decomposition of acetic acid were investigated. When the clay/dolomite mass ratio was 0.4 and the CMC/dolomite mass ratio was 0.2, the porous dolomite pellets had a mechanical strength of 15 N and a pore rate of 0.75 cm3 g−1. The pore size had approximately a normal distribution in the range of 0.06–200 μm. Under the condition of gas residence time at 7.5 s and bed temperature at 800 °C, 99.7 wt% of acetic acid was decomposed over the porous dolomite pellets, but only 36.5 wt% of acetic acid was decomposed with natural dolomite particles. It was indicated that the porous dolomite pellets were much more effective than the natural dolomite particles for catalyzing the decomposition of tar to gas.Recently, biomass has been studied as a potential energy source, because the energy shortage and the environmental problems caused by the use of fossil fuels become more and more severe. Gasification technologies are used to convert biomass to fuel gas by heating it in a gasification medium such as air, oxygen, or steam. The product gas can be used in many fields, such as the generation of heat or electricity, and the synthesis of liquid fuels and chemicals Although the main components of the gas produced are H The tar content must be reduced before the produced gas is further processed. Among the usual methods to reduce the tar content such as decomposition, filtration and scrub, decomposition is a more attractive approach, because it has the potential to increase the total energy efficiency of gasification, and simultaneously eliminate the need for the collection and disposal of tar In the tar decomposition process, dolomite is often used as a catalyst, because of its high catalytic activity, low cost, and large amount of storage in the earth in comparison with alkali metals and nickel, etc Tar is a complex mixture of a large number of compounds, including acids, aldehydes, alcohols, ketones, substituted furans derived from cellulose and hemi-cellulose, and phenolic and cyclic oxygenates derived from lignin. The water phase of tar contains 17.8% of acetic acid The present research work was carried out to make strong and porous pellets of dolomite catalyst for the tar decomposition in biomass gasification process. Porous dolomite pellets were prepared with dolomite, clay and carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC). Effects of CMC/dolomite mass ratio on mechanical strength and pore rate in the porous dolomite pellets were investigated. Catalytic effect of the porous dolomite pellets on acetic tar decomposition was evaluated using acetic acid as a model compound, in comparison with that of natural dolomite particles. Porous dolomite pellets were prepared following the procedure of mixing, molding, drying and calcining A small-scale extruder (TBL-2, Baiyang Chemical Engineering Experimental Equipment Co. in Tianjin University, China) was used to make cylindrical pellets of 3 mm in diameter and 4 mm in height. The pellets were dried at the room temperature for 12 h followed by calcination at 900 °C for 4 h under air atmosphere. Carbonates, the main components of dolomite, were converted to oxides, and the CMC was removed during the calcinations. Mechanical strength, pore size distribution and pore rate of the prepared porous dolomite pellets were measured. A particle hardness tester (GWJ-1, Hangzhou Tuopu Instrument Co., Ltd., China) was used to measure the mechanical strength. Each pellet sample was compressed in its axial direction, and the force required to destroy the pellet sample was recorded. The mechanical strength was determined by averaging the compression forces of 20 pellet samples. An automatic mercury porosimeter (Poromaster GT-60, Quantachrome, USA) was used for measuring the pore size distribution and the pore rate. Mercury pressure varied in the range of 9.65 kPa–159 MPa at the room temperature. Acetic acid in liquid phase (purity > 99.5%, Shantou Xilong Chemicals, China) was used as a model compound to investigate the catalytic effect of the porous dolomite pellets on tar decomposition. Experimental apparatus used for the catalytic decomposition of acetic acid is shown in Acetic acid was fed into the reactor with a peristaltic pump (BT50-1J, Baoding Longer Precision Pump Co., Ltd., China). The feeding rate was controlled at 1 mL min The yield of each gas component, The yield of total product gas was expressed by the summation of the yields of all gas components. On the other hand, the coke yield, Mechanical strength of the porous dolomite pellets is shown in As shown in Roughly, pore size in the porous dolomite pellets followed a normal distribution. For the porous dolomite pellets with a CMC/dolomite mass ratio of 0.2, the pore size distributed in the range of 0.06–200 μm ( Natural dolomite particles usually have micropores of 0.9–4 nm in diameter and a pore rate of 0.34–0.41 cm The changes of H The decomposition of acetic acid over the porous dolomite pellets was affected by the gas residence time ( The yields of total product gas and coke in acetic acid decomposition over the natural dolomite particles and the porous dolomite pellets are compared in The yields of each gas component in acetic acid decomposition over the two different catalysts are shown in The decomposition reaction of acetic acid could be expressed as follows: In addition, a series of reactions also occur It can be assumed that there are three stages in the decomposition reaction of acetic acid over catalysts, i.e., (1) diffusion of the acetic acid from the main gas stream to the external surface and then to the internal pores, (2) reactions on the external and internal surfaces, and (3) diffusion of the produced gas from the external and internal surfaces to the main gas stream. The catalytic activity increases with increasing of pore size and internal surface area, when the pore size is larger than 0.7 nm in diameter Although all of the tests in the present research work have been conducted with the cylindrical pellets of 3 mm in diameter and 4 mm in length, practical methods are available to make pellets of various sizes. The catalytic activity will increase with decreasing pellet size, since smaller pellets have larger specific surface area and lower resistance to gas diffusion within the pellets. Large pellets may be more suited to either fixed bed or moving bed reactors, while small pellets would normally be used in fluidized bed reactors.  The porous dolomite pellets of 3 mm in diameter and 4 mm in height had a mechanical strength of 15 N and a pore rate of 0.75 cm In the decomposition of acetic acid over the porous dolomite pellets, the yield of total product gas increased with increasing gas residence time and bed temperature at first, and then became constant when the gas residence time was longer than 7.5 s and the bed temperature was higher than 800 °C. A high yield of total product gas meant a low yield of coke. Under the condition of gas residence time at 7.5 s and bed temperature at 800 °C, 99.7 wt% of acetic acid was decomposed over the porous dolomite pellets, but only 36.5 wt% of acetic acid was decomposed over the natural dolomite particles, indicating that the porous dolomite pellets were more effective than the natural dolomite particles in catalyzing of tar decomposition to gas. This research project was financially supported by the