Joint waviness is one of the important parameters of joint that need to be considered in civil and mining engineering design of structures built in or on jointed rock masses. However, this parameter is often overlooked by designers. In this study the mechanical properties of laboratory scale jointed granite with both planar and non-planar joints of different joint configurations are investigated using the lattice-spring-based synthetic rock mass (LS-SRM) modeling approach. Jointed granite models are calibrated using the laboratory test results and the calibrated lattice model parameters are used to perform both conventional triaxial and true triaxial compression tests. In addition, the influences of joint orientation, intensity, and persistence on the strength and deformability of jointed granite with both planar and non-planar joints are investigated. The simulation results show that the strength and deformation modulus of the jointed rock decrease with the increase of joint intensity and persistence. The strength and deformation modulus of the jointed rock are higher for the ones with non-planar joints. Under the true triaxial loading condition, the strength and deformation modulus of the jointed granite depend strongly on the magnitude and orientation of the intermediate principal stress.Rock masses are heterogeneous and anisotropic materials mainly because of the existence of pre-existing joints and the estimation of mechanical properties of jointed rock mass is very challenging. Because large-scale testing of rock masses is not feasible, often the mechanical properties of rock masses are estimated using laboratory triaxial test results while taking into account the jointing factor based on some rock mass classification systems such as Rock Quality Designation (RQD), Most previous experimental studies have been conducted to investigate the strength and deformability of rock-like materials. The influence of roughness or waviness on the strength and deformability of jointed rocks can be accounted by increasing the effective joint friction angle without explicitly integrating the non-planar joints in SRM models. Alejano et al. In this paper, the laboratory test results are simulated using the lattice-spring-based synthetic rock mass (LS-SRM) modeling approach and the tool used is SRMTools of Itasca. In a LS-SRM model, intact rock is represented as a random assembly of lattice nodes that are connected to each other with massless springs in 3D space. The formulation of the lattice spring model in SRMTools is similar to the bonded particle model in PFC In LS-SRM models, pre-existing joints can be incorporated as smooth joint contacts into the lattice assembly. The spatial orientation of the lattice springs through which a pre-existing joint passes is the same as that of the joint, and these springs are also called joint springs. In addition, SRMTools can represent the realistic geometry of a natural undulating joint easily. The mechanical response of a jointed rock is the emergent behavior caused by the interaction of the resultant force and the displacements of joint springs and intact lattice springs. The lattice spring modeling approach is efficient in terms of computational time because it is formulated in small strain, which does not require contact detection and updating as in other Discrete Element Method (DEM) models. Unlike other DEM modeling approaches, calibration of some micro-property parameters is not required in the lattice code because some calibration factors are built-in and most of the desired macroscopic properties can be provided as direct model inputs. In this study, mechanical properties of jointed granite with different joint configurations are investigated using the LS-SRM modeling approach under unconfined and confined compressions. Confined compression tests are conducted under both conventional triaxial and true triaxial loading conditions. Both the intact rock model and the jointed granite models with planar joints are calibrated using the laboratory triaxial test results. LS-SRM models are constructed based on the information reported in the laboratory triaxial test results of intact and jointed Blanco Mera granite Each synthetic rock model is 100 × 50 × 50 mm The spacings of the vertical and horizontal joints in Model C ( Planar joints are generated using the joint set builder in SRMTools and non-planar joints are generated using MoFrac, a 3D discrete fracture network modeling software developed by MIRARCO, Laurentian University, Canada. The specimens are loaded axially using the displacement-control loading mode (i.e., constant velocity). Vertical and lateral confining forces are applied simultaneously during a triaxial test simulation. Vertical force, vertical displacement, lateral displacement, and the number of cracks is recorded in all numerical simulations. The axial stress is calculated based on the total reaction forces acting on the specimen's top or bottom surface. To calibrate a model efficiently, it is essential to quantify the influence of model parameters on the macro-mechanical properties. Because SRMTools has fewer micro-parameters compared with other DEM codes, the calibration procedure is less complicated. In this study, spherical-shaped lattice with a resolution of 0.2 cm is used, which results in 25 lattices in the shortest dimension (50 mm) of the synthetic specimen. All LS-SRM models have a lattice size and a flat joint radius multiplier of 0.2 cm and 0.9, respectively, and are subjected to a loading rate of 0.01 m/s. The calibrated lattice parameters for both the intact and the jointed granite are based on the extensive sensitivity studies conducted by Bastola and Cai. As mentioned in Section Calibration of the intact Blanco Mera granite is performed by carrying out direct tension ( The lattice model parameters of the calibrated macro-mechanical model are shown in The goal of calibration is to capture the peak confined compressive strength ( A series of triaxial test simulations are performed using Models A and B with planar persistent joints under 1.0, 2.0, 4.0, 6.0, 10.0, and 12.0 MPa confining pressures. Model parameters used in both models (A and B) are the same. Under the confined condition, the synthetic jointed rock models show a degradation in both strength and deformation modulus with the increase of the number of joints, which is in agreement with the laboratory test results. The peak strengths and deformation moduli of both jointed rocks (Models A and B) decrease with the increase of the degree of jointing. The Hoek–Brown (H–B) ( For the jointed granite Models A and B, the deformation modulus In the laboratory triaxial test, the failure of the (2 + 3) jointed granite was accompanied with irregular cracking of the rock blocks, crushing of the block corners, and sliding along the pre-existing joints. Rock joints have a large influence on the strength and deformation properties of the jointed rock mass as shown in One of the most important characteristics of joints is their orientations relative to each other or other geological structures in underground excavations or slopes. Joints are often classified based on their orientations because geological processes usually generate one or more clusters of nearly parallel joints in a rock mass. The simulated triaxial test results are summarized in To quantify the influence of joint orientation on rock strength, empirical relations are derived among The normalized deformation modulus ( A comparison of the ( Joint intensity, which is measured by joint spacing or frequency, is another important parameter that influences rock mass strength and deformation behavior. In this section, the influence of joint density on the strength and deformability of jointed rocks is investigated using Models A, B, C, and D as shown in The simulated triaxial test results show that both the peak strength ( The influence of Similarly, a bi-variate relation between In most geotechnical investigations and numerical modeling, a joint is often idealized as a planar surface. However, rock joint surfaces are wavy and undulating in their natural states. If joints are smooth and planar, blocks can slide easily under small external forces. Joint surface asperities cause interlocking of blocks, resulting in a high load bearing capacity of the jointed rock mass, which may reduce the demand on rock support. Thus, it is important to quantify the stiffness and strength of rock masses with non-planar joints. To investigate the influence of joint waviness on the strength and deformation behaviors of jointed rock masses, four models two with planar joints (Models A & B; The triaxial compression test simulation results show that when the joint spacing is smaller, the strengths of the jointed rock model with non-planar joints (Model F) are higher than that of the model with planar joints (Model B) ( However, in the models with a larger joint spacing, the peak strength is less sensitive to the change of joint surface condition. For instance, in the case of Models A and E, the peak strengths of the models with planar and non-planar joints are similar. In comparison, in the case of Models B and F with a smaller joint spacing, the peak strength of the model with non-planar joints is 18% higher than that with planar joints. This could be attributed to the relative loss of cohesion and strength for models with more joints. As a result, any contribution of interlocking can increase the strength of jointed rocks significantly. The Joint persistence is of great importance for many rock-related engineering applications because it affects both the rock mass strength and the deformation modulus. In this section the influence of joint persistence on the mechanical properties of jointed rocks is investigated using the constructed jointed rock models with both planar and non-planar joints. Five jointed rock models with planar joints (Models B, K, L, M, and N; see The triaxial compression test simulation results show that both The percentage changes of The influence of joint persistence on the strength of jointed rocks with planar joints is quantified by deriving a bi-variate relation between Similarly, the influence of joint persistence on the deformability of the jointed rocks with planar joints is quantified by deriving a bi-variate relation between A rock mass in the field is under a true triaxial (σ In this section, the mechanical response of the jointed Blanco Mera granite is investigated numerically under the true triaxial loading condition. True triaxial compression tests are conducted on the same LS-SRM models (Models B and F; The modeling results show that the peak strengths (σ The ratio The cracking mechanism is also influenced by the relative orientation of σ Mechanical behaviors of laboratory scale jointed granite with different joint configurations (orientation, intensity, waviness, and persistence) under triaxial compression are investigated using the LS-SRM modeling approach. Strength and deformability of the jointed rocks are highly depended on the orientation, intensity, waviness, and persistence of the joints. The modeling results show that the strength and deformation modulus of jointed granites are lower than these of the intact granite. Jointed granites exhibit a U-shaped strength curve with the increase of joint dip from 35° to 67° and the deformation modulus increases non-linearly with the increase of joint dip. In addition, both the strength and deformation modulus decrease with the increase of joint intensity and persistence. The results from this numerical investigation are reasonably consistent with the laboratory test results. Compared with other numerical modeling approaches, the LS-SRM modeling approach is computationally efficient and it is easy to consider intersecting and non-planar joints in the models. Furthermore, model parameter calibration is simpler and more straightforward compared with other DEM codes. Although the cross-sectional shape of the synthetic specimens is square because of the limitation of SRMTools, this approach provides new avenues in the investigation of mechanical properties of jointed rocks with non-planar joints. Using an appropriate scaling approach, these findings could be extended to studying the mechanical properties of jointed rock masses with realistic non-planar joints and assessing the stability of structures built in or on jointed rock masses. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors would like to thank Ontario Trillium Scholarship for supporting the doctorate program at Laurentian University. Financial supports from the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at