Flotation is a common physico-chemical solid-liquid separation technology. It is applied in classical fields like minerals processing, pulp deinking and wastewater treatment and novel fields like biotechnology. The success of flotation is influenced by flotation key parameters. The aim of this study was to present a set of small-scale screening methods for the key flotation parameters particle size, particle hydrophobicity, bubble size and direct particle-bubble interaction. Experiments were performed with the model microorganism S. cerevisiae. Flotation was done in complex fermentation media and in isotonic saline, at varying pH and after flocculant addition. The goal, to combine small-scale laboratory methods to explain, predict and optimize yeast flotation results was achieved. Combining the methods can be used prospectively for wide screening of potential flotation additives, such as collectors, frothers and flocculants and to optimize microorganism floatability.Recovery Flotation [–] microorganism concentration at time t [m flotation rate constant [min bubble surface area flow [m flotation probability [–] adsorption probability [–] collision probability [–] desorption probability [–] recycle volume flow [L/h] gas volume flow [NL/h] flow condition term in flow condition exponent in flotation basin area [m bubble surface area (single bubble) [m bubble volume (single bubble) [m superficial gas velocity [m/s] bubble Sauter mean diameter [m] bubble radius [m] particle Sauter mean diameter [m] Reynolds number [–] relative bubble rising velocity [m/s] bubble number frequency distribution [–] bubble sum frequency distribution [–] pressure in the saturation tank [barg] flotation batch volume [L] adhesion energy barrier [J] kinetic energy of collision [J] adhesion force [nN] Debye Length [nm] Euler’s number [–] Waddel disc diameter Particle Sauter Mean Diameter Bubble Sauter Mean Diameter Dissolved Air Flotation Induced Air Flotation Bubble Size Analyzer Yeast-Malt-Broth Derjaguin, Landau, Verwey, Overbeek forces Flotation is a promising technology for separation of products from fermentation liquid in biotechnological processes ( In the last decades, downstream processing by flotation was mostly performed with algae ( Early flotation models consider flotation as direct bubble-particle interaction and to depend on three sub-processes: collision, adhesion and detachment ( For fine particles With laminar and intermediate flow conditions, Reay and Ratcliff verified experimentally that n equals 2, so Bubble-particle adhesion will occur when the sliding time of a particle on the bubble surface is longer than the induction time It is based on the particle With the bubble surface area flow rate Based on flotation models, it is possible to declare the key parameters for flotation. The flotation rate constant varies with generated bubble size, bubble surface area flow and hydrodynamics, which can be optimized by setting the right operational parameters. It also depends on the physicochemical properties of the system, which influence particle and bubble size, particle hydrophobicity and particle-bubble interaction forces. There are additional challenges in bio-based flotation compared to the classical application fields. One of them is the small size of microorganisms, with 1–10 µm, which reduces their probability of collision with and adhesion to bubbles. It can be addressed positively by flocculation, because it increases the size of particles meanwhile reducing their number. Another one is that the hydrophobicity of biological material, such as microorganisms, can strongly vary depending on the microorganism strain, the growth conditions and the age of a microorganism. One goal of this study was to find small-scale laboratory procedures for the analysis of the flotation key parameters described and to explain their influence on the flotation rate constant. In the experimental setup, different chemical compositions were chosen for flotation of the model organism: protein-rich Yeast-Malt-Broth (YMB) and isotonic saline without protein (NaCl in water solution), both at different pH values and YMB with the addition of the flocculant chitosan. A second objective was to develop a flotation model, based on these analyzed key parameters, to be able to optimize and predict microorganism flotation results. The floatability of yeast is well known and documented. Consequently, it was chosen as the model organism for the underlying study ( Yeast flocculation was performed with Chitosan, since its flocculation effectiveness is well reported in literature ( A sketch of the flotation setup and the bubble size analysis device, used in this work, is shown in The decrease in yeast particle concentration over time was analyzed via a photometer at wavelength of 600 nm (optical density, OD The exponential decrease in yeast concentration, as a function of flotation time (Eq. We developed and validated the Bubble Size Analyzer (BSA) in a previous work ( A Master Sizer 2000 (Malvern Instruments, UK) was used for particle size analysis. Its measurement principle is laser diffraction. The detection limit ranges from 20 nm to 2 mm. Sample dilution, to 0.01 of the initial concentration, was necessary, to allow for laser diffraction measurements and was done with YMB or saline, depending on the initial suspension. The result is displayed as volume frequency distribution of the particle size, given as Waddle Disc Diameter (WDD), which is the diameter of a circle with the equivalent projection area as the analyzed particle or floc. The particle size distribution was summarized by the particle Sauter mean diameter PSDM. Particle sizes were analyzed in YMB and NaCl after pH adjustments and in YMB after flocculation with Chitosan. Cell-wall hydrophobicity plays an important role for cell-to-bubble-adhesion and for cell-to-cell-adhesion. It is a result of the relative amounts of chemical groups present on the microbial cell-wall. Microbial adhesion to hydrocarbons (MATH) is a method to determine microbial cell surface hydrophobicity. The degree of hydrophobicity is determined by the partitioning of cells in a two-phase system water/organic solvent. MATH measures an interplay of hydrophobicity and electrostatic interactions on the cell surface ( The MATH test procedure is as follows. 3 mL aqueous yeast suspension (yeast in YMB or NaCl) with start concentration of The role of cell-wall hydrophobicity in the flotation process and the choice of the best method to measure it are discussed controversial in literature ( Hydrophobic particle surfaces cause hydrophobic attraction and allow for particle-bubble attachment. Flotation is not only influenced by cell-wall hydrophobicity, but also by properties such as liquid viscosity, liquid density and direct bubble-particle interaction: electrostatic forces, dipole-dipole forces and steric interactions ( Colloidal probe technology allows for measurements of direct particle-bubble interaction by analysis of forces between a particle, that is attached to a cantilever, and a surface or second particle. The colloidal probe technology was introduced in 1991. Butt glued glass spheres onto cantilevers while Ducker et al. used silica spheres ( Quantifying direct particle-bubble interaction forces is crucial for understanding and increasing particle-bubble attachment. Therefore, Ditscherlein et al. adapted the colloidal probe technology to analyse direct microorganism-bubble interplay ( The microorganism-bubble adhesion force and Debye length are analyzed with MFP-3D (Asylum Research, Oxford Instruments, United Kingdom) on an inverted light microscope DSX510i (Olympus K.K., Japan). The MFP-3D is equipped with a fluid cell and operated in a climate-controlled laboratory (Temperature of 23 °C). All-in-One tipless Si-cantilevers with alumina reflex coating (BudgetSensors® Innovative Solutions Bulgaria Ltd., Bulgaria) were chosen with a typical resonant frequency of 15 kHz and a spring constant of 0.2 N/m. Cantilever hydrophobization, by using a silane solution (Dynasylan® F8261 of evonik Industries AG), was necessary for a stronger attachment of the bubble to the cantilever in aqueous solution. Adhesion force and Debye length were analyzed in YMB after pH adjustments with hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide. From the microorganism-bubble interaction force maps, the Debye length The adhesion force To calculate the probability of adhesion, after Yoon, it is necessary to have a value for the induction time. Since we did not determine the induction time As an alternative equation for the probability of adhesion, The probability of direct flotation Once the probability of flotation The influence of varying pH and different flocculant amounts on the flotation key parameters and consequently on the flotation rate constant was analyzed. It is discussed if small scale flotation key parameter analysis allows for explanation of varying flotation performances. The experiments were performed with yeast suspended in two media at different pH, to analyze the influence of physicochemical condition on the flotation relevant parameters. The flotation setup was operated under standard conditions.  The flotation rate of yeast, The influence of the pH of yeast particle size in YMB and NaCl is shown in Because of the energetic advantage, the native globular structure of a protein causes hydrophilic patches to be on the outside and in direct contact with the aqueous media and the most hydrophobic patches to be in the core of the protein ( Adhesion force and Debye length, given in The only analyzed key parameter, that does not seem to be influenced by changing pH was the bubble size. As shown in The BSA software algorithm can detect and correctly calculate the size of overlapping bubbles, due to the Hough transform algorithm ( Denaturized proteins, with high affinity to the bubble surface, could have increased the probability of yeast adsorption and have functioned as a collector for yeast cells. Their presence also caused the generation of big bubble-protein-yeast agglomerates. Complexes which contained up to 50 bubbles, compared to those which only contained up to 5 bubbles, had higher equivalent diameters and therefore highly increased buoyancy. Sufficient buoyancy is an important micro process for successful flotation and influences flotation rates and could have supported the flotation in YMB at low pH. This could be a reason, why the flotation rate in YMB at pH 2 is almost as high as at pH 3, even though the hydrophobicity and adhesion force is significantly lower. In NaCl the increased particle size at pH 2 probably caused the flotation rate to be as high as at pH 3, since it increased the particle collision probability. Between pH 5 and pH 8 in YMB, the flotation rate was decreased by factor 8, from 0.120 min Further experiments were performed to examine the effect of flocculated cells on flotation rate. It is documented in literature, that yeast and other microorganisms can be flocculated with Chitosan ( In The flotation model of Yoon et al suggests, that the flotation rate is increased proportional with The mode of action of the flocculant chitosan can be explained by the combination of the analyzed key parameters. The flocculant addition increased the flotation rate just by increasing particle size, since bubble size and hydrophobicity remained constant. It was tested if the experimental determined flotation rate constants The deviations between the experimental flotation rate The flotation model shows good agreement and could be used prospectively to investigate the impact of key parameters on the flotation dynamic. As model extension, it would be possible to combine the flotation kinetics with a CFD-model (computational fluid dynamics) of the flotation apparatus and to consider flow conditions on high spatial resolution for flotation dynamics. The goal to find a set of analysis methods for flotation key parameters, which would allow for better understanding the mode of action and for finding optimization possibilities in microorganism flotation, was achieved. The influence of chemical variations in the flotation suspension, on the flotation rate and the flotation key parameters were analyzed. Experiments were performed with the model microorganism yeast and performed in two suspensions, complex fermentation broth (YMB) and in isotonic saline (NaCl). Known effective chemical alterations, such as different pH and addition of the flocculant Chitosan were tested. Flotation results were compared with the key parameter results bubble size, particle size, particle hydrophobicity, Debye length and adhesion force. The key parameter analysis methods uncovered the flotation optimization potential and mode of action of the additives with regard to flotation rate. The smaller bubble sizes in YMB, compared to NaCl, had a positive effect on the flotation rate, especially since particle sizes in YMB were also higher and both caused higher probability of collision and attachment. Increased particle size, induced by lowering pH (analyzed in YMB and NaCl) and by Chitosan addition (analyzed in YMB) had a strong positive influence on the flotation rate. A significant change in hydrophobicity as a consequence of pH alteration was only registered in YMB. In NaCl comparatively little hydrophobicity alterations were measured. This correlated very well with the trend of the flotation rate, which increased towards lower pH (<5) but decreased towards higher pH (>5). Again, the trend is far less pronounced in saline than in YMB. Within YMB, additional protein was available and might have played a role in the strong hydrophobic shift, because of conformational change and adsorption on cells and bubbles. The analysis of direct bubble-particle interaction in YMB confirmed the hydrophobicity results in YMB with a minimal Debye length at pH 3 and a maximal Debye length at pH 8, along with minimal adhesion force at pH 8. Taking all these parameters into account, the strongest influence on flotation rate by pH variation was caused by an increase in hydrophobicity of the yeast surface. This resulted in bigger particles, higher probability of particle-bubble adsorption, lower probability of particle-bubble desorption and after all it increased the flotation rate. The agglomeration of small cells to bigger flocs, triggered by flocculant addition, also had a strong influence. This became evident from experiments, where all parameters, but particle size, were kept constant. The growth in particle size by factor 3.6 caused an increase in flotation rate by factor 4.4. Thanks to the integration of the hydrophobicity value in the flotation model and the optimized term for the probability of adhesion, the small-scale laboratory analysis methods could be used prospectively to test and predict the flotation dynamic of particles in fermentation broths. These particles could be microorganisms or other media components, such as proteins, enzymes or inclusion bodies (after cell rupture). The flotation key parameter analysis methods could also be used to detect the most effective parameter modifications and to optimize the process. Plus, they would allow for wide screening of interesting flotation additives, such as collectors, frothers and flocculants, in small quantities. Based on the analyzed key parameters, prediction of the flotation kinetics with the flotation model would possible. Further work could combine CFD with flotation modeling to achieve the best fit between theoretical and experimental flotation rates. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The authors thank Patrick Graefen for the development of the