Cold brewing of rooibos tea has gained popularity, in particular in Japan, one of its major markets, due to the convenience of preparation. The sensory profile of traditional (‘fermented’) rooibos, prepared by regular brewing (5 min infused in freshly-boiled water) and served hot, is well described. However, no sensory profiling of cold-brewed rooibos tea, rooibos tea served at ambient temperature, or green rooibos tea has been performed to date. In this study, the sensory profile of both fermented and green rooibos prepared by cold brewing (8 h at ≤5 °C), regular hot brewing and boiling (5 min), and consumed at ambient temperature (21 °C), were investigated. ‘Rooibos woody’ and ‘fynbos-floral’ aroma notes of fermented rooibos were unaffected by brewing procedure, but its cold brew was sweeter and less astringent than the other brews. The sensory profile of green rooibos, dominated by a ‘hay/dried grass’ aroma, bitter taste and astringency, was affected to a greater extent by brewing procedure, but mostly, cold and regular brews had similar aroma attribute intensities. Higher levels of flavonoids may explain the trends for astringency. Fe and Al were present in the highest levels in boiled brews, although at levels too low to impact on health.Sugar-sweetened beverages, including ready-to-drink teas, come at a price, not only in terms of ‘sugar-tax’, but also the socio-economic burden of non-communicable diseases. These beverages make a substantial contribution to sugar intake and have consequently been linked to the onset of obesity, diabetes, and heart diseases ( Another market trend is the emergence of cold-brewed tea, which could boost the acceptance of sugar-free tea. Cold brewing delivers a beverage with less caffeine and subsequently a reduced bitter taste as demonstrated for green tea ( Against this background, the aim of this study was to determine the effect of brewing procedure on the sensory profile and composition of both fermented rooibos and green rooibos. The sensory profile, color, and turbidity of cold-brewed rooibos were therefore compared with that of regular- and boiled-brewed rooibos. Color and turbidity are important parameters for visual appeal. The chemical composition of the beverages was quantified in terms of their Reagent-grade chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) or Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). Ultrapure water for HPLC and metal analysis was prepared by a two-stage water purification system (Elix and Milli-Q) (Merck). Authentic standards (purity ≥ 95%) were purchased from Extrasynthese (Genay, France; isoorientin, orientin, 7-β-D-glucopyranosyleriodictyol (miscanthoside), isovitexin, luteoloside, hyperoside), Carl Roth (Karlsruhe, Germany; vitexin), Sigma-Aldrich (isoquercitrin, ferulic acid), Transmit (Gieβen, Germany; rutin), Phytolab (Vestenbergsgreuth, Germany; aspalathin (91% purity)) and SAMRC (Cape Town, South Africa; nothofagin). PPAG was from our compound library (Plant Bioactives Group, ARC Infruitec-Nietvoorbij). Stock solutions of the standards (ca. 1 g/L) were prepared in DMSO and diluted with water as required. The diluted standard mixtures contained ca. 10 g/L ascorbic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) and were filtered through 0.45 μm hydrophilic PVDF filters (Merck). Working standard solutions for metal analysis were prepared by appropriate dilution of inorganic atomic absorption standard solutions (1000 mg/L) of Fe (Carlo Erba, Milan, Italy) and Al (Sigma-Aldrich) and stored in a refrigerator at ca. 4 °C protected from light. Ultrapure nitric acid (670–690 g/kg) was purchased from Carlo Erba. Samples from production batches (n = 12) of both fermented rooibos and green rooibos were sourced from Bokkeveld Rooibos (Nieuwoudtville, Northern Cape, South Africa) and Rooibos Ltd. (Clanwilliam, Western Cape, South Africa), respectively. Samples were mechanically sieved to remove dust (<0.42 mm) and coarse material (>1.68 mm) ( A cold brew (C), regular brew (R), and boiled brew (B) were prepared from each batch of fermented and green rooibos by adding 1 L of distilled water to 12.5 g plant material (equivalent to ‘cup-of-tea’ strength) as outlined in Panel training and testing were performed separately for fermented and green rooibos. Eleven assessors, with extensive experience in DSA of fermented rooibos, were trained according to a basic protocol ( Turbidity, objective color, and soluble solids (SS) content of the brews were determined in triplicate as described by The concentration of the major flavonoids and PPAG in the brews was determined in duplicate by high performance liquid chromatography with diode array detection (HPLC-DAD) using an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA, USA). All compounds, except aspalathin and ferulic acid, were quantified using the validated method described by Samples were prepared and analyzed in triplicate in a clean room laboratory ISO 14644–1 Class 6, with areas at ISO Class 5 under laminar flow. All the laboratory materials were acid-cleaned as described by For assessment of the accuracy of the data, Al and Fe were determined using a certified reference material (dogfish muscle DORM-2, NRCC; Ottawa, ON, Canada). Certified mean values and experimental mean values obtained from the analysis of DORM-2, expressed in mg/kg dry weight (d.w.), are as follows: Fe, certified value = 142 ± 10, measured value = 132 ± 1; Al, certified value = 10.9 ± 1.7, measured value = 10.2 ± 0.8. The certified values showed good agreement with the measured values (P ≥ 0.05, Student's T-test), proving good accuracy of the analytical methodology. Data obtained for fermented rooibos and green rooibos were analyzed separately. DSA data were subjected to various statistical analyses to confirm panel reliability ( Principal component analysis (PCA), using the correlation matrix, was performed, using XLStat (Version 2018, Addinsoft, Paris, France). Using the combined fermented and green rooibos data sets, the Pearson correlation coefficient (r) was calculated to determine the relationship between individual compound content and bitterness and astringency, respectively. Twelve batches of both fermented and green rooibos were subjected to three different brewing procedures, i.e. cold (C), regular (R), and boiled (B), to determine the impact on their respective sensory profiles. As the mean intensity scores for the aroma and flavor attributes followed similar trends with flavor attributes mostly perceived at lower intensities, the focus will fall on the aroma. The PCA bi-plot for fermented rooibos ( For green rooibos, PC1 and PC2 explained 77.6% of the variance and a clear distinction between the samples of the three brewing procedures is evident ( The fermented and green rooibos samples did not originate from the same batches of fresh plant material, so that direct comparison between samples is not possible. However, the sensory profile of green rooibos was consistently and vastly different to that of fermented rooibos, especially in that the vegetal (‘green grass’, ‘cooked vegetables’) and cereal-like (‘oats porridge/cooked grains’) aroma attributes were present in moderate to high intensities in green rooibos brews, depending on the brewing procedure. While these aroma notes seem integral to the sensory profile of green rooibos, they are considered to be negative for fermented rooibos ( The SS content and turbidity of the fermented rooibos brews were significantly (P < 0.05) affected by brewing procedure, increasing progressively from cold to regular to boiled brew ( The different procedures used for the brewing of green rooibos had similar effects to fermented rooibos on the soluble solids content, turbidity, L*, a* and hue of the brews (P < 0.05) ( The PPAG concentration of the fermented rooibos brews was slightly increased (P < 0.05) by boiling compared to cold and regular brewing ( For the green rooibos brews, most compounds showed a significantly (P < 0.05) higher concentration in the boiled brew compared to the other brews ( The investigation of the association between the PPAG and flavonoid content of rooibos infusions and the intensities of the taste modalities and astringency (when served hot) is limited ( It is well-known that phenolic compounds contribute to the astringency of food, wine, and tea ( Al and Fe were present in significantly higher (P < 0.05) levels in the boiled brews of both fermented and green rooibos ( The Fe and Al content values were similar to those previously reported for hot water infusions of fermented rooibos ( Boiling increased the flavonoid content of rooibos tea, irrespective of the type. Similarly, in our previous study boiling also delivered brews with the highest antioxidant capacities (ORAC and DPPH) ( The flavor of beverage products is regarded as one of the main drivers of consumer preference. The sensory profile associated with the respective rooibos brews would be the deciding factor if convenience is not considered important. Cold brewing of fermented rooibos delivered a similar primary and secondary sensory profile as regular brewing, thus cold brewing offers no advantage or disadvantage in terms of its sensory profile. The slightly higher intensities of ‘raisin’ and ‘caramel’ aroma notes of boiled-brewed rooibos may be one of the reasons why rooibos was traditionally brewed on a hot stove for extended periods. The ‘caramel’ note was also more prominent in boiled-brewed green rooibos, adding to the preferred sweet profile of this herbal tea. The intensity of the ‘oats porridge/cooked grains’ note, not present in fermented rooibos, was substantially increased with the boiling of green rooibos. While the brewing procedure did not impact on astringency, boiling of green rooibos increased the bitterness of the tea, linked to increased extraction of flavonoids. To date, no study has been conducted to determine whether rooibos consumers are willing to forfeit taste for health. Even the Fe and Al content of a cup of rooibos tea, irrespective of type or brewing procedure, was found to be too low to impact, respectively, positively and negatively on health and thus would not drive choice. Cold brewing of both fermented rooibos and green rooibos did not offer many advantages in terms of flavonoid content and sensory profile of the brew compared to regular brewing. Notable was a less bitter and/or sweeter taste of the cold brew compared to the boiled brew.  The authors declare no conflict of interest. Clinton Gass, Rooibos Marketing Ltd., Japan, and Prof. Yutaka Miura, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, Fuchu, Japan, are thanked for information on the preparation of rooibos tea by Japanese consumers. This work was supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at