Centrifugal gravity concentrators currently operate on a wet basis, with slurry feed and fluidising water used to enhance the separation based upon density differences. This work investigated the potential for running a laboratory scale 3″ Knelson Concentrator on a dry basis. Air was used as the fluidising medium in order to separate tungsten from silica in a synthetic ore (1%w/w tungsten), and compared to an optimised wet process. The wet processing attained a mean tungsten recovery of 94.92% (tungsten grade: 30.96%). The dry processing at two different fluidising air pressures attained a recovery of 78.53% (tungsten grade: 6.32%) and 69.90% (tungsten grade: 15.57%) at 2psi and 3psi respectively. This preliminary work shows that it is feasible to separate minerals on a dry basis in a Knelson Concentrator.Gravity concentrators utilise the differences in density of minerals in order to facilitate separation. These concentrators may employ natural gravity, or 1 The two main centrifugal gravity separators that are in operation are the Centrifugal separators are not limited to gold ( This has the potential to be utilised in a number of fields, including reducing the nuggeting effect in gold processing and processing heavy mineral sands in conjunction with dry magnetic and electrostatic separators. Synthetic ore was used to mimic the composition of a gold ore. It has been shown that synthetic ore can accurately simulate gold ore under gravity test conditions ( Silica (Unimin Canada Ltd.) was used as the low-density gangue (2.65 The Knelson Concentrator used in this investigation was a laboratory 3″ KC. The bowl has a capacity of 65 Wet processing of the samples was conducted in order to find the maximum recovery of tungsten using the conventional experimental protocol. The tests followed the methodology developed by 4 The solids feed rate was kept constant at 500 Fluidizing water: 4 Bowl speed: 1.465 The concentrate was collected and screened into four size distributions (−1180 The unit was modified for pneumatic fluidization by the fitting of a specialised rotating union and regulator to control air pressure into the inner bowl. The feed funnel at the top of the Knelson Concentrator was replaced with a clear Plexiglas lid to prevent loss of material as dust during tests. A gate valve connected the bottom of the hopper to a straight feed tube which runs into the Knelson Concentrator, controlling the solids feed rate. The tailing fraction was discharged into a sealed pail. In order to increase the flow of solids into the tailings container, air lances were set up in the launder of the Knelson Concentrator to remove the solids. This ensured that the launder did not become clogged with solids. The operating parameters were as follows: Solids feed rate: ∼180 Air fluidizing pressure: 2 The bowl speed: 1.465 Concentrate collected and screened into the same four size classifications as the wet processing. The concentrate of each test was analysed using a laboratory Mozley shaking table to completely separate the tungsten from the quartz, with the tungsten recovery and concentrate grade being calculated. For the +106  The recovery of the tungsten at 2 The recovery and grade of the tungsten using the dry setup are not as high as those achieved using the conventional wet processing. This is to be expected in this case as the wet process was optimised by Separating tungsten from quartz using a Knelson Concentrator operating on a dry basis has proven to be possible. At 3 The efficiency of the Knelson is largely dependent on a number of operating variables such as feed rate, fluidising pressure and rotational speed of the bowl. The effect under dry conditions will be investigated in order to further determine the potential for dry processing using a Knelson Concentrator. Further on in this research, a standard GRG test will also be carried out under dry conditions, and compared to the standard GRG test. In addition, the effect of particle size, especially fine particles, will be investigated. The authors would like to acknowledge the Natural Science and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) for assisting with funding this project through the Discovery Grants Program.