In a cross-sectional study of 8695 men and women free of clinical CVD, aged 45–64 years at the 1987–1989 baseline Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC) study exam, we examined the relationship between carotid artery lesions (CALs), with and without acoustic shadowing (AS) as an index of plaque mineralization, to systemic markers of inflammation and markers of endothelial function, including endothelial adhesion molecules. A three-level variable, based on the presence of extracranial CALs and AS, identified by B-mode ultrasound of six 1 cm arterial segments, defined the outcome. Among subjects without evidence of AS, after controlling for age, gender, ethnicity, study site, body mass index, hypertension, diabetes, and smoking status, CALs were associated with systemic markers of inflammation, including higher levels of fibrinogen [OR=1.24 (95% CI: 1.09, 1.40)] and white blood cell count [OR=1.37 (95% CI: 1.21, 1.56)]. Among subjects with a CAL, after controlling for the above risk factors as well as mean far wall intima-media thickness, AS was associated with higher levels of von Willebrand factor [OR=1.38 (95% CI: 1.10, 1.74)], a marker of endothelial activation. Associations with endothelial adhesion molecules were inconsistent. Further studies aimed at elucidating the mechanisms of arterial mineralization are warranted.Calcification in the coronary arteries was recognized as early as the seventeenth century The epidemiology of arterial mineralization has been studied extensively in cross sectional studies In this study we examined the association between carotid atherosclerosis and systemic markers of inflammation, endothelial function, behaviors, and disease processes typically associated with an inflammatory component. The first objective was to identify which of these exposures was associated with the presence of carotid artery lesions (CALs) among those free of arterial mineralization as indexed by acoustic shadowing (AS). The second objective was to identify which of these exposures was associated with the presence of AS among those with CALs. The ARIC study is an ongoing, population-based study of the etiology and natural history of atherosclerosis and its sequelae. The ARIC study cohort consists of 15 792 men and women in four communities: Jackson, Mississippi; Forsyth County, North Carolina; northwest suburbs of Minneapolis, Minnesota; and Washington County, Maryland. Probability sampling was used to select ARIC cohort participants from these communities—African Americans were over-sampled in Forsyth County and exclusively sampled in Jackson. Response rates for the ARIC baseline exam were 66, 46, 67, and 65% for Forsyth County, Jackson, Minneapolis and Washington County, respectively. Details of the study design, including sampling procedures, have been previously published The baseline ARIC cohort exam conducted from 1987 to 1989 consisted of a standardized medical examination that included interviews, measurement of blood pressure, anthropometry, a fasting venipuncture, and an ultrasound examination Systolic and diastolic (5th phase) blood pressures were measured three times after the participant was at rest and seated for 5 min. The average of the second and third measurement was used in the analysis. All anthropometric measurements were obtained while the participant was fasting, wearing a scrub suit, and had an empty bladder. Body mass index (BMI) was calculated as weight (kg) divided by the square of height (m). Individuals who used vitamins (multi or individual) during the 2 weeks prior to their visit, and brought the container to their ARIC visit were considered vitamin users; all other individuals were considered non-users. Individuals who used anti-inflammatory agents during the 2 weeks prior to their visit, and brought the container to their ARIC visit as well as individuals who reported taking aspirin or medication for pain during the 2 weeks prior to their visit, were considered users of anti-inflammatory agents; all other individuals were considered non-users. Hemostatic factors, clinical chemistries, and lipids were measured at the ARIC Central Hemostasis Laboratory, the ARIC Central Clinical Chemistries Laboratory, and the ARIC Central Lipid Laboratory, respectively Prevalent coronary heart disease (CHD) at baseline was defined as electrocardiographic (ECG) evidence of myocardial infarction, self-reported history of a physician-diagnosed heart attack, or self-report of cardiovascular surgery or coronary angioplasty. Prevalent stroke or transient ischemic attack (TIA) was defined as self reported physician-diagnosed stroke. Prevalent Rose angina was ascertained using the London School of Hygiene Chest Pain Questionnaire (Rose Angina Questionnaire) The second ARIC cohort exam occurred on average 3 years after a participant's baseline exam. CHD between the baseline and second ARIC exams was defined based on the occurrence of a validated myocardial infarction (fatal, non-fatal or silent), a fatal CHD event, or a cardiac revascularization procedure (cardiovascular surgery or coronary angioplasty) B-mode ultrasound evaluations of atherosclerosis were completed on bilateral segments of the extracranial carotid arteries. The Biosound 2000 IIsa was used to obtain the ultrasound images at each of the four study centers. Reading of all ultrasound tapes occurred at a central Ultrasound Reading Center. Sonographers and readers were required to complete central training and obtain annual re-certification. In addition, quality control measures included a repeat scan of a randomly selected carotid segment in each study participant, and complete re-readings of a subset of the ultrasound tapes The primary goal of ultrasound imaging was to obtain precise measurements of the intima media thickness (IMT) from fixed angles, rather than to achieve optimal visualization of CALs. For the ARIC exams, the carotid artery was divided into three segments: the 1 cm section of the common carotid immediately proximal to the beginning of the dilation of the bifurcation, a 1 cm section of the bifurcation immediately proximal to the tip of the flow divider, and a 1 cm section of the internal carotid immediately distal to the tip of the flow divider. Readers were asked to measure IMT within these 1 cm regions and to report whether they saw evidence of a lesion, and whether or not AS was present. Lesions were not defined explicitly—readers were asked to judge the presence of a lesion on the basis of abnormal arterial wall thickness, shape, or texture. AS was defined as a reduction in amplitude of echoes caused by intervening structures with high attenuation. AS on ultrasound is commonly accepted as a marker of arterial mineralization. Although to our knowledge no studies have validated that AS only occurs in the presence of mineralization, the only reported non-artifactual cause of AS is mineralization Based on the above definitions and information from the six available sites, three groups of participants were identified: (1) individuals without CALs identified at any site; (2) those with CALs identified at one or more sites but no evidence of AS associated with those CALs; and (3) those with one or more CALs characterized by AS. In addition, mean far wall extracranial carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) was derived from information available from the six carotid artery sites The ARIC cohort includes 15 792 individuals. Exclusions for these analyses included individuals with prevalent CHD, cerebrovascular disease, or Rose angina at their baseline ( A cross-sectional study was carried out in which the presence of CALs, with and without AS, determined a participant's carotid atherosclerosis status (the three level outcome of interest). The exposures of interest included diabetes status, hypertension status, smoking status (current, former, and never), vitamin use (yes, no), anti-inflammatory use (yes, no), white blood cell count, albumin level, fibrinogen level, factor VIII activity, and vWF antigen level. Covariates of interest also included age, gender, race-center (Forsyth County whites, Forsyth County African Americans, Minneapolis whites, Jackson African Americans, and Washington whites), BMI, total cholesterol level, and mean far wall IMT. Baseline means and proportions, stratified by the three levels of carotid atherosclerosis status and adjusted for age, gender, BMI and race-center, were calculated for each exposure using the methods proposed by Zhao et al. Continuous exposures were categorized into tertiles, the first (lowest) tertile routinely being used as the referent group. Additionally, two summary exposure variables were created: the ‘inflammation index’ and the ‘endothelial index’. The inflammation index combined tertile information on white blood cell count, fibrinogen, and albumin—the low category included those in the low-inflammatory tertile for at least two of the three markers, the high category included those in the pro-inflammatory tertile for at least two of the three markers, and the middle category included all others. The low-inflammatory tertile was the lowest tertile for white blood cell count and fibrinogen, and the highest tertile for albumin. The pro-inflammatory tertile was the highest tertile for white blood cell count and fibrinogen, and the lowest tertile for albumin. The ‘endothelial index’ combined tertile information on Factor VIII and vWF antigen—the low category included those in the lowest tertile for both markers, the high category included those in the highest tertile for both markers, and the middle category included all others. Each exposure was modeled separately, using logistic regression. Separate models were used to evaluate associations between exposures and (1) CALs without AS and (2) AS among individuals with CAL. Since increased BMI was associated both with the absence of B-mode ultrasound data and with a decreased prevalence of CALs and AS, BMI was considered as a covariate throughout the analysis. BMI was categorized into three levels (BMI<25, 25–30, and ≥30 kg/m A parallel analysis was carried out on a stratified random sample of the study population for endothelial adhesion molecules E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1. For these analyses continuous exposures were dichotomized at the median. The sampling frame consisted of 18 sampling strata based on age, race, gender, and intima media thickness. Throughout these analyses, SAS-callable Survey Data Analysis (SUDAAN) computer programs were used to make appropriate adjustments for sampling weights and the sampling strategy. Overall, 44% of the population was male, 22% was African American, and the mean age at the baseline exam was 54 years. Baseline means and proportions, stratified by the three levels of carotid atherosclerosis status and adjusted for gender, age, BMI and race-center, were calculated for covariates and each exposure ( Pearson correlation coefficients between continuous exposures among those without evidence of a CAL are shown in Among the 8038 participants without AS, odds ratios (ORs) for exposures comparing those with a CAL without AS to those without a CAL are shown in Among the 3762 participants with CALs, ORs for having AS are shown in Adjusted ORs for the endothelial adhesion molecules E-selectin, ICAM-1 and VCAM-1 comparing those with a CAL without AS to those without a CAL are shown in Among those with a CAL, adjusted ORs for ICAM-1, and VCAM-1 comparing those with AS to those without AS are shown in Finally, neither cigarette smoking status, gender, nor mean far wall IMT were found to modify associations between exposures and AS among individuals with CAL Overall, systemic markers of inflammation were associated with the presence of CALs without AS; while among those with CALs, markers of endothelial activation were associated with AS. However, both associations were modest. Further, because our markers of inflammation and endothelial activation were non-specific, two index variables were created in an attempt to sharpen our classification of individuals. Among those without evidence of AS, CALs were more common in those with a high inflammation index compared with those with a low inflammation index [OR=1.44 (95% CI: 1.26, 1.65)]. While among those with a CAL, AS was more common in those with a high endothelial index compared with those with a low endothelial index [OR=1.48 (95% CI: 1.11, 1.96)]. Although sample size might have limited our ability to detect statistically significant associations, point estimates associating higher levels of ICAM-1 both with the presence of CALs, and AS within those CALs, were above one, while VCAM-1 appeared to be differentially associated with the presence of CALs, and AS within those CALs. Smoking status, hypertension, and diabetes were associated with the presence of a CAL without AS. Among those with a CAL, smoking status, but not diabetes or hypertension, was significantly associated with the presence of AS. In contrast, neither vitamin use nor use of anti-inflammatory agents was associated with the presence of a CAL without AS, or with AS. Historically, arterial mineralization was accepted as a marker or manifestation of advanced atherosclerosis; however, evidence suggests that arterial mineralization occurs early in the development of atherosclerotic lesions and is a regulated process similar to bone growth. Many similarities between skeletal bone and mineralized atherosclerosis have been identified. For example, osteopontin, a 44 kDa acidic, sialated, phosphorylated glycoprotein found in skeletal bone with the arginine–glycine–aspartate cell adhesion motif, has been isolated from mineralized plaques Inflammation and endothelial activation have been studied in association with the development of atherosclerosis and CVD events in the biochemical and epidemiologic fields In the current study we have addressed several systemic markers of inflammation, markers of endothelial activation including adhesion molecules, as well as disease processes and behaviors typically associated with an inflammatory component. Increases in fibrinogen and decreases in albumin level, both plasma proteins produced by the liver, as well as increases in white blood cell count, were used to indicate a systemic pro-inflammatory shift. The plasma level of von Willebrand factor, a pro-coagulant synthesized by endothelial cells that stabilizes factor VIII, which in turn is produced in the liver and stored in platelets, was used as a marker of endothelial activation. The endothelial adhesion molecule E-selectin, found only in activated endothelium, is a cell surface component expressed by cytokine-stimulated endothelial cells, and is believed to mediate the initial rolling of leukocytes along the endothelium The complex processes that putatively link inflammation, endothelial activation, and arterial calcification cannot be fully explained by epidemiologic studies. The purpose of this study was to examine the association of CALs, and among those with CALs, the association of AS, with a range of endothelial and inflammatory markers. If increased inflammation, or endothelial activation, are associated with the process of arterial mineralization, one would expect a number of these markers to be associated with AS in those with CALs. However, at the current time it is difficult to predict the direction or magnitude of associations between markers, such as endothelial adhesion molecules, and arterial mineralization. For example, if the development of arterial mineralization is triggered by endothelial activation, this process may be accompanied by either reduced or elevated levels of circulating endothelium adhesion molecules. Finally, although there was not evidence that cigarette smoking status, gender, or mean far wall IMT modified associations between exposures and AS among individuals with CAL, statistical power was limited and these results should be interpreted with caution. The ARIC cohort is a large biethnic population-based sample. Since the ARIC cohort is large with a focus on sub-clinical atherosclerosis, we were able to exclude participants with prevalent cardiovascular disease, including coronary heart disease and stroke, and focus our study on asymptomatic individuals. This is especially important in a cross-sectional analysis where clinical disease may influence health behaviors and thus risk factor levels. Second, because information was available on the presence of CALs with and without AS, we were able to differentiate between those risk factors associated with the presence of CALs and those risk factors associated with the presence of AS among those with CALs. While characteristics of ultrasound imaging make it ideal for epidemiologic investigations, new methods have been developed with an enhanced ability to detect, quantify, and characterize calcification in various arterial territories. Of the methods suitable for population based studies because of their noninvasive nature, relatively low cost, and low exposure to radiation, electron beam computed tomography and fast gated helical computed tomography can quantify the area and volume of coronary arterial calcium with accuracy and considerable precision. By comparison, B-mode ultrasound represents a crude indicator of the presence or absence of mineralization in the carotid arteries. Further, the ARIC ultrasound scanning and reading protocols were developed with the aim of measuring IMT precisely—not identifying and characterizing lesions in the carotid arteries. Despite these shortcomings, CALs and AS identified during an examination were likely to represent true findings of CALs and AS; the false positive rate is expected to be low. By contrast, the false negative rate (i.e. missed lesions) may have been high. Kappa statistics based on blinded repeat ultrasound readings of 658 baseline ARIC scans were 0.66 (95% CI: 0.61, 0.72) for the carotid atherosclerosis status variable (weighted for the three levels), 0.57 (95% CI: 0.46,0.68) for the determination of AS, and 0.56 (95% CI: 0.44, 0.68) for the determination of AS among the 234 individuals with evidence of CALs Two exclusions among those without evidence of a lesion were aimed at decreasing the frequency of misclassified subjects, individuals with incomplete visualization were excluded; and individuals were required to be without evidence of a lesion at both the baseline and second ARIC exams. Although these requirements may have introduced bias, the exclusions were deemed necessary for accurate lesion classification. The inherent correlation between arterial mineralization and atherosclerosis severity poses an additional obstacle to our inquiry. In attempting to differentiate between risk factors associated with the development of lesions with and without mineralization, it is important to control for severity of atherosclerosis. We attempted to do this by limiting the analysis of AS to those individuals with lesions, by controlling for mean far wall IMT, and by evaluating mean far wall IMT as an effect modifier. Nevertheless, residual confounding by atherosclerosis severity may explain the differential risk factor profile observed for CALs with and without AS. A third limitation of the current study is the cross-sectional design. Since atherosclerosis is a chronic inflammatory disease that may be accompanied by activation of inflammatory and endothelial cells in the fibrous cap of stressed lesions, increases in markers of inflammation and endothelial activation measured systemically may simply reflect the total burden of atherosclerosis in all arterial beds. We attempted to eliminate those subjects with the greatest burden of atherosclerosis by restricting the study population to those free of clinical CVD. Unfortunately, the cross-sectional design of this study does not allow us to determine whether elevations in these markers of inflammation and endothelial activation preceded or followed the development of CALs and AS. Finally, while the consistent association of smoking status with arterial mineralization provided motivation for the study, possible residual confounding due to smoking levels limited our ability to interpret the results. Further study in this area is required to determine the factors and mechanisms that play an important role in the development of CALs with and without arterial mineralization. In particular, because smoking status has been consistently associated with arterial mineralization, as well as inflammation and endothelial activation, studies of never smokers are recommended. Finally, to further determine the risk factors that differentiate between the development of atherosclerosis with and without arterial mineralization, prospective epidemiologic studies are needed. Support for this work was provided by National Heart, Lung and Blood Institutes Contracts N01-HC-55015, N01-HC-55016, N01-HC-55017, N01-HC-55018, N01-HC-55019, N01-HC-55020, N01-HC-55021. The research and writing of the manuscript were conducted under the sponsorship of a National Research Service Award (contract 5-T32-HL07055) for the National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute. The authors thank the staff and participants in the ARIC study for their important contributions.