Resource nationalism in the mining sector has recently gained momentum in the Global South ( In ‘resource nationalist’-type reforms, many countries have focused on Large Scale Mining (LSM) while ignoring Artisanal and Small-scale Mining (ASM) ( Research into state efforts to regulate, tax, and intervene in the mining sector, should consider formalization of ASM, a key global policy dynamic ( In places where access to formal property rights for ASM is possible, research into formalization focuses on a broader ‘process of registering, organizing, and tracking mining activity in the field’ ( There are very few discussions of the role of ASM within resource nationalist strategies. The following therefore represents a preliminary exploration. Kinyondo and Huggins contend that the ASM role depends on the particular aspects of resource nationalism in a particular place and time (2019). Nevertheless, broad categories of resource nationalism can be discerned from the literature. In order to conceptualize such a discussion, we will use the categorization by In terms of ownership of resources, governments often require greater ownership of foreign LSM companies by citizens of the ‘host country’, or by a state-owned mining firm. More rarely, they may delineate mineralized areas (including former LSM concessions) for ASM. If this is done effectively, ASM may therefore benefit; however, in practice, many areas reserved for ASM are only poorly mineralized; this is the case in the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DRC), for example. Permits for ASM may depend on institutionalization of mining activities. Perks, in one of few articles linking ASM to resource nationalism, defines the latter very broadly as involving ‘national participation [in mining economies] and benefit distribution’ (2012: 1), as well as a general intention to make the sector more economically productive. Using such a broad definition, policies to build ASM capacity, such as requiring that miners join cooperatives, could be seen as ‘nationalist’ because they increase the participation of citizens in the mining economy ( Policies that regulate the operations of LSM may influence ASM. Economic aspects of resource nationalism may have direct impacts on ASM. Beneficiation policies, which require local processing before export, may impact markets for both LSM and ASM if introduced before adequate local beneficiation capacity exists. In many countries, royalty rates for minerals and gemstones are the same for LSM and ASM. When governments increase royalty rates to increase government revenue from LSM, artisanal and small-scale actors are also affected. In other countries, such as the DRC, there are separate tax and royalty regimes for ASM. Depending on many factors, such as the relationship between ‘local’ and the ‘national ’economic interests in resource nationalist policy-making, and the role that ASM plays within that debate, governments may monitor and enforce existing or new regulations in ASM to generate government revenue. In Tanzania, for example, government signalling on the minerals sector emphasizes clamping down on ‘cheating’, such as tax evasion and under-declaration of mineral production and profits. It is primarily LSM firms that are accused of this; however, actors in the ASM sector are also targets of criticism. Therefore, the main justification for resource nationalist policies, while primarily focused on LSM, has also resulted in intensified enforcement of laws in ASM. Finally, the ‘assertion of strategic state control’ ( Recent resource nationalism in Tanzania dates from the 2010 Mining Act ( Apart from local content aspects which may potentially benefit ASM, the reforms focus on increasing government revenues from LSM and restricting LSM from repatriating revenues abroad. Overall, economic concerns seem to dominate, which reflects the argument that, ‘for the ruling party, increased revenues are central in order to live up to the electorate's demands for improved social services and economic development, and their own goal of re-election and becoming independent of donors' (  While attention to resource nationalism has focused on LSM, this article considers how increased royalty rates and taxes on gemstones, the ban on export of raw gemstones, and state emphasis on revenue collection all affected formalization of the ASM tanzanite sector. Tanzania is well-endowed with many types of minerals and ASM is widespread in many regions. In Tanzania, formalization of ASM dates from the Mining Act of 1979, which enabled citizens to apply for prospecting licenses and engage in artisanal mining. ASM operators can legally access minerals in Tanzania through Primary Mineral Licenses (PMLs). Formalization was supported by the 1983 Small-scale Mining Policy Paper, intended to attract Tanzanians into mining ( ASM employs over a million people in Tanzania ( Research involved semi-structured interviews with key stakeholders, and a review of available academic, commercial and unpublished literature. Forty-three different participants were interviewed in October and November 2018 in the following locations: Dar es Salaam, Arusha, Manyara, and Dodoma (Tanzania). Interviews used semi-structured question checklists and lasted 60–90 min. Of these, 14 belonged to civil society organizations including professional associations within the gemstone sector; 11 were civil servants or politicians; seven were large-scale mine operators or members of large private sector organizations; and 11 were former or current artisanal or small-scale miners (including managers, geologists and other ‘above-ground’ mining staff). Several participants occupy several roles in the mining sector: for example, several members of CSOs are also owners of small mines. Some participants were interviewed twice, making for a total of 45 interviews. Tanzanite has been found only in one location, the Merelani hills in Simanjiro District. The deposits were initially mined by artisanal miners and the state miner, STAMICO ( TanzaniteOne also developed a traceability scheme which involved gems being inscribed by laser with the TanzaniteOne logo and a unique serial number ( However, the Tucson Protocol was only partially implemented. TanzaniteOne, due to its pre-existing traceability scheme tried to position itself as ‘conflict-free’, leading to tensions with ASM which had no traceability scheme. Simultaneously, as TanzaniteOne differentiated itself from ASM, it purchased and sold artisanally-mined tanzanite. The traceability scheme of TanzaniteOne has arguably failed to have a long-term impact on the industry, as buyers do not necessarily favour certified stones. In 2010 the government banned export of rough tanzanite pieces heavier than one g ( In 2013, following promulgation of the Mining Act of 2010, the State-owned Mining Company (STAMICO) took a 50% share in TanzaniteOne. The company's mining license was renewed, despite opposition from civil society groups ( By 2016, TanzaniteOne had laid off half its workforce (over 600 people) apparently because its tanzanite production had halved from 2014 to 2015. During the 2015 election campaign, the Secretary General of the ruling party said that if victorious, Magufuli would confiscate ‘idle’ tanzanite mining plots belonging to large-scale firms and redistribute them to artisanal miners ( Artisanal and small-scale operators in Merelani differ in the kinds of machinery and equipment used, and the number of mineshafts operating. However, there are some similarities in financial models and employment conditions. Whereas in previous decades ASM mineshafts tended to be limited to around 200–300 m depth, diminishing availability of tanzanite has caused operators to go much deeper. Many ASM operations therefore require mechanized ventilation and other equipment. In many cases, a single PML will involve multiple investors. Such cooperation is necessary because mines can go many months without striking a seam of tanzanite. Most operations have a few paid positions, including geologist, electrical engineer, mine manager and explosive specialist. In 2017, a Parliamentary committee was established to investigate reports of corruption and smuggling in the tanzanite sector. The committee reported that 80% of tanzanite was irregularly sold to avoid taxation and recommended that a tanzanite-specific law be promulgated, that a state-owned tanzanite mining company be established, and that tanzanite trading be centralized to eliminate smuggling ( In 2017 legislation banned the export of In September 2017, President Magufuli ordered the military to build a wall around the entire tanzanite mining area ( Several regulations and procedures in Merelani were changed during 2018. By August 2018, entry to the MCA was restricted to those with special identification documents provided by the Regional Mining Office in Mererani. According to informants, these documents are inexpensive but are only issued to those with contracts from a mining company, or members of a recognised organization. Tanzanite brokers visiting Merelani must buy at an office next to the main entrance. A government-employed valuation specialist values the stones, and taxes and fees are paid on the spot. All sales are carefully documented. Merelani is situated in a relatively remote area in Simanjiro District. Infrastructure is limited. The commercial trade in tanzanite has historically been carried out in Arusha, a large town about 90 min drive away, with extensive banking, hotel, and other services. The government has directed that tanzanite be auctioned under its control, and in Mererani, rather than Arusha. This is, broadly, intended to distribute economic benefits at the site of production. An auction was held there in December 2017. It had been planned for Arusha, but the venue was changed on government orders on the day it was due to take place. In mid-2018, the Manyara Regional Commissioner ordered mining operators in Merelani, including ASM operators, to issue contracts and pay workers regular salaries. According to multiple respondents, the vast majority of mining operations lack the necessary capital to pay all their employees regularly. This is clearly an effort to formalize ASM. The results seem to be twofold. On the one hand, the numbers of miners working in the MCA has declined since mid-2018, probably because of the policy. On the other hand, some contracts may exist only on paper, and are not implemented. One small-medium scale mine manager said that 60–70% of his workers have a contract. Since the wall was built, some ASM mines have been visited by the Occupational Health and Safety Agency, which promotes the use of personal protective equipment, and requires maximum shifts of 8 h. However, there has reportedly been no follow-up since initial visits. One manager of a small-medium scale mine said that, ‘they came, but they just counted the machines and then applied a certain amount of taxes or fees based on the amount of equipment that we use. They never asked any questions about working conditions.’ The government has also started to enforce several other regulations that were previously loosely enforced or interpreted, especially those relating to licenses for gemstone brokering. Brokers argue that these regulations impose financial costs are putting them out of business. Many respondents, including some associated with ASM, commented that the wall has improved security in the MCA and allowed the government to collect more revenue. According to the Minister of Minerals, in the first three months of 2018, the government was able to collect royalties amounting to more than 714.5 million Tshs, of which more than 614.5 million Tshs came from ASM. This is more than what the government collected in the past three consecutive years. However, many respondents deny that this was due to smuggling. Respondents said that three separate mines uncovered large amounts of tanzanite in early 2018, leading to the spike in royalties; however, since then, production has been minimal. Another respondent argued that in early 2018, when royalty collections were high, entry into the MCA was still straightforward. The authorities later insisted on miners having contracts, which reduced the workforce and hence constrained production. On the positive side, child labour in ASM has been curtailed. In addition to various poorly-paid roles in artisanal mines ( Mine owners face further financial difficulties because prices of goods and services in the MCA have marginally increased, according to some participants. For example, mine operators purchasing goods could previously hire a motorbike-taxi for a return trip to the nearby Mererani town. Since mid-2018, motorcyclists cannot move back-and-forth through the gate, so mine operators have to organize separate transport arrangements inside and outside the wall, which is more expensive. Those with their own vehicles have to maintain one inside and one outside the wall. The current slump in the tanzanite sector more generally may have many causes, and is not solely a result of recent government interventions. For example, miners have argued that overall economic conditions, such as a decline in agricultural commodity prices, have adversely impacted tanzanite production ( The beneficiation policies, in a context in which gem cutting cannot meet demand, have negatively affected the tanzanite sector according to multiple respondents. One civil society member said simply that these policies ‘have killed ASM’, another said ‘they have paralysed the industry’. Indeed, according to news reports, a real estate slump in Arusha has been partially blamed on the diminishing business of tanzanite dealers ( The 2017 tax and royalty regime may have encouraged smuggling. Some smuggling persists. One respondent mentioned how easy it is to walk gemstones across the border to Kenya, outside of official crossing points. Given the risks of gender-based exclusion during processes of formalization, we briefly consider impacts on women. Women are involved in mining, and there at least two major Tanzanian associations of women miners. However, according to interviews, women have not typically been involved in underground mining operations, but have played other roles, such as owning mining operations, selling food and firewood, and sifting discarded material for pieces of tanzanite. This latter work has involved risks of robbery, ‘verbal abuse, violence and rape’ ( In addition, women miners, CSO members, and gemstone dealers interviewed indicated that they find the search procedure, which happens every time they exit the area, unpleasant. One respondent said that, ‘because of this, 90% of older women won't go in, they will send their children instead’. Recent events in Tanzania contribute to our understanding of formalization of ASM. Government support to the ASM gemstone sector has not been significant; some support was provided to the diamond sector, partly through LSM involvement. TanzaniteOne has not recently played such a role in the tanzanite sector. Even authorities at STAMICO admitted that their support largely targets the metals sector (especially gold), not gemstones. This is partly due to lack of funds and staffing but also because the country lacks capacity when it comes to mining and value addition in gemstones. It is clear that recent policy changes have prioritized collection of royalties, taxes and fees by the government. Government personnel have repeatedly emphasized the importance of revenue collection, rather than issues such as health and safety. This tendency was seen also pre-2017, when researchers found that, ‘auditing activities are guided almost exclusively by TMAA's ability to collect royalties' rather than over priorities related to health and safety, environmental degradation, and similar concerns' ( One respondent argued that initiatives in Merelani represent ‘legalization’ rather than ‘formalization’, because miners pay fees and file paperwork to maintain legal status, but have not experienced changes in working conditions. This is not unusual, as globally, ‘for most donors and host governments, formalization of ASM entails legalization and the steps required to put individuals in a position to secure the requisite permits’ ( The case study reflect some concerns of critical scholarship on ASM formalization, such as the gender dimensions ( Scholars of ASM have argued that, ‘top-down policies do not work, formalization is a process and miners need incentives to join this process’ ( The 2017 reforms raise questions about governance of the mining sector. In a bid to improve ‘strategic control’ ( STAMICO, a 50% shareholder of TanzaniteOne, is widely seen as severely limited in capacity. For example, a senior STAMICO official said that ASM associations have to contribute funds to receive training, and that in addition to funds, lack of staff is also a constraint. STAMICO's limitations are also a result of contradictory elements of its operational and legal mandate. For example, it has a responsibility to build the capacity of ASM; however, in the tanzanite industry, as part-owner of a large-scale operator it is in direct conflict with neighbouring ASM operators. There is no evidence of STAMICO engaging directly in ASM capacity-building in the tanzanite sector. Resource nationalist-type state intervention appears not to have benefitted ASM; further, STAMICO has also been unable to maintain production at TanzaniteOne. A report of the Controller and Auditor General (CAG) of Tanzania found that STAMICO did not have any access to tanzanite sales information from TanzaniteOne, as all revenues were banked directly by the firm, not into a joint bank account as planned ( Many interventions in the tanzanite sector, such as the wall, and planned investment in Mererani's infrastructure are long-standing ideas originating in the Tucson Protocol or advocacy by local CSOs and politicians. However, current interventions have been heavily ‘branded’ as part of President Magufuli's broader strategies of economic nationalism. For example, in October 2018 the entrance to the MCA still featured a large poster of President Magufuli, advertising a Presidential visit dating from April 2018. The President has visited Merelani on several occasions and has addressed the tanzanite sector in several high-profile speeches and events. Tanzanite is a particularly important symbol of the Tanzanian mining sector because it is uniquely Tanzanian and yet has profited other countries to a greater degree than Tanzania. It therefore fits President Magufuli's argument that Tanzania's mineral sector has been the victim of foreign exploitation. Nevertheless, President Magufuli's insistence that tanzanite should be auctioned at Mererani, while gold should be auctioned near a major goldmine at Geita (where an export processing zone will also be established) ( Perhaps the state's ambiguity towards ASM is shifting to greater political support. The President has rhetorically supported ASM in various speeches and public comments (e.g. This case study has demonstrated how the Tanzanian government has attempted to formalize ASM in a context where spatialized forms of discipline are possible (e.g. searches, mine inspections, controls on movement). It has concluded that state emphasis is on maximizing government revenues, and on related bureaucratic forms of legalization. It has identified conceptual links to state strategies of resource nationalism, particularly through state narratives that the Tanzanian state has been ‘cheated’ of revenues in the mining sector, and through the political gains sought from personally identifying President Magufuli with interventions. Resource nationalism is not only about maximizing economic returns, but is also related to political legitimization through symbolic and material actions. The ‘great wall of Merelani’ is a symbol of President Magufuli's ability to ‘get things done’. Interventions in the tanzanite sector appear to have resulted in reductions in the ASM workforce and a related decline in official production, although continuing smuggling and geological factors could also be involved in this decline. TanzaniteOne, the only LSM operation in Merelani, is not operational, despite the direct involvement of STAMICO as part-owner. The new policies do not seem beneficial to the tanzanite sector. Spillover from the tanzanite sector to the local economy may have been restricted as well, due to reductions in production; though time will tell whether tanzanite auctions in Mererani can benefit local communities. Impacts of tanzanite sector policies at the national level depend, of course, on how royalties and taxes are used; the government has prioritized investment in various forms of infrastructure and has a ‘developmentalist’ outlook, but there are also concerns over financial transparency ( The findings support the argument by The findings from the tanzanite sector hold broader lessons for gemstone production, and mining more generally, in Tanzania. The 2017 mining laws did not help ASM, or dealers and brokers, as they banned export of all raw tanzanite, and increased both taxes and royalties making it even harder for ASM to operate. It is therefore not surprising perhaps that some smuggling continues. Nevertheless, legal changes in March 2019 to provide preferential tax rates for ASM may improve the situation. The future of ASM in Tanzania may depend on the willingness of the government to consult more widely over mineral policies, and to introduce new regulations using longer timelines, to allow stakeholders to adapt. This study suggests several key issues for future research. First, the long-term impacts of using the military to secure the MCA, including on relations between ASM and the state. Second, the sustainability of both the centres of excellence and trading centres for minerals, as anecdotal evidence is not promising. Third, the socio-economic impacts of changes to the broker system and the shift of the tanzanite economy away from Arusha towards Mererani. Fourthly, the real reason for the decline in official tanzanite sales since May 2018, especially the role of smuggling within the contemporary tanzanite sector and the geological aspects (the extent of remaining tanzanite deposits). Lastly, this article has sketched out connections between resource nationalism and ASM rather than LSM, a promising avenue of research. None. The authors would like to thank the participants in this research for sharing their insights with us, and the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at