The understanding of fundamental mechanisms of fragmentation is still being developed. As such the fine fragmentation produced in a blast has been the subject to study. By examining the fines in the context of surface area instead of mass, several patterns and sub-populations have been observed. This paper is a study of fine fragmentation generated in small scale blasts. Each size distribution was transformed from mass into surface area. Each explosive charge was simulated in context of the energy it applied to the sample during breakage. This paper represents a small part of a larger study.
                  The samples blasted in this study produced several aspects of self-similarity in breakage. Samples of the same rock type produced a similar surface area size distribution that was observed at a wide range of applied explosive energies. Each rock type had a characteristic surface area size distribution. Shape characteristics of measured fragments in the √2 sieve series shared similarities across a wide range of size fractions.
                  Also paradoxically, the products of fine fragmentation were found to be multi-component in nature. A change in surface area size distribution was observed at 1mm, which was found to be statistically significant. The fractal dimension of particles larger than 1mm were found to be statistically different to particles smaller than 1mm. Another change in particle character was found at 10mm fragment size.
                  The generation of fine fragmentation characterisation paradoxically has two fragment size thresholds of note, 10mm and 1mm, and is self-similar in nature. It is postulated that fragmentation is not a true fractal but the individual fundamental mechanisms that generate it may well be.Both the hypotheses that fragmentation is self-similar ( A study of fines generation is useful because fine particles are created first ( The topic of fines generation was not well understood as most studies focus on coarse fragmentation. An experimental program was designed to examine this paradox of self-similarity in breakage, of multi-component sub-populations of fragments and develop an understanding of their origin. Three different sample types ( The samples were placed inside a blast chamber. To reduce secondary fragmentation from blasted particles breaking against the inner wall of the chamber, rubber matting and pieces of wood were used to surround the samples. The objective was to isolate the fragmentation caused by the explosive blast. Once the samples were recovered from the chamber, the size distribution was measured on the √2 sieve series by sizing each sample manually to minimise degradation. A study in particle shape characteristics was conducted on two samples (a granodiorite and the synthetic grout) at a range of size fractions. For the +6.7 The −6.7 The −6.7 In this manner, the The total surface area of those fragments is indicative of the energy required to create them. As such examining the surface area of fines produced in a blast at various size fractions can be indicative of the mechanisms of fragmentation and its relationship with applied breakage energy. Other researchers have established relationships between energy and surface area of breakage ( Once the samples were blasted, the particles were collected and the surface area calculated in the blast using a method outlined in Once the size fraction distribution has been defined for that size fraction, the individual fragment volumes in a given size fraction can be simulated by randomly sampling Eq. Each individual particle volume was simulated by sampling the predicted distribution of particle volumes in each size fraction, A model was developed to predict the distribution of individual particle volumes in each size fraction. All particles are assumed to be from a spectrum of shapes between three extremes: spheres, ellipsoids and discs, which are modeled using the ellipsoid formula, based around the As such the individual particle volume distribution for each size fraction was predicted based on a size fraction, which was then sampled Fragmentation in blasting is not controlled by a single explosive property, but by a combination of explosives variables ( The energy factor applied in the blasts used in this paper is calculated by multiplying the energy released per gram by the powder factor used ( There is a relationship between specific surface are generated and specific energy applied in the breakage event ( This relationship has been observed in the literature previously ( Once the breakage size distribution has been transposed from mass to surface area, a pattern emerges. This pattern has been observed previously in the literature ( This is ungainly but this is what was done to normalize each sample in a fashion they could be compared directly. On each graph, the axis is labeled as surface area (m Note that in As can be observed, there are structures seen in the surface area plots that are not seen as clearly in the conventional cumulative percent passing plots. Each of the samples in It is hypothesized that this basic unit of broken particle shape spectrums is part of the signature of how each rock type fragments. Liberation of grains, matrix minerals and the breaking of grains as breakage energy is applied would be controlling mechanisms. The synthetic grout showed these phenomena most clearly, as the comparatively larger grains of quartz were so much harder than the surrounding cement matrix. The use of surface area in this context could provide a practical link to rock texture and mode of breakage. The phenomena shown in The author is of the opinion that each lithology texture (expressed in terms of grain size and structure) has a characteristic signature with regard to how fines are generated in the fragmentation process, thus breakage in general. It is proposed that the size of the mineral grains and the matrix of the rock in a mineralogical context influence the rocks ability to transmit energy in an impedance signature. This would manifest as the rocks characteristic dynamic loading of strain rate before failure or breakage in the explosive/rock interaction. This, in conjunction with the concept of very similar surface area signatures observed at different energies, implies that a sophisticated model relating rock texture to breakage is possible, using surface area as a basis. Examining the data presented in this study, two different surface area size distribution sub-populations of fragments can be seen. There is a threshold that corresponds to a change in gradient in the surface area size distribution curve. Each curve was divided into two components. The upper component was labeled F (Fines) and the lower component was labeled UF (Ultra Fines). This pattern was observed in all 45 samples blasted. The exact size fraction of the threshold was mathematically determined through comparison of fitted curves of the coarse and fine parts of the size distribution. The first part of the curve fitted was Component UF. To do this, size fractions were added both sides of the −600 All 45 blasts shown in this paper had a Component UF top size of −1.18 Components F and UF have a statistically different power law exponent ( It has been postulated in the literature that fragmentation is self-similar in nature ( During the image measurements of the −6.7 While collecting this data, it was observed that it was difficult to determine by eye what size fraction was being measured by visual observation of the image once the scale had been normalised. All particles were presented as a black silhouette. Each size fraction looked very similar with the same shapes and jagged perimeter characteristics. It was also difficult to determine the difference between rock types by eye once they were imaged through the microscope. From the shape measurement data collected across the size fractions, the  Further, this was found to be the case for both samples examined. This supports the concept of self-similarity in fragmentation. The appearance and geometric form of fragments produced in these blasts, from the coarse to the very fine, share very similar characteristics. While this data set has a limited scope it could be argued that blast induced breakage fragments share self-similarity characteristics. Further work is required before any definitive statement can be made. These fragments were measured in a size distribution using the √2 sieve series, where each sieve is scaled √2 apart in aperture size. The During the development of the surface area algorithm (discussed previously), the volume of each individual fragment was measured across 26 size fractions in multiple samples. For each sample examined a very similar distribution shape was found around an average and standard deviation related to the measured size fraction ( These individual volumes (measured mass of each particle in conjunction with density measured for each size fraction) were examined statistically as groups in their measured size fractions. It was found that the histogram of individual fragment volume had very similar shape and form across all size fractions in all samples measured, once they were normalised by the mean volume for the size fraction ( As can be observed, the histogram of mean normalized individual fragment volumes each size fraction (from a really wide range of sizes) from two very different sample types (one synthetic, one natural rock) overlays very well.  An approach to explain the self-similarity of breakage could be dynamic crack branching. Fragments are formed when cracks propagate and join together ( Micro crack branching could explain the mechanisms of how fines are created along the surface of larger cracks (which in turn form the larger fragments) ( The definition of a fractal is given by the relationship between number and size. There are a variety of ways to represent the size-frequency distribution of fragments ( Fractal dimension is a critical factor for the success of describing blast-induced fragmentation sub-populations as fractals. The fractal dimension of rock fragments can be measured from two-dimensional imaging of the particles, by fitting a power relationship (Eq. The area for each individual particle was calculated from the image by the number of pixels shown in the fragment. The number of pixels around the edge of each fragment was counted to the perimeter. This was done for each size fraction in each sample that was measured with image analysis. The Fractal Dimension As can be observed, the fractal dimension for the fractions +1 The surface area generated in a blast is directly related to the number of fragments at each size fraction. If fragmentation was a true fractal, it would have the same fractal dimension at all scales and a plot of the number of fragments across the size distribution would form a single straight line. As can be observed in This paper has presented several interesting phenomena in describing fine fragmentation in blasting. The use of surface area as a means of comparison has provided new insight to the complex system of rock breakage. Several self-similar aspects of rock fragmentation were observed in the 45 samples examined in this paper ( Yet, it has been demonstrated in the literature that fragmentation products are multi-component in nature ( Examination of the samples blasted under the microscope showed that there was no clear mineralogical structure at the 1 It has been postulated that these different sub-populations are generated by different mechanisms, which manifest as different micro crack branching characteristics. It is further postulated that while fragmentation may not be a true fractal, the individual mechanisms that create it may possibly be. Paradoxically fragmentation products also seem to be self-similar in nature. Studying individual breakage mechanisms and how they dynamically interact in the generation of fine fragments in rock breakage may well resolve this paradox. This approach could be a more practical method of studying this phenomenon. The following conclusions were drawn from this study of 45 blasted samples: Several self-similar aspects of rock fragmentation were observed. Each blasted rock type produced a similar surface area size distribution at different applied explosive energies. The shape characteristics of individual fragments in the √2 sieves series size fractions appeared to have a similar form from very fine to comparatively very coarse particles. Each rock texture type produces a characteristic surface area versus size distribution plot. Fine fragmentation products were also shown to be multi-component. There was a change in the surface area size distribution at 1 The fractal dimension calculated with image analysis for fragments smaller than 1 Examination of each sample type under the microscope showed that there was no mineralogical structure that could clearly explain the 1 Examining each sample on a plot of number of fragments across the size distribution, there was no change in gradient at 1 The generation of fine fragmentation characterisation paradoxically has two fragment size thresholds of note, 10 Preferential breakage and liberation of quartz grains was clearly observed in all 30 of the synthetic grout samples. This was observed with a peak in the surface area size distribution at 300 The author would like to thank Dr. Toni Kojovic and Prof. Malcolm Powell for their assistance in the development of this paper.