The aim of this work was to study the fatty acid composition and proximate analysis, including total proteins, dry matter, total phenol levels, antioxidants and antiradical activities of clary sage (Salvia sclarea L.) seeds harvested in five consecutive years, from 2006 to 2010. Firstly, the dry matter, oil, protein and fatty acid composition of the clary sage seeds were determined. The dry matter, oil and protein content of the clary sage seed samples varied between 97.64 and 98.35, 23.83 and 29.34, and 21.97 and 22.96%, respectively. Secondly, the fatty acid compositions in the oil and the bioactive properties in the extract were investigated. Polyunsaturated fatty acids were the most abundant fatty acids in the clary sage. The α-linolenic, oleic and linoleic acid contents of the sage oils changed from 50.04 to 53.69%; 20.10 to 22.97%; 15.54 to 18.06%, respectively according to year. The total phenolic content, antioxidant and antiradical activities of the sage seeds were determined in the range of 7.71–13.21mg GAE/g dry extract, 50.45–74.04 (mg AAE/g dry extract) and 13.14–21.21% respectively. Each of the investigated parameters of the sage seeds was significantly affected by the harvesting year. Consequently, clary sage seeds are rich in fatty acids and contained high levels of antioxidant and antiradical activities making them ideal for use as nutraceuticals.  As is known, the chemical composition variation of aromatic and medicinal plants depends on different conditions such as cultivation area, climatic conditions, harvest year, vegetation phase, genetic modifications, countries and geographical zones ( The research was carried out in the Experimental Horticulture area of Cumra Agricultural Vocational School in Konya, Turkey. The clary sage ( The clary sage seeds were analyzed for protein, oil and dry matter contents according to AOAC International methods ( The FA compositions of the samples were determined according to AOAC method ( Firstly, using the extraction method in dark conditions the extracts were obtained from the clary sage seeds using 80% ethanol: water solvent. Secondly, the total amount of phenolic compounds in the extract was determined by the Folin–Ciocalteu colorimetric method ( The antiradical activity of the clary sage seed extract was determined according to the procedure described by The antioxidant activity of the seed extract was evaluated by the phosphomolybdenum method according to GC–MS analysis was performed using some modifications according to the procedure described by All analyses were performed in triplicate. SAS statistical software ( The dry matter, oil and protein composition of the sage seeds over five years, 2006–2010 are shown in Enhanced photosynthesis leads to higher dry matter production ( Solar radiation reaching the earth surface changes from year to year ( Other factors such as rainfall, differentiation in cultivation area, vegetation phase, countries and geographical zones all have different impacts on plant production and composition. For example, some rainfall changes in the past have resulted in significant differences in agricultural regions such as rainfall decline by 20% in the wheat belt of Western Australia over the past decades versus rainfall increases by 100–200 For the above reasons, the proximate properties, fatty acid compositions and bioactive characteristics of clary sage seeds varied from year-to-year in this study. The fatty acid composition of the clary sage seeds harvested in different years is presented in We did not find any study in the literature on the effect of cultivation years on the fatty acid compositions of the sage seed. The bioactive properties of clary sage seeds harvested from 2006 to 2010 are shown in Generally, volatile compounds, such as essential oil constituent are responsible for the antioxidant and antiradical activity of the samples ( Although compositions of the essential oil of aerial part of the sage have mostly been studied, there is a little study on the volatile compound of the sage seed. Volatile composition of the clary sage seeds harvested in five consecutive years, from 2006 to 2010, was shown in