The phase evolution and electrical conductivity of barium doped GdAlO3 samples have been investigated. The Ba- doped compositions of GdAlO3 were prepared through citrate gel process. Analysis of the phases was carried out using X-ray diffraction (XRD). The morphology of the calcined powders was studied by scanning electron microscopy. The electrical conductivity of Gd1−
                     
                        x
                     Ba
                        x
                     AlO3−
                     
                        δ
                      (x
                     =0–0.04) was measured using ac impedance spectroscopy as a function of temperature ranging from 300 to 1000°C under air. The solid solubility of barium in GdAlO3 was found to be less than 4mol%. The undissolved barium precipitated in the form of BaAl2O4 phase. The barium doped GdAlO3 powders obtained after calcination at 1000°C was found to be porous agglomerate composed of nanocrystalline grains. The total electrical conductivity of Ba-doped GdAlO3 increased with increasing amounts of barium up to 2mol% doping.Gadolinium based perovskite oxides are technologically important materials that find potential applications in the form of phosphor, scintillator, and regenerator material for sub −4 The preparation of barium doped gadolinium aluminate powders was carried out through citrate gel route using the same procedure as described for calcium doped system The phase purity of the calcined powders was confirmed through high resolution X-ray diffraction. The XRD data were collected at a step interval of 0.01 2 For the sintering study, the calcined powders without any further mechanical grinding were utilized. The calcined powders were compacted in a uniaxial hydraulic press at 150 The morphological characterization of calcined powder particles and microstructural analysis of the fractured surfaces of sintered samples were carried out by scanning electron microscopy (SERON AIS2100). Specimens taken for electrical property measurements were 9–10  The SEM photomicrographs of barium doped GdAlO Based on the above XRD results, sintering study and electrical characterization of Ba-doped GdAlO The fractographs of barium doped GdAlO The typical Nyquist plots of barium doped gadolinium aluminate sample for The plots of log ( It can be postulated that addition of barium in GdAlO The increase in total conductivity can be attributed to the formation of oxygen vacancy as well as increase in cell volume of the perovskite that assists the mobility of oxygen ion. The increase in the cell volume with initial barium doping is the result of 35% larger ionic radius of Ba Barium doped GdAlO