The toxicity of cyanide is hitherto attributed to its ability to bind to heme proteins’ active site and thereby inhibit their activity. It is shown herein that the long-held interpretation is inadequate to explain several observations in heme-enzyme reaction systems. Generation of cyanide-based diffusible radicals in heme-enzyme reaction milieu could shunt electron transfers (by non-active site processes), and thus be detrimental to the efficiency of oxidative outcomes.Anthropogenic activities (from mining and mineral processing industries) present significant amounts of free cyanide in environmental samples, which is measured as the sum total of its ionic and acidic forms (CN Inhibition of peroxidase activity of heme-enzymes is explained by the binding of CN as the sixth axial ligand within the distal active site pocket (and this is called Type II binding). A coordination between Fe atom of heme and (most probably) the carbon atom of CN results, thereby inhibiting the formation of the catalytically active species of Compound I All proteins were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich and other chemicals/reagents were procured from reputed vendors and freshly reconstituted. A systematic study of one-electron oxidations mediated by three structurally and functionally different enzymes- (i) chloroperoxidase (CPO, a kind gift from the late Dr. Lowell P. Hager, UIUC), a heme-thiolate system from the microbial fungus- All reactions were carried out at 27 Select data are shown in The effect of varying substrate concentrations (at a given pH) is presented in The highest and lowest IC Further, we explored inhibitions of reactions at very low concentrations of CN, which is shown in The observations presented challenge hitherto available explanations and invoke upon alternative mechanism(s) for explaining CN-proffered inhibition of the studied enzyme systems-heme-thiolate (CPO), heme-histidylate (HRP) and heme-tyrosylate (catalase) over wide pH/substrate/inhibitor concentration ranges, with substrates belonging to diverse classes-an aromatic amine (TMPD), a phenolic compound (Pyro) and a heteroatomic multinuclear molecule (ABTS). In hemoprotein research, Mason’s group had confirmed cyanide-based (cyanyl) radical formation in HRP (horseradish peroxidase), CPO (chloroperoxidase), LPO (lactoperoxidase) and MetHb (methemoglobin) systems in the presence of H This work is dedicated to the late Lowell P. Hager, Professor Emeritus at UIUC (Member, NAS-USA), for his truly inspiring mentorship. The fundamental strings leading to this work were discovered in the 1990s at his lab at UIUC, when K.M.M. worked with him as a postdoctoral research associate. K.M.M. acknowledges support from