Microwave irradiation has been considered as one of the most promising approaches to assisting mechanical rock breakage in rock engineering. Understanding the influence of microwave-induced damage on rock dynamic fracture properties is thus desirable. Using the notched semi-circular bend (NSCB) method, dynamic fracture tests were carried out on rock specimens irradiated by microwaves with different durations. Prior to the dynamic tests, X-ray micro-CT scanning and P-wave velocity measurement were employed to quantify the microwave-induced damage. Both the CT value and the P-wave velocity decrease with the increase of the irradiation duration. During the dynamic tests with loads exerted by a split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) system, a laser gap gauge (LGG) technique was used to monitor the crack surface opening distance (CSOD). The results show that the dynamic initiation fracture toughness increases linearly with the loading rate, and the microwave irradiation has a significant weakening effect. Moreover, the propagation fracture toughness and fracture energy are also sensitive to the irradiation duration and the loading rate, which both increasing with the loading rate while decreasing with the increase of the irradiation duration. In addition, the dynamic fracture velocity increases with the loading rate, whereas the limiting fracture velocity and the fracture arrest toughness are significantly reduced by the microwave irradiation.length of the notched crack cross-sectional area of input/output bar area of new crack surface created thickness of a NSCB specimen wave speed of input/output bar Young’s modulus of input/output bar Young’s modulus of a tested specimen force difference between the ends of the specimen average force between the ends of the specimen force at the incident end of the specimen force at the transmitted end of the specimen fracture energy stress intensity factor for mode-I fracture dynamic initiation fracture toughness for mode-I fracture propagation fracture toughness for mode-I fracture fracture arrest toughness for mode-I fracture fracture loading rate for mode-I fracture residue kinetic energy of the rotating fragments radius of a NSCB specimen span of the supporting pins fracture propagation velocity terminal rotation velocity of the fragments crack tip limiting velocity dimensionless stress intensity factor strain in input bar induced by incident wave strain in input bar induced by reflected wave strain in output bar induced by transmitted wave Poisson’s ratio of the tested specimen split Hopkinson pressure bar International Society for Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering notched semi-circular bend computed tomography laser gap gauge crack surface opening displacement crack surface opening velocity During hard rock breakage in underground excavation and tunneling operations, the performance of mechanical equipment such as TBMs is significantly restricted by high levels of bit wear and frequent maintenance According to the existing investigations, the weakening mechanism of microwave irradiation on rocks is mainly attributed to the selected heating mechanism due to the difference in dielectric properties of minerals The microwave-induced damage results in the rock strength degradation and thus facilitates rock breakage. In general, the influence of microwave irradiation on the rock physical and mechanical properties strongly depends on the mineralogy and water content of the rock material. Rocks with different hardness, water content and microwave absorption abilities were selected by Hassani et al. The aforementioned investigations are mainly focused on the mechanical properties under static stress conditions, few studies have been conducted on the dynamic mechanical properties of irradiated rocks. The rock breakage processes in real TBMs tunneling and drilling operations are fundamentally dynamic In this work, dynamic fracture tests on the raw and irradiated rock specimens were carried out using a split Hopkinson pressure bar (SHPB) system. The notched semicircular bend (NSCB) specimens of a well-studied granitic rock, Barre granite, were selected to investigate the fracture initiation toughness and fracture energy. As compared with other dynamic fracture methods, the NSCB method has advantages including core-based specimen configuration and relatively small dimension in the loading direction, which facilitates the dynamic force balance in SHPB tests. The NSCB method thus has been extensively used to determine fracture initiation toughness and other fracture parameters as shown by Chen et al. This paper is organized as follows. Following the introduction, Barre granite is a fine to medium grained rock with mineral grain sizes ranging from 0.25 to 3 mm, which was collected from southwestern Burlington in Vermont, USA. Barre granite is mainly composed of 65% (by volume) feldspar with quartz, micas and biotitic minerals making up the majority of the rest The samples were prepared following the International Society for Rock Mechanics and Rock Engineering (ISRM) suggested method For microwave irradiation experiments, a CM-06S multimode cavity microwave system Several investigations were devoted to characterizing the internal damage of rock-like materials subjected to microwave irradiation or thermal treatment by employing X-ray micro-CT scanning and P-wave velocity measurement It is well known that X-rays have different attenuation degrees passing through the minerals with various densities, thus leading to various gray-levels in the CT images. Specifically, the darker zone in One can see that the average CT value significantly decreases with the increase of the microwave irradiation duration, and the longer the exposure time, the greater reduction in the CT value. There is an obvious downward trend of the P-wave velocity, and the shape of the curve is consistent with that of CT value. The decrease of these two properties clearly indicates that significant damage has been introduced during the microwave irradiation process. For dried Barre granite, both the free water and water-bearing minerals can be rarely found in the components, thus we believe that the degradation of CT value and P-wave velocity are mainly attributed to the combination of thermally induced microcracks and the formation of voids owing to the quartz phase change Based on the ISRM suggested method for determining rock dynamic fracture toughness LGG system was introduced by Chen et al. It is well known that the force balance at both ends of NSCB specimens is the basic prerequisite for inertial effect elimination and effective data reduction in dynamic fracture test. To achieve the dynamic force balance, the pulse shaper made of C11000 copper disc was attached on the impact end of the incident bar, and a typical bell-shaped incident stress pulse was generated ( Due to the difference in mechanical impedance between the specimen and the bars, the force within the specimen increases from zero to a uniform state after the elastic wave propagates back and forth for several traversals. According to Frew et al. Once the force balance is achieved, the stress intensity factor for mode-Ι fracture can be calculated by the following formula Based on the first law of thermodynamics, the energy consumed during the dynamic propagation of the fracture can be determined. For an NSCB fracture test, the energy dissipation As mentioned above, the initiation fracture toughness measured by NSCB method is actually the peak value of stress intensity factor history curve at which the crack begins to propagate and thus can reflect the ability of the rock to resist fracture initiation. Therefore, the fracture toughness is a useful parameter to assess the weakening effect of microwave irradiation. For a given loading rate, the initiation fracture toughness shows little difference at 60 s compared with the untreated rock, and then exhibits a remarkable decrease with the exposure time from 120 s to 240 s. This result implies that the duration of microwave irradiation has a significant weakening effect on the fracture toughness of Barre granite. Unlike the conventional heat treatment method in which the heat transfers from the surface into interior due to higher ambient temperature, microwave heating relies on molecular friction within the material, resulting in a rapid and volumetric heating process. In literature The loading history, crack surface opening distance (CSOD) and crack surface opening velocity (CSOV) of specimens with different microwave irradiation durations are shown in The average propagation velocities of crack and the fracture energy are plotted in The induced microcracks may result in changes in grain shape, size and contact of rocks  The dynamic fracture propagation toughness is positively correlated with the fracture velocity, and the relation between them can be empirically described by the following formula In this study, an attempt has been made to investigate the weakening effect of microwave irradiation on the fracture properties of Barre granite (BG). The notched semi-circular bend (NSCB) BG specimens were irradiated for the durations up to 240 s with a microwave system operated at a power of 6 kW before the dynamic tests, and the microwave induced damage was quantified by both CT value and P-wave velocity. The results indicate that both of these two indicators significantly decrease with the increase of the microwave irradiation duration. The mode-Ι fracture parameters were measured using a split Hopkinson pressure bar system with the laser gap gauge technique. Regardless of the microwave irradiation duration, the initiation fracture toughness of the rock increases almost linearly with the loading rate and shows an obvious loading rate dependence. The fracture toughness for each irradiation duration increases with the loading rate at approximately the same ratio. For a given loading rate, the initiation fracture toughness shows little difference at 60 s as compared with that of the untreated rock, and then exhibits a remarkable decrease with the duration varying from 120 s to 240 s, implying that longer duration of microwave irradiation has a more pronounced weakening effect on the initiation fracture toughness. With the increase of the microwave irradiation duration, the density of microcracks increases and the binding capacity between the grains is gradually deteriorated, resulting in an increase of the propagation velocity as well as the fracture velocity. Moreover, the fracture energy and propagation fracture toughness are also sensitive to the irradiation duration and the loading rate. Specifically, both the fracture energy and propagation toughness increase with the increase of the loading rate while decrease with the increase of irradiation duration. Finally, the results demonstrate that the dynamic fracture propagation toughness increases with the increase of the fracture velocity, and both the limiting fracture velocity value and fracture arrest toughness are significantly affected by the microwave irradiation. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work has been supported by the Science Fund for Creative Research Groups of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: