The sorption behaviour and mechanism of a novel chelate resin, imino-diacetic acid resin (IDAAR), for Yb(III) has been investigated in HAc–NaAc medium. The sorption of Yb(III) obeys the Freundlich isotherm. Optimum sorption for Yb(III) on IDAAR is at pH 5.13 and the statically saturated sorption capacity is 187 mg/g resin at 298 K. Yb(III) can be eluted using 1~2 mol L−1 HCl and the resin can be regenerated and reused without apparent decrease of sorption capacity. The apparent sorption rate constant is k
                     298
                     =1.57×10−5 s−1; the apparent activation energy is 13.8 kJ mol−1 and the enthalpy change ΔH of IDAAR for Yb(III) is 29.8 kJ mol−1. The sorption mechanism of IDAAR for Yb(III) was examined by using chemical methods and IR spectrometry. The molar coordination ratio of the functional group of IDAAR to Yb(III) is 3:1 with the coordination compound formed between oxygen atoms in the functional group of IDAAR and Yb(III).Various studies on the synthesis, characterization and sorption properties of polymeric materials have been published by this author and other researchers in recent years ( Imino-diacetic acid resin was provided by East China University of Science and Technology and activated before use. Standard solutions of ytterbium(III), yttrium(III), lanthanum and samarium(III) were prepared from Yb Shimadzu UV-2401PC UV/VIS spectrophotometer; SartoriusPB-20 pH meter; SHZ-B temperature constant shaking machine; Perkin–Elmer 683 FT–IR(KBr pellets); Elemental Analyzer EA 1110. A desired amount of treated resin was weighed and added into a conical flask, and then a desired volume of buffer solution at pH 5.13 was added. After 24 h, a required amount of standard Yb(III) solution was added. The flask was shaken in a shaker at constant temperature. The upper layer of clear solution was taken for analysis until adsorption equilibrium was reached. The distribution coefficient ( initial concentration of metal ion in solution (mg RE(III).mL equilibrium concentration of metal ion in solution (mg RE(III).mL total volume of solution (mL) A solution containing less than 75 μg of Yb Twenty milligrams of resin was added into a mixed solution of pH 5.13 buffer solution and the desired amount of standard Yb(III). After the equilibrium was set up, the concentration of Yb(III) in the aqueous phase was determined, and the sorption capacity of the resin for Yb(III) was obtained. The resin separated from the residual aqueous phase was washed three times with pH 5.13 buffer solution. The resin which had adsorbed Yb(III) was shaken with the eluant. After reaching equilibrium, the concentration of Yb(III) in the aqueous phase was determined and then the percentage of elution was obtained. The test was carried out according to the above-mentioned method. The influence of pH on the sorption behaviour of IDAAR for Yb When the rare earth concentration [RE The experiment was carried out with 20 mg resin at 288, 298, 308 and 314 K with samples taken out at intervals to determine the remaining concentration. According to the Brykina method ( A plot of log Various weights of resin between 15.0 and 35.0 mg were equilibrated with 7.0 mL standard Yb(III) (1.0 mg/mL) and 33 mL buffer solution at pH 5.13 and 298 K. When the sorption equilibrium was reached, the equilibrium concentration ( The distribution coefficient ( Eight parts of different amounts of resins were accurately weighed and mixed with different amounts of Yb(III). The total moles of IDAAR and Yb(III) was kept a constant 145.0 μmol. whatever the molar ratio. The sorption amount vs [Yb The sorption capacity of the resin for Yb From the results above, it can be deduced that the sorption of Yb(III) by IDAAR can be classified as chemical sorption by ion exchange (Δ Experimental result in In order to test the practical value of HCl as an eluant, the elution rate of 2.0 mol L After Yb(III) was adsorbed and eluted by 2.0 mol L The IR spectrum of the regenerated resin was exactly the same as that of the original IDAAR as was the N content. The results show that the regenerated IDAAR quality is good.  Ytterbium(III) can be optimally adsorbed on imino-diacetic acid resin in HAc–NaAc medium at pH The apparent sorption rate constant is The sorption behaviour of imino-diacetic acid resin for Yb(III) obeys the Freundlich isotherm with proton exchange and a coordination compound formed between oxygen atoms in the functional group of imino-diacetic acid resin and Yb(III).