Modeling and optimizing process parameters, initial pH, pulp density, and initial concentration of ferrous ions by bacterial leaching to increase copper extraction from a low-grade ore of Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex was studied as an empirical model. Optimum conditions to achieve maximum total copper extraction were initial pH 2.0 and pulp density 1.59% without adding ferrous ions. In these conditions, model prediction for total copper extraction was 85.98%, higher than any value obtained in conducted experiments.Sarcheshmeh Copper Complex is the largest copper mine in Iran. Every year, the mine produces about one million tones low-grade ore, a mixture of sulfide and oxide containing 0.3%-grade copper, which should be treated using hydrometallurgical methods ( In this study, around 3500 Mixed cultures of both iron–sulfur-oxidizing mesophilic bacteria, including A series of experiments was conducted by Central Composite Design (CCD), using Design Expert 7 Trial (State Ease, Inc., Minneapolis, MN, USA) to determine relationship between response (total copper extraction) and three process parameters with following ranges: Initial pH: 0.96–2.64. Pulp density: 1.59–18.41% w/v. Initial concentration of ferrous ions: 0.00–6.27 Consequently, the total number of tests necessary for the three independent variables is 2 All bioleaching CCD tests were performed at 140 In Design Expert software, effects of all model terms were calculated and a quadratic model was selected. Probability of model Lack-of-fit (0.633) was more than 0.1, and the model was highly significant with very low probability value (<0.0001) and very high determination coefficient (0.948). Likewise, a very low value of variation coefficient (1.48) indicates precision and reliability of experiments. Adequate precision (23.598) measures the signal to noise ratio, ratios greater than 4 are desirable. Furthermore, Results obtained from the experiments are summarized in The observed and predicted values using model equation (Eq.  Effect of three process parameters is shown in The quadratic model equation is optimized using quadratic programming (QP) to maximize total copper extraction within the studied experimental range. The optimum process parameters were pH In this study, CCD, and QP were used to model and optimize the influence of three process parameters on bacterial leaching of a low-grade copper ore. Using a set of experimental data and Design Expert software, a mathematical model equation was derived. Predicted values using the model equation were in a pretty good agreement with the observed values (