The cementation cake (CINKUR Co., Turkiye) was leached with hydrochloric acid. The extraction and concentration of cadmium from these acidic leach solutions, containing various other ions, such as zinc, iron, lead, aluminium, copper, cobalt, and nickel, by an emulsion liquid membrane (ELM) using trioctylamine (TOA) as extractant were studied. The study has highlighted the importance and influence of membrane composition for maximizing the extraction of cadmium. The ELM consists of trioctylamine as an extractant, commercial kerosene as a diluent, Span 80 as a surfactant and 6 M ammonia solution as a stripping solution. The important factors studied which affect the ELM stability and extraction of cadmium are acid and cadmium concentrations in the acidic leach solution, mixing speed, type and concentration of the stripping solution, extractant concentration, surfactant concentration and phase ratio. The results showed that it is possible to extract 98% of cadmium after 10 min contact time by using ELM from the acidic leach solutions, containing Zn, Fe, Pb, Al, Cu, Co and Ni ions, at the optimum operating conditions.Cadmium occurs naturally as a minor constituent of base metal ores and coal deposits. As a result, cadmium is obtained commercially as a by-product in base metal refining. For example, 95% of cadmium comes as a by-product from zinc hydrometallurgical processes. In general, the acid leachate of zinc ores contains several rare metals such as cadmium, cobalt, copper, etc. Because of their economic value, recovery of these rare metals has been attracting a great deal of attention from chemists and metallurgists ( The presence of cadmium ions in many industrial aqueous waste solutions is a complex example of pollution because of its toxicity, which affects aquatic life and, in extreme cases, human life. Therefore, wastewater decontamination is of great concern in the environmental field of waste and pollution reduction. The presence of traces of heavy metals in wastewater streams is particularly dangerous, since most of them are toxic and persistent ( Several technologies can be used to remove these toxic metals from liquid effluents, including precipitation, solvent extraction, ion exchange, etc ( Liquid-membrane technology is an attractive and promising technology for the selective extraction and recovery of heavy metal ions from aqueous solutions ( There are few papers, which deal with Cd (II) removal and Cd (II) over Zn (II) separation by supported liquid membranes. The main advantages of the ELM system are: (a) high interfacial area for mass transfer, especially at the inner membrane–water interface, due to the small size of the aqueous phase droplets; (b) high diffusion rate of the metal ion through the membrane; (c) simultaneous performance of extraction (at the outer interface) and stripping (at the inner interface) in the same system, and (d) capability of treating a variety of elements and compounds in industrial setting at a greater speed and with and a high degree of effectiveness, with varying contaminant concentrations and volume requirements. Many successful applications of ELMs for separation processes in general, and especially for removal of heavy metal ions from wastewaters, have been reported in the literature ( The liquid-membrane phase is that which separates the encapsulated drops in the emulsion from the external continuous phase. ELMs provide a potentially powerful technique for effecting a diverse separation operation, while simultaneously allowing the extracted solute to be concentrated strongly in the receiving phase. ELMs have also been applied to a variety of separations including removal of contaminants from wastewater, fractionation of hydrocarbons, in biochemical and biomedical fields and recovery of metal ions ( In the present work, in order to have a better understanding of the dynamics of ELM technique, the major parameters influencing the extent of extraction were experimentally studied and the optimum conditions needed for the selective extraction and concentration of cadmium from acidic leach solutions, containing cadmium together with Zn, Fe, Pb, Al, Cu, Co and Ni were determined. The liquid-membrane phase is composed of a surfactant, an extractant and a diluent. The non-ionic surfactant used for stabilizing the emulsion is sorbitan monooleate which is a product of Fluka and commercially known as Span 80. The mobile carrier is trioctylamine (TOA) which is purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Company. A commercial kerosene (TUPRAS Oil Company, Turkey) was used as diluent. Ammonia, hydrochloric acid, sodium carbonate, ammonium carbonate, ammonium acetate and sodium hydroxide were of A.R. grade (Merck, Germany) used directly as received from the manufacturer. On the other hand commercial kerosene is a complex mixture of aliphatic origin and also contains aromatics about 15% w/w. The cementation cake (CINKUR Co., Turkiye) consists an average of 20% Zn, 10% Cu, 1% Pb, 0.1% Fe, 2.2% Co, 3.1% Ni, 3.0% Cd, and 1% Al on mass basis was leached with a 2 M hydrochloric acid solution using a solid/liquid ratio of 1/4 at 85 °C for 240 min and was obtained with acidic leach solution containing Zn (II), Cu (II), Pb (II), Fe (III), Co (II), Ni (II), Cd (II), and Al (III) ions. Except for cadmium (II), cobalt (II), and nickel (II), the other metal ions in the acidic leach solution were precipitated by adding various reagents and adjusting the pH of solution. Then, acid and cadmium (II) ion concentrations of this stock leach solution, containing 1650 mg/L Cd, 130 mg/L Zn, 1305 mg/L Co, and 1725 mg/L Ni, were made as desired by adding hydrochloric acid and water ( In 250 mL beaker, a 30 mL portion of TOA and Span 80 in kerosene are emulsified at mixing speed of 1800 rpm by a variable speed mixer. The composition of membrane expressed is in % weight and correspond to the volume of kerosene In 600 mL beaker, the ELM prepared was added to 250 mL of the feed solution. The contents were stirred by a variable speed mixer equipped with a turbine-type impeller at speed of 250 rpm for extraction time of 10 min. To determine the important variables governing the permeation and separation of cadmium (II) from the acidic leach solution containing cobalt (II), nickel (II), and zinc (II), acid and cadmium (II) concentrations in the acidic leach solution, mixing speed, type and concentration of stripping solution, extractant concentration, surfactant concentration and the effect of volume ratio of the stripping phase to the membrane phase were varied to observe their effect on cadmium (II) extraction and separation. At the end of each run, the emulsion was recovered and subsequently broken into its constituent organic and ammoniacal solutions using a high voltage splitter with niobium electrodes. The uptake of metal ions was monitored by removing samples of the feed solution periodically for analysis. Atomic absorption spectrophotometry (Shimadzu AA-6701F model, Tokyo, Japan) is used for the determination of metals (Cd, Co, Ni and Zn). All the extraction experiments were carried out batchwise at the ambient temperature of 20 A number of extractants appropriate for recovery or removal of cadmium from aqueous solutions have been tested, among them amines, preferably tertiary amines, with the metal extracted from an acid phase together with chloride ion ( Trioctylamine is capable of forming organic soluble salts of anionic species. Since trioctylamine contains a basic nitrogen atom, it typically can react with a variety of inorganic to form amine salts, which are capable of undergoing ion exchange reactions with a lot of other anions. In the presence of HCl in the feed solution, the extraction and stripping processes of cadmium (II) through an ELM are illustrated by the following equations ( TOA (shown as R In the feed solution, CdCl NH The effect of acid concentration in the feed solution on the extraction of CdCl The increase in proton concentration in the feed solution will form a species like H R As known from the literature, the main factor of emulsion liquid-membrane applicability is stability of emulsion. In addition to agitation speed, extractant, and surfactant concentration, another parameter is stripping agent type ( As the extraction step occurs in the interface between the feed solution and the liquid membrane, the extraction of metal necessarily requires a simultaneous back-extraction step at the opposite side of the membrane. In the back-extraction stage, the extractant is regenerated and the metal is stripped ( In the present study, the effect of NH Extractant plays a significant role in ELM process in order to make the system efficient and economically viable. Therefore, it is necessary to investigate the effect of extractant concentration on the extraction of metal ion. The effect of TOA on the extraction of CdCl It is very important to ascertain the effect of surfactant concentration on the behavior of CdCl The phase ratio, defined as the ratio of the stripping phase volume (  Mixing speed during extraction is an important factor. Effects of mixing speed on the extraction of CdCl The effect of CdCl The effect of optimum conditions on the extraction efficiency of cadmium (II) and other ions from the acidic leach solution containing 750 mg/L Cd (II), 590 mg/L Co (II), 785 mg/L Ni (II), and 60 mg/L Zn (II) ions was shown in The separation factors An emulsion liquid-membrane process using TOA as an extractant to extract and concentrate cadmium (II) from acidic leach solutions of zinc plant cementation cake containing various metal ions has been investigated. From this study the following conclusions can be drawn: The experimental results obtained showed the validity of the ELM method to be used for selective extraction and concentration of cadmium (II) from hydrochloric acid leach solutions. At the optimum conditions, the extraction of cadmium (II) has been achieved with an efficiency of about 98.0% from the acidic leach solution containing various metal ions. The liquid-membrane selectivity of cadmium (II) with respect to other ions that existed in the acidic feed solutions was high at the first 10 min. The cadmium (II) concentration could be increased about ten times in one stage, and using more stages the concentration of cadmium (II) could be further improved. The reduced amount of solvent required for selectively separation and concentration of toxic cadmium metal, account for the promising performance of this technology in practical applications. The author wish to express his sincere gratitude to the State Planning Organization of Turkiye (DPT), that supported this work, and Mehmet Yilmaz, coordinator of BAPK in Sakarya University.