The separation and extraction of associated rare earths from the Zhijin phosphorite mine is of great interest. Based on previous studies, the hydrolysis of phosphate ore using hydrochloric acid was systematically studied through extensive testing. Experiments were conducted to separate and recover the rare earths from the hydrolysis solution. Kinetic studies on the acidolysis of phosphorite using hydrochloric acid show that the use of hydrochloric acid in the acidolysis of phosphorite is mainly controlled by a chemical reaction and is also a diffusion-controlled reaction. When 210 L of HCL per 100 kg of phosphorite was used at 30 °C for 360 min, 96.1% of the P2O5 and 95.0% of the rare earths are leached from the phosphorite. After defluorination and purification, the pH of the phosphate-acid solution is adjusted to 2.1 using sodium hydroxide, and a rare earth concentrate with rare earth content of 1.76 wt% is obtained; i.e., 90.1% of the rare earths are recovered. The rare earth content is increased to more than 5 wt% through multiple enrichment processes, with a total yield of 59.5%.The Guizhou Zhijin phosphorite mine is an extremely large rare earth low-grade phosphorite mine, The hydrochloric acid method is represented by the IMI wet phosphoric acid process developed by the Israel Mining Engineering Company in the 1960s. However, this method has not been used in China due to its complexity, equipment corrosion, and the production of calcium chloride waste solution. Based on the characteristics of China's mineral resources and the phosphorous chemical products solutions, researchers conducted experiments on the preparation of phosphoric acid, fertilizer, feed calcium, and flame retardant from phosphorite using the hydrochloric acid method, However, the hydrochloric acid method is still not widely used in China, and there are few engineering examples of its use. In particular, the Zhijin phosphorite mine contains low-grade, high impurity ore that contains trace rare earths. The separation and extraction of the rare earth elements contained therein are more complicated and are not economically feasible. Until now, most studies have focused on the acid leaching of rare earth elements. The extraction of the rare earth elements in the leachate is mainly carried out using organic extracting agents. Because the rare earth ion content in the system is very low, the amount of extracting agents used for the direct extraction is high, resulting in the poor economic feasibility of the overall process. The selective precipitation method is a method where a precipitating agent is added to the sample solution and one component precipitates as a solid phase with a certain composition and is separated from the liquid phase by filtration. The principle is simple, no special device is needed, and it is a classic separation technique. In particular, the selective precipitation method is advantageous when used in the primary separation and enrichment of trace elements. Therefore, in this study, rare earths were enriched using the ion precipitation method. The advantage of this method is that the rare earth concentrate can be obtained at a low cost, and there is no increase or only a slight increase in the number of subsequent processing steps. This method differs from the direct use of oxalic acid to precipitate rare earth elements from the acid hydrolysate. Due to the low content of rare earth elements in the acid hydrolysate, the high concentration of impurities results in an unsatisfactory enrichment and precipitation of rare earth elements and a high cost. Based on previous studies, in this paper, a process involving fluoride removal, impurity removal, and multi-cycle enrichments was developed and was verified by a scaled-up experiment, and the low-cost and high-efficient enrichment of rare earth elements in the acid hydrolysate of phosphorite was verified. This work provides valuable information that can be used in the development and utilization of rare earth-containing phosphorite in Zhijin. Phosphorite samples were collected from the Zhijin Xinhua phosphorite mine, Guizhou. The composition of these samples is shown in The concentrations of the industrial-grade hydrochloric acid and analytical-reagent-grade hydrochloric acid used in the experiments were 31 wt% and 36 wt%, respectively. The sodium hydroxide, sodium chloride and sodium sulfide used were all of analytical grade. As can be seen from The process used in the experiment is shown in The amount of hydrochloric acid needed was calculated based on the calcium oxide, magnesium oxide, iron oxide and alumina contents of the phosphorite. Hydrochloric acid was weighed, and a portion of the hydrochloric acid was placed in an enamel reactor. The stirrer was turned on with a fixed rotation speed of 150 r/min. The previously measured phosphorite powder and the remaining hydrochloric acid were slowly added to the stirring tank, and after approximately 360 min, the phosphorite leaching solution was obtained from the solid-liquid separation process. The sodium chloride solution was added drop by drop to the separated phosphorite leaching solution while stirring, and then, it was filtered to obtain the sodium fluorosilicate precipitate and the primary purified solution. Then, the sodium sulfide solution was added drop by drop to the primary purified phosphorite solution while stirring. The pH was adjusted to about 1.0 using calcium hydroxide, and the solution was filtered to obtain a secondary purified phosphorite solution. While stirring, a sodium hydroxide solution was used to adjust the pH of the phosphorite-acid leaching solutions, i.e., the primary and secondary purified solutions, and the mixture were allowed to react for 30 min. Rare earth rich materials were obtained after the solid-liquid separation, precipitation, washing, and drying processes had been conducted. The rare earth concentrate was added to the secondary purified phosphorite solution while stirring. A sodium hydroxide solution was used to adjust the pH. After the solid-liquid separation, precipitation, washing, and drying processes were conducted, the rare earth secondary enrichment product was obtained. Repeating the above described steps can produce further rare earth concentrates. The content of rare earth elements in phosphorite was analyzed using an ICP-MS. The Pb content was analyzed by atomic absorption spectroscopy. The F content was analyzed using the fluoride ion selective electrode method (GB/T 1872-1995). P was analyzed using the quinoline phosphomolybdate gravimetric method (GB/T 1871.1–1995). Al, Ca, and Mg were measured using the volumetric method (GB/T 1871.3-1995, GB/T 1871.4-1995, GB/T 1871.5–1995). Fe was analyzed using potassium dichromate titration (GB/T 1871.2–1995). Si was measured using the animal gel coagulation gravimetric method (GB/T 1873-1995). The effective leaching of P The generated HF and SiF Previous studies have shown that in the decomposition of phosphorite using hydrochloric acid, hydrochloric acid concentration, reaction temperature, and reaction time have an impact on the leaching efficiency of phosphorus and rare earth elements. In addition, because the rare earth elements are mainly present in fluorapatite, the phosphorus and rare earth element leaching trends are almost the same. Increases in the reaction concentration, reaction temperature, and reaction time can all enhance the reaction rate and the phosphorus leaching efficiency. However, due to the relatively low concentration of the hydrochloric acid, in order to increase the concentration of the phosphoric acid in the acid hydrolysate, concentrated hydrochloric acid is generally used for the acid hydrolysis of phosphorite.  As can be seen from The acid hydrolysis of P As can be seen from the above analysis, the reaction system that uses hydrochloric acid for the decomposition of phosphorite complies with the relevant “shrinking core model” theory of reaction kinetics. The Mckwan equation describing the liquid–solid leaching process that produces no solid products and is controlled by a chemical reaction and the Ginstling equation describing the diffusion controlled process were selected to conduct kinetic analyses on the leaching of phosphorite. The kinetic equations are as follows: The chemical reaction-controlled rate equation: The diffusion-controlled rate equation: The data shown in As shown in For various reasons, the hydrochloric acid method has rarely been used in China, and there are few related engineering applications. To increase the engineering feasibility of the process, industrial-grade hydrochloric acid was used to study the leaching of phosphorite, phosphorus, and rare earth elements using scaled-up experimental conditions. Effect of reaction time on the leaching of rare earths and P The effect of reaction time on the leaching of the rare earths and P It can be seen from Effect of temperature on the leaching of rare earths and P The effect of temperature on the leaching of the rare earths and P It can be seen from Effect of hydrochloric acid on the leaching of rare earths and P The effect of the amount of hydrochloric acid used per 100 kg of phosphorite on the leaching of the P As can be seen from Through comprehensive analysis of the above described process, the preferred experimental conditions were to be as follows: 210 L of HCL per 100 kg of phosphorite at 30 °C for 360 min. Under these conditions, 96.1% of the P The main components of the acid hydrolysate of phosphorite formed using hydrochloric acid are shown in The phosphoric acid solution has a high fluoride ion content. By adding the fluoride ion precipitant, i.e., the sodium chloride solution, the fluorine in the acid hydrolysis can be precipitated as sodium fluorosilicate. After separation, a sodium fluorosilicate product can be obtained. The main reaction is as follows: The effect of the amount of sodium chloride added (10 wt%) per 100 kg of phosphorite acid solution on fluorine recovery at 25 °C for 60 min is shown in It can be seen from The effect of reaction time on the recovery of fluorine was investigated when 100 L of precipitant was added at 25 °C. The results are shown in  The analysis also shows that when sodium chloride was used for defluorination, the rare earth elements remained almost entirely in the liquid phase, and precipitation did not occur. The effect of pH on the rare earth enrichment before and after defluorination is shown in As can be seen from Due to the high lead ion content of the phosphorite acid solution, it co-precipitates with the rare earth ions when the pH is adjusted, resulting in the low recovery of rare earths and making it more difficult to process the material. In addition, due to the low pH of the phosphorite acid solution, direct use of sodium hydroxide to adjust the pH of the system can result in increased costs. In the experiment, calcium hydroxide was used to adjust the pH of the system to 1.0, and sodium sulfide was added to remove the lead, which took 30 min. The effect of the lead removal agent (10 wt%) on 1 m From The main components of the liquid phase after the acid hydrolysate was purified by defluorination and the impurities were removed, as shown in After defluorination and lead removal, the pH of the phosphorite hydrolysis solution was adjusted using sodium hydroxide. The relationship between the rare earth content of the precipitates obtained at different pH values and the yield of rare earths is shown in As can be seen from In order to balance the rare earth yield and content, the product of the rare earth content and yield was used as a comprehensive evaluation index for rare earth recovery. Since the rare earth content of the rare earth enriched material after the first enrichment process is relatively low, if it is directly extracted and purified, the utilization rate of the extracted material is low. Therefore, the rare earth enriched material was dissolved in the phosphorite purification solution to allow the enrichment process to be repeated for multiple times. In addition, the P From Using the process described in this paper, efficient enrichment of associated rare earths from phosphorite can be achieved at a relatively low cost. After four enrichments, the total rare earth yield was 59.5%, the rare earth element content reached 5 wt%, and the rare earth concentrate produced can be used as a rare earth ore for subsequent processing and utilization. Further separation and purification of the rare earth elements can be achieved by ion extraction and oxalic acid precipitation. Until now, most studies on rare earth elements in the hydrolysate of phosphorite have focused on the migration behavior of rare earth elements, and the extraction of rare earth elements in the leachate was mostly carried out using organic extracting agents. In view of the low grade of the Zhijin rare earth-containing phosphorite, its high impurity content, and the difficulty in separating the associated rare earths from the phosphorite using the existing process, we propose using the hydrochloric acid process to separate and recover the phosphorite-associated rare earths. Based on previous studies, the ideal conditions, i.e., the amount of hydrochloric acid used for the phosphate hydrolysis, the reaction temperature, and the reaction time were systematically studied, and experiments were conducted to separate and recover the rare earths from the phosphorite hydrolysis solution. Defluorination, impurity removal, and multiple enrichment processes enabled the efficient separation and recovery of the phosphorite-associated rare earths. The main findings of this study are as follows: The acid hydrolysis of phosphorite using hydrochloric acid is mainly controlled by a chemical reaction, but it is also controlled by a diffusion reaction. When 210 L of HCl per 100 kg of phosphorite was used at 30 °C for 360 min, 96.1% of the P Hydrochloric acid phosphate hydrolysis solution is defluorinated using sodium chloride and is purified using sodium sulfide and calcium hydroxide. Sodium hydroxide was then used as the pH adjusting agent. When the pH value is 2.1, a rare earth concentrate with a rare earth content of 1.76 wt% is obtained. Rare earth recovery reaches 90.1%. The rare earth material undergoes multiple enrichment processes. After undergoing four enrichment processes, the rare earth content in the rare earth concentrate reaches 5 wt% with a total yield of 59.5%.