The effectiveness and mechanism of dimethyldithiocarbamate (DDTC) for recovering low-grade cobalt and nickel from the lixivium of a manganese-rich slag have been investigated via a computational and experimental study. First principles calculations using a solvation model showed that DDTC can efficiently bind Fe(III), Co(II), Ni(II), and Cu(II) via the carbon disulfide functional group, indicating that Fe(III) and Cu(II) should be removed before addition of DDTC. Experimentally, 80.2% Co and 78.0% Ni were extracted from the slag containing low-grade 0.09% Co and 0.073% Ni under optimal conditions. Then, 99.92% of iron was removed from the lixivium via hydroxide precipitation. Finally, after the treatment with DDTC, excellent recoveries of 97.98% and 98.08% were obtained for Co and Ni, respectively. Further, high-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy results showed that the added DDTC can collect not only the free metal ions but also the nano-sized sulfide mineral particles. Thus, DDTC shows potential for the recycling of low-grade Co and Ni resources from solution.K Concentrations of metal ions before treated by MnS (mg/L) Concentrations of metal ions after treated by MnS (mg/L) Removal efficiency/% Cobalt (Co) and nickel (Ni) are two of the crucial components that constitute the most important battery cathode materials Several methods have been developed for extracting Co and Ni from aqueous solutions, such as precipitation, oxidation, solvent extraction, etc. Although the high recovery of Ni and Co can be obtained using these methods in some cases Dimethyldithiocarbamate (DDTC: (CH In this study, the extraction of Co and Ni with DDTC was investigated via both mechanism analysis and practical tests. Accordingly, the structure and performance of DDTC for collecting metal ions were studied via first principles calculations. High-Mn slag containing Ni and Co was chosen as the research object. The conditions of leaching metal values from slag, ferric iron removal from leach liquor, and extraction of Ni and Co were systematically tested. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was used to detect chemical information about the precipitated product. Furthermore, the recovery of nano-sized particles of sulfide from solution with DDTC was investigated. This work may shed light on the extraction of low-grade Co and Ni resources by using the promising DDTC reagent. The raw slag was sampled from slag from Sichuan Pingwu Manganese Industry (Group) Co., Ltd., Sichuan, China. As shown in Sulfuric acid (>99.8%), hydrogen peroxide (30%), manganese sulfide (>99.9%), and sodium dimethyldithiocarbamate (DDTC 99%) were used. pH regulators were prepared with a stock solution of sodium hydroxide (>96%) and sulfuric acid (>98%). All the purities are in mass percent. Deionized water was used throughout this work. A Millipore filter (0.45 μm in diameter) was used filter the lixivium to prevent large-size precipitated particles from penetration. First principles calculations were performed to obtain the changes in Gibbs energy (ΔG) of the binding reaction between the solution species and DDTC at the density functional theory (DFT) level using Becke’s three-parameter functional in combination with the Lee–Yang–Parr correlation functional (B3LYP) To ensure that the bulk slag was fully liberated, the slag was first ground up for a period of grinding time that varied from 0 to 20 min using a ball mill (using stainless steel balls with ball diameters varying from 10 to 50 mm). The grounded slag samples were further leached to determine the leaching efficiency of the specific metal elements as a function of grinding time. Based on the properly selected grinding time, the operating conditions, including temperature, leaching time, and liquid-said ratio (ν/ν), were further optimized. The dosage of sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide (as shown in Here, an electro-thermostatic water bath was used to control the temperature and was agitated using a magnetic agitator. During the optimization of the operating conditions, our experiments were conducted in parallel. In these parallel tests, 5 g of slag sample, deionized water, H The X-ray fluorescence spectrometer (XRF, AxiosmAX, Panalytical.B.V, Almelo, Netherlands) was only used to roughly and quantitatively analyze all elements in the sample. Then, inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES, Thermo-Scientific (Baird) Co., USA) was used to more precisely analyze the components of the obtained pregnant lixiviums. The ICP-AES technique is a fairly precise (μg/L level) technique that can be used to determine the concentrations of metal ions in aqueous solution. XPS is a sensitive (0.1%, weight) surface analysis technique that can help distinguish the chemical state of trace surface elements to allow detailed characterization of the qualities and properties of the precipitated products. XPS data were collected in a K-Alpha 1063 (Thermo Scientific Co., USA) spectrometer with Al Kɑ as the sputtering source at 12 kV and 6 mA in an analytical chamber with a vacuum pressure of 1.0 × 10 As shown in First, it is the most crucial step to extract as much Co and Ni as possible from the slag. The leaching efficiency of valuable metals directly influences the final product and the basic cost.  Based on the optimal environmental factors, the leaching efficiencies of Fe, Co, and Ni are plotted as functions of the H As is known, most soluble metals can be precipitated when the pH is increased to a given point As described in the computational section, DDTC should collect Co, Ni, and Cu in the final solution after the removal of elemental Fe at pH = 3.5 for 2 h. Sulfide precipitation is one of the most efficient methods to recover metal ions at low concentrations based on the low solubility of sulfide minerals. However, we have met some challenges during the recovery of Co, Ni, and Cu in our case. In this part of the study, excess MnS (four times the total metal ion concentration) was added to precipitate Cu ions in solution. As shown in    This work shows that DDTC has advantages in collecting free ions and fine sulfide particles to form large sized particles, which can be used to easily recover nano-sized Ni sulfides, Co sulfides, free Ni  Shown in In summary, extracting Co and Ni from a high Mn slag with DDTC was performed according to DFT calculation results and an experimental study. First principles calculations showed that DDTC can efficiently bind with Co(II), Ni(II), and Fe(III) in aqueous solution. Overall, 80.2% Co and 78.0% Ni were extracted from the slag under optimum conditions of grinding for 15 min and leaching with a liquid-solid ratio of 6:1 at 60 ℃ for 2 h. DDTC acts as a highly effective reagent to precipitate Co and Ni responding recoveries of 98.08% and 97.98% after Fe ion removal. The high-resolution XPS spectra of each leaching product indicate that DDTC can recover Co and Ni via chemical adsorption on the sulfide mineral surfaces, binding interactions with the metal ions, and hydrophobic flocculation. This investigation showed that DDTC has considerably potential application in the recovery of low-content Co and Ni from solution. This work was supported by the Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship Program by There are no conflicts of interest to declare. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: 