The low-temperature calcination of nickel sulphide concentrates with NaCl (at 400–450 °C) and subsequent hydrometallurgical processing provide a promising alternative to existing nickel sulphide concentrate processing technologies. The advantages of this processing approach arise from the formation of water-soluble compounds of the metals extracted as well as Na2SO4 generation during calcination, which contributes to significant (up to 75%) reduction in SO2 emission. The influences of the calcination conditions on the recoveries of Ni, Cu, and Fe from the calcine via water leaching are investigated. The optimal conditions for the samples investigated are as follows: calcination temperature of 400 °C, NaCl content of 50–100%, and calcination duration of 90 min. Based on these results as well as the data published in Part 1 of this study (thermodynamic, X-ray diffraction, and scanning electron microscopic analyses of the interaction products), the chemistry and mechanism of the calcination of the nickel sulphide concentrate with NaCl are suggested. The proposed mechanism entails the oxidation of sulphides to sulphates (at 325–400 °C) followed by partial decomposition of the latter at higher temperatures (400–450 °C). During calcination, NaCl interacts with the SO2 emitted owing to sulphide oxidation. This interaction further promotes sulphide oxidation at 350–450 °C via the consumption of the product of the reaction, i.e., SO2. Additionally, owing to the removal of SO2 from the system, the interaction of NaCl with SO2 decreases the partial pressure of S to values at which Ni remains in the sulphate form, whereas Fe has already transitioned to the oxide form. Calcine leaching provides the opportunity to extract up to 95% of Cu and Ni using water while simultaneously leaving a significant part of Fe in the cake, and this is very important from a technological perspective.The low-temperature calcination of nickel sulphide concentrates with NaCl and subsequent hydrometallurgical processing provide a promising alternative to existing nickel sulphide concentrate processing technologies. This method of processing the sulphide concentrates of non-ferrous and rare metals provides significant reduction in SO In Part 1 of this study ( In Part 1 of this study, the reaction mechanism of the calcination was not described. In this context, the purpose of Part 2 of this study was to evaluate the influences of the calcination conditions on the recoveries of Ni, Cu, and Fe from the calcine via water leaching. Based on these results as well as the data (thermodynamic, X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses of the interaction products) published in Part 1, this part aimed to suggest the chemistry and mechanism of the interaction including defining the role of NaCl in the process of calcination. Nickel sulphide concentrate was used as a precursor in this study and its composition was determined via induction coupled plasma spark mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) using a double focusing mass spectrometer, JMS-BM-2 (Japan). The results are shown in A qualitative phase analysis was performed using an ARL 9900 WS wave X-ray fluorescence spectrometer with ICDD PDF-2 database and Crystallographica Search-Match application software. Both concentrates comprised mainly magnetic pyrite, pentlandite, and chalcopyrite ore with trace amounts of cobalt pentlandite. The concentrates (sample weights of 5–10 g) were mixed with NaCl in specified ratios, evenly distributed in a ceramic cup (layer thickness of 4–5 mm to ensure complete conversion), and calcinated in a muffle furnace, Nabertherm LT 9/12/B170, at specified temperatures and durations. The calcines obtained were analysed via XRD and SEM using a Quanta 650 microscope equipped with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopic (EDS) detector, and the results were presented in Part The water leaching of the calcines was performed at 90 °C for 90 min at a solid-to-liquid ratio of 1:7. The relationships between the NaCl content of the mixture and the subsequent Ni, Cu, and Fe recoveries from the roast residue from the calcination of Concentrate 1 and water leaching are shown in The maximum recoveries of Ni and Cu in water (95% and 96%, respectively) were achieved at 100–200% NaCl content. However, from a technological perspective, a salt content of 50% (which provides 85% Ni and 95% Cu recovery) may be considered optimal, provided that Ni and Cu are additionally recovered from the water-leached cake at the stage of H The recoveries of the metals via water leaching of the calcine from Concentrate 2 are shown in Calcination with 25% NaCl content at 400 °C for 90 min results in Ni and Cu recoveries of up to 90% and 95%, respectively. The maximum Ni recovery is approximately 95%, achieved with 100% NaCl content. In comparison with that via calcination of Concentrate 1, the Fe recovery via water leaching is significantly higher and amounts to 20–30%. The difference between Fe recovery and maximum Ni recovery requires additional investigations, but it is evident that both concentrates can be used to achieve Ni and Cu recoveries in water to the extent of 95% with the use of approximately 100% NaCl content. The relationship between the calcination temperature and the subsequent recoveries of the valuable components of the calcine via water leaching is of definite interest. In the case of Concentrate 1, the optimum temperature depends on the NaCl content of the mixture and lies in the temperature range of 350–400 °C ( It should be noted that the behaviours of Cu and Ni are almost identical in the entire temperature range investigated; however, the recovery of Cu is 10–20% higher (at 50% NaCl content) than that of Ni ( The influence of temperature on the calcination of Concentrate 2 was investigated at 100% NaCl content. Thus, it is shown that the method proposed is applicable for both the concentrates tested and results in Ni and Cu recoveries in water to the extent of 95%. Regardless of the salt content, the temperature of 400 °C should be considered the optimum calcination temperature. The relationships between the calcination duration and subsequent recoveries of Ni, Cu, and Fe from the roast residue from the calcination (at 400 °C and 50% NaCl content) of Concentrate 1 followed by water leaching are shown in  The results obtained are worthy of detailed analysis as they can provide an understanding of the process of calcination. In the first part of this investigation ( During the initial stage of calcination, FeS   The occurrence form of Ni in the system containing SO The results obtained in this investigation are consistent with the data in the literature on the calcination of nickel sulphide concentrates without the addition of NaCl ( This phenomenon is explained by the fact that without the addition of NaCl, the sulphides of Fe and Ni are oxidised with the emission of SO As long as the partial pressure of SO The abovementioned reactions proceed at acceptable rates at 600–650 °C; however, at calcination temperatures of 400–450 °C, only 10% of Ni is transformed into its sulphate form ( The addition of NaCl leads to its interaction with SO Partial consumption of the reaction product (SO  From a technological perspective, it is important to produce calcines with water-soluble NiSO Thus, during calcination, NaCl plays a dual role. At the beginning of the process, NaCl intensifies the oxidation of NiS, enabling the interaction to proceed at a significant rate at 325–400 °C. Furthermore, NaCl bonds with excess SO  The influences of the calcination conditions on the recoveries of Ni, Cu, and Fe from calcines via water leaching are investigated and the optimal conditions are defined as follows: calcination temperature of 400 °C, NaCl content of 50–100%, and calcination duration of 90 min. The reaction mechanism of nickel sulphide concentrate calcination with NaCl comprises oxidation of the sulphides to sulphates with subsequent decomposition at higher temperatures and calcination durations. The role of NaCl in the process of calcination is in its interaction with the SO The reductions in Ni recovery via water leaching of the calcines obtained from calcination at temperatures higher than 400 °C, process durations greater than 2 h, or NaCl contents exceeding 200% are attributed to the decomposition of NiSO The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the