Froth flotation is a widely used process of particle separation exploiting differences in surface properties. The froth performance in a flotation cell is expected to be affected by the froth rheology, as it affects the froth residence time that determines the probability of recovery of valuable minerals in the froth phase. Flotation froths have a similar structure to the gas–liquid foams whose rheology has been widely studied. However, to date, very little work has been done in the rheology of flotation froths owing to their instability and the presence of solid particles (on bubble surfaces and in the plateau borders) that are believed to influence froth rheology and complicate any investigation. In this paper, the effects of froth properties on froth rheology were studied by examining the results of 33 flotation tests performed under various conditions that resulted in changes in the froth properties and, consequently, the froth rheology. The experiments were performed in a 20L continuous flotation cell. It was found that the bubble size and the fraction of lamellae covered by solids defined the froth rheology, while the presence of particles in the plateau borders contributed very little to the froth rheology. A model structure was developed by taking into account froth properties to predict froth viscosity.In flotation, the froth phase plays the role of transporting the hydrophobic minerals from the collection zone to the concentrate launder. Froth transportation consists of both vertical and horizontal motion: the vertical motion is defined by the flow of bubbles that carry particles moving from the pulp–froth interface to the launder lip level, while the horizontal motion describes the motion towards the overflow weir Rheology is a measure of the flow characteristics of a substance. It is usually represented by a rheogram which plots the shear stress of a fluid when subject to different shear rates. In general, a substance can either exhibit Newtonian or non-Newtonian behaviour, with the latter including dilatant, plastic, pseudo-plastic and Bingham behaviours In order to fully understand what froth properties determine the froth rheology, it is firstly necessary to gain insight into the froth characteristics. From the study of aqueous foams, when the gas volume fraction is less than 0.73, bubbles disperse in the liquid phase without becoming attached to one another; at a gas volume fraction greater than 0.73, the bubbles start to pack and are separated by thin-plane-parallel films forming polyhedral cells (lamellae) Flotation froths have a similar structure to foams, making it possible to begin the study of froth rheology by considering the rheology of foams (i.e. leaving aside the presence of solid particles). Practically, foam rheology is associated with bubble size and foam quality (the volume fraction of air in the foam) Previously, the authors have investigated the effects of various flotation conditions (viz. froth height, gas rate, impeller speed, feed particle size and feed grade) on froth rheology. A Central Composite Rotatable Design (CCRD) study was carried out, in which 33 flotation tests were performed in a 20 The 33 flotation tests were performed in a bottom driven 20 The flotation feed was a mixture of pure chalcopyrite and silica. The chalcopyrite was purchased from Geo Discoveries as bulk rock. The silica was purchased from Sibelco Australia as fine particles (P80 The flotation tests were operated continuously in a closed circuit by recycling the concentrate and tailing. Samples of the feed, concentrate and tailings were collected, and weighed before and after drying. Sub-samples were assayed for copper to determine the flotation recovery. The concentrate flow rates in terms of mass and volume were also measured. A pictorial diagram of the experimental set-up is shown in The froth rheology measurements were conducted using a 6-bladed vane (22 A digital video camera (Sony ACC-FV50B) was mounted above the flotation cell to record the froth movement. The video images were analysed by a contracted software This section introduces the methods of estimating a number of froth properties, viz. gas hold-up, fraction of lamellae covered by solids and the solids volume fraction in the plateau borders and vertices. To perform the estimations, some assumptions were made based on reasoning provided in the literature. The estimation of the fraction of lamellae covered by solids and the solids volume fraction in the plateau borders needs the value of the gas hold-up in the froth. Researchers In a continuous and stable flotation process, the froth phase is in dynamic equilibrium. Air bubbles, particles and water continuously enter the froth phase from the pulp–froth interface and flow over the launder lip. Some air is lost from the froth surface during its transportation to the launder lip ( To calculate the fraction of lamellae covered by solids, the mass of solid particles attached to the lamellae per unit area (i.e. bubble loading) and the size distribution of particles needs to be known. The bubble loading in the froth phase can be derived from the bubble loading in the pulp phase. The estimation of bubble loading in this work is based on the assumption that particles that detached through bubble bursting and bubble coalescence do not reattach on the lamellae in the froth phase. This assumption can be supported by some previous studies. Vera, Franzidis and Manlapig Silica, a hydrophilic mineral, does not attach on bubble surfaces and is recovered into the froth phase by entrainment, which contributes negligibly to bubble loading. Hence, bubble loading is associated with hydrophobic chalcopyrite particles only. In the pulp phase, the chalcopyrite particles attached onto dispersed bubble surfaces are transported to the froth phase. As a result of the quick drainage of water in the froth, bubbles start to attach to one another. Given that bubbles are densely packed in the froth phase, each lamella is shared by two neighbouring bubbles. The particles originally attached on dispersed bubble surfaces redistribute on lamellae. Consequently, the bubble loading in the froth phase is double that in the pulp phase. Bubble loading in the pulp phase can be calculated as the ratio of the mass flow rate of chalcopyrite entering the froth phase to the bubble surface area flow rate entering the froth phase. The mass flow rate of chalcopyrite entering the froth phase is equal to the mass flow rate of chalcopyrite in the final flotation concentrate when the drainage of chalcopyrite in the froth phase is negligible. This is a reasonable assumption when the final flotation recovery is close to 100%. As shown in Eq. The bubble surface area flow rate entering the froth phase can be determined by using the bubble surface area flux ( The mass flow rate of chalcopyrite in the concentrate can be calculated from the measured mass flow rate of solids in the concentrate (∅ To simplify the analysis, the shape of the solid particles on the lamellae is assumed to be spherical. The mean particle size of the solids on the lamellae (P50) is assumed to be the same as that of the sized concentrate. It is assumed that the particles exhibit a monolayer distribution on the lamellae. Hence, the area of a particle occupying the lamella is equal to its projected area. The fraction of the lamella covered by solids ( The solids volume fraction in the plateau borders and vertices is determined by the ratio of the volume of solid particles to the total volume (including solids and water). It is equal to the ratio of the solids volumetric flow rate (hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles) to the total volumetric flow rate (hydrophilic and hydrophobic particles and water) in the plateau borders and vertices. The volumetric flow rate of hydrophobic particles in the plateau borders and vertices is the overall volumetric flow rate of hydrophobic particles in the final concentrate minus the flow rate of the particles attached on bubble surfaces. The latter is directly determined by the bubble surface area flow rate overflowing the concentrate lip and the bubble loading. The bubble loading is obtained from Eq. The Sauter mean bubble diameter in the froth ( Ventura-Medina and Cilliers The measured froth rheology data were vane speed and torque as shown in The changing slope of the torque versus vane speed relationships is an indication that the flotation froths created in the test program are exhibiting non-Newtonian shear-thinning behaviour. Thus the apparent viscosity of the froth increases as the shear rate applied decreases. As the shear rate is expected to be related to froth velocity which is not constant throughout the froth phase, this poses a challenge when one wants to compare the viscosity of different froths and how it changes with froth properties. What viscosity should be compared? The Herschel–Bulkley model (Eq. where Eq. Björn, Monja, Karlsson, Ejlertsson and Svensson The curves of apparent viscosity versus shear rate for all tests are plotted in If the flow indexes can be considered constant, the variation of froth rheology in these tests can be represented by the differences in the consistency indices ( where The A summary of the data measured in the flotation experiments to perform the calculations described in Eqs.  From a macroscopic viewpoint, with the air volume fraction being above 0.95 in the froth in all the experiments (see From a microscopic viewpoint, the relationship in Froth flow also involves bubble surface area change. In static circumstances, a lamella is in a force equilibrium composed of the pressure difference between neighbouring bubbles and the surface tension. In sheared foam, the analysis of bubble dynamics has shown that the perpetual formation and disappearance of foam films between colliding bubbles leads to variation of the bubble surface area around its mean value Flotation froth is a three-phase regime involving the presence of solid particles. The solid particles are distributed on the bubble surfaces and likely have an effect on the froth rheology. The positive correlation between the fraction of lamellae covered by solids and froth rheology is likely to be due to two reasons: The presence of particles on a lamella likely roughens the bubble surface as shown in The presence of hydrophobic particles on the lamellae can lower surface tension and enhance froth stability Within the plateau borders and vertices which form between the packed bubbles of a flotation froth, water and suspended solids exist. In aqueous suspensions, solids concentration by volume can have a considerable effect on bulk rheology and potentially the solids within the plateau borders may also be having an effect on the froth rheology. However, there was no trend observed between the froth viscosity (in terms of the consistency index) and the estimated solids concentration in the plateau borders and vertices ( Now this observation may be a consequence of either the bubbles being so tightly packed that the rheology of the suspension between the bubbles plays no role or the percent solids in the water phase is too low to be having an effect. In a dilute system in which the solids volume fraction is less than 0.05, the collisions between particles can be ignored where When the solids volume fraction increases to a moderate level of about 10%, the average distance between particles becomes approximately equal to their average diameter. The interaction between pairs of particles starts to influence the suspension rheology by dissipating shearing energy. The effect of particle interactions on suspension rheology is complex and can be generally expressed as a Taylor expansion in powers of the solids volume fraction as shown in Eq. Above a certain solids concentration, the suspension viscosity increases sharply due to the significant energy dissipation resulting from friction between particles. The suspension viscosity tends to infinity when the solids volume fraction is close to the maximum where the suspension stops flowing and behaves like a solid body. In general, the suspension viscosity increases slightly with increasing solid volume fraction below solids concentration of about 0.50; above this value, the suspension viscosity increases much more rapidly with increases in solids concentration In this study, the solids concentration in the plateau borders was low and varied in a narrow range between 5.56% and 10.75% ( According to the above analysis, bubble size and the fraction of lamellae covered by solids are the two important froth properties affecting the froth rheology. Based on these findings, the literature was reviewed with the objective of determining an appropriate model structure that could be used to predict froth rheology based on the underpinning mechanisms. Princen and Kiss where where This is of the same form as the modified Herschel–Bulkley model originally fitted to the experimentally produced froth rheograms in this study but includes parameters related to the properties of the froth system — its yield stress (when it is relevant), gas hold-up, the bulk viscosity of the continuous phase which will exist in the plateau borders, bubble size and interfacial tension. Interestingly the flow index is assumed to equal 0.5, which is similar to that observed in the flotation froths produced in the experiments in this study. A number of other researchers have also shown that the flow index should equal 0.5 In this study, the flotation froth exhibited no significant yield stress. The bulk viscosity of the continuous phase is expected to be close to the liquid media and will not change as the proportion of solids in the water in the plateau borders was reasonably low in all tests ( where Using the froth property data measured in this study ( The effects of froth properties on froth rheology were investigated under various flotation conditions. The froth properties were calculated based on several assumptions. The froths exhibited shear-thinning behaviour that can be described well using a power law model defined by a consistency index and a flow index. No statistical difference was found between the fitted flow indices in the different tests. Therefore, the consistency index, which is independent of shear rate, was used to evaluate the froth rheology. The understanding of the rheology of two-phase fluids (i.e. aqueous foams or suspensions) was consulted (and expanded upon) with the objective of understanding the rheology of three-phase flotation froths. The results showed that the measured froth rheology could be related to the estimated froth properties in each experiment. Bubble size had a negative correlation with froth viscosity, which is in line with that observed in two phase dry foams. In a sheared froth, relative motion between bubbles occurs, which results in bubble deformation. The energy dissipation rate is determined by the friction between bubbles and the bubble surface dilatational modulus, both of which are negatively correlated to the bubble size. The fraction of lamellae covered by solids was found to positively influence the froth viscosity. The presence of solid particles stabilizes froth and consequently generates small bubble sizes. In addition, the presence of particles on the lamellae will be expected to increase the surface rigidity and bubble interfacial tension and therefore more energy will be dissipated as the bubbles are sheared, increasing viscosity proportionally with bubble loading. No clear relationship between froth viscosity and the solids volume fraction in the plateau borders and vertices was observed and this was attributed to the percent of solids being low and not varying significantly. A model structure was developed which enables prediction of the apparent viscosity of a three phase flotation froth based on froth bubble size, the proportion of the lamellae covered by particles and the shear rate applied. This model was able to adequately predict the froth rheology measured in the tests performed in this study. It is hoped that this model structure can be fitted to any flotation system to enable prediction of froth rheology. More work, however, is required to validate this hypothesis. There may also be the potential to further refine this model. Interfacial surface tension which is an input to the model is likely to be affected by frother type and dosage as well as the hydrophobicity of the particles attached to the bubble lamellae. Froth rheology is expected to affect the overall flotation process by affecting froth residence time. This will be investigated in future work.  cell cross-sectional area (cm capillary number Sauter mean bubble diameter in the pulp (cm) Sauter mean bubble diameter in the froth (cm) copper concentrate grade (%) froth height above discharge lip (cm) superficial gas velocity (cm/s) constant that accounts for the velocity profile of the overflowing froth regression constant (Pa·s·N·cm bubble loading in the froth (g/cm flow index (−) mean particle diameter of chalcopyrite measured in the concentrate (μm) flotation recovery (%) Sauter mean bubble radius in the froth (cm) pulp recovery (%) froth recovery (%) bubble surface area flux in the pulp (cm velocity of the upper surface of the overflowing froth (cm/s) volumetric flow rate of air overflowing the lip (cm volumetric flow rate of air entering the cell (cm volumetric flow rate of chalcopyrite that is entrained in the plateau borders and vertices (cm concentrate slurry flow rate (cm volumetric flow rate of silica overflowing the discharge lip (cm volumetric flow rate of water overflowing the discharge lip (cm lip width (cm) fraction of lamellae covered by solids shear rate (s gas hold-up in the froth solids volume fraction in the plateau borders consistency index (Pa·s chalcopyrite density (g/cm silica density (g/cm interfacial tension (N/cm) shear stress (Pa) yield stress (Pa) bubble surface area flow rate overflowing the lip (cm bubble surface area flow rate in the pulp (cm solid flow rate of concentrate by mass (g/s) apparent viscosity (Pa·s) viscosity of the Newtonian continuous phase in a foam or emulsion (Pa·s) relative viscosity The authors would like to thank the