In prior work, the authors demonstrated a method for the creation of composite coatings containing TiC particles in a pure Al matrix by cold spray via a satelliting technique. Here, the authors investigate the effects of using the ‘Satelliting’ technique on the deposition and characteristics of A6061-TiC coatings fabricated by cold-spray. The results showed clear improvements in the deposition efficiency and porosity of the satellited powder obtained by using the satellited feedstock. Annealing heat-treatment was then applied for further enhancement of the coating's density and wear properties. The heat-treated coating exhibited a ~70% reduction in interlamellar porosity. Dry sliding wear testing using a steel counter body at 5 N showed that using a satellited feedstock with TiC yielded a 55% and 20% reduction in coating specific wear rate in comparison to coatings made using pure 6061 and blended 6061-TiC, respectively. This was further reduced by ~70% and 40% in comparison to the 6061 and blended 6061-TiC coating after heat-treatment with good repeatability.Ceramic-reinforced metal matrix composites are desirable given their combination of metallic properties; such as high ductility, toughness, and thermal conductivity alongside ceramic characteristics of high hardness, high strength and Young's modulus [ Aluminium 6061 is widely used in many automobile, aerospace and mineral processing components because it boasts low density and high electrical/thermal conductivity [ Cold spray (CS) is a solid-state deposition process that accelerates powder particles to a high velocity (usually 500–1200 m/s) [ Satelliting was recently used as a method for preparing composite feedstocks [ Annealing has been shown to reduce the porosity of cold-sprayed Al coatings, enhancing inter-splat bonding [ In the present study, cold spraying is used to create composite coatings of 6061 aluminium alloy reinforced with TiC particles on an A6082 aluminium substrate using optimised spray conditions previously determined. A6061 coatings were also cold sprayed using identical process conditions for comparison. The satelliting technique was used to prepare the composite feedstock to eliminate the rebounding of the fine ceramic fraction in the CS process. Annealing heat treatment was applied to the composite CS coatings to reduce porosity and improve cohesive properties of the coating structure. Additionally, a detailed hardness study is performed to evaluate hardness prior to and after heat treatment so the effect of heat treatment on matrix as well as overall composite properties can be understood. Dry-sliding wear testing is performed to evaluate the contribution of the reinforcement material to as well as the effect of heat treatment on practical mechanical properties. 6061 aluminium alloy (simply 6061) was used as the parent powder and TiC as a reinforcement material in the satelliting process to prepare a composite satellited feedstock (6061-TiC) for processing by cold spray. The Al powder has an irregular shape with 20–53 μm size range (D The batch of satellited feedstock used for cold spray was made via multiple small batches of 25 g which were consecutively satellited using the incremental addition of binder and gyroscopic mixing until reaching the desired quantity. The final feedstock consisted of 80 wt% 6061 and 20 wt% TiC with a negligible amount of remaining binder (~0.0007 wt%). Cold-spraying was performed to create individual tracks of 6061, blended 6061-TiC and satellited 6061-TiC on Al substrates. The CS system used for this work is a custom built system described in detail elsewhere [ 6061 and 6061-TiC coating samples were subject to an annealing heat treatment at 345 °C for a duration of 2 h. These parameters are well understood to relieve the strain hardening effects of cold worked 6061 components [ Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) with an FEI Quanta 600 was used to confirm successful satelliting of the powder, as shown in  Cross-sectional imaging was performed on samples after polished using SiC grinding wheels final polishing stages using 6 and then 1 μm diamond paste. Image-J software (USA) was used to analyse the thickness and porosity of the deposited coatings using three SEM across the length of the coatings using images of 250 × 350 μm to provide averages. All error bars represent the standard error values of the mean of the relevant measurements. The deposition efficiencies ( A Buehler Microhardness machine (USA) was used for microhardness testing on coating cross-sections, using loads of 10 gf and 50 gf and a dwell time of 15 s. At both loads the average of 10 Vickers microhardness measurements was used to provide mean hardness values. The distance between every two consecutive indents was kept 5 times more than the indent size to avoid the influence of nearby indents on the next indent. To examine phase composition of the sprayed coatings, a Siemens D500 X-ray diffraction instrument was used, with a wavelength of 0.15406 nm (Cu k-alpha), a 2θ range of (30°–90°) and step size and step time of 0.05° and 2 s, respectively. Ball-on-flat reciprocating dry-sliding wear tests were performed using AISI steel ball (grade 440c) with a hardness of 250 Hv, and 6 mm diameter as a counter body at 5 N normal load. A CETR Universal Micro-Tribometer 3 (USA), was used for all wear tests, using a linear displacement amplitude of 5 mm and 1 Hz frequency for a duration of 10 min. A sample of 25 × 50 mm of each coating type was prepared for wear tests, using an overlap cold-spray strategy. The coated area was 35 × 25 mm with an average thickness of ~300 μm. All coating surfaces were polished to a mirror finish using standard grinding and polishing steps, finishing with a 1 μm diamond polish prior to testing. Three tests were performed on each sample to confirm result reliability. An Alicona Infinite Focus focus variation microscope was used to measure wear track volume. The specific wear rate (SWR) was calculated using the following formula: Typical cross-sectional BSE images of the 6061 and 6061-TiC coatings are shown in As cold spray greatly depends on the deformation of the sprayed materials, an absence of particle deformation can lead to porosity. Significant porosity can be seen in the 6061 coating, which can be explained by a lack of local deformation. Additionally, the appearance of the interface line indicates poor bonding in several substrate-coating interface regions. This is correlated with the low ductility of 6061 that causes limited local deformation of the deposits. Low particle deformation produced poor particle-particle interfacial bonding and created a highly porous structure as shown in  The satellited 6061-TiC coating yielded the larger thickness (360 μm) with an increase of 34% and 50% compared to the 6061 and blended 6061-TiC coatings, respectively. In addition, as represented by the error bars, the satellited 6061-TiC coating was more uniform in thickness than blended coating, reaching a minimum of 340 μm and maximum of 380 μm. The DE of the satellited 6061-TiC coating is clearly higher than the 6061 and blended 6061-TiC coatings ( In the satellited feedstock, the attachment of TiC particles on an Al particle surface will increase the Al particle mass by 25% compared to a non-satellited Al particle with the same size, assuming all TiC particles are attached to the Al particles. This increase in particle mass leads to a reduction in the in-flight velocity of the satellited particle due to the increase in both density and particle diameter according to the particle velocity Eq. For a 45 μm diameter Al particle, after satelliting, the density of the satellited particle increases from 2.7 (Al density) to 2.968 g/cm For an Al particle (not-satellited): After satelliting; According to Eq. Fernandez and Jodoin [ Porosity levels in the deposited coatings are shown in The satellited 6061-TiC coating shows a significant reduction in the interlamellar porosity, it is lower than the 6061 coating and blended 6061-TiC coating by 87 and 68%, respectively. The effect of the TiC particles on coating porosity is similar to their actions in the case of the blended coating. Moreover, the larger TiC fraction can increase the influence of TiC particles in the satellited coating. In addition, it was found that the hard particles with high momentum allow a higher level of deformation and also increase the peening action in the cold-sprayed layers [ In order to obtain further improvement in structure density and coating cohesion, the satellited 6061-TiC coating was heat treated at 345 °C for a duration of 2 h. This temperature is above the recrystallization temperature of Al, which is 325 °C [ Similar observations were made in a previous study, in which the interlamellar porosity of cold-sprayed Al coatings significantly decreased after annealing at 300 °C [ XRD analysis was performed on the three coating types. XRD patterns of the as-sprayed 6061, labelled 6061-AS and heat treated satellited 6061-TiC, labelled as 6061/TiC-HT coating samples are shown in A series of 50 gf microhardness measurements were used to evaluate the practical hardness of the coating, by creating indents which incorporate both matrix and ceramic material. After heat treatment, internal residual stresses are expected to be relieved, hence also contributing to a lower measured microhardness in the heat-treated coatings. These results are in agreement with another prior study [ The microhardness of the AS and HT coatings was also measured using a smaller load (10 g) targeting TiC-free areas, as shown in The increase of the matrix hardness in the AS satellited 6061-TiC coating can be explained by the increased work hardening in the composite cold-spray coatings, this is likely result of the high level of work hardening caused by the satellited particles during CS process. While the annealed matrix showed lower hardness values than the as-sprayed coating owing to the softening action of the annealing process, however it still had a hardness higher than the 6061 coating due to the TiC reinforcing effect. It is therefore clear that the addition of TiC provides the majority of the hardness increase as measured by the 50 gf indents for the results in When a large load was used (50 gf), some cracks can be seen adjacent to the indents on the AS-6061 and AS-composite coatings, but not at the indent tip. It is observed that cracks do not necessarily start from the indent corners in the sprayed coatings [  Interestingly, the heat-treated 6061-TiC coating presented a mean SWR 25% lower than the AS-satellited 6061-TiC, despite the heat-treated coating yielding lower microhardness values. Therefore, the HT-satellited 6061-TiC coating presents a total reduction of ~70% and 40% in comparison to the 6061 and blended 6061-TiC coating, respectively. A likely explanation for this is the reduced porosity in the heat-treated coating due to annealing improving the resistance of the coating against wear. This is likely explained by a reduction in the incidence of a pull-out based wear mechanism which was observed in the wear tracks in this work. The pulling-out of the reinforcing particle has been reported as an important factor in increasing the wear rate in the composite coatings [ The as-sprayed 6061 coating exhibits a wear track morphology with a combination of abrasive scratches and flattened regions of the original splat morphology. Round regions can be seen with similar dimensions to individual deposits. These regions have no indication of grooving implying either a pull-out/delamination mechanism taking place, or these regions are particularly soft. In addition, wear debris has also become trapped between splat-like regions, likely explained by regions of porosity revealed during wear. It is clear therefore that in the case of the 6061 coating the inter-splat porosity and splat-based structure has an adverse influence on the wear mechanism. The blended 6061-TiC coating shows excessive wear on the surface, with a combination of fracture and cracking confirmed by the high magnification image, In the case of the satellited 6061-TiC coatings, splats do not appear as part of the wear morphology. Abrasive grooves dominate the surface, with cracking also prevalent. For the HT-satellited 6061-TiC coating, a similar abrasive mechanism can be seen with scratching apparently less prevalent. In the low magnification image, the wear morphology of the heat-treated coating appears somewhat more uniform than the un-treated, providing evidence that more uniform properties pervade the coating. Several studies have considered toughness as a significant factor in the improved wear behaviour of metal matrix-ceramic composites [ In this work, the effect of using satelliting feedstock preparation on the deposition and characteristics of A6061-TiC coatings fabricated by cold-spray was investigated. The use of satelliting is shown to overcome typical defects observed in the deposition of less compliant Al alloys. Deposition efficiency of the 6061-TiC satellite feedstock was improved by 40% in comparison to that when using a simple 6061 feedstock, as the coating porosity reduced by ~70% with using the satellited feedstock. The TiC area fraction increased by >60% in the satellited coating section compared to the blended coating. In addition, heat-treatment of the satellited coating at 345 °C for 2 h yielded a reduced porosity of 0.21% from 0.66% for the non-heat-treated coating. This was explained by reduced inter-particle interfaces and an enhanced coating-substrate interface owing to the solid state diffusion of Al. The contribution of the satelliting approach is manifested in increased embedment and enhancing the compaction action of TiC in the composite coating. The as-sprayed satellited 6061-TiC coating yielded the highest mean microhardness value among the coatings at 91 HV0.05 (±1.5). The mean hardness of the heat-treated 6061-TiC was 83 HV0.05 (±0.7), while the as sprayed 6061 coating yielded 70 HV0.05 (±0.8). The blended 6061-TiC coating presented a hardness similar to the 6061 coating, 67 HV0.05 (±1.8). Under dry-sliding conditions, the specific wear rate of the heat-treated 6061-TiC cold-sprayed coating against a steel ball was reduced by a mean of 25% in comparison to the as-sprayed coating, with good repeatability. This was explained by the contribution of the improved toughness and enhanced structure cohesion after heat treatment, resulting in reduced fracture during wear. The authors would like to thank the Iraqi ministry of higher education for financial support of Mr. Al-Hamdani's studentship.