Over the past decade, Zimbabwe has implemented various policies in the form of export tariffs and embargoes to stimulate downstream mineral beneficiation. The policies failed to yield tangible results due to, among other factors, inadequate due diligence regarding the capability of the country in terms of its factor endowments to support downstream beneficiation. Additionally, lack of Investment in the country's downstream industries as reflected in its capital stock contributed significantly to poor domestic demand for raw materials. In light of the above, different studies have established that there are few examples where mineral beneficiation oriented policies have yielded positive results in mineral-rich countries. The reasons for failure include lack of comparative advantage and economic viability of the technologies adopted. Related studies have also shown that the similarity of factor intensities and technology across sectors stimulates structural transformation in developing countries. This paper uses the factor endowment approach to evaluate Zimbabwe's comparative advantage in the downstream beneficiation of minerals. The country's arable land, physical capital stock and human capital are used as a measure of its capability to produce beneficiated products along the mineral value chain. By matching Zimbabwe's arable land, capital stock and human capital to the revealed factor intensities for different products, the mineral related products that the country has a comparative advantage in producing are identified and presented.Regional bodies such as the African Union and SADC and several researchers have advocated for the adoption of beneficiation-oriented policies as a means for structural transformation in mineral-rich African countries. In line with the recommendations of these organizations and economic researchers, Zimbabwe has actively sought to stimulate downstream beneficiation in the mining industry for the past decade. The pursuit of beneficiation and value addition in Zimbabwe focused exclusively on mining sector policy reform largely driven by the decline of the agriculture and manufacturing sectors in the country, and the government's increased dependence on natural resource revenue amid fiscal pressures ( Through beneficiation and value addition, the Zimbabwean government intended to improve the contribution of the manufacturing sector (inclusive of smelter and refinery products) to exports from 16% to 50%, create employment, minimize the trade deficit and increase fiscal incomes ( In April 2011, the Government of Zimbabwe banned the export of raw chromite ore with the intention of pushing mining companies to set up chrome smelters ( In 2013, the government, through the ministry of finance, made public its intention enforce a 15% export tariff on PGMs concentrates with effect from January 1, 2015 ( In light of these events, The emergence of the beneficiation discourse can be traced back to the linkages concept introduced by Hirschman in the 1960s where he asserted that industries with strong backward and forward linkages were worthwhile to invest in ( The definition of beneficiation, however, varies between countries and Zimbabwe has defined it as the refining of minerals into metals ( According to The effectiveness of restrictive policies as a means to stimulate downstream beneficiation is debatable. In 1938, the Australian government believed that it had limited iron ore reserves and implemented its first embargo on ore exports to prevent supply to Japan ( Positive incentivisation policies to the private manufacturing sector can however yield positive results. For instance, the Australian steel industry was established in 1905 driven by policy mechanism that incentivized steel production using local ores and the government's demand for steel spanning a period of 7 years. The private sector played a major role in the growth of the steel sector in Australia and factors such as access to markets, raw materials and labor, low cost transportation, adequate infrastructure and local demand stimulated investment in downstream beneficiation ( To enhance domestic demand, Australia adopted a targeted policy stance in 1970 and committed to assist the iron and steel private sector if their local market share fell below 80% or rose above 90%. Additional commitments included incentives, a review of electricity and freight charges as well as payroll taxes (  The concept of comparative advantage dates back to the 19th century where The application of the Ricardian idea of comparative advantage is illustrated by several authors ( In analysing the Ricardian model, While  This five-step process was used in this study to establish whether Zimbabwe should continue to pursue the beneficiation and value addition policy in light of its factor endowments. The methodology adopted in this study was based on the Hecksher-Ohlin theory on comparative advantage emanating from factor endowments. In line with the theory, the goods that Zimbabwe exports are a reflection of its abundant factors. This therefore implies that the weighted average of factor intensities for Zimbabwe's top exports are a reflection of the country's abundant factors. This line of reasoning was adopted to establish Zimbabwe's factor endowments using export data. Data for Zimbabwe's top exports by value at the HS 6 Digit level was obtained from the United Nations Comtrade database while data for revealed factor intensities for the top exports was obtained from the UNCTAD database on international trade in goods and international services. The revealed factor intensities for all internationally traded goods were initially determined by Once the factor endowments for Zimbabwe were established, the five step process proposed by Data on revealed factor intensities covered the 1988 to 2014 period and this study was therefore limited to 2014. The analysis focused on the post 2008 period when the Zimbabwean economy started on a recovery path after a hyperinflationary episode. The factor endowments for each year were calculated as a value weighted average of factor intensities for goods with an export value of US$10 million or more. As shown in According to The minerals and mineral value chains of focus in this study were therefore nickel, chrome, platinum group of metals, gold, diamonds, iron and steel, lithium and precious metals. The average RFIs per year established in the previous section reflect Zimbabwe's factor endowments. Subsequently, products related to the selected minerals which correspond to such levels of endowments were adopted from the UNCTAD statistics database and are presented in graphical form  Along the value chain, Zimbabwe's factor en This means that the beneficiation and value addition drive should focus on these goods as long as Zimbabwe's factor endowments remain at the levels they were in the 2008 to 2014 period. In order to further cement these findings, Zimbabwe's revealed comparative advantage was calculated for different product categories using In order to deal with the challenge associated with explicitly taking into consideration all the factors that influence comparative advantage, In order to cement the findings from Equation 4–1: Revealed comparative advantage (  As shown in In As revealed in the previous analysis where no manufactured goods were within Zimbabwe's Factor endowments, The same trend revealed by Results from the five step process proposed by 1.   The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at