Bone scan with Tc-99m (technetium) diphosphonate is sensitive, but non-specific for musculoskeletal tumors. Tl-201 (thallium), Tc-99m-sestamibi, Tc-99m-tetrofosmin, and F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18-FDG) can visualize tumors more specifically and are therefore useful in orthopedic oncology. However, cartilaginous tumors are characterized by histological and biological features, which potentially impair specific radionuclide imaging. A case of a patient with a low-grade primary chondrosarcoma of the femur and a false negative Tl-201 scan is presented. Tc-99m-based tumor-localizing compounds (sestamibi, tetrofosmin), as well as metabolic and receptor-imaging radiopharmaceuticals have also been reported to fail in low-grade chondrosarcomas imaging. Low cellularity, mitochondrial specialization and the presence of an efflux membrane pump may contribute to poor imaging. A negative Tl-201 or Tc-99m-sestamibi scan should be interpreted with caution, when the possibility of a chondrosarcoma is not negligible.Chondrosarcomas are chondrogenic tumors, classified as primary and secondary. Eighty-five percent of primary chondrosarcomas, typically found in adults, are low-grade tumors Bone scan with Tc-99m (technetium) diphosphonate is the standard scintigraphic modality for the evaluation of both local tumor conditions and remote bone involvement. Tl-201 (thallium), Tc-99m-sestamibi, Tc-99m-tetrofosmin and metabolic positron emission tomography (PET) radiopharmaceuticals are characterized as ‘tumor seeking’ agents and have been found useful in initial diagnosis, grading and post-therapy evaluation of primary bone tumors The patient was a 67-year-old lady with a short history of left hip swelling and pain. Hematological laboratory values and chest radiograph (CXR) were normal. A radiograph of the femurs showed an extensive osteolytic lesion occupying and deforming the proximal third of the left femur ( Data on chondrosarcoma imaging with Tl-201, Tc-99m-sestamibi, Tc-99m-tetrofosmin or F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose (F-18-FDG) were collected from literature Chondrosarcomas, in general, showed a lower L/N ratio than osteosarcomas in both early and late phases of Tl-201 scan ( Low Tl-201 uptake by chondrosarcomas, resulting in false negative diagnoses, may be due to the low cellularity of the most common low-grade chondrosarcomas. Cellularity is an important feature for grading and is low in grade I chondrosarcomas. On the other end of the spectrum, cellular density may be so prominent and chondroid matrix so limited in grade III chondrosarcomas that the tumor could resemble spindle cell sarcoma Imaging of chondrosarcomas with the newer tumor-seeking agents Tc-99m-sestamibi and Tc-99m-tetrofosmin is of particular interest. Reduced uptake of both agents by chondrosarcomas as compared to osteosarcomas has been reported The above comments for sestamibi could also account for tetrofosmin, a newer cationic compound with intracellular distribution similar to that of sestamibi. The L/N ratio has been found lower in chondrosarcomas than in osteosarcomas, when tetrofosmin was used for imaging An alternative or even additional mechanism that could account for the low uptake of both sestamibi and tetrofosmin by chondrosarcomas, could be the pumping of these radiopharmaceuticals out of the cell by P-glycoprotein (Pgp), which is a cation-pumping membrane molecule also responsible for multi-drug resistance to cytotoxic agents Successful imaging of sarcomatous tumors with In-111-DTPA-octreotide, a somatostatin labeled analogue, has been recently reported. Interestingly, the only one out of 13 tumors, which failed to be visualized was again a chondrosarcoma In conclusion, visualization of low-grade chondrosarcomas with a variety of radiopharmaceuticals is problematic. Low cellularity may be responsible for false negative Tl-201 scans and metabolic PET imaging. Evaluation of malignancy on the basis of Tl-201 scan findings is not prudent for low-grade chondrosarcomas. Poor performance of the newer Tc-99m-based tumor-seeking compounds in chondrosarcoma may be associated with chondrocyte-specific features, such as specialized mitochondrial function or the presence of a membrane efflux pump. As chondrosarcomas are the second most frequent malignant bone tumor and the vast majority of them are low-grade tumors, exclusion of malignancy on the basis of a negative Tl-201 or Tc-99m-sestamibi scan should be cautious, when the likelihood of chondrosarcoma is suggested by clinical, demographic and imaging data. A negative base-line scan excludes these agents from further specific, clinically useful tasks, such as the evaluation of response to treatment or characterization of post-therapeutic tissue changes.