In this paper micromechanical behavior of ferrite and martensite microphases was evaluated by means of comprehensive micro-nanohardness measurements supplemented by light and electron microscopies and wavelength-dispersive spectroscopy (WDS). Experimental results indicated that not only ferrite but martensite hardening behavior was significantly influenced by ferrite and martensite volume fractions in dual phase (DP) microstructures. Ferrite hardness was continuously diminished with increasing ferrite volume fraction whereas the martensite hardening was increased with increasing ferrite volume fraction and then it did not varied in line with further progress in ferrite transformation and relevant carbon enrichment of prior austenite. In addition to these unexpected ferrite and martensite hardening variations, the lower hardness of martensite in DP microstructures in comparison to that of martensite in full martensitic microstructure cannot be completely interpreted by carbon alloying effects. These results are rationalized to the introduction of mobile dislocations into prior austenite due to plastically accommodation of martensitic transformation strains by prior austenite areas during quenching and the influence that formation of ferrite would have on this hardening mechanism.Low carbon ferrite-martensite dual phase (DP) steels are one of the family members of low alloy work-hardenable steels with a good combination of strength and ductility which is ideal for sheet forming operations, particularly in automotive industry AISI4340 steel as one of the medium-carbon low alloy steels has a wide variety of applications in automobile, aircraft, aerospace and nuclear industries. Most of these services require good combination of mechanical properties such as high strength and satisfactory impact properties Chemical composition of the commercial low alloy variant of AISI4340 steel used in the present investigation has been shown in The microstructural characterization was examined by light microscope model OLYMPUS BX51 M and field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) model TESCAN-MIRA3 operated at an accelerated voltage of 15 kV in the secondary electron mode. In order to pursue carbon concentration variation within ferrite grains and adjacent prior austenite areas, comprehensive line scan wavelength-dispersive spectroscopies (WDS) were carried out with a CAMECA SX100 electron probe microanalyser (EPMA) on a hypothetical line, joining the central locations of ferrite grain and its adjacent prior austenite areas. Macrohardness tests with a load of 30 kg and microhardness tests using a load of 5 g for ferrite and martensite as well as 10 g for martensite for comparative purposes were carried out for 20s duration time using a Future Tech microhardness tester machine model FM700. The microhardness data were collected from at least five tests for each microphase in every sample. The specimen surfaces for nanoindentation tests were mechanically polished and subsequently electropolished in order to remove any damaged and/or contamination layers. The nanoindentation tests were carried out within ferrite and martensite grains using a CSM machine model NHTX S/N: 001–03119 equipped with a Berkovich indenter. Analyses for the tip calibration and the calculation of hardness were conducted based on the Oliver and Pharr      For more comparison of ferrite and martensite hardening responses, the variation of ferrite fraction in association with ferrite and martensite hardening changes are shown in  For more comparison, the mean microhardness of full martensitic microstructure (633HV10g) which is very close to that of macrohardness result of these samples (628HV30 kg) has been indicated in  Several nanoindentation tests have been conducted within martensite in order to investigate the individual martensite hardening response. Results of nanoindentation tests are briefly shown in Since austenite to ferrite phase transformation is associated with carbon redistribution, the variation of carbon partitioning was tracked within ferrite and prior austenite microphases. For this purpose, WDS has been employed widely at various locations within ferrite and martensite microphases to follow the variation of carbon partitioning. In contrast to rather homogeneous distribution within ferrite grains, a significant concentration gradient for carbon partitioning has occurred from carbon-rich α/γ interfaces toward the carbon-lean interior regions of prior austenite during progress of ferritic transformation. More interestingly, the higher carbon accumulation has been observed within prior austenite areas close to α/γ interfaces of DP samples treated for prolonged periods of holding time compared to that of short time treated samples. In addition, the average martensite carbon content has been raised from 0.49 to 0.67 wt.% with increasing holding time from 10 to 60min in the samples treated at isothermal temperature of 923 K (650 °C) which is totally in an opposite manner compared to ferrite carbon content. These results indicate that a significant carbon partitioning has occurred within prior austenite areas as a consequence of ferrite formation in DP microstructures. According to the microanalysis results, this is thought that due to applying normalization and rather long-term austenization stages before DP treatment, it is unlikely that previous ferrite or cementite/carbides regions could have survived austenization In this work, ferrite hardening response is significantly variable in DP specimens obtained at various isothermal transformation conditions ( Second, it is well known that volume expansions caused by martensitic phase transformation induces plastic deformation and generates unpinned GNDs for maintaining lattice continuity The higher martensite volume fraction means that more ferrite boundaries are surrounded by greater numbers of martensite particles. This is characterized by much more number of interfacial locations at which ferrite has to accommodate the volume and shape effects of martensitic phase transformation. Hence, higher fraction of an individual ferrite grain experiences local plastic deformation and its hardness increases due to decreasing the average spacing between dislocations The chemical microanalysis results obtained from WDS measurements indicated that as the ferrite volume fraction has been increased, the average carbon content of ferrite has been slightly decreased ( In this investigation, the martensite hardening response is quite variable with martensite volume fraction in DP specimens treated at various isothermal conditions ( ; where C According to the microanalysis results, variation of ferrite carbon level was negligible and seemed to approach saturation amount in ferrite. Since, assuming that the maximum solubility limit of carbon in ferrite and the mean carbon content of the investigated low alloy steel are about 0.02 wt.% and 0.36 wt.% ( As well as intrinsic dislocations induced due to transformation strain, another contributing factor in martensite hardening would be the introduction of accommodation dislocations into prior austenite grains The initial (just before quenching) austenite strength mainly depends upon prior austenite carbon content and grain size Several investigators have documented the hardening response of martensite as a function of martensite carbon content for a wide variety of plain carbon and low alloy direct quenched full martensitic microstructures and their findings have been gathered by Krauss More detailed evaluation was made as in This way, the observed mismatch can be rationalized due to the presence of ferrite in the vicinity of prior austenite. As ferrite grains nucleate and grow along prior austenite grain boundaries during the soaking stage, they continually outline and finally separate previously physically connected network of austenite grains, leaving isolated austenite grains embedded in a ferrite matrix. This means that surrounding austenite grains which would otherwise transform into martensite upon quenching, increasing GNDs density of adjacent austenite grain are gradually replaced by a soft deformable ferrite matrix by increasing ferrite volume fraction. It should be noted here that although progress of ferritic transformation is also accompanied with an increasing dislocation density in austenite, the amount of ferritic transformation-induced dislocations is not comparable with that of martensitic accommodation dislocations In the present work, the individual mechanical behavior of ferrite and martensite have been investigated in a commercial low alloy AISI4340 ferrite-martensite DP steel particularly focusing on ferrite and martensite mechanical interaction in DP microstructures. The conclusions are as follow: Ferrite formation is dependant on isothermal temperature and duration of soaking stage. By increasing isothermal transformation temperature from 773 to 923 K (500–650 °C), the ferrite volume fraction has been increased from 7% to the maximum ferritic nose value of 29% and then decreased to 12% for further 50 °C rise in temperature. While, a continuous increment in ferrite volume fraction from 29 to 49% has occurred for DP samples treated at 923 K (650 °C) as the isothermal holding time is raised from 10 to 60min, respectively. Ferrite hardening response has been significantly increased with increasing martensite volume fraction as a consequence of higher martensitic shape deformation accommodated by ferrite grains in DP microstructures. The average ferrite micro- and nano-hardnesses have been increased from 114 to 175HV5g and 343 to 368 H V5mN with increasing martensite volume fraction from 51 to 71% in DP microstructures obtained isothermally at 923 K (650 °C) for 60 and 10min holding times, respectively. Also, the average ferrite microhardness has been increased from its lowest value of 175HV5g conformed to the lowest martensite volume fraction of 71%, to 210 and 256HV5g as the martensite volume fraction has been increased to 88 and 78% for 10min isotime treated DP samples at 973 and 873 K (700 and 600 °C), respectively. Martensite carbon content is reliant on ferrite and martensite volume fractions developed as a result of ferritic and martensitic phase transformations after successive soaking and quenching treatments. While, ferrite carbon content has been slightly decreased from 0.03 to 0.02 wt.% that of martensite was increased from 0.49 to 0.67 wt.% by increasing ferrite volume fraction from 29 to 49% for DP specimens isothermally treated at 923 K (650 °C) for 10 and 60min, respectively. Martensite hardening response is significantly increased with increasing martensite carbon content in DP microstructures. The martensite microhardness has been increased from 525 to the maximized value of 616HV10g with increasing nominal carbon content from 0.49 to 0.61 wt.%, however, carbon enrichment of prior austenite to 0.68 wt.% has been associated with decrease in martensite microhardness down to 581HV10g. Furthermore, hardness of martensite developed in ferrite-martensite DP samples is significantly lower than that in as-quenched samples. Ferrite nanohardness has been decreased from 368 to 319 H V5mN and 429 to 329 H V5mN with decreasing ferrite volume fraction from 49 to 29%, respectively. The higher ferrite nanohardness has been related to the higher constraints induced within ferrite developed in higher martensite DP samples.