In this study, a new design for tensile specimens made from tailor rolled blanks (TRB) with longitudinal thickness transition zone (TTZ) has been proposed. To this end, an additional lateral wedge angle is introduced to obtain a uniform stress field along the gauge length, which enables one to study the tailored properties of TRBs via stress-strain curves without considering the effects of geometrical inhomogeneities. Parallel finite element simulations were carried out to study the stress and strain fields resulted from different geometries of tensile specimens. The results were then used to obtain stress triaxiality factors to analyze the deformation prior to failure. In addition, a mathematical model was developed to study the contribution of different parts of TTZ to the total deformation. The results of uniaxial tension test along with results of simulation revealed that the deformation is controlled by the side with lower load-bearing ability in the new-developed tensile specimen. Furthermore, it was concluded that the conventional tensile specimens are more appropriate to study the effect of thickness changes on the elongation of TRBs. However, the presented tensile specimens can be used to study the strength of TRBs. Finally, the fracture mechanisms were investigated utilizing SEM and optical observations.In order to satisfy increasing demands for safety and comfort, the weight of cars has risen over the past years, which enhances the fuel consumption and air pollution There are different load-adapted blanks such as tailor welded blanks, patch-work blanks, tailor heat treated blanks and tailor rolled blanks (TRB). Considering different features of welding and patching, rolling can be preferred in terms of production costs and surface quality Kopp et al. Dual phase steels have received great attention for many applications, especially in automotive industries. It is predicted that dual phase steels will be used to produce more than 80% of car bodies in the near future There is always a need to propose more reliable methods to characterize different mechanical properties of engineering materials Dual phase steels have received great attention for many applications, especially in automotive industries. It is predicted that dual phase steels will be used to produce more than 80% of car bodies in the near future The material used for this study was DP590 steel sheets with the initial thickness of 2 mm. The chemical compositions of the investigated material were summarized in Variable gauge rolling (VGR) was carried out using a four-high mill with the working roll diameter of 183 mm. The aim was to produce TRBs at different reductions ( Since there is no specific international standard for tensile specimens of TRBs with longitudinal TTZ, the considerations of ASTM E8M were adopted to obtain the dimensions of tensile specimens. In this study, it was focused on the condition with the reduction of 47% and 58 mm length of TTZ to study the tensile behavior in the more critical situation incorporated with the highest level of stress concentration. In addition, other tensile specimens with the same overall dimensions were cut out to study the tensile behavior of uniform sheets with the thicknesses of 1.9 mm, 1.8 mm, 1.3 mm, 1.2 mm and 1 mm. These data were then used to assign the tensile properties to the different parts of specimens for finite element simulations. In the context of this study, this type of specimens is called “uniform tensile specimen”. All the tensile tests were carried out at a constant cross-head speed of 3 mm/min using an Instron 8803 (500 KN capacity) tensile machine. It is also noteworthy to mention that all the stress-strain curves were calculated utilizing the corresponding force-displacement curves obtained from tensile machine. In all the tensile tests, three different specimens were tested and the results were averaged. However, other methods such as digital image correlation (DIC) method can be used for strain measurement with higher accuracy. In order to examine the fracture surface, a ZEISS SEM was used. In addition, microstructural evolutions during variable gauge rolling were analyzed using a ZEISS axioplan 2 optical microscopy. For metallographic purposes, all the samples were etched with 2% Nital to reveal the ferrite grains and grain boundaries. The average grain size of ferrite was measured to be equal to 3.7 μm using interception method. Furthermore, image analysis obtained using Clemex software showed that the volume fraction of martensite was 11 ± 5%. Tensile specimens were cut out from different sides of TRBs with different thicknesses to evaluate the effect of cold work on the mechanical properties of DP590. The main idea behind proposing a new design for tensile specimens prepared from TRBs is to achieve a uniform field of stress along the gauge length. The existence of a thickness transition zone is the main reason which causes stress concentration on the thinner side at the early stages of deformation. Since different parts of TRBs (with variable thicknesses) contribute to the overall deformation, one cannot consider a unique cross-sectional area to obtain stress-strain curves. Accordingly, proposing a new tensile specimen with constant cross-sectional area along TRBs may enable one to characterize the tensile behavior of TRBs by means of stress-strain curves. It is believed that the expected results obtained from the stress-strain curves are more comparable when studying two or more different TRBs made from materials with different properties. In order to reduce the effect of aforementioned geometrical inhomogeneities, some measures were considered to hold the cross-sectional area constant along the longitudinal direction of the specimen. This goal was achieved utilizing a lateral transition zone, as shown in  Parallel numerical simulations for both of the tensile specimens were carried out using commercial ABAQUS/Dynamic Explicit software to obtain the exact components of stress and strain at critical points. To this end, Mises yield surface was used to model the isotropic metal plasticity. In addition, an eight-node brick element with reduced integration (C3D8R) was used for the blanks. Furthermore, adaptive remeshing was performed using arbitrary lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) method to prevent mesh degeneration. The results of these simulations were then used for the following purposes: Prediction of tensile behavior of tailor rolled blanks ( Evaluation of stress and strain fields during uniaxial tension ( Analyzing the variations of stress triaxiality factor with strain ( Due to the continuous changes in the strength of material along the thickness transition zone, it was necessary to divide this zone into a finite number of parts with specific mechanical characteristics. In this way, the tensile behavior of each part corresponding to a specific thickness was interpolated based on the stress-strain curves of thicker and thinner sides using Lagrange polynomial interpolation in MATLAB™. The interpolated stress-strain field is shown in  For the sake of simplicity, it seems essential to develop an equation to calculate the lateral wedge angle (α) at different conditions. Accordingly, the angle of α can be expressed as follows (see    In addition, as shown in The higher values of lateral wedge angle (α) show a greater difference between the mechanical properties of different sides of bilateral tensile specimen. Therefore, the stress-strain curves obtained from tension test using bilateral tensile specimen can be a good indication of the tensile properties of TRBs without considering the geometrical inhomogeneities. Accordingly, the lateral wedge angle (α) should be reported in support of the data obtained from bilateral tensile specimens. This can show the possible deviation of tensile properties compared with zero reduction condition (bilateral tensile specimen). The higher values of α represent the practical conditions with shorter length of TTZ or higher amount of reduction. Accordingly, it is expected that in practice the TRBs with higher values of In this study, Finally, it can be concluded that the new design of tensile specimen has the capability to be implemented to examine the tensile behavior of TRBs without considering the effects of geometrical inhomogeneities. In many practical problems, equivalent strain to crack formation in tensile specimens is taken as a measure of ductility The accurate values of stress and strain were obtained at the location of crack formation with the aids of finite element simulations for each specimen.  Four distinctive damage mechanisms can be considered for dual phase steels as reported by Avramovic-Cingara et al. SEM fractographs of CTS and BTS are shown in  The conventional design of tensile specimens (CTS) proposed by ASTM-E8 cannot be used to construct the stress-strain curves of tailor rolled blanks with variable thickness. A new tensile specimen has been proposed to study the mechanical behavior of tailor rolled blanks using uniaxial tension test. This new tensile specimen is called An additional lateral wedge angle (α) was introduced to obtain a uniform stress field along the gauge length. The dependency of the lateral wedge angle (α) on the length of thickness transition zone and the amounts of reduction have been studied. It was found that an increase in the reduction at a constant length of TTZ leads to a non-uniform stress field and consequently the lateral wedge angle (α) should be increased to keep the stress field uniform. In addition, decreasing the length of TTZ has the same effect on the lateral wedge angle (α). In conventional tensile specimens, the deformation is mainly controlled by the thinner side. Furthermore, the contribution of other parts to the overall elongation is restricted by the variations of cross-sectional area along thickness transition zone. In bilateral tensile specimens, the deformation is controlled by the side with higher load-bearing ability. Accordingly, the contribution of other parts to the overall elongation is dependent on the strength gradient along thickness transition zone. The results of uniaxial tension obtained from conventional tensile specimens are highly dependent on the geometrical inhomogeneity along thickness transition zone. Consequently, effects of thickness variations on total elongation can be easily studied using this type of specimen. It is suggested that the bilateral tensile specimen can be used to study the strength-related properties of tailor rolled blanks such as yield and ultimate tensile strength. The SEM micrographs revealed that the predominant failure mechanisms for TRBs made from DP590 are dependent on the type of specimen and the amount of reduction. It was found out that the failure strain is inversely proportional to the maximum stress triaxiality factor for both of the studied tensile specimens. According to Since the cross-sectional area is constant along TTZ, the following expression can be written: Accordingly, According to