The effect of a small addition of boron (B) on the sintering, sintered microstructure and mechanical properties of a Ti-7Ni alloy (wt.%) compacted from −100 mesh hydride-dehydride (HDH) Ti powder has been investigated systematically. An addition of ⩾0.62%B to the Ti–7Ni alloy resulted in fast, near full-densification (⩾99% relative density) within 15min at 1200°C, compared to 95.6% relative density obtained after 120min at 1200°C without B, compacted at 400MPa in both cases. In addition, the pre-eutectoid α phase changed from long parallel α-laths (up to∼500μm) to near-equiaxed α-Ti throughout the microstructure with an addition of ⩾0.31%B. Elemental B was found to be more effective than TiB2 as a sintering aid for Ti-7Ni. A small addition of B increased both the tensile strength and yield strength of Ti–7Ni but at the expense of tensile ductility. The mechanisms behind each of these observations were discussed.Elemental boron (B) and borides are established sintering aids for a variety of powder metallurgy (PM) steel alloys The addition of B or borides to titanium (Ti) and its alloys has been well documented but as an effective grain refiner during solidification The first documented addition of elemental B powder (0.1%, 0.5%, 5%) to Ti powder for sintering purposes was reported in 1949 This work presents a systematic study of the effect of a small addition of B (0.31%, 0.62%, and 0.93%) on the sintering, sintered microstructure, and mechanical properties of a Ti-7Ni alloy. The Ti-7Ni alloy was selected for the following reasons. Since Kroll first sintered a Ti-5Ni alloy in 1937 Sumitomo HDH Ti powder of purity 99.5% (0.25%O) and particle size <150 The theoretical density The green density of each sample was calculated from the weight and dimensions of the powder compacts, and the sintered density was measured using the Archimedes method according to ASTM Standard B328 (MPIF Standard 42). Mobil DTE25 oil having a specific gravity of 0.87 was used as pore-filling liquid; the test liquid was a hydro-fluoro-polyether heat transfer fluid with a specific gravity of 1.68 (Solvay-Solexis H-Galden ZT-180). Tensile specimens (3 Cross-sections of sintered cylinders were prepared and polished using colloidal silica with 3  Both TiB   The solidus of Ti-7Ni is about 1235 The fast, near full-densification achieved with 0.62%B or 0.93%B is indicative of liquid phase sintering (LPS). This is supported by Thermal-Calc predictions (see Detailed dilatometric analyses were then conducted to assist in understanding the difference. The results are plotted in It should be pointed out that because of the low vacuum dilatometry used, minor oxidation occurred to all samples. This may have affected the dilatometry results. Limited evidence indicates that increasing the oxygen content tends to increase the sintered density Excellent liquid–solid wettability is a prerequisite for LPS to enable fast full-densification. Given that the liquid volume fraction in Ti-9Ni is much more than that in Ti-7Ni-0.62/0.93B at 1200 It is useful to note that the enhanced sintering of Ti-7Ni by B depends on sintering temperature. The lattice constants of TiB (orthorhombic) are TiB particles that form along the prior-β grain boundaries can effectively restrict β-Ti grain growth Elemental B was found to be superior to TiB The liquids that first form during heating are thus binary Ni-Ti and Ni-B liquids. They will meet up and mix to form ternary Ti-Ni-B liquids during subsequent spreading. Depending on the local B content, the ternary Ti-Ni-B liquids can form below about 1200  Boron is known to increase the tensile strength but decreases the ductility due to the formation of the TiB reinforcement whiskers.  A small addition of B (0.62%) to PM Ti-7Ni alloy compacted from −100 mesh HDH Ti powder at 400 A small addition of B to Ti-7Ni not only promoted ternary liquid formation but also likely improved the liquid–solid wettability, compared to binary Ti-Ni liquid. Elemental B is superior to TiB An addition of ⩾0.31%B changed the pre-eutectoid α-Ti phase from long parallel laths (up to ∼500 A small addition of B increased the tensile strength and yield strength of Ti-7Ni alloy but at the expense of tensile elongation. Fractured TiB whiskers and whisker clusters were observed on the fractured surfaces. This work is supported by the