For more than a century, the use of mineral resources has increased exponentially with annual growth percentages of between 4% and 6%. While for most mineral resources, depletion is not an issue, for some mineral resources the current level of extraction is likely to pose a problem for future generations. Depletion of a mineral resource means that its enriched deposits will have been extracted, and consequently it will become much more expensive for future generations to continue to use these minerals. While technology may reduce some of the adverse effects of depletion, future generations may be deprived of potential innovations for which these specific materials would be essential. The question arises as to how the currently unsustainable extraction of mineral resources can be decreased to safeguard them for future generations. It is submitted that it is unlikely that market forces alone will sufficiently impact the prices of minerals to resolve the unsustainable use of certain minerals timely enough. In this article, it is posited that an international agreement on the conversation and sustainable use of geologically scarce minerals is necessary. The agreement will recognize that the geological scarcity of mineral resources differs between different minerals. It will therefore make a selection of priority minerals, determine how far the extraction rate of these substances must be reduced and decide on a fixed time period within which the extraction must decrease from the current rate to a sustainable rate. The design of such an agreement will be based on two basic principles contained in existing international environmental agreements: (1) the inter-generational equity principle and (2) the principle of conservation of natural resources. Furthermore, the obligatory reduction of the extraction of mineral resources will affect the sovereign rights of resource countries to exploit their own resources. Therefore, any international agreement should make arrangements to ensure resource countries are adequately compensated for their loss of income.For more than a century, the use of mineral resources has increased exponentially with annual growth percentages of between 4% and 6%. A mineral resource is a concentration of naturally occurring solid, liquid or gaseous material in or on the Earth's crust, in such form and amount that economic extraction of a commodity from the concentration is currently or potentially feasible ( The population data until 1950 is from The question arises whether current levels of extraction of certain mineral resources will result in a problem for future generations and what measures, if any, humanity should take to reduce current levels of extraction of the scarcest mineral resources to safeguard them for future generations. The goal of the present paper is to discuss the necessity of an international agreement on the conversation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources and the possible design of such an agreement. Discussions on the geological scarcity of mineral resources and the consequences of unsustainable use are nothing new.  By the end of the 19th century there was a broad concern about resource availability, especially in the USA. This was reflected by the so-called Conservation Movement that was active between 1890 and 1920 ( After World War II, new concerns on the long-run availability of resources were raised in connection with the substantial resource use related to postwar reconstruction. In the USA, this led in 1952 to the creation of the President's Material Policy Commission (or Paley Commission, after its chairman). One of the consequences of the work of this Commission was the sponsoring of organizations and studies on growth and scarcity. A very influential book within this framework was published by On the other hand, the resource optimists support the so-called opportunity-cost paradigm. The optimists do not deny that mineral resources will deplete gradually, but they have a strong belief that humanity will be able to cope with the effects of depletion. When demand outpaces supply, the costs will rise and – simultaneously – the pressure to find substitutes or alternatives for the depleted mineral. According to the resource optimists, the market will automatically solve the problem. Moreover, mostly – and unlike oil, natural gas and coal – mineral resources are not destroyed by using them. Recycling and reuse are possible. Finally, the total geological stock is enormous. It will always be possible to extract minerals, although the costs will be considerable. Resource optimists are for instance The point of view of the resource optimists is shared by economists such as e.g., Both resource pessimists and resource optimists acknowledge that mineral resources are exhaustible. The difference between them is that the optimists trust that humankind will find a timely solution by replacing scarce resources with substitutes. The pessimists, on the other hand, are of the opinion that humanity should not deliberately deprive future generations from scarce resources, regardless of whether they could be replaced by alternative resources. In the view of the authors, the optimistic and pessimistic visions are not mutually exclusive but are in fact reconcilable; humanity will be able to resolve mineral depletion problems, e.g. by replacement of scarce resources and by increasing recycling, but it is also the case that the current generation should not take away geologically scarce resources from future generations. Hence it is essential that minerals are extracted in a sustainable manner. In order to ensure this, a sustainable extraction rate must be determined. An important question, in this respect, is how large the Extractable Global Resources of a given mineral are. According to the According to calculations of the UNEP International Panel on Sustainable Resource Management, the EGR estimate of 0.01% of the amount in the upper 1 It ought to be noted that, after the depletion of an extractable mineral resource, 99.99% of that mineral still remains in the Earth's crust. However its extraction will be much more expensive than the extraction of the enriched top 0.01%. Enrichment factors of geologically scarce mineral resources are 100 Once the extractable quantity of a mineral resource is determined, it is essential to choose a basis from which to determine whether the extraction rate of a mineral is sustainable. An extraction rate is considered sustainable “i After analyzing the geological scarcity of 65 minerals – mainly metals and metalloids ( It should be noted that For a number of minerals, depletion of ores is relatively nearby, and a substantial extraction reduction is needed to make the use of these minerals sustainable. Therefore, it could be considered wise to create an international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources. The question arises why there has not been a similar urgency in the negotiation of an international agreement in response to the depletion of minerals as there has been with environmental issues such as biodiversity and climate change. The explanation might be that mineral resource depletion does not directly co-determine the One could argue that the price mechanism of the free market system could lead automatically to a sufficient reduction of the use of geologically scarce mineral resources due to the inevitable price increase which results from growing scarcity ( It is for these reasons that an international agreement is proposed with the objective to achieve a situation of sustainable extraction and to equitably distribute geologically scarce mineral resources between the current and the future generations at the lowest cost. This section will discuss how this objective can be translated in concrete, implementable goals. Hence, based on the considerations in In order to determine those minerals for which the reduction of the extraction rate is a priority, it is obvious to select the scarcest minerals as priority minerals: antimony, gold, molybdenum, rhenium and zinc which, according to our estimate, will be depleted within about 100 years. Indeed, geological scarcity is an important criterion because the essential purpose of the agreement is to ensure that future generations are not deprived scarce natural resources. Other selection criteria could be relevant such as: the extent that a mineral is critical for our society, its economic importance, the stability of its delivery, its substitutability and its recycling potential. For an overview of criticality criteria, reference is made to an overview of criteria that have been used in 15 different criticality studies ( Elements which are essential for life and which cannot be substituted by other elements may need priority compared to elements which are not essential for life, for instance minerals used in fertilizer and micronutrients. Of the elements in Another factor is the relative economic importance of an element for society in general or for specific countries. This depends on the strategic value of the applications. The overall weighing of these various factors is subjective and is influenced by the economic interests of the involved parties so the priority setting will necessarily be a political process. The political and societal insights with respect to priority setting of the minerals for extraction reduction may change over time. Therefore, an international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources will need to incorporate a priority setting procedure. Due to the potentially changing nature of the priority setting and the notoriously difficult processes involved in adopting amendments to treaties, the details of such a procedure are best elaborated in a separate protocol to ensure that it can be more easily altered to adapt to new realities. How fast must, or can, the required extraction reduction take place? The answer depends on how fast society can change to production of substituting products, more material efficiency and a higher recycling rate without too much destruction of capital. Looking to history, relevant data may be derived from the phasing out of ozone depleting substances, the phasing out of asbestos, the ban of the use of certain chemicals in certain applications (e.g. PCBs and cadmium), the transition to cleaner and more economical cars, the emission reduction of greenhouse gasses and the emission reduction of acidifying air pollutants (e.g. SO Without going into too much detail, one can say that a phasing down period will be in the order of 5–10 years, at a minimum. Determining factors are the time needed for the technical development of suitable substitutes and recycling technologies, plus the time needed to realize the necessary industrial facilities. Private companies must get sufficient time to amortize existing facilities in order to prevent too much financial loss. The feasibility of a phasing down scheme needs to be separately assessed for each selected mineral. Because phasing down schemes are specific and may differ per mineral, these schemes should be elaborated in a separate protocol per mineral. This will need to be reflected in any framework agreement. For the minerals that are selected for extraction reduction, the capped annual quantities that may be extracted will need to be allocated between the resource countries. The extraction reduction must – over a number of years – gradually arrive at the agreed level of sustainable extraction. For example, it is agreed that the extraction of a certain mineral resource must be reduced by 80% over a period of 10 years in steps of 8% of the original extraction. Assume that at the beginning there are 3 resource countries: A, B and C. The (known) reserves of the resource are respectively Now assume, new reserves are found in country D and country D decides to exploit the resource from year 8. In this case, the amount allocated to country D (A The globally agreed extraction reduction must go on, irrespective of the discovery of new reserves. This is necessary because the global extraction reduction scheme has already taken into account that most of the extractable resources have not yet been discovered ( To prevent the allocation system from being too restrictive, it must allow resource countries to trade within the allocated quotas. By allowing trading of allocated extraction quota, several objectives are achieved simultaneously: (1) flexibility of the system, (2) the final objectives are maintained and (3) extraction will take place in countries and mines with the lowest extraction costs. If resource country A cannot deliver, e.g. due to accidents, strikes or geopolitical events, then the other resource countries may be allowed to buy the extraction quota allocated to country A. Country A is allowed to buy back the quota again later on. Extraction allocation pro rata of proven reserves is a rational approach, but other criteria might be taken into consideration as well, such as production capacity, historical production share, domestic consumption, production costs, dependence on export, population and external debt (see e.g. the discussion within the Organization of Oil Producing Countries (OPEC) on a quota system for oil production ( The extractable reserves need to be evaluated regularly to assess whether these are still in accordance with the assumptions that were at the basis of the extraction reduction scheme. This is the task of a research body that must be installed as part of the international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources. The principle of annual extraction quota per resource country and the tradability of extraction quota amongst resource countries needs to be included in the framework agreement. The elaboration of the system requires further research and can be part of a separate protocol. In this framework the experience with existing quota systems, such as the OPEC system of quota for oil production, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) CO Once the geologically scarce mineral resources have been selected and the extraction reduction goals have been determined, technical measures must be defined to achieve these goals. Generally, the technical measures that are taken are: (1) substitution of the resource for another less scarce resource, (2) increasing material efficiency and (3) more recycling. In other publications the authors have demonstrated that the required reduction goals are technically achievable, even if they are very ambitious ( Applied on resource extraction, a cap and trade system fixes the maximum amount that is allowed to be extracted, but it allows for flexibility in the pricing of the extracted resource. A tax system fixes the price of the extracted resource but leaves the extracted quantity uncertain. There is much literature comparing the two systems with each other. This literature is mostly centered on the merits of either system for Green House Gas emission reduction. Criteria that are being used can be divided by the following three dimensions (i.e. Performance (e.g. goal achievement, effectiveness etc.) Political acceptability (e.g. costs-efficiency, equity/fairness, flexibility, stringency for non-compliance, legal certainty/predictability/credibility, transparency controversy etc.) Ease of implementation (e.g. feasibility, accountability, transparency, complexity etc.) Some authors come to the conclusion that cap and trade is better ( The present publication elaborates on a global cap and trade system to achieve a sustainable extraction of geologically scarce mineral resources. The argumentation for this choice is that cap and trade offers greater certainty that the required extraction reduction is achieved. The cap and trade system is successfully applied in the framework of the US Acid Rain Program for the emission reduction of Sulfur Dioxide, and it is also already being applied at an international scale in the EU Emission Trading System for the reduction of the emission of greenhouse gases. Thus far, taxing systems for environmental purposes are only employed at a national scale. Striving after a global cap and trade approach does not necessarily hamper or withhold concerned user countries to formulate and implement their own resource saving policies in advance. This will have the advantage of offering flexibility to States as to which policies they pursue, such as policies based on taxing or other instruments such as directly imposing or promoting substitution of geologically scarce mineral resources in selected applications and recycling and arranging (voluntary) agreements with or between sectors of industry or society. To the extent that a global cap and trade system would be implemented, such national or regional fall back options may be loosened or abolished again, may work in parallel or compliment a global regime. Ideally, the approach for solving the problem of geologically scarce mineral resources is global. Geological scarcity is not a local or a regional problem; it is a problem of humanity as a whole, particularly for future generations. However, the climate change problem shows how difficult and time-consuming it can be to agree on a workable and practical solution that is acceptable for all countries despite the fact that the technical pathways are known and feasible. Nevertheless, a global approach is the ideal way to safeguard geologically scarce mineral resources for future generations. In addition, countries and regions may decide to go faster and implement unilateral measures to save geologically scarce mineral resources in advance of a global agreement. A practical argument in favor of a global approach is the role of the resource countries. Without their cooperation, it will be very difficult or even impossible to substantially reduce the extraction of geologically scarce resources within a limited period of time. The system must include a mechanism that makes resource countries wholeheartedly stand behind an agreed extraction reduction. If not, there is a serious risk that an extraction reduction that is not supported by all resource countries leads to flooding of the market with scarce resources, decreasing their price and frustrating the objectives of the agreement. The objectives of the international agreement discussed in section 4 refer to what Principles are preconditions of an agreement. Without adequate principles accepted by the parties of the agreement, the objectives of an agreement cannot be achieved. The aim of these principles is to satisfactorily comply with the justified interests of various partners of the agreement. Relevant principles for an agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources are the sovereign right principle, the common concern of mankind principle, ethical principles (intra-generational equity, priority for the special situation and needs of developing countries and fairness), responsibility assignment principles (such as the common but differentiated responsibilities principle) and the polluter pays principle ( Most of these principles relate to burden sharing in connection with the agreement. The formulation and elaboration of these principles is essentially a political process and can therefore end up being a bottleneck of any agreement. The present section shall elaborate on the compensation of resource countries and how to address the special situation and needs of developing countries. In the Supplementary Data background information is provided on the “sovereign right” principle, the “common concern of mankind” principle, the “common but differentiated responsibilities” principle and the “polluter pays” principle in relation with the issue of depletion of geologically scarce mineral resources. When a resource country loses sovereignty over certain portions of its natural resources (and the related income) by being obliged to reduce the extraction of these resources for the purpose of serving a common concern of mankind, it should be compensated. Compensation of resource countries is justified because not only are their sovereign rights affected but also their income. The price increase that is probably caused by the obligatory extraction reduction of resources is not certain and may not be sufficient to compensate for the decreased production and export of resources. Without a guaranteed compensation for lost income, there is a substantial risk that resource countries may not want to participate in the international agreement, in which they play a crucial role. The compensation principle is already being brought in practice in the UN REDD compensation programme on Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation which compensates (developing) nations for not logging their forests. The compensation for extraction reduction of mineral resources is discounted in an increased resource price. To compensate the resource countries, the resource price needs to be increased proportionally to the decrease of the extraction rate. Therefore, from the moment on that extraction reduction is implemented, a resource tonnage price needs to be fixed annually, directly reflecting the imposed extraction decrease. The compensation of resource countries must be such that their income with an agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce resources is equal to their income without such an agreement. A resource country should not get more compensation than the income that it would have received without international agreement. Corrections of the general approach may be necessary because the reserves in a country may be near to depletion. It is not necessary to compensate a country for lost income when this country would not have had this income anyway. The principle of the compensation mechanism needs to be part of the framework agreement. The detailed elaboration of the mechanism can be arranged in a separate protocol, since the outcome will be partly the result of political negotiations and may change over time. The solution of the geological scarcity problem may encompass substantial extra costs for all countries, including poor countries. Increasing scarcity of mineral resources is mainly caused by developed countries. Developed countries were able to generate welfare for their people and to build up a physical infrastructure co-based on the massive extraction and use of mineral resources. When limiting the further extraction of geologically scarce mineral resources, developing countries would be confronted with substantially higher costs for these resources, even though they have not yet been able to build up an infrastructure at the same level as developed countries and the majority of people in their societies have not yet been able to enjoy the services provided by these resources to the same extent of a citizen of the average developed country. It will be difficult to expect that developing countries would unconditionally agree with a system that leads to higher costs for their inhabitants without considering that they are not responsible for geological scarcity in the first place. Moreover, without the consent of these countries, an international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources cannot be globally ratified. This means that the role and position of developing countries needs special attention. The interest of the developing countries in this perspective is twofold: (a) that their access to geologically scarce mineral resources remains attainable and (b) that the costs for solving the scarcity problem are acceptable for the developing countries from a historical perspective. Equitable distribution of geologically scarce mineral resources Geologically scarce mineral resources can be considered as part of the “ Equal amount per capita Equal amount per unit of GDP Grandfathering: the distribution is based on the existing amount of resource that is used in a country in a reference year Contraction and convergence: convergence from the status quo to equal per capita emission rights over an agreed period of time Contraction and convergence with accounting of past use, e.g. from 1990. Countries that have used more than the global average use per capita until an agreed moment in time have to reduce their consumption by this amount in a later period  Lower costs for developing countries Each of the user countries – developed or developing – will pay the same fixed tonnage price for the amount of resources that is distributed to it. This resource tonnage price is annually fixed by an international body in the framework of the agreement and is universal for all countries. User countries will be allowed to trade the allocated quota of mineral resources. They may sell the resource for a price that the market (usually mineral processing companies) is prepared to pay. Because of the global extraction reduction, scarcity is artificially increased during the phasing down period. The market price of the resource, that the user countries will be able to receive, will probably become higher than the fixed tonnage price that the user countries have paid. The gross effect of this system will be that the costs of the proposed system are relatively higher for countries with a high consumption of the scarce material and relatively lower for countries with a low consumption of the scarce material. The per capita consumption of mineral resources is positively related to GDP ( The extraction quota that are allocated to resources countries must be distinguished from the distribution quota of extracted resources that are allocated to user countries (see Although geologically scarce mineral resources are equitably distributed to countries, it will remain the sovereign right of each country to determine how to manage the distribution of costs and benefits in its own country for its own citizens. The costs of an international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources can be split up in three elements: The higher costs for substituents, increased recycling and better material efficiency compared to the current situation and the higher market price for the original resource. These costs will vary per mineral resource and per application and it is not easy to make a precise estimation of these costs in general. The optimal mix of substitution, material efficiency measures and recycling will differ per resource and per application. Moreover these costs will depend on the required reduction rate. The lower the required reduction of the extraction rate of a primary material is, the easier it will be to realize the necessary reduction of the use of that primary material and the less the market price of the original material will increase. These types of costs will be paid by the ultimate consumers of the products, within which the scarce resources are included. This is fair, because in this way the extra costs will be distributed according to the use of the resource. The economical consumer will incur fewer costs than the wasting consumer. The additional costs to compensate the resource countries for their loss of income. These costs will be incurred by the user countries and must be included in the annually fixed tonnage price that the user countries pay to the resource countries. The annually fixed tonnage price is paid to the administrative body that is in charge of the execution of the agreement and transferred by the administrative body to the resource countries. In return for the paid compensation costs, the user countries should gradually and proportionally become owner of the saved reserves. In this way, from a certain moment on, the remaining reserves are owned by the user countries and compensation does not need to be paid anymore. The costs for the international administrative bodies that will be in charge of the implementation and monitoring of the agreement. These are called the transaction costs. Usually these types of costs will not be permitted to exceed some percent of the total market value of the original amount of resources on an annual basis. These costs must be shared by the user countries in proportion to the amount of resource distributed to each of them. These costs are paid together with the fixed tonnage price to the international body that is in charge with the execution of the agreement. The buyers (the processing industry) will pay the market price to the user countries. However, it will be necessary to establish a minimum for the market price for preventing the market price to become lower than the annually fixed tonnage price. The minimum price should be equal to the annual fixed tonnage price plus the transaction costs. The purpose of setting a minimum price is to ensure that a user country, whatever the market price will be, will not suffer any costs if it sells any scarce resources that it received through the distribution system. The mechanism is presented is The present paper examines the set-up of an International Agreement on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Geologically Scarce Mineral Resources. The focus is on the objectives, principles, set-up and mechanisms of the agreement. The objectives of an agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources are: The sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources Equitable distribution of geologically scarce mineral resources between the current generation and future generations. The principles, on which an agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources is based, are: The sovereign right principle The concern to mankind principle Compensation of the resource countries for their willingness to reduce the extraction of geologically scarce mineral resources Equitable distribution of geologically scarce mineral resources to the world's countries The set-up is a cap and trade system and consists of: A priority setting methodology that results in a list of geologically scarce mineral resources, of which the extraction must be reduced with priority A procedure for the determination of an extraction reduction goal for the selected mineral resources and a phasing down scheme A system for setting annual extraction quota of the selected mineral resources and the allocation of these quota to the resource countries A system of equitable distribution of geologically scarce mineral resources to user countries for a fixed price per ton The financial mechanism of the proposed agreement consists of: A system of comcser countries for reducing the extraction of geologically scarce mineral resources. A system to annually fix a resource price that includes the compensation for the resource countries and the transaction costs for the implementation of the international agreement A system that makes the user countries owner of the not extracted mineral resources to the extent that they have paid compensation to the resource countries The right for the resource countries to trade the extraction quota between the resource countries The right for the user countries to sell the distributed resources on the free market An international body for the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce resources that is responsible for the transfer and appropriate administration of the necessary payments to the extraction countries, and for inspection, monitoring, evaluation and research. For each of the above mentioned set-up elements and financial mechanisms, separate protocols will be needed to elaborate the agreed systems The following institutional bodies will need to be set-up: Conference of Parties for international cooperation and decision taking Secretariat Administrative body for scientific and technological advice Body on implementation, monitoring and evaluation A draft of a framework Agreement on the Conservation and Sustainable Use of Geologically Scarce Mineral Resources is included in In this paper the main lines of an international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources were laid out. The details of the proposed agreement need further research. This concerns especially: The factors that (may) hamper the genesis of an international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce mineral resources and how these hampering factors could be addressed. An analysis of the interests of various partners to the agreement (resource countries and user countries, developed countries and developing countries) and other stakeholders (mining companies, processing industry) How to deal with countries that do not ratify the agreement. The draft framework agreement in the supplementary data contains a tentative article on this subject, but this approach needs more research The methodologies for priority setting of geologically scarce mineral resources for the determination of the extraction reduction goals and for the phasing down schemes The system for the allocation of annual extraction quota to resource countries The system of distribution of regulated mineral resources to user countries The system of compensation of resource countries for their loss of export opportunities. In this framework, existing compensation schemes, such as the REDD compensation scheme, need to be evaluated. The set-up of a system of periodic evaluation of extractable reserves per resource country The ownership system of non-extracted resources The lessons that may be drawn from the creation, the implementation and the execution of existing international environmental agreements and other relevant mechanisms, such as existing quota systems (oil-OPEC, CO A study on how to harmonize an international agreement on the conservation and sustainable use of geologically scarce resources with existing WTO agreements. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 