Generation of calcium vanadate waste sludge their management and treatment.is one of the major problem of metal processing industry. In this paper, we have proposed a simple process for the selective recovery of vanadium as ammonium metavanadate (AMV) from the calcium vanadate sludge using ammonium sulphate (AS) as a leaching agent. Under the optimum leaching condition (pH-7.5, temperature-80 °C, time-1 h, AS reagent-0.5 M) it is possible to leach out 82% of V values from the calcium vanadate sludge. The overall recovery of V is 81% with 98.5% AMV product purity. The AMV product quality from AS leach process has been compared with conventional H2SO4 leach process. The proposed process has major advantages such as, better economic benefits, less chemical consumption, minimum effluent recycling and less waste generation.Vanadium finds major applications in Ferro-alloys industry and less in chemical industry as catalyst. Generation of vanadium containing waste from industrial operations is one of the serious environmental concerns in the present scenario and the reason is due to their toxic nature. Most of the V based wastes have been generated from industrial process such as coal based power plant (coal fly ash - V), petrochemical processing (spent catalyst, petroleum coke, and boiler slag), sulphric acid production (V Usually, various V containing solid waste are either transferred to secured landfill disposal site/or treated by methods such as reclamation/rejuvenation of metals, recycle/reuse and used as raw material for other applications. The choice between these options depends on technical feasibility and economic consideration. Although landfill is the preferred choice in most of cases, due to toxic nature of vanadium waste materials a pretreatment stage is required to meet the stringent environmental requirement that make the process non-economical. The reuse of coal fly ash is attracting nowadays more due to the generation of more than 750 million tons per year from power generation process. The unburnt carbon present in the coal fly ash direct used as supplementary fuel in cement manufacturing process and the other metal values recovered before its disposal. More focus has been paid to use the coal fly ash in cement products, building construction brick materials and road application. But, the major parts of coal fly ash discarded by mine filling and landfill method only ( Pyrometallurgic and hydrometallurgy based metal reclamation/recycle is well established industrial practice for the various V containing materials. Some of the draw backs like high metal loss, non-selective separation and energy consumption limit the pyrometallurgy process ( In addition some crude such as hard crudes contain varying concentration of vanadium in ppm levels, which on processing in hydrotreating plants by Mo based catalysts V and other impurities gets deposited on the catalyst surface. As a result catalyst activity reduces and considered as waste. The volume of spent catalysts waste generated from petro-chemical industries worldwide has increased significantly in recent years and is expected to increase further ( Compared to conventional Na salt roasting process the Ca salt roasting process is increasingly gaining popularity among V metallurgical industry due to certain operational/cost/environmental advantages. So, the leaching philosophy for different Ca based V compounds in presence of different other elements is of considerable interest to the research community. Consequently, some novel processes for vanadium extraction have been proposed, like ammonium sulphate roasting followed by dilute H However, those processes suffer from non-selective V leaching, particularly in presence of high Mo in feed material, long processing steps, high chemical cost and difficulties in handling effluent. Although, H Hence, the objective of the present research work is to develop an economical and commercially viable process to recover V as AMV from a calcium vanadate sludge that contain variable percentage of V and other impurities. In order to meet the above requirement, selective leaching of V from the calcium vanadate sludge using AS as leaching medium followed by AMV precipitation by cooling crystallization method from the V LL was studied. Different process parameters such as pH, temperature, time, pulp density (PD) and reagent concentration were studied for selective V leaching and AMV precipitation. For a comparison, the conventional dilute H Typical calcium vanadate sludge was collected from a metal recycling plant situated in the western part of India and used as such for all further experiments. The major elements present in the sludge is shown 13.5% V, 8.98% Mo, 4.48% W, 25.6% Ca and along with other minor impurity and the results as shown in The optimized conditions for V leaching and AMV precipitation used for this study are based on our expertise and results based on preliminary tests carried out in our laboratory. The V leaching experiments were performed using a solid to liquid ratio of 1:5 (100 g sludge and 0.5 L water) in a 1 L glass reactor at atmospheric pressure and temperature. The stirring of the slurry was done by using an impeller driven by a variable speed motor and controller. The slurry pH was adjusted to 6.0 by slow addition of 360 g/L H The AMV precipitation experiments were carried out in a 0.5 L three-necked round-bottomed flask equipped with an overhead stirrer, condenser, pH and temperature meters, fixed in a thermostatic water bath with a temperature precision of ±1 °C. A known quantity of purified V LL was charged into the round- bottomed flask and the pH of the solution was controlled to 8.0 using 360 g/L H Selective V leach by using AS as leachant followed by AMV precipitation based on solubility difference at different temperature was carried out using the set-up described in previous Recovery of V as AMV from calcium vanadate sludge by sulfuric acid leaching process follows four different main stages, i.e. pH controlled leaching of V, purification of V LL, AMV precipitation by adding AS, crude AMV washed to remove soluble cations/anions. Based on our preliminary test results, optimum conditions were derived for the above mentioned stages and the same were adopted throughout the process. The optimum conditions that were used for V leaching were as follows; pH value of 6.0, 20% pulp density, room temperature, reaction time of 2 h and agitation speed of 600 rpm. The results are presented in The chemical reaction taking place during the leaching process can be expressed as given below: Under the above leaching conditions, a satisfactory vanadium leaching efficiency of 87.8% was achieved. At the same time, negligible amount of Mo (0.7%) and W (0.3%) were leached into the V LL. Other noticeable impurities leached into the V LL were 9.3% Ca, 13.2% Mg, 73.2% SiO The V leaching efficiency decreased substantially from 87.8% to 52.5% when the pH of the leaching slurry was increased from 6.0 to 7.0. The decrease in V leaching efficiency was probably due to the fact that, at neutral and alkaline pH value, the solubility of calcium vanadate is negligible ( The V LL generated under the optimized leaching conditions contained 23.7 g/L V, 0.12 g/L Mo, 0.03 g/L W, 4.77 g/L Ca, 0.38 g/L Mg, 0.95 g/L SiO (I) single stage pH control to 11.0 by adding 10% NaOH , (II) two stage pH control i.e., the pH increase from 6.0 to 8.5 by adding Na The precipitation of V as AMV from the purified V LL was carried out by the process explained in the experimental section that can be explained by the following reaction mechanism: The chemical analyses of AMV produced before and after the washing steps, are presented in Considering the problems associated with acid leaching process, AS based process was studied for the recovery of V as per the mechanism show below: As per the above Eq.  Chemical reactions that follow during leaching of calcium vanadate sludge by acidification with H  Low recovery of V (<20%) at low temperature (30 °C) is mainly due to less solubility of soluble V from LL and increased V recovery at high temperature (80 °C) due to increased solubility of leached AMV from sludge. Control experiment on AMV solubility at 80 °C showed 50–55 g/L (i.e equivalent to 23.9 g/L of V) and it clearly revealed the role of temperature on AMV solubility in the vanadium leaching process in the present case. Besides, the hot water washing of calcium vanadate sludge residue (1:2 water w/v) after the AS leaching showed <5% V (0.56% V) left over in the, which indicates the precipitation of AMV during the filtration process is the major reason. Proper devise to handle hot filtration of soluble AMV from leach slurry is necessary. So, the liberation of NH The effect of pulp density (PD i.e-5–20 wt% solids in 100 ml solution) from 5 to 20% on vanadium leaching studied in the early optimized condition and the results are given in the As per the Eq. Chemical analysis of AMV H A hydrochloric acid leaching process was studied to separate Mo and W from the V leached cake. At a leaching condition of 160 g/L HCl, 20% PD, reaction temperature of 60 °C, reaction time of 2 h, about 98% of Mo and V was solubilized and reported to the leach liquor. At the same time, about 95% W present in the V leached cake was precipitated as tungstic acid (H In this paper we have developed a simple and selective V leaching process from calcium vanadate sludge using AS and recovered V as AMV product. The conversion of orthovanadate to metavanadate species is the key step to improve V leaching efficiency and reduce chemical consumption drastically. Using our AS process 82% V leaching efficiency with overall V recovery of 81% and AMV product purity of 98.5 was achieved. No impurity removal step is necessary compared to conventional acid leach process. This process is cost effective, less number of stages and generates effluent which is recyclable to leaching step. Present AS leach process solves the hazardous waste handling problem industrially but also recovers V as AMV product suitable for use in chemical/metallurgical applications. Finally, complete process flow sheet of the process with material balance is presented. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to thank the management of