The here presented criterion describes the disintegration kinetics of cast in sand cores, which is influenced by transient thermal and mechanical casting process loads.
                  A semi-permanent mould setup allowing for various thermal exposure intensities was developed and used with wedge shaped, hot hardened silicate bonded sand cores. During defined mechanical agitation of such produced castings the minimum core removal mass rate was identified and combined with the de-agglomeration degree of the collected core sand. The de-agglomeration degree was evaluated from particle size analysis with specifically adapted sieving parameters and a modelling approach for the size distribution. The retained mass on the top mesh constituted the lump mass.
                  Cast-in cores generally exhibited higher de-agglomeration rates compared to non-cast-in reference cores, which confirmed a deteriorating influence of a casting process on the sand core. Increased de-agglomeration rates and more disintegrated core lumps were observed for the samples with longer thermal exposure. Avoiding ambient humidity resulted in a significantly increased de-agglomeration rate compared to openly stored samples.Sand cores are used in numerous metal casting technologies to shape complex internal contours and undercut sections. After the solidification and cooling of a casting, a sand core removal process is required to obtain a sand-free casting.  Quantitative evaluation methods for core removal properties are rarely available. At the Polish Foundry Institute, several investigations have been performed using knock-out testing, according to standard ( In the present study, the kinetics of sand core de-agglomeration are investigated; no contributions to such research could be found in the available literature. Therefore, the field of mineral processing has been evaluated in greater depth, as the fragmentation properties (e.g. of ores or rocks) are central to this field. In summary, the RRSB approach is widely accepted, and is generally documented in mineral processing handbooks ( Sample production for core removal trials are presented. These include the different applied cooling conditions, the core removal setup, and the particle size evaluation method. Silica sand H32 ( For casting the test core was placed in a steel mould and liquid Al (alloy AlSi7Cu0,5Mg) at a temperature of 745 The steel mould was operated based on the mould side wall temperature Four different thermal exposure scenarios were defined. The following colour coding applies throughout the text and figures: Hardened reference: non cast-in cores, realised by re-filling the empty cavities of test castings with virgin core sand mixture hardened therein (yellow). Water cooling: realised by setting the casting with the feeder 40 Air cooling: cooling the cast samples at non-agitated air ambience (green). Insulation: completely embedding the cast part between 30  Times of thermal exposure of the sand cores are significantly different with the different cooling types. Because the sand cores have low thermal conductivity, they show long heating delays relative to the short pouring time of < A vibration unit equipped with two electrical imbalance drives rotating at 50 On top of the sample, a knocking mass has been placed. Both the sample and mass are freely movable in the vertical direction. The maximum vertical acceleration of the vibration unit was measured as 6 A Retsch AS200 digit sieve machine with meshes of 0 (tray), 63, 90, 125, 180, 250, 355, 500, 710, 1000 and 1400 The removed core sand from castings also contains larger agglomerates and core lumps. To avoid their excessive breakdown during sieve analysis, the sieving amplitude was reduced from 1,5 to 0,2 Curves for removed mass over time (obtained from the vibration test bench) are presented for the different sample conditions, followed by mass rate and particle size evaluations.   To improve manual minimum mass rate evaluation, an objective criterion is required. The minimum core removal mass rate  From In this study, three castings were sealed against air exchange during the cooling phase at a still-elevated casting temperature. This was done to eliminate humidity condensation. For a direct comparison, two more castings were openly stored in ambient air. After 10 The results demonstrate a significant deceleration in core removal for the unsealed samples compared to the sealed samples. The core removal mass-time curves for the unsealed samples are similar to the initial curves presented in The silicate bonded sand cores had a propensity to absorb humidity. This prolongs the core removal rate, which is potentially overlaid to all results. This section presents an analysis of particle size modelling, and the deduction of the de-agglomeration degree and rate. The achieved results for the different conditions are summarised and discussed. To apply an extended analysis of the obtained sieve fraction after core removal, a particle analysis according to the RRSB approach was performed. The RRSB function of the retained mass portion During experimental evaluation, the RRSB parameters are obtained by minimising the variance of The relevant retained mass fractions for the RRSB fit are those on Assuming spherical particles, the specific surface Because of its low specific surface contribution, the lump mass fraction will be excluded from the specific surface evaluation of core sand The researched de-agglomeration degree is defined by the quotient To assess time dependency, an identified minimum core removal rate This criterion reflects the rate at which sand particle bonds are broken up. The de-agglomeration rate predominantly refers to the sand core bonding strength properties. Any pre-damage to the core is reflected (e.g. by different thermal loads or casting contraction stresses), along with the residual core strength and brittleness. Based upon the measured grain size analysis and the retained mass fraction, all mesh sizes have been obtained. Subsequently, the optimum RRSB distribution was evaluated. A pronounced minimum is present, with RRSB particle size distribution curves for raw sand and the removed core sand of all thermal exposure variants are shown in The removed core sand generally shows a shift towards higher particle sizes, indicating the presence of sand agglomerates. The highest lump mass fraction (above 50 %) was found for the hardened condition, followed by the insulated and air-cooled cases. Interestingly, the lump mass fraction was very low for the water-cooled case. In The data reveal that the de-agglomeration rate is direct proportional to the minimum shake-out mass rate and de-agglomeration degree is inversely proportional to the lump mass fraction. Thus, applied for quality control purposes these primarily measured characteristics can be evaluated without full grain size analysis already. The lowest de-agglomeration rate and –degree were observed for the hardened condition. The initial core strength is non-deteriorated by any overlaid loading. The cast-in samples all exhibited a higher de-agglomeration rate. As previously discussed, this rate was potentially decreased by the influence of ambient air humidity, as different examples with air-cooled samples clearly show. Interestingly, for a longer thermal exposure time (e.g. during insulated cooling), a lower degree of de-agglomeration and higher de-agglomeration rate were found, relative to the water-cooled condition. This may be attributed to thermally induced sand core damage, which can cause binder embrittlement by de-hydration and micro-cracking caused by sand grain expansion. The major process difference between the externally hardened sample and cast-in and water-cooled samples is the missing casting-core interaction for the hardened sample. This led to the early release of large core lump pieces, and the consequent observed low degree of de-agglomeration. In contrast, the core in the water-cooled sample suffered only minor damage during the casting process, but may have been intensively exposed to hydrostatic pressure from the rapidly contracting quenched casting as the core expanded, because of the low thermal conductivity of the core. These thermomechanical stress conditions could have prevented the early release of the cast-in core during the vibration-induced core removal process.  Sand core disintegration at core removal from cast parts was quantified with a de-agglomeration rate criterion. Two main elements required are the minimum core removal mass rate, which is reflecting the kinetics, and the specific surface area of the removed core sand compared to the initial one of the raw sand. The core lump mass constituted a significant fraction of the removed cores sand. The observed core lump disintegration was depending on the casting parameters. Particle size measurement of the removed core sand required specifically adjusted parameters. The resulting size distribution was modelled with good accuracy using an approach adopted from the field of mineral processing. This allowed the subsequent calculation of the specific surface area. The de-agglomeration rate of non-cast in reference core samples was the lowest. Cast-in cores show higher de-agglomeration rate with increased thermal exposure. Specifically, samples stored without ambient air exchange exhibited the highest de-agglomeration rate. Implementation of the method is possible for whichever casting geometry and core removal technology. For intricately shaped cores a complex transient process load overlay could be hindering to access the exact kinetics in experiments. Modelling of local core properties influenced the thermal and mechanical interaction with the cast part might be required. The support from company Nemak Linz for this study by enabling the extensive use of production and engineering facilities is highly acknowledged.