Increasing numbers of vegetable growers are adopting conservation tillage practices and including cover crops into crop rotations. The practice helps to increase or maintain an adequate level of soil organic matter and improves vegetable yields. The effects of the practices, however, on enzyme activities in southeastern soils of the United States have not been well documented. Thus, the objectives of the study were to investigate the effects of cover crops and two tillage systems on soil enzyme activity profiles following tomato and to establish relationships between enzyme activities and soil organic carbon (C) and nitrogen (N). The cover crops planted late in fall 2005 included black oat (Avena strigosa), crimson clover (Trifolium incarnatum L.), or crimson clover–black oat mixed. A weed control (no cover crop) was also included. Early in spring 2006, the plots were disk plowed and incorporated into soil (conventional tillage) or mowed and left on the soil surface (no-till). Broiler litter as source of N fertilizer was applied at a rate of 4.6Mgha−1, triple super phosphate at 79.0kgPha−1, and potassium chloride at 100kgKha−1 were also applied according to soil testing recommendations. Tomato seedlings were transplanted and grown for 60 days on a Marvyn sandy loam soil (fine-loamy, kaolinitic, thermic Typic Kanhapludults). Ninety-six core soil samples were collected at incremental depths (0–5, 5–10, and 10–15cm) and passed through a 2-mm sieve and kept moist to study arylamidase (EC 3.4.11.2), l-asparaginase (EC 3.5.1.1), l-glutaminase (EC 3.5.1.2), and urease (EC 3.5.1.5) activities. Tillage systems affected only l-glutaminase activity in soil while cover crops affected activities of all the enzymes studied with the exception of urease. The research clearly demonstrated that in till and no-till systems, l-asparaginase activity is greater (P
                     ≤0.05) in plots preceded by crimson clover than in those preceded by black oat or their mixture. Activity of the enzyme decreased from 11.7mgNH4
                     +–Nkg−1
                     2h−1 at 0–5cm depth to 8.73mgNH4
                     +–Nkg−1
                     2h−1 at 5–10cm and 10–15cm depths in the no-till crimson clover plots. Arylamidase activity significantly correlated with soil organic C (r
                     =0.699**) and soil organic N (r
                     =0.764***). Amidohydrolases activities significantly correlated with soil organic N but only urease significantly correlated with soil organic C (r
                     =0.481*). These results indicated that incorporation of cover crops into rotations may increase enzyme activities in soils.Soils are inhabited by a vast array of microbes responsible for breakdown of organic matter and solubilization of nutrients. These microbes are major source of soil enzymes and their dynamics in soils seemed to be related to management practices. Enzymes play an important role in the cycling of nutrients in nature and because soil enzyme activity is sensitive to agricultural practices, it can be used as an index of soil microbial activity and fertility ( Arylamidase (EC 3.4.11.2) is an enzyme that catalyzes the hydrolysis of an N-terminal amino acid from peptides amides using Amidohydrolases are widely distributed in nature and have been detected in plants, animals, and microorganisms ( The experiment was initiated in fall 2005 at the George Washington Carver Agricultural Experiment Station at Tuskegee University, Tuskegee, AL, on a Marvyn sandy loam (fine-loamy, kaolinitic, thermic Typic Kanhapludults) soil. Prior to establishment of the experiment, the site was in fallow (mainly grasses) for several years. Composite soil samples were collected from 0 to 15 Soil pH (6.1) was determined by a glass electrode (soil:water 1:2.5) and soil cation exchange capacity (<4.6 The cover crops tested were crimson clover ( Following tomato harvest, ninety-six core soil samples (2.5 The soil samples were passed through a 2-mm sieve and kept moist in a refrigerator at 4 Amidohydrolases ( All results reported are averages of duplicate assays expressed on moisture-free basis. Moisture was determined from loss in weight following drying at 105 Before cutting the cover crops, four areas of 1 Because measures obtained at the three depths are not independent, data were analyzed using MIXED procedure of In general, cover crops and soil sampling depths significantly ( Statistical analyses suggested that cover crops and soil sampling depths affected significantly (  In the no-till plots, arylamidase activity was consistently higher under black oat at 5–10 and 10–15 Tillage practices have profound influences on amidohydrolases activity in soils. In general, tillage practices did not have a significant effect on In no-till plots, the enzyme activity was at all depths significantly ( All the factors and their interactions significantly affected Contrary to what was observed in the tilled plots, Effects of cropping systems on four amidohydrolases (amidase, Urease activity was significantly ( However, in the no-till plots at 0–5 Some of the enzymes studied significantly correlated with soil organic C and/or soil organic N. Arylamidase activity ( All amidohydrolases significantly correlated with soil organic N but only urease significantly correlated with soil organic C ( Our research demonstrated that enzyme activities were very sensitive to presence of cover crops and with the exception of urease in tilled plots, could be used as potential soil quality indicator. Individually used, crimson clover and black oat can stimulate arylamidase activity in till and no-till soils.