More efficient and selective extraction systems are especially attractive in the solvent extraction process. A synergistic green solvent extraction system of vanadium(V) in a black shale acid leaching solution that uses a mixture of diisooctylphosphinic acid (Cyanex272) and trialkylamine (N235) is proposed. The effects of the volume ratio of extractant on vanadium extraction and the synergistic co-efficient (R) were studied. The vanadium extraction could reach 96.70% at conditions of 12% Cyanex272, 8% N235, a pH of 1.60, an O/A phase ratio O/A 1:2 and an extraction time 8 min. FT-IR spectra analysis indicates that the synergistic effects owing to the formation of hydrogen bonds NH+···OP, result in easier dissociation of the hydrogen ions in Cyanex272. In the extraction process, two kinds of vanadium species VO2
                     + and H2V10O28
                     4−, can both be extracted by an ion exchange reaction. Under optimal condition, a vanadium-rich solution containing 12.80 g/L and V2O5 product of 99.32% purity were obtained after three-stage extraction, three-stage scrubbing and three-stage stripping. The vanadium concentration in raffinate decreased to 5.69 mg/L and the impurities especially Fe, Al, P, Si were efficiently separated. The findings in this study could also give the inspiration for the recovery or removal of vanadium and other metal ions in different solutions.The separation and recovery of vanadium has drawn increasing attention due to the ever-creasing demand for V The selection of separation and extraction methods strongly focuses on efficiency and cost Instead of using a single extractant, mixtures of extractants can give rise to synergistic effects and better selectivity of metal extraction in the solvent extraction processes. Many metal ions have been recovered and high separating efficiency has been obtained in recent years by synergistic solvent extraction, including for rare earths In view of the above studies, PC88A-N235 system showed a better separation and extraction performance for vanadium over impurities in black shale sulfuric acid leaching solution. The authors found that N235 destroyed the dimers of PC88A and the hydrogen bond N In this research, a mixture of N235 and Cyanex272 was explored to synergistically extract vanadium from a black shale sulfuric acid leaching solution bearing multiple impurities. The present study mainly aims to obtain better extraction efficiency and separation from massive impurities, such as Fe, Al, P, Si, Mg, K and Na. The synergistic extraction mechanism was analyzed by FT-IR spectra and counter-current simulation extraction and stripping experiments were conducted. Trialkylamine N235 (R Liquid–liquid solvent extraction was performed in a 100 mL beaker, in which 20 mL of organic phase and 40 mL of feed solution were mixed by magnetic stirring at a speed of 250 r/min for 8 min. The organic phase was composed of 20 vol% extractant, 5% vol. TBP as a phase modifier and 75 vol% sulfonated kerosene. The feed solution pH was adjusted by 3 mol/L H The pH value of the feed solution was measured by using a pH meter (PHS-3C, supplied by Shanghai INESA). The vanadium concentration was determined by ferrous ammonium sulfate titration using N-phenylanthranilic acid as an indicator Distribution ratios (D), extraction (E), separation factor (β), and synergistic co-efficient (R) were calculated by Eqs. The effects of typical phosphoric acid extractants D2EHPA, PC88A, Cyanex272, trialkylamine N235 and the mixture of Cyanex272 and N235 on V (IV) and V (V) extraction were studied and the results are shown in In addition, the extraction of N235 increased in the pH range from 1.20 to 1.60, and then kept constant in the pH range from 1.60 to 2.00. And in the mixture of Cyanex272 and N235 extraction system, the extraction is obviously higher than that of the single extractant system. Therefore, the N235 and Cyanex272 extraction system has a good effect on vanadium separation from the black shale acid leaching solution and showed potential for the synergistic extraction of vanadium. The effects of N235 volume fraction (X Effects of extraction time on vanadium extraction using single extractants and mixtures of extractants were shown in Both high vanadium extraction and good selectivity are required in solvent extraction. To examine the selectivity of the N235 and Cyanex272 synergistic extraction system, the concentration, extraction and separation factor β of the main impurities in the raffinate were measured and the results are presented in The results in  The good separation performance of the synergistic extraction process is attributed to two main reasons. One is the combining capacity of vanadium and extractant is stronger than impurities and extractants To make clear the synergistic mechanism of N235 and Cyanex272, FT-IR spectra of organic phase was analyzed and is shown in After extracting vanadium using the mixture of Cyanex272 and N235, N The electron drift in the mixing of Cyanex272 and N235 is showed in Therefore, the synergistic extraction mechanism and reactions can be proposed as follows: Stage I: in the acidization process, the primary N235 was protonated after reacting with H Stage II: in the mixing process of Cyanex272 and N235, the hydrogen bond N Stage III: in the extraction process, two kinds of vanadium species can both be extracted by the two-mixed-cooperate extractants. To determine the extraction stages in the counter-current experiments, the synergistic extraction isotherm was studied under conditions of 12 vol% Cyanex272 and 8 vol% N235, feed solution pH 1.60, phase ratio (O/A) 1:2 and extraction time of 8 min. The McCable-Thiele plot for vanadium extraction was established by means of changing the phase ratio and the results are shown in The McCable-Thiele plot for vanadium stripping was established under conditions of 1 mol/L NaOH, a stripping time 6 min, and a phase ratio O/A of 4:1. The results are shown in According to the above studies, a vanadium separation and recovery flow sheet from the black shale acid leaching solution was proposed, as shown in This paper describes a Cyanex272 and N235 synergistic green solvent extraction system, for efficient vanadium recovery and separation from impurities in black shale acid leaching solution. In conclusion, the mixture of Cyanex272 and N235 synergistically improved the vanadium extraction and separation efficiency. The maximum synergistic co-efficient R of 4.77 and vanadium extraction of 96.7% were obtained under conditions of 12 vol% Cyanex272 and 8 vol% N235, feed solution pH 1.60, phase ratio (O/A) of 1:2 and extraction time of 8 min. The FT-IR spectra demonstrated that the formation of hydrogen bonds N-H After three-stage counter-current extraction, three-stage scrubbing using 1 vol% HCl and three-stage counter-current stripping using 1 mol/L NaOH, a vanadium-rich solution containing 12.80 g/L V and V This study was financially supported by Project of