Pressure-driven membrane processes such as reverse osmosis (RO), nanofiltration (NF), ultrafiltration (UF), and microfiltration (MF) are emerging as key components of water purification systems throughout the world. The bulk of the capital and operating costs of membrane systems is associated with the high pressure needed to remove dissolved contaminants (e.g., monovalent ions and small organic molecules). RO and NF are very effective at removing dissolved ions and organic solutes. However, high pressures (100-1000psi) are required to operate RO and NF membranes. Conversely, UF and MF membranes require much lower pressure (5-60psi). Unfortunately, they are not effective at retaining dissolved ions and organic solutes. The author of this chapter has developed a dendrimer-enhanced filtration (DEF) process that can remove dissolved substances using UF and MF. Dendrimers are highly branched 3D globular nanopolymers with controlled composition and architecture. They have many reactive functional sites and binding pockets per molecule, and their globular shape and large size makes them easier to filter than linear polymers. The DEF process works by combining dendrimers with conventional membrane filtration. Functionalized dendrimers are added to an incoming aqueous solution and bind with the target contaminants. For most dissolved solutes (e.g., cations and anions), a change in solution acidity causes the dendrimers to bind or release the target solutes. Thus, a two-stage filtration process can be used to recover and concentrate a variety of dissolved ions in water. This concentrated solution is then collected for disposal or subsequent processing or disposal, whereas the dendrimers are recycled. The DEF process has many applications including the recovery of toxic metal ions (e.g., copper) from industrial wastewater, the extraction of valuable metals (e.g., uranium) from aqueous solutions generated during in situ recovery mining, and the remediation of groundwater contaminated by anions (e.g., perchlorate).Introduction Dendrimers as recyclable ligands for cations Dendrimers as recyclable ligands for anions Dendrimer-enhanced filtration: overview and applications Summary and outlook Acknowledgments References  Dendritic nanopolymers include hyperbranched polymers, dendrigraft polymers, dendronized linear polymers, dendrimers, and many other supramolecular assemblies such as core-shell tecto(dendrimers) and dendrimer-like star polymers ( Chelating agents are widely used in a variety of environmental and industrial separation processes. These include (i) selective extractants in hydrometallurgy, (ii) metal ion binding functionalities for ion exchange resins, and (iii) high-capacity polymeric ligands for water treatment Poly(amidoamine) (PAMAM) dendrimers provide good model systems for probing the aqueous coordination chemistry of cations with dendritic nanopolymers. These dendrimers were the first dendrimer family to be synthesized, characterized, and commercialized. PAMAM dendrimers ( Diallo et al.  Anions have emerged as major water contaminants throughout the world. In the United States, the discharge of anions such as perchlorate (ClO  As stated in the introduction, the invention of dendritic nanopolymers is providing unprecedented opportunities to develop enhanced UF and MF processes for recovering dissolved ions from aqueous solutions. The DEF process developed by Diallo As a proof-of-concept study, Diallo et al. Dendritic nanopolymers are among the most chemically and structurally diverse classes of nanomaterials available to date. These “soft” nanoparticles, with sizes in the range of 1–100 Recovery of perchlorate from contaminated groundwater. Recovery of uranium from in situ mining leach solutions and contaminated groundwater. Recovery of metal ions (e.g., copper, silver, nickel, and zinc) from industrial wastewater. I thank the US National Science Foundation (NSF Grants CTS-0086727, CTS-0329436, and NIRT CBET-0506951) and the US Environmental Protection Agency (NCER STAR Grant R829626) for funding my research on the use of dendritic nanopolymers as functional materials for water purification. Partial funding for this research was also provided by the Department of Energy (Cooperative Agreement EW15254), the W.M. Keck Foundation, and the National Water Research Institute (Research Project Agreement NO 05-TT-004).