The application of pressure filtration in microalgae harvesting requires chemical pretreatment in order to reduce membrane fouling and to increase water flux. Surfactants have shown potential to enhance microalgae dewaterability by charge neutralization, bridging and releasing extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) and bound water. In this study, the effect of three surfactants including anionic sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), non-ionic triton X-100 and cationic cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) on the dewaterability of Chlamydomonas sp. was investigated. Filtration fluxes and biomass concentrations were used to evaluate the microalgae dewaterability. Based on the results, SDS and Triton X-100 had a negative effect on the dewaterability of microalgae biomass. However, CTAB improved the dewaterability by decreasing the reversible and irreversible fouling resistance. The optimum dosage of CTAB was found to be 1500 mg/L, and resulted in 95.8% and 140% improvement on average water flux and biomass recovery efficiency, respectively.Today, there is no doubt that microalgae have a broad Pressure filtration has been considered as a reliable and commonly used method for harvesting and dewatering of microalgae biomass due to its higher separation efficiency, easy operation and low energy consumption ( In order to alleviate the fouling resistance and to increase dewaterability, microalgae pretreatment with conventional coagulants such as aluminium salts and ferric salts is reported as an effective approach by several studies ( Surfactants with hydrophilic head and hydrophobic tail are considered as promising dewatering agents ( This study investigates the effect of three surfactants: anionic sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), non-ionic triton X-100 and cationic cetyl trimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) on microalgae dewatering. Dead-end filtration experiments on  In order to study the effect of surfactant pretreatment on the dewaterability of microalgal biomass, three surfactants with different iconicity were selected. Triton X-100, CTAB and SDS represent non-ionic, cationic and anionic surfactants, respectively ( A single dead-end filtration (DEF) setup (CS20-201203538) was used in this study. The area and effective volume of the filtration cylinder were 0.0706 m All filtration tests were conducted using 7 L of the microalgae suspension, which had an initial height of 0.1 m in the cylinder. A Plexiglass® window was improvised on the filtration chamber to enable measuring and recording of the variation of the suspension height ( where To disclose the influence of the surfactants on the dewaterability of microalgae biomass, the average water flux variation due to pretreatment was calculated as Assuming that only water passed through the filter medium and microalgae cells were retained in the filtration tank, the microalgae biomass concentration and biomass recovery efficiency were defined by Eqs. The zeta potentials of the surfactant-treated microalgae samples were measured using a zetaphotometer (ALPHAPHOT – 2, SY2, France) at 26 °C ( The morphology and flocculation shape of the microalgae for the before and after treatments were observed using a microscope (Olympus BX51, Tokyo, Japan). According to the microscopic observation, The flux behavior and fouling resistance during filtration of microalgal suspensions is shown in As shown in Unlike SDS and Triton X-100, when microalgae was treated with a CTAB surfactant, the final flux values increased from 6.1 to 11.6 Lm The effect of surfactant concentrations on average water flux variation   The surface charge of microalgae cells, which is usually shown by zeta potential values, affects the compaction and settling properties of microalgae biomass ( The changes of pH values of the surfactant treated microalgae as a function of surfactant concentration are also shown in An attempt to investigate the influence of cationic surfactant on microalgae cell disruption was preformed via microscopic observation. The microscope images of microalgae biomass before and after treatment with CTAB are shown in The results show that CTAB improved the dewaterability of microalgae, while SDS and Triton X-100 showed a negative effect. The improved dewaterability can be attributed to the combined effects of (1) electrostatic neutralization, (2) release of EPS and bound water and (3) high MV and hydrophilic foulants removal. The optimal concentration for maximum dewaterability was determined to be 1500 mg/L, which generate microalgae biomass with optimal flux (6.1 to 11.6 Lm This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (