The effect of six lignosulfonates on the Hallimond tube flotation of chalcopyrite and molybdenite was studied as a function of pH, with the use of common pH modifiers (soda ash, potassium hydroxide, and lime). By comparing the flotation results with the adsorption data collected in Part I of this contribution, it becomes evident that the depression of chalcopyrite flotation takes places only when lignosulfonates adsorb on the mineral surface and, at the same time, a fraction of the xanthate collector is desorbed from the mineral surface. These two conditions are met only at high pH adjusted with lime. The depression of the natural floatability of molybdenite is relatively easy using all six lignosulfonates, but once the mineral is rendered strongly hydrophobic by the addition of an oily collector (dodecane), the depression of molybdenite by lignosulfonates is very difficult and only calcium lignosulfonates, and the highest molecular weight sodium salt, produce significant levels of depression. Overall, the results suggest that it is possible to selectively float chalcopyrite from molybdenite using lignosulfonates by depressing molybdenite. This can be achieved over a wide pH range provided that a pH modifier other than lime is used for pH control. Although the results showed that chalcopyrite flotation and molybdenite depression can be achieved under similar physicochemical conditions, further tests with real ores under industrial conditions have to be carried out with particular attention to the effect of process water quality.Chalcopyrite (CuFeS The natural hydrophobicity of molybdenite results from its layered crystal structure. The sulfur and molybdenum atoms within each layer are held together by strong covalent bonds, while the bonds between adjacent layers are weak van der Waals bonds between sulfur atoms (  In the case of chalcopyrite, once the mineral is rendered hydrophobic by a xanthate collector, its depression can effectively be achieved by rather drastic chemical treatments. The usual reagents include: sodium bisulfide (NaHS) in combination with nitrogen gas for flotation, Noke’s reagent (thiophosphorus or thioarsenic compounds), and cyanides. In Part I of this study, it was found that lignosulfonates are capable of adsorbing on both molybdenite and xanthate-treated chalcopyrite. It was also observed that the adsorption of lignosulfonates on chalcopyrite at high pH was accompanied by a simultaneous desorption of a portion of ethyl xanthate. Lignosulfonate adsorption on molybdenite was rather low at natural pH (∼4.5) but was greatly enhanced at high pH adjusted with lime. In general, the adsorption results pointed towards specific/chemical interactions between lignosulfonates and specifically adsorbed metallic species on chalcopyrite and molybdenite. When the mineral surfaces were strongly negatively charged (high pH adjusted with soda ash or potassium hydroxide), the adsorption density of the anionic polyelectrolytes decreased dramatically. In this part, the above observations are correlated with the flotation response of the minerals. Samples of chalcopyrite and molybdenite were received from Ward Natural Science Establishment. The preparation of the samples for testing (grinding and sizing), specific surface areas, and purity were described in Part I. The chalcopyrite sample was of excellent quality but the molybdenite sample (+38 The same lignosulfonates, with one exception, as in the previous study were used in flotation experiments. Their properties, including the new D-659 reagent, are listed in In comparison to the other lignosulfonates, the D-659 can be characterized by low anionicity, as seen from the contents of sulfonic and carboxylic groups, and a relatively high molecular weight. Analytical grade calcium oxide (CaO), potassium hydroxide (KOH), and soda ash (Na Despite repeated screening, the +38 About 2.5 After conditioning, the whole mixture was transferred to a modified Hallimond tube and the tube was filled with 0.001 The pH was mainly adjusted with lime (CaO). A “control” test for each type of lignosulfonate was performed at pH 11 adjusted with KOH for chalcopyrite. Na The same procedure was followed during flotation tests with molybdenite, with the exception that nitrogen was used instead of air. When dodecane was used, it was added to the flotation mixtures in the form of a freshly prepared aqueous emulsion (0.3  The D-748 lignosulfonate ( Additions of the D-659 and D-750 reagents result in chalcopyrite depression in the presence of lime, both at high and moderate pH values, using fairly low concentrations of the lignosulfonates ( The D-912 measurably depresses chalcopyrite flotation under all test conditions ( It is noteworthy that this lignosulfonate (D-912) was the only calcium salt tested on chalcopyrite. The other reagents were sodium salts. The depression of chalcopyrite achieved at high pH adjusted with KOH is never as good as the depression level achieved in the presence of lime at high pH. Also, at natural pH, the reverse addition of lignosulfonate (i.e., the addition of lignosulfonate prior to the addition of xanthate), results in better depression than the addition of xanthate followed by lignosulfonate. The flotation results for molybdenite are shown in It should be noted that in the absence of lignosulfonates, the flotation of molybdenite was surprisingly low, considering that the mineral was pre-concentrated earlier by flotation. The poor grade of the sample (73% MoS As can be seen from The D-748 at high enough concentrations was able to strongly depress molybdenite ( The D-701, the D-750 and the D-912 induced very strong depression of molybdenite at very low concentrations (5–10 A series of additional flotation tests were carried out to show the effect of induced hydrophobicity of molybdenite on the depressing action of lignosulfonates. The tests were performed in the presence of 10 When oil is added to molybdenite, the floatability of the mineral reaches very high levels (dashed line). Furthermore, if dodecane is introduced ahead of lignosulfonates, the depression of the mineral is quite poor. Alternatively, if the mineral is conditioned with lignosulfonate first followed by dodecane, the depression is excellent. Using the depression level of chalcopyrite flotation at natural pH as a measure of the depressing power of lignosulfonates, it can be seen that the effectiveness of lignosulfonates increases in the order: D-619 It is important to recall from Part I of this study that all lignosulfonates gave high and almost the same adsorption densities at natural pH and at pH 11 adjusted with lime. Even though the adsorption characteristics of lignosulfonates were very similar under those conditions, the flotation results show that the high adsorption of lignosulfonates at natural pH does not really translate into a strong depressing effect on chalcopyrite flotation. However, a very similar level of adsorption at pH 11 adjusted with lime brings about complete depression of chalcopyrite by all the reagents. Control of pH with soda ash and KOH does not result in chalcopyrite depression, which correlates very well with low adsorption of lignosulfonates under these conditions. Low adsorption of lignosulfonates coupled with the presence of just the chemically adsorbed xanthate on the mineral surface is insufficient to depress the mineral. At natural pH, the desorption of xanthate does not occur and the depression of chalcopyrite by lignosulfonates is not very effective. It is apparent that the desorption of xanthate alone is not sufficient for depressing chalcopyrite and a simultaneous adsorption of lignosulfonates must also take place. When pH is adjusted to a high value using KOH, the physically adsorbed xanthate is removed from the mineral surface but this process in not accompanied by the adsorption of lignosulfonates. As a result, the flotation of chalcopyrite is not affected. On the other hand, using lime for pH adjustment induces high lignosulfonate adsorption and a measurable quantity of xanthate appears in solution. At high pH using lime, all lignosulfonates gave high adsorption densities which also resulted in the complete depression of chalcopyrite. Therefore, it can be concluded that it is the combination of xanthate desorption and lignosulfonate adsorption that leads to the depression of chalcopyrite flotation. Overall, and consistent with the adsorption data from Part I, calcium salts of lignosulfonates are stronger depressants of chalcopyrite compared to sodium salts. In the case of naturally-hydrophobic molybdenite, the depression of mineral flotation by lignosulfonates is very strong even at natural pH, when the adsorption of the depressants is relatively low. It should also be pointed out that lignosulfonates are not very effective depressants of molybdenite when the mineral surface is rendered strongly hydrophobic by the addition of dodecane. This suggests that lignosulfonates weakly interact with strongly hydrophobic surfaces. It is also noteworthy that the two reagents that significantly reduced the floatability of oil-covered molybdenite (D-701 and D-912) were the only calcium salts among the tested reagents. The D-912 lignosulfonate was also the strongest chalcopyrite depressant, which again shows the importance of polyvalent metal species in controlling the adsorption behavior and depressing action of lignosulfonates. The addition of lignosulfonate ahead of oil, however, prevents the oil from enhancing the hydrophobicity of molybdenite. The low adsorption of lignosulfonates on molybdenite appears to be sufficient to render the mineral surface hydrophilic and to prevent the oily collector from attaching and spreading on the molybdenite surface. This poor depressing effect towards strongly hydrophobic, oil-coated molybdenite also correlates well with the inability of lignosulfonates to depress chalcopyrite in the presence of xanthates at natural pH. Dixanthogen, an oily oxidation product of xanthates, present on the chalcopyrite surface would likely function in a way similar to dodecane on the surface of molybdenite. Overall, the results suggest that it could be possible to selectively float chalcopyrite from molybdenite by depressing molybdenite with lignosulfonates. This separation can be achieved over a wide pH range provided that a pH modifier other than lime, e.g., soda ash, is used for pH control. A rougher flotation stage could be run at high pH (to depress pyrite) in the presence of only xanthates to float chalcopyrite. It could be expected that a portion of naturally-hydrophobic molybdenite will float along chalcopyrite. The rougher tailings could then be scavenged for molybdenite using an oily collector. Any molybdenite reporting to the rougher (chalcopyrite) concentrate could be depressed using lignosulfonates in a cleaning stage. Pulp dilution and the use of flotation columns could potentially enhance the selectivity of the process. It is also noteworthy that carbonate anions introduced with soda ash would mostly precipitate any calcium ions naturally present in process water thus allowing lignosulfonates to act more selectively. A couple of the tested lignosulfonates appear to be particularly promising as selective depressants. The D-619 and D-648 lignosulfonates do not affect the flotation of chalcopyrite at natural or weakly alkaline pH while at the same time, they completely depress the natural floatability of molybdenite. It should also be pointed out that dixanthogen could to some extent function as a collector of molybdenite and could interfere with the depressing action of lignosulfonates by analogy to the molybdenite flotation results obtained in the presence of dodecane. Depression of chalcopyrite flotation by lignosulfonates takes place only under high pH conditions when lime is used for pH control. Calcium-hydroxy species, which form in alkaline solutions, specifically adsorb on the mineral surface, reduce or even reverse the negative surface charge, and act as adsorption sites for lignosulfonates. The adsorption of lignosulfonates is accompanied by desorption of the physically adsorbed xanthate fraction, and this combination of processes brings about the depression of the mineral. The natural floatability of molybdenite can easily be depressed by any type of lignosulfonates regardless of pH and all lignosulfonates seem to show a similar affinity towards the untreated molybdenite surface. Apparently, the presence of a small amount of strongly hydrophilic lignosulfonates adsorbed on the surface is sufficient to render the mineral hydrophilic, although lignosulfonate adsorption on molybdenite is greatly enhanced at high pH adjusted with lime. The adsorbed lignosulfonate molecules also prevent the attachment and spreading of an oily collector over the molybdenite surface and the flotation of the mineral cannot be improved. On the other hand, lignosulfonates appear to weakly interact with apolar oils resulting only in poor depression of dodecane-coated molybdenite. Although the tests were performed with the use of single minerals, the flotation results for molybdenite and chalcopyrite indicate that lignosulfonates can be used as selective depressants under neutral and weakly alkaline pH. Under these conditions, molybdenite will be depressed while the flotation of chalcopyrite should not be affected. The use of lime as a pH modifier is not recommended because of the activating role of calcium for lignosulfonate adsorption. In the presence of Ca Due to the role of calcium ions – polyvalent ions in general – in lignosulfonate adsorption and mineral depression, calcium lignosulfonates are stronger depressants than sodium salts. However, calcium salts also appear to be less selective. Financial and in-kind support for this study from Borregaard Lignotech USA, through a Grant-in-Aid of Research, is gratefully acknowledged.