In this study, Plantago major L. has been evaluated as an active natural coagulant for the removal of dye from a model textile wastewater containing neutral red. Response surface methodology (RSM) based on a three-variable, three-level Box–Behnken design (BBD) was employed to study and optimize the treatment process. The effect of three parameters including contact time, pH and the coagulant dose on the color and COD reduction were analyzed. A partial cubic equation could accurately model the response surface with an R
                     2 of 0.99. The pH was found to be the most significant parameter affecting both color and COD reduction. A high color (92.4%) and COD (81.6%) reduction efficiency was obtained using P. major L. at the optimal conditions of 49.6min, pH 6.5 and 297.6mg/L coagulant dose. The results also showed that the isothermal equilibrium could be represented by the Freundlich model with an R
                     2 of 0.94.Wastewater is one of the major environmental concerns of the dye-manufacturing and dye-consuming industries such as textiles, rubber, leather, paper, plastics, printing, cosmetics and mineral processing. Dyes have high tinctorial values and less than 1 Commercially available chemical coagulants include alum, ferric chloride, ferric sulphate and polyaluminium chloride, together with synthetic organic polymers as coagulant aid. However, usage of these chemicals has several disadvantages such as relatively high costs, harmful effects on human health, production of large sludge volumes as well as the fact that they considerably affect pH of the treated water ( In recent years, there have been many reports on the usage of plant-based coagulants for water and wastewater treatment. Four types of plants which have received the greatest degree of attention are  So far, there are few reports on the usage of The aim of the present work was to evaluate the effectiveness of mucilage obtained from The seeds of Neutral red (NR), C.I. 50040, is a basic dye of the azine series and belongs to quinone-imine class of dyes ( The reduction in color concentration was measured by using a spectrophotometer (Model UV 2100, Shimadzu Co., Kyoto, Japan). The color removal percentage was calculated using the following equation: In order to examine the ability of Permanganate oxidation method was utilized for measuring COD (COD To reduce the number of experiments and to optimize the treatment conditions, a three-variable, three-level Box–Behnken response surface design (BBD) was employed with 17 experiments. BBD is an efficient experimental design for response surface methodology (RSM). RSM is a well known and economical statistical technique in evaluating the effect of parameters on treatment results ( A software package of Design Expert Version 6.0.6 (Stat-Ease, Statistics Made Easy, Minneapolis, MN, USA) was used in this study. After testing increasingly complex models from linear to partial cubic, a partial cubic polynomial model was developed to study the effects of the variables on the responses. The partial cubic model does not contain pure cubic terms but includes terms having cubic interactions. An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used to determine whether the developed models were adequate to describe the observed data. Optimization was performed by the software using a desirability function. Equilibrium isothermal studies were performed by adding various doses of the coagulant to the dye solution and contacted for equilibrium time. Two main adsorption models (the Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms) are usually considered for coagulation and flocculation processes. These models were examined in the present work. The Langmuir isotherm represents monolayer adsorption on a set of distinct localized adsorption sites having the same sorption energies ( The Freundlich adsorption isotherm deals with surface heterogeneity and is derived from empirical data. It assumes that adsorption capacity ( Design matrix of the variables along with obtained color removal percentage is given in The ANOVA for the model is shown in Adequate precision measured the signal-to-noise ratio. The adequate precision, which measures the signal-to-noise ratio, for the developed model (37.03) was greater than 4, indicating that the model could be used to navigate the design space. The significance of each term in the model was examined by testing the null hypothesis. If the Eq. According to ANOVA, pH is the most significant parameter ( Experimental data along with obtained percentage reduction of COD are presented in Similar to decolourization efficiency, pH of the solution was found to have the greatest effect on the COD reduction, with the highest   A control experiment (using a solution of distilled water and coagulant) performed after settling of the solution showed that less than 10% of the remaining COD is related to the organic matter of the coagulant. This amount is negligible in low coagulant dosage. However, an over optimum amount of coagulant may increase the COD of the treated effluent. RSM can present the optimum combination of parameters, on the basis of the ridge maximum analysis and the canonical analysis, to obtain the highest percentage of color and COD removal. By using the optimization function of the software, the experiment with desirability value of 1 was selected. The desirability function is given in the following equation: The maximum color and COD reduction (93.0 and 86.0%, respectively) was predicted under treatment conditions of 49.6 In order to study the coagulation mechanism, a theoretical model which explains the dye removal by the coagulant was proposed. According to literature ( Fitting of the equilibrium adsorption data to Langmuir and Freundlich isotherms showed that the Freundlich equation fits slightly better than Langmuir model. A linear fitting graphic for the Freundlich isotherm is included in The color removal ability of 