A series of rock bolt pull tests were carried out in the laboratory to determine the critical embedment length of a specific type of fully cement-grouted rebar bolt. The rebar bolt is 20mm in diameter, and it is widely used in underground excavations in Norway. Three water-cement (w/c) ratios were used in the tests. It was discovered that the critical embedment length of the rock bolts was approximately 25cm for the water-cement ratio 0.40 (the corresponding uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the grout is 37MPa), 32cm for the ratio 0.46 (UCS 32MPa), and 36cm for the ratio 0.50 (UCS 28MPa), for the specific type of cement, Rescon zinc rock bolt cement. It was found that the bond strength of the rock bolt is not a constant but is related to the embedment length. The bond strength was linearly proportional to the UCS of the grout.The rebar rock bolt that is fully encapsulated in a borehole with cement mortar or resin grout is the type of rock bolt widely used in civil and mining engineering. The wide use of this type of rock bolt is predominately owed to its high load-bearing capacity. The grouting quality and performance of the rock bolt are usually examined by pull test. In such a test, a rock bolt grouted in a borehole is either pulled out to measure the bond strength in the case of a short embedment length ( The performance of a fully grouted rebar rock bolt is very much affected by the bond at the rock bolt-grout interface. The bond strength directly determines the critical embedment length of the rock bolt, which refers to the longest encapsulated length at which the rock bolt is pulled out of the borehole. The rock bolt will fail in the shank if the grouted section is longer than the critical embedment length. For instance, in order to stabilise a loosened rock block with fully grouted rock bolts, the length of the rock bolt portion that is installed in the stable stratum must be longer than the critical embedment length. The quality of grouting and the load-bearing capacity of grouted rock bolts are often examined through pull tests in the field. One of the concerns with such a pull test is whether the performance of the rock bolt is negatively affected by the pull test. The authors acknowledge that the issue of the critical embedment length was studied by others in conjunction with individual engineering projects, but little information about it can be found in the literature. Therefore, a series of tests were carried out at the Laboratory of Rock Mechanics at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology to determine the critical embedment length of a specific type of 20 The type of rebar rock bolt tested is 20 The grouting agent used in the tests is Rescon zinc rock bolt cement mix, which is used for grouting rock bolts in road tunnels in Norway. The cement mix is made of cement (c) and silica (s). The weight ratio of the mix (cement and silica) to the cement is (c For instance, the ratio of w/(c The embedment length of the rock bolt was varied for every water-cement ratio in order to find the critical embedment length. In general, three rock bolt specimens were pulled for every embedment length. The number of rock bolt specimens for every embedment length and every water-cement ratio is given in The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) of the grout was measured after the same curing time as the tested rock bolts. Three cubic grout specimens, 100 Boreholes were percussively drilled with a 48 Every rock bolt specimen is labelled with three digits after the letter B. The first digit represents the parameter of water-cement ratio, the second represents the group of the embedment length, and the third represents the sequence number of the specimen in the group. The rock bolts were tested after curing for seven to nine days. The load-displacement curves of the rock bolts grouted with a water-cement ratio of 0.40 are presented in The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length of 150 The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length of 200 The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length of 300 The load-displacement curves of the rock bolts with a water-cement ratio of 0.46 are presented in The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length of 200 The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length 25 The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length of 300 The load-displacement curves of the rock bolts with a water-cement ratio of 0.50 are presented in The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length of 300 The test results of rock bolts with an embedment length of 400 The cubic specimens of the grout for every water-cement ratio were tested for UCS after seven-eight days of curing. Abnormal results were obtained for the water-cement ratio 0.50 in the first test round so that a second round of tests was run afterward. The UCS results of the grouts for different water-cement ratios are presented in The ultimate pull loads of the bolt specimens are plotted against the embedment lengths for the three different water-cement ratios in The ultimate loads of the rock bolt specimens in the group with a water-cement ratio of 0.46 are plotted against the embedment length in All the rock bolts with a water-cement ratio of 0.50, except those with an embedment length of 400 The critical embedment length of the bolt, The critical embedment lengths derived in this section were based on the results of the pull tests carried out under strictly controlled laboratory conditions, which guaranteed satisfactory grouting qualities. The critical embedment length in the field could be longer than the laboratory-obtained value, taking into account variations in grouting quality as well as rock mass quality. Therefore, a safety factor between two and four should be used for the critical anchoring length of rock bolts in the support design ( Bond strength, defined as the average shear strength, of the rock bolt-grout interface, is usually used to describe the binding capacity of an encapsulated rock bolt with the grout. It is calculated as: It is noticed that A series of pull tests were conducted to determine the critical embedment length of a specific type of 20 The bond strength is linearly proportional to the UCS of the grout. The bond strength of the rock bolt, that is, the average shear stress at the bolt-grout interface when the bolt starts to slip along the interface, does not seem to be a constant but increases with the embedment length as long as the yield strain of the bolt shank is not significantly large, for instance <10%. More experimental tests need to be carried out in the future to clarify whether the bond strength is dependent on the embedment length or not. The authors would like to thank Mr Gunnar Vistnes and Mr Torkjell Breivik for their valuable assistance in the laboratory. The support by the