In the literature many researchers have tried to correlate the (dry) abrasion resistance of steels to their standard mechanical properties as determined in simple tensile and hardness testing. However, many unclear or even conflicting correlations have been reported, in part due to small data sets being used, different testing methods and relatively simple data processing techniques. In the present work 40 different low alloy steels were tested using the same ASTM G65 abrasion test and standard mechanical testing. The data set consists of 20 samples having the same chemical composition yet processed to different microstructures and different mechanical properties, as well as 20 steel grades with various compositions but having mechanical properties comparable to the first data set. The results show that for steels of the same composition significantly higher correlations between the abrasion resistance and certain mechanical properties (in particular strength coefficient K, hardness and UTS) are observed than those for steels having different compositions. In case both data sets were combined and a new regression analysis was applied, the quality of the correlation dropped significantly and the correlations became barely statistically relevant. Furthermore, when taking into account the measurement errors in both independent and dependent variables, the correlation coefficient became even worse and no statistically relevant correlation was observed at all. The current study clearly casts doubts on the validity of reported correlations between material (mechanical) properties and abrasion resistance.Abrasive wear is one of the dominant wear processes encountered in steel components used in the earth moving, mining and mineral processing, and agricultural industries The aim of the present work is to use a single industry accepted (dry-) abrasion test (ASTM G65), conventional tensile and hardness testing and a larger data set of 40 industrially produced low alloy steel grades, as well as professional linear regression methods to determine whether such correlations between the abrasion resistance and standard mechanical properties of low alloyed construction steels for abrasive applications may exist. With the application of the statistical methods, it will be possible to examine whether (linear and single parameter) correlations proposed in the literature on the basis of results for a modest number of samples are generally valid when tested over a wider range of carefully selected samples of controlled composition and microstructures. The total data set in the analysis consists of 40 steels of which 20 belong to a steel of fixed composition (22MnB5) heat treated to different microstructures and 20 belong to commercial low alloy steels of various chemical compositions but with comparable mechanical properties to the first data set. Seven independent mechanical properties were used in the correlation studies. Four different linear regression methods were employed. The 40 steels tested belong to two different data sets: Group A consists of 20 grades all made from a single hot rolled 22MnB5 steel with a fixed chemical composition (Fe–0.22C–1.2Mn–0.25Si–0.2Cr in wt%) yet processed to distinctly different microstructures and mechanical properties. Group B consists of 20 commercial low-alloyed steels of various chemical compositions and microstructures but with mechanical properties comparable to those of group A. For the samples belonging to group A, a hot rolled 22MnB5 steel of 3 The mechanical properties of all steel grades were measured using two different techniques: tensile testing and micro-hardness testing. The hardness measurements were carried out using a Vickers indenter under 2 The standard ASTM G65 dry sand rubber wheel abrasion test was performed on all samples using exactly the same testing conditions with a total of 2000 rotations at a speed of 200 Regression analysis is a statistical method that estimates the statistical relevance between a dependent and one or more independent variables. The experimental data observed are obtained from different measurement techniques having different specific standards and uncertainties. Hence, the data set consists of variables that are subject to measurement error of unequal variance and are composed of varying numbers of measurements. This greatly complicates the correlational analysis between the variables. The classical approach is to assume a linear dependence between the (measurement error free) independent parameter and the (measurement error containing) dependent parameter. The least-squares approximation The unique solution Ordinary least squares (OLS) minimises the sum of distances between one of the variables and the best fit line. Usually the residual between the dependent variable and the best fit line is chosen as the parameter to be minimised. Due to the non-symmetry of this technique, there is no reason to expect the same solution when regressing OLS can only be used on the basis of the assumption that the dependent variable contains a random error in the measurement and the independent variable is error-free. In addition, the random error in the dependent variable is of equal variance or homoscedastic over the entire value range of the independent variable. Unlike the ordinary least square regression, the Weighted Least Squares (WLS) solution In essence, the robust fit is the same as ordinary least-squares estimation but with the automatic removal of outliers far from the normal distribution around the best fit line. The statistical bias can be adjusted to preference, but normally (and in this analysis) the 95% interval is chosen The York fit is an iterative numerical least squares solution with measurement scatter in both independent (explanatory) In the present work the abrasion resistance, i.e. weight loss from the ASTM G65 test, is defined as the (error containing) dependent variable The mechanical properties for all samples as well as the weight loss data are listed in While the global dependences as determined for group B are quite comparable to those determined for group A, the scatter in the data and hence the uncertainty in the linear correlation is much higher for group B. This is not-withstanding the fact that the ranges of parameter values spanned in both data sets are quite comparable. For the group B data set the dependences as determined by the least squares, weighted least squares and robust fit models are quite comparable, while the optimal fit as determined by the symmetric York method can sometimes lead to a somewhat different results, as shown in In order to quantitatively assess the strength of the linear correlation for each variable pair in group A and B, all relevant correlation coefficient The four regression models as described above were employed to carry out the linear regression analysis for the measurement data. The resulting measures for the significance of the correlation, the It is clear from While the group B presents a similar order of correlation coefficient It can be generally concluded that the strength coefficient This section further refines the discussion on the difference in correlation factors for the data of group A and those for group B. As the regression results of the LS fitting, WLS fitting and Robust fitting models are comparable with Robust fitting model being more representative, the results of the Robust fitting model are selected to analyse the differences. Moreover, the correlation coefficients from the York fittings, being statistically the more advanced method, are also further analysed. We now examine how merging of the two data sets into a new combined (A+B) affects the correlation values upon refitting the collective data against the 7 material parameters using the Robust fitting and the York fitting model. The The observed strong dependence of the value of the correlation coefficient on the size of the data set is a clear indication of the absence of a physically real correlation between the independent parameter (any of the 7 material parameters) and the dependent parameter (in this case the weight loss). The data also explain why such different dependences between the material (mechanical) parameter and the abrasion resistance have been reported in the literature for low alloy steels. The systematic datasets and analysis in the current investigation provide very solid evidence that a monotonous correlation of hardness and abrasion resistance does not exist even when comparing samples belonging to a subset of all possible steel grades, although the hardness is still applied as the most relevant parameter to rank the abrasion resistance in industry and academic research. The fact that the material (mechanical) properties do not display any firm relevance with the abrasion resistance can be attributed to various points, e.g. the difference in strain rates, the multi-axial nature of stress and the dependence of loading condition in the abrasion process. The abrasion is a complex process involving not only the working condition but also the simultaneous development of subsurface microstructure. Upon abrasion, the material at and below the worn surface undergoes severe plastic deformation with strain rates much higher than that in the quasi-static tensile or hardness test, and the evolution of microstructure is very different to any of those simplified mechanical tests. The surface morphology, different loading conditions and contact geometries also lead to very complex stress condition on the surface. Therefore, the evolution of local response and difference in damage mechanisms during abrasion process are significantly different to those in any simplified mechanical test. Interestingly, the correlation between material properties and ASTM abrasion resistance was found to be stronger for samples having different microstructures but the same chemical composition. When the correlation was tested over (microstructurally comparable) steels but having different chemical compositions, the correlation was found to be statistically unproven. The current analysis shows that it may not be possible to build a universal (linear) correlation between the ASTM G65 abrasion resistance and the material properties determined from simple mechanical tests on pristine material. Finally, it is necessary to point out that the current analysis aims to test correlations between the ASTM G65 test results and a single material parameter. Even for the current relatively large dataset, from a statistical point of view the dataset is still too small to test multi-parameter dependences. The present study examines the presence of linear correlations between 7 independent material parameters (hardness, ultimate tensile strength, yield strength, uniform elongation, energy to failure, the Hollomon strength coefficient and the strain hardening exponent) of low-alloy construction steels and the ASTM G65 (dry) abrasion resistance for a larger data set of 40 samples of which 20 have the same chemical composition yet different microstructures, and 20 have different chemical compositions yet comparable mechanical properties as the first subset. The correlation analysis was performed using 4 different statistical methods. The conclusions are: For the data set of steel grades of equal chemical composition, strong linear correlations exist between the Hollomon parameter For the data set of steels of different chemical compositions, the correlations are statistically much weaker and only the Hollomon parameter The York fit method, which takes into account both the measurement scatter in the independent and the dependent parameter, gives a more reliable indication of the quality of the correlation but shows much low values for the correlation coefficient for all material (mechanical) properties. Reanalysis of the correlations after merging of both data sets showed that there remained no statistically relevant correlation between any of the 7 mechanical parameters and the abrasion resistance. The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support provided by the See