Iron is usually present in leach solutions and its elimination is a major operational problem in zinc hydrometallurgy. The recovery of iron from such solutions is usually carried out by precipitation as jarosite, goethite or hematite. These residues, contaminated with heavy metals ions such as Zn, Pb, In, Ga, Ge, Co and sulphur, are environmentally unacceptable and their disposal in controlled ponds is very expensive. This fact justifies the interest in producing iron as a marketable product––pure hematite. With this purpose solvent extraction is being investigated as a promising alternative for the recovery of iron from leach solutions.Iron is present as an undesirable constituent of zinc ores, concentrates and calcine oxides. The leaching of concentrates results in the solubilisation of the desired metal together with some iron. Iron constitutes a severe impurity in zinc solution and must be removed before electrolysis. Nowadays iron is usually removed from leaching solutions by precipitation ( In order to overcome these problems it is required to remove iron from aqueous solutions as marketable iron products––i.e. pure hematite that can be used as a pigment or as raw material in steel making industry. Pure hematite can be obtained if iron is removed from aqueous solutions by the solvent extraction technique with selective extractants. Although different extractants have been tested the solvent extraction has not yet achieved success in the zinc hydrometallurgy. However, the various approaches used so far are reviewed in this paper. The inclusion of the jarosite process in electrolytic zinc plants allowed an improvement in the zinc recovery to a value as high as 96–98%. This fact is related with the possibility of recovering zinc in ferrite (Fe Jarosites are a complex basic iron sulphate, and their formation is represented by the following equilibrium: According to Special attention has also been paid to the jarosite precipitation reaction, mostly in the context of zinc solutions ( The weakness of the precipitation process seems to be the co-precipitation of various metals ions (Cu, Zn, Co, Ni, Mn, In, Ga, Ge, Al) present in the solution. The exhaustive work carried out on jarosite precipitation was very important for the modifications ( The conventional jarosite process was developed and patented simultaneously by the Asturiana de Zinc S.A. of Spain, by The Electrolytic Zinc Co. of Australasia and by Det Norske Zinkkompari A/S of Norway in the early 1960s. Subsequently a large number of zinc producers have implemented this process. In this process iron is precipitated from the hot acid leaching solution at elevated temperatures (95–97 °C) in the presence of sodium or ammonium ions. The reaction of precipitation liberates acid, which must be neutralized with zinc calcine. This one is only partially dissolved; the rest stays with the jarosite precipitate. Consequently considerable amounts of zinc and valuable metals such as lead, silver, indium, gallium, germanium, etc. are lost ( In the mean time some modifications were carried out in the conventional jarosite process with the purpose of a high zinc recovery and the production of a more pure residue. One of these modifications consists on carrying out a  The modifications above described and introduced by zinc producers in theirs plants had only partial success. In fact jarosite actually produced is more pure but is not totally free of heavy metal and sulphate. This residue has no applicability and it is landfilled ( The goethite process is also successfully implemented in the electrolytic zinc industry. The elimination of iron from an aqueous solution as goethite (FeO·OH), implies that the concentration of ferric ion in solution must not exceed 1 g/l. This can be accomplished by reducing all ferric ions to the ferrous state (Vieille Montagne technique; The goethite is precipitated by the reaction One advantage of precipitating iron as goethite instead of jarosite is the low volume of the waste goethite. The Union Miniere ( One marked feature of the removal iron from solutions as hematite is related to the possibility of using it in the cement, in the iron industries and or as pigment. This means that a major problem in the zinc industry i.e. the accumulation of residues is overcome. The hydrolysis of ferrous sulphate to hematite is represented by the following reaction: According to literature data at 200 °C, iron is eliminated as hematite ( The presence of zinc sulphate in solution displaces the phase boundary between Fe The requirement of this process to operate at high temperatures is translated into high capital and operational costs. However, the problems related with the storage of residues is minimized because the hematite produced is sold to cement makers (Iijima Refinery, Japan, The implementation of solvent extraction process in hydrometallurgical zinc plant has not yet achieved success although there has been considerable work carried out on the use of different extractants. The various approaches that have been taken and the remaining problems are reviewed below. The extraction of iron with organophosphorus acids has been extensively studied ( Thus far, DEHPA ((di-2-ethylhexyl) phosphoric acid) is one of the most widely studied extractants to remove iron from zinc solutions.  It is consensual, that the main draw-backs in the use of DEHPA as an iron extractant are related to the stripping process (strong acid solutions required) and to the low rate of extraction. In order to improve the latter,  In the stripping process is not recommended to use concentrated acid solution as it can degrade the organic phase. Taking this into account and the fact that Fe  Others approaches have been tried to overcome the difficulty on the DEHPA stripping, namely the use of mixtures of extractants (synergistic mixtures). The common feature in the use of such mixtures is the possibility of using dilute solutions of sulphuric acid (<1 M H  These results show that is possible to use a dilute solution of sulphuric acid (<1 M) to remove iron from a loaded organic phase.   The results shown in In The synthesis of new extractant molecules containing an amino group and a phosphoric group (“fused amino-phosphoric acids”; Other interesting works has been published on iron extraction with amines by several researchers ( Carboxylic acids have been reported, since the early 1960s as iron extractants alternatives to alkyl phosphoric acids (  The aqueous phase containing only zinc is sent to the electrolysis. The stripping of loaded organic phase can be performed in different ways: hydrolytic stripping, precipitation stripping and carboxylic acid stripping. In hydrolytic stripping ( Most of the world’s zinc producers currently use the jarosite process to remove iron from the aqueous solution because of its simplicity and low costs. However, large amounts of residues are produced and stockpiled in various types of storage ponds and lately this practice has become questionable on environmental grounds. The production of a marketable product (hematite) has been carried out at least in two electrolytic plants to overcome the jarosite waste disposal problem, since hematite is sold to cement makers. The use of such hematite in the steel industry is not allowed because it is not totally free of contaminants (Zn, As, Ga, Ge, etc.). In order to obtain a clean hematite, iron must be precipitated from pure solutions. Pure ferric solutions could be obtained by solvent extraction techniques if selective extractants are used. The classes of organophosphoric and carboxylic acids extractants present a high affinity to ferric ions. However, the use of these extractants is not advisable due to problems related to the stripping process. In fact the stripping of a loaded solvent could be only accomplished using high concentrations of sulphuric acid or using sophisticated methods such as reductive or hydrolytic stripping. Recently, interesting results in iron extraction with mixtures of extractants––synergistic mixtures have been published. The most promising are mixtures of amine-alquil phosphoric acid and amine and 2-octanol. It is possible to carry out the stripping of these loaded solvents using a weak acid solution. In the future the recovery of iron by the solvent extraction technique will certainly involve the use of synergistic mixtures unless new iron extractants are synthesized.