Some AM processes such as directed energy deposition (DED) have typical powder usage efficiencies ranging between 40 and 80%. Since, for a given alloy, powder cost is proportional to its purity, choosing a less expensive powder or reusing powders is interesting for economical and environmental reasons. The work summarized below studied the effect of oxygen content in Ti6Al4V powders on mechanical properties of AM parts fabricated by DED. Three different powders with increasing oxygen content were used to produce specimens and characterize its effect on microstructure and tensile properties before and after heat treatment. Our results show that no clear oxygen pick up was measured from either powder recycling or during printing of parts. Only coarsening of the particle size distribution and the presence of fragmented particles was observed for the recycled powder. Comparing the chemistry of parts vs that of powder feedstock it was determined that for all the tests, the Al content was slightly lower in the parts and that no significant loss of vanadium was noted when printing with new (fresh) powders. On the other hand, V loss was significant in parts made with recycled powders, although still leaving them within acceptable chemistry to respect their original grade 5 classification.The emergence of additive manufacturing (AM) for the production of metallic parts is continuously pushing further the boundaries of fabrication. Limitations in achievable geometries typical of more traditional shaping processes are now easier to overcome with AM, if not eliminated. Metallic additive manufacturing can use various types of feedstock such as powder, wire or metallic foils according to the different AM technologies considered [ Laser Engineered Net Shaping (LENS) is part of the directed energy deposition processes and uses metal powders as in-feed material and a laser as its heating source [ Ti-6Al-4 V (commonly identified Ti64) is one the most popular titanium alloys used worldwide [ Ti-6Al-4 V absorbs most of the laser energy due to is low reflectance [ Because as-fabricated AM-Ti64 components suffer from a lack of ductility [ Three types of gas atomized and spheroidized Ti-6Al-4 V powders were selected to produce specimens for this study: fresh grade 23 and 5 directly provided by supplier A and a grade 5 powder provided by supplier B that was recycled 10 times. The reused material was utilized over a two-year period. Initially, a batch of 27 kg was acquired and 20.5 kg was used to produce numerous parts. After each build, excess powder was collected and blended with fresh one with a ratio up to 1:1 to refill the powder feeder until no fresh powder was available. This latter procedure correspond to 10 recycling cycles. The remaining 6.5 kg was then used for this study. Each powder was sieved and mixed prior to use or reuse to retain only the +45/−150 μm fraction. Sieving was done with U.S.A. standard test sieves on a Humboldt shaker to remove all agglomerates, as required by ASTM F3187 standard [ To simplify annotation of the different grades of powder used, they were renamed as a function of their oxygen content: low, medium and high. A prefix will also be used to identify the sate of the powder; “N” for new and “R” for reused. Their respective chemical compositions in the as-received condition are presented in Samples were produced in a custom-made Optomec LENS-450 equipped with a 1 kW, 1064 nm wavelength IPG Photonics YAG laser ( After printing, all specimens, including test blocks, were heat treated in a single batch to ensure identical conditions. Heat treatment consisted of a hot isostatic pressing cycle followed by annealing according to AMS SAE 4999 A specification [ Tensile specimens were tested according to AMS 4999 A [ Rockwell C hardness tests were performed with a Clark CR-3 hardness tester utilizing a load of 1471 N and a dwell time of 4 s as specified in ASTM standard E18 [ Oxygen analysis by inert gas fusion according to ASTM E1409-13 [ Optical micrographs were acquired using a Nikon Eclipse LV150 optical microscope. A Hitachi SU3500 SEM equipped with a tungsten filament and an Oxford Instruments electron backscattered diffraction detector were also used to characterize crystallographic textures. EBSD analyses on specimens from the low and the high oxygen series after HIPing and annealing were carried out using a maximum step size of 1.5 μm to generate the mappings. Metallographic specimens were prepared and etched with 2%vol HF to reveal microstructural constituents. In all cases, metallographic samples were prepared to show a section of the XZ plane ( For each heat-treated sample, four frames were acquired in SEM using the backscattered electron imaging mode to scan the overall surface. SEM micrographs were then characterized using Clemex Vision PE software version 8.0.153 to reveal the width of alpha laths inside grains. Measurement was done manually on all the SEM micrographs for a total count of 80 lath widths for each heat-treated sample. XRD spectra were obtained with a PANalytical X’Pert PRO diffractometer. A voltage of 40 kV and current of 30 mA were used in conjunction with a Cobalt anode having a Kα Phase analysis was performed directly with the X’Pert platform softwares using the normalized RIR method, also known as the matrix-flushing method or the adiabatic principle from Chung [ The three different types of powders were characterized by scanning electron microscopy. Micrographs of sieved powders using the secondary electron imaging mode are shown in Results of the oxygen analysis are presented in Tensile curves from the 12 samples studied are presented in Additional analysis of the tensile curves was made to calculate the strain hardening exponent and the strength coefficient using Hollomon’s law (Eq.  Metallographic samples of parts containing increasing amount of oxygen were compared before and after heat treatment and under different magnifications. Highly martensitic α’ structures surrounded by prior β grain boundaries are visible in  XRD analysis was also used to characterize the phases present in the different specimens. The disposition of the phases is strongly influenced by the distribution of the alloying elements; titanium-alpha shows a higher concentration in aluminum while titanium-beta is richer in vanadium. XRD spectra from the HIPed and annealed specimens are presented in The two-sample bilateral All the powders discussed above fulfill the requirements relevant to maximum oxygen content, with grade 5 from supplier A being significantly lower than the maximum limit of 0.20%wt. Two trends of curves are distinguishable from the size distributions presented in Chemical composition of the printed parts slightly differs from that of the base powders used, as seen in The concentration of oxygen in solid solution in the powder does not seem to make any difference on the as-printed microstructure. Long columnar grains made of martensitic α’ with prior β grain boundaries and oriented along the building direction are found in all series of specimens. Not only are grains preferentially oriented but also they show growth through deposited layers as they can become longer than the thickness of a single layer ( After heat treatment, the columnar orientation of grains is maintained and the martensitic structure is replaced with an α/β weaved structure, as confirmed by XRD. Grain boundaries get richer in Ti- α as oxygen content in the powder increases, as shown by the light phase surrounding the grains in The annealed specimens show gradually better tensile properties with an increasing weight fraction of beta-phase and finer alpha laths, induced by an increase in oxygen content, which is consistent with results from literature [ The AMS SAE standard [ Closer analysis of the tensile curves indicates that the level of oxygen does not have a clear impact on the strain-hardening coefficient. The strength coefficient increases with increasing oxygen content but this is only the result of the higher tensile properties obtained as function of oxygen. HRC hardness is also found to increase with oxygen content but is not correlated at all with the elongation observed. On the other hand, it is strongly correlated with the ultimate tensile strength and with the oxygen measured in the printed samples. Subsize tensile specimens in X-direction were successfully built by direct energy deposition using different grades of spherical Ti-6Al-4 V powder. Oxygen content in the base powders was found to have a clear incidence on the observed microstructures, which in return affects tensile properties. No clear oxygen pick up was noted from either powder recycling or during printing of parts. Only coarsening of the size distribution and presence of fragmented particles was observed; Variations in chemistry between the feedstock powders and the printed parts were measured. Nevertheless, the chemical composition of the latter still leaves them within acceptable chemistry to respect their original grade classification. Aluminum is slightly lower in all conditions tested and no loss of vanadium was noted when printing was performed with powders. On the other hand, vanadium was significantly lower when the recycled powder was utilized; As printed parts show highly martensitic α’ grains with prior β grain boundaries, giving place to an α + β weaved structure after heat treatment; Grains are preferentially oriented in the build direction and this anisotropy is maintained after heat treatment; Increasing oxygen concentration promotes formation of Ti-α at grain boundaries, Ti-β inside grains and finer Ti-α laths. Consistent results showed an increase in tensile properties with and increase of oxygen, without significantly affecting elongation; N Low-O powder did not allow us to meet the yield strength requirements of standard AMS SAE 4999 A. This is most likely caused by coarsening of the Ti-α lamellar structure for the longest annealing time permitted in the latter standard; Elongation after break was over 20% for all specimens; The authors would like to thank the