Fludarabine is a purine derivative, anti-neoplastic drug and is still being used in the treatments of chronic lymphocytic leukemia, small lymphocytic lymphoma, acute myeloid leukemia, Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It achieves its function by interacting with DNA. Therefore, the binding interactions of such drugs with deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) is an important subject for pharmaceutical and biochemical studies aiming at designing better DNA binding drugs. Although DNA binding mode of some of the anti-neoplastic drugs has been studied, DNA interaction of Fludarabine has not been explored yet. For this reason, this work has been dedicated to deciphering the experimental and theoretical investigation of Fludarabine binding mechanism via multispectroscopic techniques including UV absorption spectroscopy, thermal denaturation, fluorescence and FTIR spectroscopy, electrochemical and viscosity measurement methods as well as with molecular docking studies under physiological conditions. We observed in the lowest energy docking poses that Fludarabine binds to DNA via major groove binding mode. The nonplanar and extended structure and hydrogen bonding interactions of Fludarabine with the Adenine-Thymine base-pair played a very decisive role in the binding mode as supported by the experimental results.Especially in the 21 Fludarabine monophosphate was kindly provided by Mustafa Nevzat Co. (Istanbul, Turkey). NaCl, dsFSDNA, tris(hydroxymethyl)aminomethane hydrochloride (Tris-HCl) and ethidium bromide (EtBr) were purchased from Sigma Co. and all solvents were purchased from Merck. All chemicals and solvents were reagent grade and were used as purchased without any further purification. 400 μM dsFSDNA stock solution was prepared by dilution of dsFSDNA to buffer solution (containing 0.2 M Tris-HCl and 150 mM NaCl at pH 7.4) followed by robust stirring for two days at room temperature and kept at 4 °C for no longer than seven days. dsFSDNA solution thus prepared yielded a UV absorbance ratio of 1.85 at 260 and 280 nm (A The absorption spectra were recorded in the range of 200–400 nm on a T80 + UV/VIS spectrophotometer using cells of 1 cm light path and samples that contain dsFSDNA and Fludarabine were mixed in a vortex before the spectra were taken. The absorbance measurement experiments were carried out in two different ways. The first one was that keeping Fludarabine concentration constant (70 μM) while varying the dsFSDNA concentration from 50 to 350 μM (r The data is reported as (η/η Autodock 4.2 Vina along with AutoGrid 4 and MGL tools 1.5.4 were utilized to establish blind docking calculations between DNA and Fludarabine monophosphate. Calf Thymus DNA (ct-DNA) sequence d(CGCGAATTCGCG) Ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy is one of the most common and valid methods used to investigate DNA interactions. The affinity of the drug and the structural changes of the DNA in the presence of the drug together with the binding mode can be effectively demonstrated from the UV-electronic absorption spectrum. The absorption of DNA occurs due to the chromophoric groups (conjugated double bonds) of pyrimidine and purine ring system within the structure. When drugs form complexes with DNA structure, hypochromic and hyperchromic effects are observed in the spectral properties of DNA. The complex formation of DNA and small molecules vary with the magnitude of the peak position and absorbance associated with the interaction strength. In general, the absorption spectra of small molecules that bind to DNA in the groove binding mode exhibit significant hypochromic effect, while the position of the absorption band is almost unchanged; this can be explained by the fact that the electronic states of the chromophore of the complex overlap with the nitrogen groups within the grooves of DNA. In this part of the study, the interaction of Fludarabine with dsFSDNA is investigated by examining the absorption spectra of the mixture solutions prepared at the appropriate concentrations. Thus, a number of solutions were prepared by adding increasing amounts of dsFSDNA solution (from 50 to until reaching 350 μM) into Fludarabine solutions at a certain concentration (70 μM) in each case prepared from the stock solutions. The ultraviolet absorption spectra of Fludarabine in the absence and presence of dsFSDNA are given in The stability of the secondary structure of dsFSDNA resulting from the binding of Fludarabine to DNA helix is usually determined by the thermal denaturation technique. The melting temperature of dsFSDNA is a significant parameter for the interaction of molecules with nucleic acids. As the temperature of the double-stranded DNA solution increases, the hydrogen bonds between the base pairs of the dsFSDNA (in the double-stranded structure) get broken and dsFSDNA begins to decompose into single strands slowly. The temperature at which half of the total base pairs separate is defined as the melting temperature (T Another significant spectroscopic technique for the examination of the interaction of Fludarabine with dsFSDNA, is the replacement/substitution study with ethidium bromide (EtBr) using fluorescence spectroscopy. According to the literature data given, EtBr is a planar molecule and interferes with DNA by intercalation. While EtBr shows weak fluorescence alone, the intensity of the emission increases considerably when bound to DNA. Fluorescence measurements have shown that the addition of intercalating compounds to increasing amounts of EtBr-DNA solutions leads to significant reductions in the emission intensity of these solutions (low concentration) [ A series of solutions were made which contained a fixed concentration of dsFSDNA and increasing concentrations of Fludarabine (samples 1–10). Then, the viscosity measurements were conducted at room temperature. The Herschel-Bulkley model parameters and calculated apparent viscosities at 20 s Electrochemical methods are extremely sensitive, inexpensive, simple, easy to use, fast and advantageous techniques which can be compatible with microfabrication technology. It also requires a small amount of samples, so it is widely used in biological and chemical analysis. The electrochemical methods of DNA interactions of small molecules are followed in two ways: (1) The change in the current molecule signal is measured before and after interaction and/or (2) The change in the signal of the electroactive bases (either guanine or adenine or both) in DNA is measured and interpretations are made according to these changes. In this study, dsFSDNA solutions with increasing amounts were added into Fludarabine solution and the changes in the voltammogram of the Fludarabine solution were examined. The exact results about the electroanalytical chemistry mechanisms are obtained from the correlation between peak current and scan rate. Therefore, the transport mechanism control (diffusion or adsorption control) of Fludarabine to the electrode surface was carried out using Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) technique at different scanning speeds. The scan rate experiments varied from 5 to 250 mV/s for 5 × 10 A plot of the logarithm of Cyclic Voltammetry (CV) of a 5 × 10 Based on our experimental results, dsFSDNA binding constant ( The terms used in the equation are as follows; [DNA]: dsFSDNA concentration alone, S The binding mode and the H-bond interactions of the Fludarabine monophosphate drug with Adenine and Thymine base pairs of DNA are illustrated in According to the docking results, the major groove binding sites of the drug were determined to be Adenine and Thymine base pairs. In order to validate the binding sites, FTIR spectra of DNA with and without the drug given in In this work, DNA binding of Fludarabine drug has been studied thoroughly by means of experimental and molecular docking techniques. In light of our findings, we concluded that Fludarabine tends to bind in the major groove of DNA through H-bond interactions. These results which helped us to justify this conclusion are as follows; (1) significant hypochromic shifts in UV absorption spectra while the maximum absorption wavelengths remained the same, (2) the incorporation of Fludarabine does not yield any increase in the T Ms. Pelin Şenel has carried out all the experimental studies and except viscosity measurements. Mr. Soykan Ağar has performed all the modeling and molecular docking studies. He has written the first draft of the manuscript. Ms. Vuslat Öykü Sayın has performed molecular docking simulations separately for the test purpose. Ms. Filiz Altay has done the viscosity measurements. Prof. Dr. Ayşegül Gölcü has supervised the experimental studies. She has read, edited and corrected the manuscript. Prof. Dr. Mine Yurtsever has supervised the computational studies. She has read, edited and corrected the manuscript. The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript. The authors declare no competing financial interest. The authors would like to thank the support of the grant of Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: