Selective separation of pyrite from base minerals is very important and challenging. This research investigates the combined inhibitory effect of two novel reagents on flotation behaviors of pyrite and galena under the low alkaline conditions. The depression and adsorption mechanism of calcium hypochlorite [Ca(ClO)2] and dextrin (DX) on pyrite and galena were systematically studied via the microflotation experiments, reagent adsorption measurements and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. Flotation results showed that the combined effect of Ca(ClO)2 and DX depressed the flotation of pyrite more strongly than that of their individual effect. An improved recovery difference of more than 60% between the galena and pyrite was achieved at pH 10 while using Ca(ClO)2 and DX as depressant system and diethyldithiocarbamate (DDTC) as collector. Reagent adsorption measurements showed that the adsorption amount of DDTC onto pyrite surface was decreased significantly with the prior addition of Ca(ClO)2 and DX. On the contrary, the surface of galena remained mildly inert in the presence of Ca(ClO)2 and DX and thus adsorbed significantly more amount of DDTC. XPS analysis showed that, in the presence of Ca(ClO)2, the surface of pyrite was severely oxidized to iron oxide/hydroxide species that promoted the adsorption of DX onto the pyrite surface. Based on the XPS analysis, an adsorption and depression mechanism of Ca(ClO)2 and DX on pyrite and galena was also proposed.Lead is an important and widely used base metal in many fields, such as electrical and chemical industries. As a major source of lead, galena has substantial value in application and scientific researches ( Reagent systems used to depress pyrite include inorganic reagents, organic reagents, and a combination of these two types of systems ( Organic depressants have attracted considerable attention from researchers because of their biodegradable and inexpensive advantages ( Calcium hypochlorite or DX has been investigated individually, however; the relevant research on the combination of these two reagents in lead flotation is not widely reported. In this study, a combined inhibitory effect of calcium hypochlorite and dextrin on flotation behaviors of pyrite and galena sulphides was investigated through microflotation experiments, adsorption measurements and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. Galena (PbS) and pyrite (FeS The main chemical reagents used in this study were calcium hypochlorite/dextrin, diethyldithiocarbamate, and terpenic oil as the depressant, collector and frother, respectively. The hydrochloric acid (HCl) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) were used as the pH regulators. All the reagents were of analytical grade. Deionized distilled water was used for all tests. Flotation behaviors of pyrite and galena under different reagents were investigated via microflotation tests, and the flowsheet was shown in A UV1901PC UV–Vis spectrophotometer was used to measure the DDTC adsorption density with a wavelength of 260 nm. In the adsorption experiments, 2.0 g of each mineral was treated under the same condition as in the flotation tests (without collecting the concentrate). After the addition of desired reagents, the suspension was stirred for 30 min to achieve stable DDTC adsorption on the mineral surface. Microporous filters sieved the supernatant, which was used in the concentration measurements of residual DDTC. Thus, the adsorption amount of DDTC on the mineral surface was calculated based on the following formula ( XPS analysis was used to detect the type of mineral surface species under different reagent conditions. The XPS spectra were recorded with a K-Alpha 1063 spectrometer (Thermos Scientific Co., USA) with a monochromatic Al Ka X-ray source at 12 kV and 6 mA. The spectra were calibrated by using C 1s at 284.6 eV, and Thermo Avantage 5.96 software was utilized to fit and analyze the XPS peaks. The mineral samples for the XPS measurements were prepared as follows. First, 0.5 g pure mineral particles were added into a 40 ml aqueous solution with different reagent systems. Second, the slurry was conditioned for 30 min at 15 °C. Third, after filtering and rinsing with deionized water, the sample was dried in a vacuum for 24 h. To avoid further oxidation, XPS was recorded to analyze the surface composition within 24 h after sample preparation.  Since, the main purpose of this study was to investigate the combined inhibitory effect of calcium hypochlorite and DX on flotation of pyrite and galena. However, before investigating the combined effect of calcium hypochlorite and DX, flotation experiments were performed to evaluate their individual depressive performance on pyrite and galena.  As it is clear from the results that the individual inhibition effect of Ca(ClO)  The effect of calcium hypochlorite, dextrin and a combination of these reagents on the adsorption behavior of DDTC was investigated corresponding to flotation experiments.    According to electron orbital theory, the surface of pyrite is comparatively more reactive to CaOH XPS analysis is an effective surface analysis measurement that clearly identify the chemical status of mineral surface species. Therefore, XPS analysis was further carried out to characterize the surface species that responsible for reagent adsorption.     Compared with pyrite ( Flotation results showed that combined effect of Ca(ClO) In this study, a combined inhibitory effect of Ca(ClO) Flotation results showed that, compared to their individual effect, the combined effect of Ca(ClO) XPS analysis indicated that the prior addition of Ca(ClO) The larger amounts of surface oxidation species on pyrite surface promoted the adsorption of dextrin more than galena. The surface metal hydroxyl species on pyrite formed the chemical coordination bonds with the active groups of dextrin. In the presence of Ca(ClO)  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was financially supported by the