Relatively few studies have examined fault rock microstructures in carbonates. Understanding fault core production helps predict the hydraulic behaviour of faults and the potential for reservoir compartmentalisation. Normal faults on Malta, ranging from <1 m to 90 m displacement, cut two carbonate lithofacies, micrite-dominated and grain-dominated carbonates, allowing the investigation of fault rock evolution with increasing displacement in differing lithofacies. Lithological heterogeneity leads to a variety of deformation mechanisms. Nine different fault rock types have been identified, with a range of deformation microstructures along an individual slip surface. The deformation style, and hence type of fault rock produced, is a function of host rock texture, specifically grain size and sorting, porosity and uniaxial compressive strength. Homogeneously fine-grained micrtie-dominated carbonates are characterised by dispersed deformation with large fracture networks that develop into breccias. Alternatively, this lithofacies is commonly recrystallised. In contrast, in the coarse-grained, heterogeneous grain-dominated carbonates the development of faulting is characterised by localised deformation, creating protocataclasite and cataclasite fault rocks. Cementation also occurs within some grain-dominated carbonates close to and on slip surfaces. Fault rock variation is a function of displacement as well as juxtaposed lithofacies. An increase in fault rock variability is observed at higher displacements, potentially creating a more transmissible fault, which opposes what may be expected in siliciclastic and crystalline faults. Significant heterogeneity in the fault rock types formed is likely to create variable permeability along fault-strike, potentially allowing across-fault fluid flow. However, areas with homogeneous fault rocks may generate barriers to fluid flow.Fault zones in a variety of lithologies are commonly observed and modelled as having a single slip surface with a fault core surrounded by a damage zone ( The controlling factors for fault rock microstructural development include: fault zone architecture, displacement (total and on individual slip surfaces), slip rates, primary lithologies, distribution of mechanical properties, remote stress, residual stress, pore pressure, fluid content and temperature ( Understanding the details of fault core production helps predictions of the sealing capacity of faults and, therefore, compartmentalisation within faulted reservoirs. Fault zone architecture, and hence location of fault rock, has significant implications for fluid flow pathways across and along fault zones ( Relatively few studies have examined fault rock microstructures in carbonate lithofacies (e.g. Faulted carbonates outcropping on Malta were chosen for study due to their relative tectonic simplicity, the variation in lithofacies present, minimal background diagenesis and a range of fault displacements to analyse the controls on fault rock development. This study used field maps to identify the distribution and variety of fault rocks types in different lithofacies at increasing displacements. Optical microscope analysis of deformation microstructures is used to infer grain-scale deformation, to characterise how different fault rock types evolve in each lithofacies and to identify the controls on such evolution. The study addresses the following main points: Are different fault rock types consistently associated with the same magnitudes of displacement? How does variation of lithofacies juxtaposition influence fault rock evolution? What influence does the principal deformation mechanism(s) have on the evolution of fault rock types? Malta is located in the foreland of the Sicilian Apennine–Maghrebian fold-thrust belt. Normal faults present on Malta form part of a dextral transtensional system in the foreland. The ENE–WSW trending Maltese graben system within, and conjugate to, the NW–SE trending Pantelleria rift system, was formed during the Pliocene to Quaternary, creating many extensional basins with approximately N–S orientation of stretching ( The Maltese Islands are composed of different limestone lithofacies that were deposited on the shallow Mediterranean Pelagian Platform ( To simplify the stratigraphy in order to document any controls on the deformation styles, the two formations (LCL and GL) have been subdivided into grain and micrite-dominated carbonates, respectively. The micrite-dominated carbonate is a fine-grained (<50 μm) lithofacies, supported in a micritic matrix of <4 μm grain size, either with or without dispersed large >250 μm bioclasts. This lithofacies has a Uniaxial Compressive Strength (UCS) of Two areas have been studied in detail: the west coast Ras ir Raheb coastal section and Madliena Tower on the east coast ( Deformation microstructures of eighty-seven oriented fault rock samples from three fault zones of varying displacement, have been examined using optical thin section and Scanning Electron Microscope – Back-scatter Electron (SEM-BSE) microscopy. A further 40 thin sections have been analysed for the deformation microstructures in the damage zones of both micrite- and grain-dominated carbonates. The thin sections were impregnated with blue epoxy, infilling the porosity. The dominant microstructural texture has been documented and a unique classification for these fault rock types has been proposed. The deformation mechanisms for each lithofacies, providing information on their deformation history, have been inferred from the recorded microstructures. The crystallographic orientation and grain size of fault rocks have been measured by EBSD mapping. EBSD mapping is a technique that requires thin sections to have a highly polished surface. Hence, the standard polished thin sections were polished further with 0.06 μm colloidal silica in a NaOH solution for between 2.5 and 3 h on a Buehler Vibromet II polisher to remove any surface damage. The samples were then coated with a carbon layer. Crystallographic orientation information was collected by electron backscatter patterns (EBSP) at individual points, which were indexed by fitting a solution generated from a reflector file for calcite. EBSD data was collected using HKL Technology's Channel 5 software on a Phillips XL30 SEM, with settings of 20 kV voltage, aperture 60 probe current, 15 mm working distance and 70° tilt. Settings for the EBSD map shown within this paper were: 60 ms collection time per frame, 64 background frames, 4 frame EBSP noise reduction, 4 × 4 binning, high gain, Hough resolution set at 65, 5 μm step size, 1.5 mean angular deviation cut off, 50 reflectors and 243 ms dwell time per point. The EBSD maps were noise reduced, using a five nearest neighbour zero solutions extrapolation, and wild spiked in the ‘Tango’ module of HKL Technology's Channel 5.0.9.0 The faults on Malta are essentially normal dip-slip, with an average slickenline pitch of Due to multiple slip surfaces formed within a single fault zone, the creation of the FSZ has significant effect on fault core production, causing strain to be distributed across the fault zone such that a continuous fault core is prevented from forming at displacements < 60 m ( The most prominent structures in the micrite-dominated carbonates are dilational through-going fractures within the damage zones, which are at high angles to bedding, associated with dispersed deformation ( Textures in damaged grain-dominated carbonates are dominated by grain-scale micro-breccia, originating as randomly oriented Hertzian impingement intragranular microcracks ( There are 9 different types of fault rock produced within the fault zones on Malta, and these vary according to the host lithofacies ( The majority of the fault rocks are cohesive, and according to the classification scheme proposed by The cataclasite classification schemes of Incohesive mosaic breccia: intact macro-breccia clasts Indurated mosaic breccia: intact macro-breccia clasts surrounded by recrystallised, micro-brecciated rock Indurated chaotic breccia: macro-breccia clasts containing and surrounded by recrystallised, micro-brecciated rock Protocataclasite: cataclased rock with 10–50% matrix Composite chaotic breccia: macro-breccia clasts containing and surrounded by protocataclasite rock Cataclasite: cataclased rock with 50–90% matrix Recrystallised: crystals with a strong CPO overprinting any original texture Cemented: sparite replacing micrite and infilling pores Fractured: late stage through-going fractures overprinting microstructures Although three of the fault rock types described may not be considered as ‘fault rock’ in the strictest sense, but rather as types of overprinting (recrystallised, cemented and fractured), it is still important to consider these as part of the fault rock classification because these rocks formed on slip surfaces through fault-related diagenesis or deformation that often destroys the pre-existing texture. Moreover, it is likely that these fault rocks will significantly influence a fault's hydraulic behaviour. The definitions of cemented and indurated have been taken from These fault rocks have large (>1 cm) breccia clasts of undeformed rock, surrounded by wide fractures that are near-randomly oriented, creating a ‘fracture mesh’ ( This fault rock has an appearance of an indurated clast-supported breccia, with an added complexity of micro-breccia surrounding the clasts. Sub-angular breccia clasts (>1 cm) of intact or partially recrystallised rock are observed surrounded by a randomly oriented wide fracture mesh. Indurated mosaic breccias have This fault rock has an appearance of an indurated matrix-supported breccia, often complicated by further micro-brecciation and recrystallisation within and surrounding the breccia clasts. Indurated chaotic breccia contains macro (>0.5 cm) breccia clasts that occasionally contain micro-breccia with <25% matrix and are recrystallised. The randomly oriented fracture mesh is recrystallised, micro-brecciated and contains breccia-in-breccia clasts supported by a cryptocryalline cement with >60% matrix ( This type of fault rock is only observed in micrite-dominated carbonates at any displacement or position along a slip surface, but often in areas where slip surfaces are in close proximity to each other, and occurs as more pervasive, thicker fault rock zones at higher displacements. Well-defined crystals with wavy, distorted boundaries are observed, overprinting the original texture and occluding any pre-existing pore spaces ( This fault rock has a matrix-supported texture with comminuted fossil clasts within a cohesive breccia matrix that makes up 10–50% of the rock ( Sub-rounded to sub-angular macro breccia clasts, >0.5 cm in size, incorporating cohesive protocataclasites with <50% matrix, surrounded by healed fractures ( Cataclasites have between 50 and 90% matrix that supports fossil clasts of <500 μm in size ( Larger sparite crystals occur in the matrix of the rock in combination with a reduction in micritic matrix, increasing the matrix grain size from <4 μm to >20 μm and subsequently infilling pore spaces ( In addition to the eight fault rock types introduced above, open through-going fractures can be observed to overprint all earlier deformation microstructures, creating a ‘fractured’ fault rock ( Different fault rock types are observed at low displacements (≤25 m) compared to those at higher displacements (>25 m), at both field and micro-scale. The fault rocks are relatively homogeneous (with respect to deformation style) at low displacements, with fewer fault rock types ( At higher displacements ( Grain-scale deformation occurs when grain-dominated carbonates are self-juxtaposed, creating protocataclasites, cataclasites or composite chaotic breccias ( The deformation style for each fault rock differs, with several processes and factors adding to their complexity. Although the shallow depth of burial, 300 m (see It has previously been discovered in a faulted siliciclastic sequence that the protolith lithology has significant control on the types of fault rock produced ( Since the two lithofacies deform differently, two breccia/cataclasite series have been defined ( Dilational fractures → incohesive mosaic breccia → indurated mosaic breccia → indurated chaotic breccia Compactional Hertzian impingement microcracks → protocataclasite → composite chaotic breccia/cataclasite This sequence develops progressively dependent on the intensity of deformation and the generation of brecciation. It is also important to note that not all carbonate lithofacies deform; coralline algae such as an algal laminated texture or algal rhodoliths forming boundstones commonly show no deformation microstructures ( There are two main evolutionary paths that can occur in micrite-dominated carbonates: brecciated and recrystallised fault rock ( The homogeneous texture of micrite-dominated carbonates means that low/no mechanical discontinuities occur throughout the rock body, allowing for through-going fractures to form ( Since incohesive mosaic breccias are often only partially healed, with areas of dissolved fracture mesh, these can have lower tensile strength than the surrounding rock and hence are often sites for further hydraulic implosion brecciation ( Areas of micrite-dominated carbonate that have no through-going fractures often evolve to create recrystallised fault rocks through ductile deformation. The observed textures and crystal orientation distribution ( The three main evolutionary paths that can occur in grain-dominated carbonates are: cataclasite, brecciated and cemented fault rock ( The dominant deformation mechanism that occurs in grain-dominated carbonates is cataclasis, specifically attrition brecciation ( Composite chaotic breccias develop from the formation of protocataclasites, showing evidence of multiple brecciation episodes by the occurrence of brecciated material within breccia clasts ( Grain-dominated carbonate fault rocks are often solely cemented, showing no evidence of other deformation microstructures ( Each fault rock has slight differences to its deformation history, creating variable, complex microstructures. Deformation histories for each fault rock type have been proposed using observed microstructures, cross-cutting relationships and alterations of the pre-existing fabric ( Examination of fault rocks in fault zones of varying displacements and in two lithofacies show that the factors controlling fault rock production are (in order of decreasing impact): lithofacies, lithofacies juxtaposition, displacement and structural irregularities. Although it is well known that juxtaposing different siliciclastic lithologies, i.e. shale against sandstone, will lead to mixing of these two lithologies to create a shaly gouge ( While some studies have documented severe localisation at higher displacements leading to mature fault rocks with an increased homogeneity in basement, siliciclastic and carbonate lithologies (e.g. Slip surface irregularities and interactions influence fault rock development, causing variations along fault strike. Mosaic and chaotic breccias commonly occur at dilational jogs because these areas promote hydraulic implosion breccias ( The structural configuration also has a significant control on fault rock distribution. Specifically, the complexity and number of slip surfaces influences fault rock location (e.g. Carbonate faults have been documented as acting as seals, reducing across fault flow ( Self-juxtaposition creates similar, homogeneous fault rock types, which all could have low permeability and may seal the fault. However, slight variations to fault rock type can cause the permeability to differ, reducing their seal capacity, and any late stage fracturing and dissolution causes an increase in fault rock permeability. The juxtaposition of two different lithofacies creates a variety of complex, variable fault rock types ( The homogeneous fault rocks that occur at lower displacements may cause the petrophysical properties to vary less, with a reduction in permeability and higher capillary pressures, potentially creating a barrier to fluid flow. However, the lack of a continuous fault core allows fluid to flow around the low permeability fault rock pods. A continuous fault core often seals in siliciclastic rocks ( Nine different fault rock types are observed in the studied fault zones, varying with displacement, structural irregularities, juxtaposition, and between the two different lithofacies. Textural differences between grain-dominated and micrite-dominated carbonate lithofacies cause the principal deformation mechanisms to vary between these two lithofacies, generating a large suite of fault rock types. As often stated in siliciclastic studies, high porosity rocks will cataclase and low porosity rocks fracture. However, both lithofacies have a high porosity but show vastly different deformation microstructures. Micrite-dominated carbonate fault rocks are commonly hydraulically brecciated, exploiting the large through-going fractures creating a variety of dilation breccias that may produce a transmissible fault core. Alternatively, micrite-dominated fault rocks can be recrystallised, creating a tight fault core. Grain-dominated carbonates deform on the grain-scale, creating protocataclasites and cataclasites, and are often cemented, potentially creating a barrier to fluid flow. Similar fault rock types are not consistently associated with different magnitudes of displacement; fault core heterogeneity increases with displacement. A lower variety of more homogeneous fault rock types occurs at lower fault displacements due to restricted mixing with lower strain creating less evolved fault rocks. An increase in structural irregularities such as dilational jogs also occurs at higher displacements, adding to the variation in fault rock development. Since the fault core is more homogeneous at low displacements, this may act to seal the fault if a continuous fault core occurred. Variations in lithofacies juxtaposition also influence the types of fault rock produced. Juxtaposing similar lithofacies restricts the variety of deformation mechanisms active and reduces variability to fault rock textures. Conversely, juxtaposition of different lithofacies generates a wide variety of fault rock types, hence could cause across-fault fluid flow leakage if all fault rocks have variable petrophysical properties. I thank Thomas Haines for much help in the field and lab, Frances Abbots, Fabrizio Agosta, Quentin Fisher, Brett Freeman, David Healy, Joyce Neilson, Toru Takeshita, Nick Timms, Graham Yielding and an anonymous reviewer for their constructive comments and suggestions to improve the quality of the manuscript. I am also grateful to