Tungsten carbide-cobalt cermets respectively doped with 0, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5 and 2wt% aluminum nitride were fabricated by the sintering process at 1400°C. The existence of aluminum nitride in the binder phase could refine tungsten carbide grains and reinforce the obtained cermets. The cermets with 1.0wt% aluminum nitride exhibited the higher hardness of 17.1GPa and transverse rupture strength of 3120MPa, compared with 15.6GPa and 2500MPa of the pure cermets. Owing to the addition of aluminum nitride, a high oxidation resistance was measured in cermets with 2.0wt% aluminum nitride, which is nearly 1.9 times than that in the pure cermets.Cemented carbides are multiphase materials composed of a metal ceramic and a cobalt binder. Tungsten carbide cermets are widely used in the machining, drilling, cutting, forming and mining tools fields where the high hardness, wear resistance and good strength are required Herein we present a new approach to improve the oxidation resistance and enhance mechanical properties of WC-Co cemented carbides simultaneously. The aluminum nitride is resistant enough to high-temperature oxidation and can be used as a refractory material up to 1100 The WC-10Co cemented carbides, containing 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 2 The density of the sintered alloys was measured by Archimedes method. The sintered alloys were grinded and polished with diamond pastes. The microstructure observation of the alloys as well as the compositional analysis of some certain phases was conducted using a FEI Nano230 scanning electron microscope (SEM). The carbide grain sizes and the mean free path of the sintered specimens were determined using photoshop software based on the SEM images. More than 300 carbide particles and binder phase were measured to obtain statistically meaningful results. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) observations were carried out in JEM-2100 microscope at 200 The microstructures of the WC-Co-AlN cermets, which were prepared by the sinter-HIP densification of the composite powders, were shown in To clarify the distributions of various alloying elements in the cemented carbides and investigate the microstructure of the WC-Co-AlN cermets, EPMA of cemented carbides were performed. The morphology and the structure of the WC-Co-AlN cermets were further characterized by intensive HRTEM analyses. It can be seen from In summary, a new approach to control the growth of WC grain, improve the mechanical properties and oxidation resistance of cermets simultaneously was developed in the present work. By a combination of experimental work and measurement, a dramatically improved combination of mechanical properties and oxidation resistance of WC-10Co cemented carbides with the AlN additions was obtained. In the sintering process, the less AlN in the WC-Co cermets can inhibit the growth of finer WC particles depending on the dissolution-reprecipitation mode. WC-Co-AlN cermets with the homogeneous and fine microstructure, can exhibit the higher hardness and transverse rupture strength. The AlN nanoparticles existed in the Co binder phase uniformly can hinder the oxidation process of binder phase and reduce the diffusion rate of oxygen element in high temperature circumstance. Using this method, the homogeneity of the microstructure, excellent mechanical properties and oxidation resistance in cemented carbides can be achieved synchronously. This work is supported by the