Sulphide-rich tailings from four Canadian mines were sampled (Mines A1, A2, B and C) to prepare several different paste backfill mixtures. The sulphur grade within these tailings samples range from 5 to 32 wt.%. The binders used were Portland-cement-based binders, fly-ash-based binders and slag-based binders with proportions ranging from 3 to 6 wt.%. The study was carried out in two stages. Stage I allowed us to understand the effects of binder type, binder proportion and tailings properties on compressive strength development of paste backfill during the course of curing time. It was pointed out that for high sulphide tailings, neither the slag-based binders nor the fly-ash-based binders were effective, whereas the sulphate-resistant-based binder (mix of Type I [TI] and Type V [TV] Portland cements) gave good long-term strength. However, the slag-based binders gave the best strength for low and medium sulphide-bearing tailings for which the Portland- and the fly-ash-based mixtures have a relatively low strength. Stage II allowed us to study the early stage strength acquisition of the various mixtures. It was found that the chemical composition of the mixing water plays a role on the mechanical behavior of certain cemented backfills.Mine backfill refers to waste materials, such as waste development rock, deslimed and whole mill tailings, quarried and crushed aggregate, and alluvial or an eolian sand, which is placed into underground mined voids for the purposes of either disposal and/or to perform some engineering function. The disposal of mine tailings underground reduces the environmental impact The mechanical and rheological properties of cemented paste backfill depend on physical, chemical and mineralogical properties of the mine tailings, binder types and their proportions  The purpose of this paper is to highlight the influence of some chemical factors of mill tailings, binders and mixing waters on the paste backfill strength acquisition. To reach this goal, mine tailings from four Canadian hard-rock mines were sampled (tailings samples A1, A2, B and C) for the preparation of different paste backfill mixtures using different binder types and binder proportions. The study was carried out in two phases: (i) Phase I investigated the effect of binder and tailings chemistry on the unconfined compressive strength (UCS) of paste backfill after curing periods of 14, 28, 56 and 91 days using tailings samples A1, B and C. (ii) Phase II of the study was about the effect of mixing-water chemistry on the paste backfill strength evolution after curing periods of 3, 7, 14 and 28 days using tailings sample A2 and 5 wt.% binder content. In order to better understand the effect of the chemical composition of mine tailings and mixing water on the mechanical strength of paste backfill, four Canadian hard-rock mine sulphide tailings (Mines A1, A2, B and C) were sampled along with typical mixing waters derived from mine process water of the different mines that differ by their sulphate content and their pH. The main chemical elements of the three tailings are listed in The grain size distributions of tailings A1, A2 and B (finer tailings) are closely similar and typical of tailings from hard-rock mines The main chemical characteristics of the mixing waters that are derived from the different mine process waters are listed in Ordinary or Type I (TI) and/or sulphate-resistant or Type V (TV) Portland cements are often used alone or with the addition of natural or artificial additives having specific hydraulic properties in cemented paste backfill. The additives are used to increase the durability and the strength of the mixture, and appreciably reduce the binder costs. In this study, TI and TV Portland cements, FA and BFS were chosen for the different binder types. Ordinary TI Portland cement was selected as the basic component of the different binder types. In Phase I of the study, the binder types used were the Portland-cement-based binder (binder type PC), the fly-ash-based binder (binder type FP), the slag-based binder (binder type SP) and slag-only binder (binder type Sg). In Phase II of the study, other slag-based binders (binder types SP-IIa and SP-IIb) and the binder types PC and FP were used (see During Phase I of the study, proportions of 3, 4.5 and 6 wt.% of the binder types PC, FP, SP and Sg For Phase II of the study, a proportion of 5 wt.% binder was used to produce various mixtures using three different mixing-water samples (Mine A2 process water, lake water and municipal water) and tailings sample A2 with a fixed slump of 6.25 in. (see For the two phases of the study, the paste backfill mixtures were poured into plastic cylinders with a diameter of 10 cm and a height of 20 cm. After pouring the different mixtures into the cylinders, they were sealed and cured in a humidity chamber maintained at approximately 70% humidity (this is similar to underground mine conditions) for periods of 14, 28, 56 and 91 days (Phase I) and 3, 7, 14 and 28 days (Phase II). The resulting paste backfill specimens were then tested by uniaxial compression tests to evaluate their compressive strength. A total of 396 backfill samples (Phase I) and 192 backfill samples (Phase II) were subjected to uniaxial compression tests using a computer-controlled mechanical press (MTS 10/GL) having a normal loading capacity of 50 kN and a displacement rate of 0.001 mm/min. The specimen's height-to-diameter ratio was 2. The two ends of the samples were first rectified to get plane surfaces before running the tests. The uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) corresponds to the maximum stress value observed during the compression test. A Hitachi® 3500-N scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to characterize the microstructure and texture of the various backfill samples. The backscattered electron (BSE) imaging mode was used because it produces images with the chemical contrast superimposed upon the relief contrast. All chemical analyses were done using an ICP ES spectrometer for all elements except for total sulphur and sulphates, which were determined with a Leco oven. The solid samples were digested entirely using aqua regia and hydrofluoric acids.      When using the binder type PC, The results of ⋅ Binder type PC (a mix of TI and TV Portland cements) gives less strength with low sulphur grade tailings (e.g., tailings sample C), or medium sulphur grade tailings (e.g., Mine B). However, the binder type PC gives good strength with sulphur-rich tailings (e.g., tailings sample A1). ⋅ Binder FP (a mix of TI Portland cement and FA) is more suitable with lower sulphur grade tailings such as tailings samples B and C than binder type PC. With the same binder proportions, the compressive strength gained with the binder type FP is always higher than the one obtained with binder type PC, except for tailings sample A1. ⋅ Binder type SP (a mix of TI Portland cement and slag) is not suitable for sulphide-rich tailings such as tailings sample A1, but can be highly recommended for low to medium sulphur grade tailings such as tailings samples B and C. Also, this binder gives more strength to the backfill samples B and C than the binder types PC and FP. ⋅ Finally, binder type Sg (slag only) is not recommended for sulphide-rich tailings such as tailings sample A1. However, it could be used for low and medium sulphur grade tailings such as tailings samples B and C. Moreover, the binder type Sg confers the highest compressive strength to the backfill sample B regardless of the binder proportion. SEM micrography was performed on the 56-day curing age samples after the uniaxial compression tests to better understand some of the relationships between the compressive strength acquisition process and the texture of each paste backfill samples studied. SEM micrography showed that paste backfill grains are evenly dispersed within their matrix. The voids between the coarse particles of the initial tailings are filled with ultrafine particles and cement hydrates depending on the cement proportion and its hydration rate SEM investigations also allowed us to observe the precipitation of some secondary minerals within the paste backfill samples B and C when using pozzolanic binders such as slag- and fly-ash-based binders (e.g., binder types SP, FP and Sg).These secondary minerals include all the hydrated phases appearing after paste backfill hardening. Secondary minerals sometimes contribute to the cohesion of the paste backfill matrix by filling the intergranular voids (see Common primary hydrates, like portlandite, were not observed while investigating the different cementitious matrixes using SEM coupled to microanalysis. This fact can be explained by the relatively low pH of the mixtures since their preparation. C-S-H gels are the only identified hydrates. The results of the Phase II study show that the mixing water is an important parameter that affects the quality of the paste backfill for two reasons: (i) the water-to-binder ratio affects the backfill strength acquisition process and (ii) the water chemistry interferes with the cement chemistry and alters the hydration processes. The results of this Phase II study suggest that Portland cements- and fly-ash-based binders have fast hydration rates compared to slag-based binders. The harmful effects of the presence of sulphate in the mixing water on cement hydration was demonstrated for the slag-based binders backfill mixtures (cf. Six binder types and six mixing-water types were used to produce various paste backfill mixtures with four different sulphide tailings from three Canadian hard-rock mines (tailings samples A1, A2, B and C). The tailings samples A1 and A2 are sulphur rich (32% wt and 24% wt sulphur, respectively), tailings sample B is medium grade for sulphur (16% wt) and tailings sample C is low grade for sulphur (5% wt). The six binder types are Portland-cement-based binders (PC), fly-ash-based binder (FP) and slag-based binders (SP, SP-IIa, SP-IIb and Sg). The six mixing-water types are lake water (LW), municipal water (MW) and mine A2 sulphate-rich process water (PW). The resulting paste backfill curing-time-dependent compressive strengths were investigated with uniaxial compression testing. At early-stage curing times (i.e., from 0 to 14 days) the cement hydration is weak, indicating little or no compressive strength for all backfill samples studied. This is particularly true concerning backfill sample A1 (sulphide-rich backfill), which did not exhibit any strength until after 14 days of curing time regardless of the binder type. Only binder types PC and FP are suitable for this backfill, which developed good compressive strength after 28, 56 and 91 days of curing time. The pozzolanic binders such as the slag-based binders exhibit hydration inhibition until after 120 days of curing time. The slag-based binders are appropriate for low and medium sulphur-rich tailings and result in high strength acquisition of the paste backfill. The mixing-water sulphate contents strongly affect the hydration processes depending on the binder type and the curing time. Also, the slag-based binder hydration seems to be inhibited by the presence of soluble sulphates in contrast to the Portland-cement-based binder. The results of this study clearly demonstrate the inefficiency of choosing paste backfill mixtures without testing first the tailings and mixing-water characteristics. The binder chemistry combined with the mixing-water chemistry affects the formation of primary and secondary hydrates during paste backfill strengthening. The cohesion of the paste backfill matrix is directly dependent on the nature of the precipitated hydrates. This study particularly highlighted the complexity of paste backfill materials for which the compressive strength acquisition depends on three main components (tailings, binder and mixing-water characteristics). There is no typical recipe for all paste backfill mixtures. Each type of tailing and each type of mixing water requires laboratory optimization for choice of binder. The chemical properties of the three main components of paste backfill play an important role in its compressive strength acquisition and must be considered when designing and operating a paste backfill plant. This is because low compressive strength of the resultant paste backfill can directly affect the operation of a mine. The authors acknowledge the financial support given by the Institut de Recherche Robert-Sauvé en Santé et en Sécurité du Travail du Québec (IRSST) and its scientific adviser Louis Bousquet. The authors also express their sincere gratitude to the mine operators for their assistance. Finally, acknowledgement for their technical support also goes to Darcy Jolette and Hugues Bordeleau.