Poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) is one of the most common polymers employed in the biomedical field owing to its outstanding properties, however, it degrades slowly, at a rate (K
                     Mw) of 0.0010days−1 at 37°C. The incorporation of a second comonomer and the tailoring of more disordered chain microstructures were tested to accelerate hydrolysis. Both ε-caprolactone-co-δ-valerolactone and ε-caprolactone-co-L-lactide copolymers, synthesized with random (R
                     ∼1) and semi-alternating (R
                     →2) distribution of sequences, exhibited faster degradation rates than PCL. ε-CL-co-δ-VAL, with ε-CL molar contents ranging from 76% to 85%, possessed K
                     Mw values of between 0.0052 and 0.0033days−1, whereas the copolymers based on lactide, with 88–94% of ε-CL, had a K
                     Mw 6–10 times higher than that of the homopolymer. The crystalline phase played a pivotal role in water absorption and degradation process, but was also responsible for the mechanical behavior of these low glass transition temperature polymers. At 21°C all the copolymers showed excellent ductility (strain at break>1000%) and improved flexibility compared to PCL (with secant modulus between 56 and 185MPa). At body temperature (37°C) it was only possible to measure the properties of the copolymers which had a Tm
                      above 52°C or a high enough melting enthalpy (>33Jg−1). Moreover, at this temperature, PCL and the ε-CL-co-L-LA with a ε-CL content higher than 88% exhibited lower stress related properties. Nevertheless, the mechanical performance at both temperatures of these poly(ε-CL-co-L-LA), in addition to their upgraded biodegradability, make them potential substitutes for PCL.Poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) is a well-known biopolyester, much appreciated in the biomedical and tissue engineering fields. This polymer presents very good biocompatibility, exceptional blend-compatibility, efficient processing with thermoplastic techniques, high thermal stability and very attractive mechanical properties with high elongation at break values The copolymerization of ε-caprolactone with At temperatures well above their glass transition, the crystalline phase is responsible for the mechanical properties of these low glass transition temperature polymers. Therefore, only those whose melting temperatures ( ε-caprolactone monomer (assay Statistical copolymers from ε-caprolactone, Proton and carbon nuclear magnetic resonance ( The lactide methine signals, centered at 5.15 200–300 The mechanical properties were determined by tensile tests with an Instron 5565 testing machine at a crosshead displacement rate of 10 For the In order to compare the degradation rate of the studied PLVLs, the exponential relationship between molecular weight and degradation time for biodegradable polyesters degrading under bulk degradation was used The molecular weights of the polymers were determined by GPC using a Waters 1515 GPC device equipped with two Styragel columns (10 The thermal properties were determined on a DSC 2920 (TA Instruments) immediately after the drying at 37 As mentioned in the introduction, the polymers employed in this study, with the exception of CL-VAL 80, were synthesized and thoroughly characterized in a previous study Polycaprolactone homopolymer (PCL) shows a glass transition temperature ( DSC scans were made from 21 to 100 It can be observed that there are some differences between the melting behavior of the polymers at room temperature (21  The experimental data show a progressive increase in the melting peaks (Δ    The copolymers containing lactide presented the fastest degradation rates. In accordance with the degradation studies at 20 The changes in thermal properties, water uptake and molecular weight loss of the polymer samples were reflected in the morphological appearance of some of the degradation remnants.   As can be seen in The mechanical behavior at 37 In this work an Both ε-CL-co-δ-VAL copolymers, with ε-CL molar content ranging from 76% to 85% and random ( However, their mechanical behavior was heavily dependent on the crystalline phase (on their The authors are thankful for funds from the Basque Government, Department of Education, Universities and Research (GIC12/161-IT-632-13) and the Spanish Ministry of Innovation and Competitiveness MINECO (MAT2013-45559-P). J.F. thanks the University of the Basque Country (UPV-EHU) for a pre-doctoral grant.