Flotation is extensively used in wastewater treatment or within the minerals processing industry. Foam and its function in those processes are not completely understood yet. Consequently, we investigated on liquid films and on particle behaviours within a quasi two-dimensional rising foam, depending on (i) surfactant concentrations and (ii) particle sizes. Experimental conditions were free-drainage in polydispersed foam. (i) The surfactant concentrations influenced foam rising velocities and particles trajectories. A minimum particle sedimentation velocity was found for a specific surfactant concentration. (ii) The particles size affected their sedimentation. Larger particles moved more slowly in Plateau borders due to their larger contact area. They had the tendency to reside within foam nodes longer than smaller particles. However, when they did not reside within the nodes, particle instantaneous sedimentation velocities attained maximum values within nodes.Bubbly flows are often used in environmental industry applications such as aeration, mixing or cleaning processes. The motion of those bubbles and the specific composition of the liquid phase generate foams. Among those processes, flotation is a technique that utilises bubbles and foams to remove or to separate components present in the liquid phase. It is especially employed in wastewater treatment or within minerals processing industry; those methods have a small environmental load because they do not require adding chemical product. The motion of particles and liquid within foams has a major importance for the efficiency of those processes. Indeed, through the understanding of foam gas cells behaviour and of liquid flow for different surfactant concentrations and particle sizes, those processes can be optimised. Joseph Plateau (19th century), of the well-known Plateau's laws, is one of the first to define foam structure (e.g. Drainage and coarsening effect in foams have been studied by many groups. It starts with the pioneering work of Leonard and Lemlich This work is continued by two major theoretical models for the drainage. The first one is developed by Verbist et al. The coarsening effect and the characterisation of foam gas cells size distribution have been studied by Magrabi et al. Concerning the motion of solids in rising foams, Neethling and Cilliers In order to gain a better understanding of the particles motion in foams, here, we present the results of an experimental study of particles motion in quasi two-dimensional rising foam. First, the motion of one particle for different surfactant concentrations is presented; pointing out that the surfactant concentration has a drastic influence on the particle sedimentation. Then, for a fixed surfactant concentration, the paths and velocities of three different particles sizes are shown. Finally, one flowing particle is followed throughout several gas cells and an analysis of its instantaneous velocities is presented. Flotation is a three-dimensional process, therefore making observations in the foam is challenging. In the present study, we use a quasi two-dimensional foam. In their study, Cox et al. In our experiments, we used photographs of a 30 As shown in Saponin was used as the surfactant. It had a density of 1025 Particle Tracking Velocimetry was used to capture the trajectory of the falling particles. A laser sheet of 3 The foam mean velocity was measured during a few minutes and for several centimeters in order to consider the coarsening effect occurring on foam gas cells. Particle Tracking Velocimetry technique was used to determine typical trajectories and mean sedimentation velocities of fluorescent particles. Particle sedimentation velocity was defined as the absolute velocity minus the mean foam velocity. We investigate firstly on the effect of the surfactant, secondly on the effect of particle size and finally the instantaneous velocity of the particle is interpreted. The characteristics of the foam and the motion of the liquid in the foam depend on the types of surfactant used. Drainage and coarsening occur in the foam generated with Saponin. In this section, the foam evolution at different surfactant concentrations is described, then particle paths at different surfactant concentrations are compared and finally the optimal concentration to carry a particle farthest in foam is discussed. Size of the particle used here was 100 The relation between the mean velocity of the rising foams and the surfactant concentrations is shown in Particle trajectories shown in Particle sedimentation velocities for different surfactant concentrations given in the caption of In this section, we compared trajectories and velocities of particles of different sizes. In  In addition to the effect of particles size, the rising motion of the foam is important for the residence time in nodes. Indeed, if the generation of the foam is stopped and the foam is not in the rising motion, particles are not kept within nodes any more. From the above results, it would be important in the future research to investigate on the effect of surface characteristic of particles by using hydrophobic particles. It would be also important to investigate on the influence of foam growth rate. In this section, particle instantaneous velocity was analysed using a particle of 100 In Finally, particles residence time within nodes versus Plateau borders orientation was investigated. The orientation was defined as the angle between a vertical line and the Plateau border before the node. The results were obtained by measuring those angles on photographs (typical photographs are given in The experimental study presented here has yielded particles motions within quasi two-dimensional rising foam and the following results have been obtained. The increase of surfactant (Saponin) concentration increased foam rising velocity. Besides, it reduced horizontally variations of particles trajectories. We also found that particles sedimentation velocity decreased monotonically with particles size presumably because bigger particles were staying longer within nodes. Nevertheless, from an analysis of the instantaneous sedimentation particle velocities passing through nodes, without being caught by them, can reach maximum velocities within nodes. The behaviours of particles in the nodes, where residing and acceleration have been observed, emphasise the complexity of flows occurring within foams. We are grateful to P.L. Wilson and J. Peixinho for their support and stimulating discussions and multiphase group members of our laboratory for their help and interest.