The laser diffraction method is widely used to measure particle size distributions. It is generally accepted that the scattering angle becomes smaller and the angles to the location of the main peak of scattered energy distributions in laser diffraction instruments shift to smaller values with increasing particle size. This specific principle forms the foundation of the laser diffraction method. However, this principle is not entirely correct for non-absorbing particles in certain size ranges and these particle size ranges are called anomalous size ranges. Here, we derive the analytical formulae for the bounds of the anomalous size ranges and discuss the influence of the width of the size segments on the signature of the Mie scattering kernel. This anomalous signature of the Mie scattering kernel will result in an indetermination of the particle size distribution when measured by laser diffraction instruments in the anomalous size ranges. By using the singular-value decomposition method we interpret the mechanism of occurrence of this indetermination in detail and then validate its existence by using inversion simulations.Laser diffraction is one of the most popular methods of characterizing particles by measuring the light they scatter. Measurements executed according to this method are fast, nonintrusive, reliable, and are widely used in spray and solid particle diagnostics. The light scattered by a single spherical particle can be strictly described by the Mie theory, which is based on Maxwell's equations One may infer that ACSED and ACAD are caused by the same reason, although literature A typical set-up for a laser diffraction instrument is given in In the ideal design for a laser diffraction instrument, the area of a detector element increases linearly with the average scattering angle, namely, Here, C is a constant and can be neglected due to the inverse procedure, where we only need the relative SED. Assuming that the detector elements are continuous and, therefore, the range of the scattering angle corresponding to each element is sufficiently small, we can rewrite In actual laser diffraction instruments, for a PSD with a volume frequency of The continuous size range is divided into a series of discrete size segments: Obviously, The Mie scattering kernel is directly related to the inverted PSD; therefore, it is necessary to analyze the signature of the Mie scattering kernel. Although the scattered intensity By using the Mie theory, The analytical formulae for the bounds and center positions of the anomalous size ranges are  When In the case of In actual measurements, keeping in mind that the size segments are discrete, the width of the size segment increases with increasing particle size. The ratio between the ending and beginning points of the This analysis indicates that for laser diffraction instruments, ACSED mostly influences the PSD to be measured in the first anomalous size range. The center position of the first anomalous size range can be described by Literature To reveal how this indetermination of particle sizing occurs, we assume a laser diffraction instrument satisfying the following two conditions: (a) the range of the angular scattering angle measured by the detector of 30 elements is 0.1°–24° and the scattering angle measured by each element increases exponentially; and (b) the incident light is nonpolarized, the wavelength is 0.633 The Mie scattering kernel calculated by Until now, a variety of algorithms have been proposed to solve The SEDs of Combining  Here we consider the conditions where  However, for non-absorbing particles with To validate the existence of the indetermination of particle sizing in the anomalous size ranges, we present two specific inversion simulations. In this paper, we use the Rosin–Rammler (RR) distribution We can draw the following conclusions: the smoothness criteria can reduce or avoid high-frequency oscillations while have no effect on reducing the indetermination of particle sizing in the anomalous size ranges. When PSDs cover the anomalous size ranges (mostly the first anomalous size range), there will be a random percentage of replacement of This paper demonstrated the angles to the location of the main peak of SEDs oscillate versus increasing particle size in the anomalous size ranges. This anomalous change of the SEDs, which is caused by the interference of the diffracted light and the refracted light of particles, leads to the anomalous change of the signature of the Mie scattering kernel and, hence, bring indetermination to the inverted PSD in the anomalous size ranges. The laws of ACSED are obtained as: the angles to the location of the main peaks oscillate with increasing particle size and the bounds of the anomalous size ranges are derived; given that the width of the size segment increases with increasing particle size, the Mie scattering kernel is anomalous mostly in the first anomalous size range. PSDs covering the first anomalous size range cannot be determined accurately by the laser diffraction method. Meanwhile, we have interpreted the mechanism of occurrence of this indetermination by using the SVD method and validate its existence by two inversion simulations. This analysis helps us to understand this disadvantage of the laser diffraction method and contributes to solving this problem in further research. This work was supported by the