In the previous study, mathematical models were proposed to describe the mass of the valuable component and quartz recovered in a Knelson Concentrator bowl based on experiments conducted on two-component synthetic feeds. In continue, a series of experiments were done on multi-component synthetic feeds which were a mixture of five valuable components (i.e., magnetite, zinc, copper, lead and tungsten) and quartz to obtain a general recovery models. In this part, the results of material characterization, details of experimental protocol and finally multi-component recovery models will be presented which are based on material properties and operating condition parameters. The observed results indicate that the best operating condition to obtain maximum recovery of valuable component and highest grade of concentrate is at values higher than 250 for 
                        
                           
                              
                                 F
                              
                              
                                 d
                              
                           
                           /
                           
                              
                                 (
                                 
                                    
                                       F
                                    
                                    
                                       c
                                    
                                 
                                 -
                                 
                                    
                                       F
                                    
                                    
                                       b
                                    
                                 
                                 )
                              
                              
                                 Q
                              
                           
                        
                     .Knelson Concentrator (KC) as a centrifugal concentrator is mainly used for recovery of gold and platinum and may be used for recovery of heavy minerals in alluvial mining, grinding and flotation circuits products ( Laboratory Knelson Concentrator operates in a batch mode and the bowl has a fixed capacity. Therefore, to use the recovery of valuable component in the bowl to prepare the model, the Knelson Concentrator should not be operate in the overloading or overfeeding conditions ( Knelson Concentrator was used for beneficiation of chromite ore. Full factorial experimental design and response surface methodology were applied to determine the effect of operational parameters, namely: feed rate, centrifugal force and fluidization water flow rate on the efficiency of the Knelson Concentrator. The quadratic models were proposed to predict the concentrate grade and recovery. The results show that all the parameters affect the grade and recovery of the concentrate to some degree. However, the fluidization water rate was found as the most effective parameter ( Should a particle be retained in the bowl, the centrifugal force ( In the previous study, Present authors proposed a model for the retained mass of materials in the KC bowl by definition of a new ratio of Also, authors derived the models to describe the separation performance in the Knelson Concentrator. In Part 2 of this article, models functions were proposed for valuable components and quartz (as tailings) recovered in the bowl of KC in terms of particle characteristics (size and density) and operating parameters (rotational speed and fluidization water pressure) ( The models for mass of recovered valuable component, Eq. The previous studies were done on a synthetic feed consisting only two components such as quartz-magnetite ( The available literature shows that synthetic feeds have been used to mimic the compositions of ores containing valuable components and gangue ( The sources of materials have been described in the previous parts of the article ( The experiments were performed using a laboratory Knelson Concentrator of Manual Discharge type (KC-MD3) with a bowl diameter equal to 3 in. at the Iran Mineral Processing Research Center (IMPRC) by feeding a mixture of quartz and five valuable components with various densities and sizes in a batch mode. All the experiments were performed in order to find the mass of recovered valuable components and quartz using the conventional experimental protocol (as Synthetic feeds were used with a volume ratio of 4% total valuable components in the feed in each size fraction ( Sum of valuable components volume in the synthetic feeds was 6 cm The solid and water feed flow rates were kept constant at 300 g/min and 700 cm The experiments were performed on each size fraction of synthetic multi-component feeds ( After performing each separation test, the materials accumulated inside the rings as concentrate were collected, dried and weighed prior to chemical analysis. After performing each test, mass-balancing of magnetite recovered in the concentrate and tailing was done. The difference between the magnetite in the actual feed and reconstituted feed was very low and less than 0.10 g (the magnetite in the feed was 5.82 g) or 2%.  To analyse the materials used in the synthetic feeds, the compositions of quartz and Fe content of magnetite were analysed by XRF (Philips, Magix Pro) and titration method, respectively. The other compositions of magnetite and compositions of metals powders were analysed by ICP-OES (Varian 735). As A total of 27 experiments were performed on each multi-component synthetic feed and size fraction, separately, to derive the models. After each experiment, the mass of each valuable component and quartz recovered in the concentrate were determined and then their volumes were calculated. The actual data collected from the tests were used to derive models.  The ratio for each valuable component was converted to the ratio for quartz by multiplying in 2.33, 3.36, 4.72, 6.13 and 10.45 for magnetite, zinc, copper, lead and tungsten, respectively. Then, the volumes of all recovered valuable components in all tests were plotted versus the ratio of The volumes of all recovered valuable components in all tests were re-plotted versus the ratio of The remained data points were re-plotted again versus the ratio of The model was fitted to the remained points of valuable components volume using Weibull distribution function by CurveExpert (Version 1.40) software ( The parameters of the determined model function for each valuable component recovered in the KC bowl are shown in  By replacing  To propose the model for quartz recovered in the bowl, the data points of volume of recovered quartz in all tests were plotted versus the ratio of The model function for mass of recovered quartz with particle size of  As an example, the recovery of each component in the synthetic feed has been calculated and given in The results of experiments and modelling on two-component synthetic feeds were given from the previous study ( To validate the model function, ore consisting of lead mineral was used as an actual feed. Therefore, a sample was taken from Nakhlak Lead Mine, Iran. This sample was ground and classified in the three size fractions of −150 + 106, −180 + 150 and −212 + 180 µm. mineralogical studies done on these fractions were shown that quartz, calcite and dolomite are the major minerals and galena and barite are the miner minerals in the ore. Three validation tests were carried out to measure the recovered volumes of galena and barite minerals as heavy minerals (valuable components) and quartz, calcite and dolomite minerals as low-density minerals (gangue) in the bowl as given in The experimental measurements showed that the recovered volumes of heavy minerals a little less than the model predictions ( The tests were done on multi-component synthetic feeds containing five different valuable components and quartz with the various particle sizes under different operating conditions. The experimental observations revealed significant findings regarding separation performance of the Knelson Concentrator and how it is affected by operating conditions parameters defining applied forces on particles. The findings are summarized as follows: As In this research, separation models were derived based on experiments on multi-component feeds consisting valuable components with the various densities in the laboratory Knelson Concentrator bowl. Therefore, the models can be used for separation of free gold grains, particles include gold grain and heavy minerals from the ore. The derived models are valid for the separation of minerals with various densities and sizes under the normal operating conditions of laboratory Knelson concentrator and does not hold for abnormal conditions. For example, these models cannot be used when rotational speed is very low (less than 1083 rpm) or very high (greater than 2141 rpm), for separation of minerals with a particle size larger than the maximum feed size (1 mm), for fine particles approximately smaller than 90 µm, for separation of ash from the coal or for the other types of Knelson Concentrator device. However, similar models can be derived for other applications based on the approach used in this research. The authors would like to thank University of Tehran, Iranian Mines & Mining Industries Development & Renovation (IMIDRO) and Iran Mineral Processing Research Center (IMPRC) for providing financial and in-kind supports during this research. X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of various materials used in multi-component synthetic feeds for experimental work are given as follows.  Based on proposed models given in Eqs.  