Single particle breakage characterisation at fine sizes for use in mill modelling has been addressed by only a few researchers and is not utilised in engineering design. This is mainly due to the challenge of accurately imparting a range of impact energies to sub-millimetre particles and then measuring the progeny size distribution for the tiny resultant mass. In order to fill this gap, a dispersed monolayer multi-particle breakage method was applied with a mini JK Drop weight tester in this work to extend the single particle breakage test from 16 mm down to 425 μm, covering a specific energy (Ecs) range of 0.1–2.5 kWh/t to provide a wide range of test conditions. A challenge that had to be addressed was switching from single particle to dispersed mono-layer due to the physical constraints of drop-height and drop mass in maintaining accuracy in input energy over the orders of magnitude required to apply the required specific range of energy input. As only a limited size range could be subjected to both single particle and mono-layer bed breakage, it was necessary to establish if the two testing techniques provide the same breakage results. A novel application of the Fréchet distance was successfully applied to quantitatively evaluate the discrepancy of progeny size distribution between single particle breakage and monolayer multiple particle breakage. Extrapolation of an empirical Fréchet distance model indicated that the application of dispersed mono-layer breakage below 2 mm provides an acceptable comparison with the single particle breakage applied to coarser sizes, thus facilitating the fitting of a single appearance function across this wide range of sizes and applied breakage energies.Ore breakage characterisation is based on laboratory breakage testing work, with single particle breakage tests the most commonly used method. Single particle breakage is regarded as the primary breakage event in a grinding mill [ The size range of particles (measured with K Extending the single particle breakage characterisation test to finer sizes will result in overwhelmingly intensive labour, as a minimum screening mass is required below which the sizing error is unacceptable. For example, if a Drop Weight Tester (DWT) is used for breakage characterisation of particles with a specific gravity 3.26 and size range − 0.5 + 0.425 mm (average mass per particle =1.67 × 10 Normally, continuous or locked-cycle grinding mill tests, such as ball mills, Vertimill®, IsaMill®, Lab-scale HPGR, AG/SAG pilot plant mills, are used for fine breakage characterisation [ Barrios et al. [ Reja et al. [ Aiming at a consistent and smooth extension from large single particle breakage to fine single particle breakage, we use dispersed monolayer multi-particle bed breakage tests to study the fine particle breakage (−8 + 0.425 mm) with the Mini JK Drop Weight Tester (Mini JKDWT). To evaluate the error of monolayer multi-particle bed breakage compared to single particle breakage, Fréchet distance is introduced to quantify the discrepancy of product size distribution between single particle breakage and monolayer multi-particle breakage. An error prediction model is developed based on the Fréchet distance theory. An alternative fine breakage characterisation technique which is equivalent to fine single particle breakage is proposed. The successful consistent extension to fine single particle breakage allows the development of a wide-range appearance function, which is more desirable in comminution modelling. To extend the rock size down to sub-millimetre in fine breakage characterisation, the Mini JK drop weight tester (Mini JKDWT) was used for ore breakage testing in this work. The Mini JK JKWT is a vertical drop weight impact system with an electromagnet to hold the drop weight ( The required input energy for breakage is controlled through the gravitational potential energy of the drop weight. The input energy for breakage [ With a given drop weight and the required energy level, the height of the drop weight can be predetermined. For single particles with size class −16 + 13.2 mm, the maximum input specific energy is around 1 kWh/t. With fine particles, a monolayer multi-particle bed is used with the Mini JKDWT. A dispersed monolayer of particles was spread on the centre of the anvil surface to allow most of particles to be broken in a single impact. Great care was taken to minimise particle-particle contact and also to ensure that the drop weight face is parallel to the anvil so as to provide an even contact with all the particles. The ore samples, a gold-copper porphyry deposits from Newcrest Cadia Hill, were sized into eight size fractions: −16 + 13.2 mm, −11.2 + 9.5 mm, −8 + 6.7 mm, −5.6 + 4.75 mm, −4 + 3.35 mm, −2 + 1.7 mm, −1 + 0.85 mm, −0.5 + 0.425 mm. The test were conducted at the following specific energy levels (kWh/t): 0.1, 0.5, 1.0, 1.5, 2.0, and 2.5. For each size fraction, particles were broken under impact at each of the six energy levels, giving 45 size-energy combinations. For each size-energy combination, a series of breakage tests were conducted to provide sufficient progeny mass for accurate determination of the product size. For size fractions >8 mm, single particle breakage was used for each test and 30–50 repeat tests conducted for each size-energy combination. For size fractions <3.35 mm, mono-layer bed breakage was used with 30 repeat tests conducted for each size-energy combination to cover the natural ore variation and experimental error. It was necessary to establish if the two testing techniques, single particle and mono-layer bed, provide the same breakage results. Due to the physical constraints of drop-height and drop mass, only a limited size range could be subjected to both single particle and mono-layer bed breakage for direct comparison of the techniques. Thus, both single particle and mono-layer tests were conducted for only three of the size fractions: −4 + 3.35 mm, −5.6 + 4.75 mm, and − 8 + 6.7 mm. The number of particles in the multi-particle experiments was chosen such that the area that particles occupied on the Anvil is just smaller than the contact area of the smallest drop weight. This is to ensure that the drop weight can have full impact on the particles. The detailed test plan is shown in For −2 mm particles, the monolayer multi-particle bed breakage method was applied. In each test, all the particles are put on the anvil forming a dispersed monolayer of particles with no overlap. For size classes −1 + 0.85 mm and − 0.5 + 0.425 mm, the number of particles per test is estimated based on the total mass of the testing sample. For other size classes, the number of particles per test was counted. The procedures for breakage test using the Mini JKDWT are as follows. Firstly, Screen the test samples into the different size fractions listed in Some of the typical breakage product size distribution (one feed size −500 + 425 μm to represent the fine end and another feed size −11.2 + 9.5 mm to represent the coarse end) are shown in To show whether there is a difference between single particle breakage and multiple particle breakage, size fractions −8 + 6.7 mm, −5.6 + 4.75 mm and − 4 + 3.35 mm were tested with the two breakage methods. Some of the results for size fraction −4 + 3.35 mm are presented in Ideally with monolayer multiple particle breakage testing, the energy of the drop weight should be evenly distributed to each particle. However, there are particle shape differences among particles which can lead to uneven contact between the drop weight with each of the particles in the particle layer. Consequently, the applied energy will not be distributed evenly among all the particles. At very low impact energy, it is expected that some smaller particles may not be impacted by the drop weight as larger particles would support the drop weight. This was also presented in the work of Barrios et al. [ To compare the two size distributions quantitatively, the Fréchet distance, a quantitative measure of the difference, was introduced [ where Wylie and Zhu [ The minimum size tested in single particle mode was −4 + 3.35 mm due to a large number of tests and extremely low drop heights required for the next finer size class. All the breakage data of the single particle breakage and the monolayer multi-particle breakage at different energy levels for feed sizes −4 + 3.35 mm, −5.6 + 4.75 mm and − 8 + 6.7 mm are plotted in It is seen from Based on the experimental data, a prediction model as shown in Eq. where, The parameters obtained in this work are listed in Using this model the error is extrapolated to the finer sizes. It is estimated that the error (the Fréchet distance) for dispersed monolayer multi-particle breakage test for 2 mm is 0.3579 at Ecs = 0.01 kWh/t and 0.0918 at Ecs = 2.5 kWh/t respectively. That means the error in the cumulative percentage passing of the PSD of monolayer multi-particle breakage test at the combination of X = 2 mm and Ecs = 0.01 kWh/t is 0.3579% and the error at the combination of X = 2 mm and Ecs = 2.5 kWh/t is 0.0918%. From the trends shown in To extend the monolayer single particle breakage test proposed by Barrios et al. [ The Fréchet distance model proposed in this paper is based on one ore. The work was conducted as only part of a wider PhD on mill modelling and took months to complete over 3000 painstaking experiments, so it was not feasible to conduct for more ores at this stage. Future work should look at a range of ores to validate if the monolayer multi-particle breakage test for −2 mm can be used to replace the single particle test using the experimental technique and mathematical methodology presented in this paper, and to confirm if the parameters are ore specific. If it is validated for a wide range of ores, then a simpler and viable fine breakage characterisation technique will be available for fine grinding modelling. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Commonwealth Scholarship from the