In this work, the Longitudinal Half Fixed Beam test (LHFB) for mode III characterization is analysed by means of Finite Element Analysis (FEA) and optical microscopy. The obtained results were compared with experimental data and analytical formulations obtained in previous works. The objective of this study is to determine the energy distribution across the crack front and to understand the micromechanics that give rise to the delamination failure in unidirectional carbon/epoxy composites.
                  It was found that for samples with long initial crack lengths (i.e. a0
                      = 30 mm), pure mode III takes place in the central part of the delamination front. Nevertheless, these samples present a significant contribution of mode II at the edges of the specimen. As a0
                      decreases, pure mode III increases in extension across the delamination front and mode II decreases at the sample edges. When the initial crack length (a0
                     ) is quite small, the sample presents pure mode III practically on the entire length of the crack front. Nevertheless, when the initial crack is very small, the applied force exercises a local influence on the tip of the crack at the edge of the sample and mode III distribution loses its uniformity across the crack front.
                  The concordance between the analytical results and the numerical results obtained by the Finite Element Method (FEM) was variable depending on the length of the crack and if the comparison was made with GIII
                      or GT
                      as reference.
                  Intralaminar cracks at approximately 45° with respect to the midplane were observed in planes perpendicular to the direction of delamination propagation (planes perpendicular to the fibre direction). Other authors also found this type of intralaminar cracks in other mode III test configurations.Due to the laminated nature of composite materials, delamination is one of the main factors that limit the in service life of this type of materials. The onset and growth of cracks between plies can take place in three different ways: in opening mode (mode I), sliding mode (mode II) and tearing mode (mode III) (see Modes I and II have been widely studied by the scientific community In actual structures, we usually find mixed modes instead of pure modes. Modes I/II have been also widely studied Conversely, pure mode III is more difficult to be reproduced by means of laboratory tests. There are also few works in the scientific literature regarding mixed modes including Mode III as I/III or II/III Despite these difficulties, there are some mechanical tests developed in the scientific literature in order to evaluate In this test, the composite sample is bonded between aluminium bars in order to reduce arms bending. Donaldson R.H. Martin Martin determined that the possible cause for fibre bridging was the high stresses in planes perpendicular to the fibres. He found cracks ahead of the delamination front that could cause fibre bridging. These cracks could be produced due to high shear stresses in planes perpendicular to the fibres Becht and Gillespie Another typical configuration to evaluate mode III is the Edge Crack Torsion test (ECT) ( The laminate specimen stacking sequence for this test is [90/(+45/−45) In his analysis of the ECT test, Ratcliffe Johnston et al. Czabaj et al. developed a study of a modified ECT sample Another test to determine mode III, named Edge Ring Crack Torsion (ERCT), have been developed by Ge et al. They concluded that, in this test, the fracture process takes place in pure mode III without contribution of mode I or mode II component. López-Menéndez et al. In this test, a load is applied by means of a torsional test machine to the upper half of a DCB sample with the bottom half fixed to the testing machine. A linear bearing allows the sample to move in the In the present work, the LHFB test is analysed by means of Finite Element Method (FEM) in order to determine the mode III distribution across the delamination front. The contribution of modes I and II has also been determined. Finally, an analysis by means of optical microscopy was carried out in order to study damage evolution across the crack front. In order to compare results, a previous experimental program An ANSYS® 19.0 Academic Research package was used in order to perform the FEM analysis. Some models were prepared in order to find the optimal element size. The mesh was refined near interesting areas as sample edges and crack front ( In order to model the boundary conditions, two different cases were studied. First, faces A, B, C and D were constrained to move in the Nevertheless, sample faces are simply supported in the testing machine. They are not bonded to the testing tool ( A more realistic approach would involve the modelling of the testing tool and the use of contact elements between the sample and testing tools. Nevertheless, this option was discarded as it would imply longer computing times, and it was also expected little improvement in the accuracy of the results. In order to compute the energy release rate in modes I, II and III, the Two Step Crack Extension Method was used. In this method loads and displacements are calculated in the same node pairs at the crack tip (nodes This procedure is similar to the VCCT (Virtual Crack Closure Technique)   The element size ahead of the crack tip (where the crack opening takes place) was set to 0.136 mm for all samples ( The critical energy release rates given by Eqs. In order to evaluate the suitability of this test procedure, it is interesting to evaluate the distribution of When analysing the variation of the energy release rate across the delamination front, we can use a procedure similar to that shown by R. Krueger In the procedure used in Therefore, in this work the value of the energy release rate at node The work done by the edge nodes was divided by Being As mention above, The average value of First, a FEM model with Another way to evaluate the variation of In order to calculate  The average values of An experimental program developed in previous works The nominal dimensions of the samples used in the experimental program were as follows ( Length ( Width ( Thickness (2 These samples were prepared with different crack lengths: 1, 5, 10, 15, 20, 26 and 30 mm. All samples had the same stacking sequence [0°] The mechanical properties of this laminate used to compute the analytical calculations and as input in the FEM models are shown in In order to calculate Being FEM models with two different boundary conditions were prepared as mentioned previously. In a first model (model 1) the movement in the As can be seen in these Tables, there are no significant differences between both models. Model 1 furnishes slightly lower   In samples with As the load is applied closer to the crack tip, the bending moment decreases and, therefore, mode II contribution also decreases. Nevertheless, as mention above, when the load is applied too close to the crack tip, mode III distribution loses its uniformity across the crack front. Finally, Mode I is practically negligible in all cases.  As can be seen in As can be seen in   Similar results were obtained with model 2. In this model the lateral faces have fewer constrains so the degree of symmetry in the graph is slightly lower (see The actual behaviour of the material is expected to be between models 1 and 2.  The analytical formulation takes into account the total energy involved in the test. This analytical formulation does not discriminate the different modes of fracture when mixed mode is present. When comparing these results with the total energy When comparing Samples tested in previous works This micrograph shows intralaminar cracks at approximately 45° with respect to the midplane as were also observed by Czabaj et al. As these authors found, these cracks seem to be produced by the resolved principal stress. This type of intralaminar cracks was also observed in section 3. In contrast, section 1 did not present these cracks. In this work, the LHFB test for mode III characterization was analysed by means of FEM and optical microscopy. Regarding the energy release rate distribution across the crack front, it was found that for samples with long initial crack lengths, pure mode III takes place mainly in the central part of the sample. In these samples, there is a significant contribution of mode II at the edges of the specimen. As the initial crack length decreases, the load is applied closer to the crack tip, the bending moment decreases and, therefore, mode II contribution also decreases. When the load is applied too close to the crack tip (the crack length is remarkably short), it exercises a local influence on the crack tip at the edge of the sample where the force is applied and mode III distribution loses its uniformity across the crack front. When comparing analytical results with the total energy When comparing Regarding the micromechanics of failure, intralaminar cracks, formed at 45° with respect to the midplane, were observed in planes parallel to the It would be necessary to conduct additional research to try to contain these 45° intralaminar cracks and in this way have a greater approximation to a pure delamination process without additional mechanisms that could influence the global energy of fracture. On the other hand, other analytical formulations based, for example, in an experimental-numerical calibration of the compliance, could be used to try to improve the coincidence of Data will be made available on request. This work was supported by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: