At room temperature and pressures, the reaction between sodium cyanide and platinum group metals (PGMs) does not occur because of poor kinetics. However, at elevated temperatures between 120 and 180 °C, PGMs can be leached by sodium cyanide like the reaction of gold. In this work, a new technique to treat Pt–Pd sulfide flotation concentrates and spent auto-catalysts by pressure cyanidation is put forward, and the results of 5 kg-scale batch experiments in a 50 L autoclave are reported for process development. The cyanide leaching reaction mechanism is also discussed. For flotation concentrates containing about 80 g/t Pt and Pd, after pre-treating by pressure acid leaching, followed by two steps of pressure cyanide leaching, up to 90–94% Pt and 99% Pd extraction could be achieved. Final concentrates obtained from cyanide leaching solution using zinc cementation contained 70–90% of precious metals. For spent auto-catalysts containing ≈1000–2000 g/t Pt+Pd+Rh, after a pre-treatment process to remove the wrapping of the catalyst carrier and to rid surface accumulated carbon and gasoline contaminants, followed by two steps of pressure cyanide leaching, the recoveries of Pt, Pd and Rh were 95–96%, 97–98% and 90–92%, respectively.The content of platinum group metals (PGMs) in proterozoic platinum ores is about 1–10 g/t, while in Cu–Ni sulfide ores containing PGMs, the content is only 0.1–1 g/t. By flotation, the content of PGMs is concentrated to more than 100 g/t. For flotation concentrates, the traditional treatment method is matte smelting where the PGMs are concentrated in the mattes. The matte is then hydrometallurgically treated to leach and separate Fe, Co, Ni and Cu leaving a slime containing 10–50% of precious metals. Direct hydrometallurgical processing of flotation concentrates has been considered impossible ( Smelting has serious environmental impacts and the lengthy overall flowsheet results in unavoidable losses of PGMs. When the mattes are acid leached to separate base metals, the content of PGMs in residues is never above 50%, leading to difficulties in the PGM refinery. To avoid these limitations a new all hydrometallurgical two-stage process for the extraction of PGMs from sulfide flotation concentrates has been suggested ( Automobile catalysts have been one of the main consumers of PGMs so far, and much attention has been paid on PGM recovery from such wastes ( In present paper, the results of pre-treating and leaching a copper–nickel sulfide flotation concentrate and an automobile catalyst are compared and the reaction mechanism of pressure cyanide leaching of PGMs is discussed.   A 50 L autoclave ( TFYXD-50 type, 316 L stainless steel, electrical heated) was used for the tests. The max design pressure, temperature and agitation speed for the autoclave are 7.0 MPa, 350 °C and 500 rpm, respectively. The mineralogical investigations of leaching residues were carried out by X-ray Diffraction (XRD; DMAX-RC, Japan), Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM; JEOL, JSM-5610) and X-ray Energy Dispersive Analysis (EDAX; ThermoNoran, Vantage DSE), respectively. The new all hydrometallurgical technique for treating sulfide flotation concentrates containing PGMs includes the following procedures: flotation concentrates temp. 200 °C, 12.5 g/L H temp. 160 °C, 6.25 g/L NaCN, 1 h, O temp. 60–80 °C, pH 9.5–10, time 2 h, 1 atmos. The new technique for extraction of PGMs from spent auto-catalysts includes the following procedures: spent auto-catalysts The 5.0 kg batch tests were carried out at the following conditions of: temp. 160 °C, 25 g/L NaOH, 2 h, O temp. 160 °C, 6.25 g/L NaCN, 1 h, pressure 1.5 MPa, temp. 60–80 °C, pH 9.5–10, time 2 h, 1 atmos. Precious metals in dried solid residue samples were analyzed by both fire assay and solution analysis methods (ICP). To prepare precious metals solution samples from the residues, the residues were alkali-fused, then dissolved in 50% HCl The 5 kg-scale batch experimental results of the percentage of Cu, Ni and Co oxidized and leached by acid and the percentage of Pt and Pd leached by cyanide for a process development unit are presented in As shown in Because the content of Pt and Pd in 5 kg flotation concentrate was only about 400 mg, and the amount of zinc cementation precipitate was smaller, the precious metal precipitate was dissolved by 50% HCl As shown in The 5 kg-scale batch experimental results from the process development unit are given in As shown in In low-grade Pt–Pd flotation concentrates, the mineralogical investigations on Pt and Pd minerals indicated that they existed in ultra-fine micro-grains and were encapsulated in FeNi When reacted at high-temperatures (> The experimental results indicated that the encapsulated PGMs micro-grains in the host catalyst carrier minerals could be exposed out after pre-treatment procedure. An EDAX analysis of exposed PGMs grains showed a complex series of peaks with Pt and Pd barely detectable from a background matrix of Cu, Ni, Mg, Al, Ce, Na, Si and other minor elements. After the pre-treated leach residues were pressure cyanide leached, the SEM image and EDAX analysis of the residue showed only oxides and chlorides of Si, Mg, Al and Ce corresponding to the rare earth oxide and alumino-silicate support matrix. There was no evidence of PGMs or base metals. For pressure cyanide leaching of PGMs, the following chemical reactions occurred. The reactions The melting point of the precious metals has an affinity with their metallic bonding energy. The melting point of Pd, Pt and Rh is 1552, 1772, and 1966 °C, respectively ( As shown in Under higher oxygen pressure, The reason for the decreased leaching with the increase of NaCN concentration as shown in The higher temperature stability of Pt(CN) The above discussion only gives some simple explanations for the reaction phenomena involved in the cyanide leaching of PGMs. The actual reaction may be more complicated, involving the atomic structure of platinum group metals, the metal bonding strength ( A new technique for the extraction of PGMs from Pt–Pd sulfide flotation concentrates and spent auto-catalysts by pressure cyanidation has been put forward and the 5 kg-scale batch experimental results reported. For flotation concentrates containing about 80 g/t Pt and Pd, after a pressure acid leaching pre-treatment process, two stages of high-temperature pressure cyanide leaching at 160 °C achieved 90–94% and 99% extraction of Pt and Pd, respectively. A final precipitate containing 70–90% of the precious metals were obtained from the cyanide leach solution by using zinc cementation. For spent auto-catalysts containing ≈ A mineralogical investigation on the leaching processes indicated that the pre-treatment procedure before the pressure cyanide leaching was very important to obtain a higher overall PGM extraction. In the pressure oxygen H For a further understanding of the behaviour of PGMs in the pressure cyanide leaching process, some new explanations are proposed in the present paper. The cyanide leaching order of Pt This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (50404004) and (50374060 ).