Rumination is an important aspect of rumen function and animal welfare. However, there is a paucity of information regarding rumination behavior and diurnal patterns among grazing dairy cows of different breeds, genetic merits and ages managed under intensive grazing systems. An observational study was conducted to explore these potential associations and highlight possible behavioral adaptations to compensate for variations in rumination time. Three hundred and twenty lactating dairy cows were fitted with HR Tag™ rumination collars from day 30 to day 240 in milk (DIM), to record daily rumination activity (min per day and min every 2h), mastication rhythm (seconds between ruminative chews) and interval between regurgitation of bolus (s). The group of cows consisted of a mix of two breeds (Friesian and Jersey) and their crossbreeds (Friesian12×Jersey4 and Friesian8×Jersey8) with ages of 2 (heifers), 3 and older than 4yr old. The results indicate no relationships among age, breed, genetic merit and daily rumination time, but a differential diurnal pattern of rumination activity. Age and breed were also associated with mastication rhythm and interval between regurgitation of bolus. The older the cow and the greater the Friesian pedigree, the larger the interval between rumination chews. The total number and time of mastications per bolus appeared to increase with cow age. Increments in Friesian pedigree were associated with fewer regurgitations of bolus per day, a longer time of mastication per bolus and more chews per bolus. The number of regurgitations of bolus per day decreased with the age of the cow. If daily rumination time is controlled by feeding management, these associations possibly highlight underlying compensatory mechanisms, for example to reductions of chewing efficiency as cows age. Therefore, specific feeding managements to manipulate rumination behavior could be designed based on age and breed. Due to the observational nature of the present study, results should be interpreted with caution. At the same time, such observations open up challenging questions for future controlled and detailed experiments.Rumination has been considered as a key component of digestion and intake by ruminants and has a significant effect in the chemical composition of milk ( The diurnal pattern of rumination is circadian but flexible, modulated by feeding frequency, physical and chemical characteristics of the diet ( This study was conducted from September 2010 to April 2011 at the Lincoln University Dairy Farm, Lincoln, New Zealand. Key features of this farm were the high stocking rate of 4.15 cows/ha, the mean cow genetic merit of BW=92 (breeding worth), the high milk solids production of 414 Three hundred and twenty lactating dairy cows were fitted with HR Tag Data were split into four quartiles according to genetic merit (BW1, BW2, BW3, and BW4) and grouped by age (heifer, 3 The diurnal patterns of rumination activity (min of rumination/2 Results are presented in The tendency for an association of daily rumination time with age could be an association with grazing time which indicates that older cows have more experience and are more efficient or dominant grazers, which may be supported by the results shown in The association between mastication rhythm and age ( Considering the lack of association between daily rumination time and breed and genetic merit, it could be suggested that at the same daily rumination time, cows with greater Friesian pedigree were associated with fewer number of boli per day (e.g. F 548 vs. J 594 bolus/d), longer time of chewing per bolus (e.g. F 0.83 vs. J 0.78 The data indicate that the total number of ruminative chews per day increased (rumination time divided by mastication rhythm) linearly with cow age (35,125, 36,070 and 36,790 for heifers, 3 Grazing behavior is intimately related to sward state and condition, and is modulated by the internal state of the animal ( Rumination time can be controlled by feeding and grazing management, but observations from the present study indicate that there are other factors (e.g. breed and age) exerting control on rumination behavior (i.e. number and time of mastication per bolus). Ultimately, chewing and mastication during rumination are the main mechanisms by which forage particle size is reduced, which is a key factor affecting dry matter intake, rumen digestion and milk chemical composition. Therefore, individual feeding programs (e.g. using additives for fiber digestion, effective fiber supplementation, strategic grazing managements, etc.) promoting forage intake and fiber digestion may consider age and breed as adjusting variables. Due to the observational nature of the present study, results should be interpreted with caution. However, these results raise challenging questions for future controlled experimental studies. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. This work was funded by New Zealand dairy farmers. The authors thank DairyNZ Inc. and the Ministry of Business and Innovation (via the Primary Growth Partnership Programme), Pierre Beukes and Viliami Taufa for reviewing this work and manuscript, and Alvaro Romera and Garry Waghorn for their useful comments during the writing of the manuscript. The statistical analysis was conducted by Barbara Dow; her help and inputs are very much appreciated.