A series of high-chain fatty acid esters of 1-octadecanol (stearyl alcohol) was synthesized with even carbon number fatty acids between C12 and C20 under vacuum and in the absence of catalyst. Ester syntheses were controlled via Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) and thermo-physical analyses of the products. These esters were particularly investigated in terms of their thermo-physical properties to be further used as Phase Change Materials (PCMs) in thermal energy storage. Purity, phase change temperature, enthalpy, specific heat (C
                     p), thermal decomposition and reliability after 1000 thermal cycles were presented with necessary statistical data. The DSC analyses indicated that the melting temperatures of the high-chain fatty acid esters of stearyl alcohol were between 42°C and 65°C with phase change enthalpies above 200kJ/kg. The results showed that these materials were favorable for low temperature heat transfer applications with their advantageous thermal properties and reliabilities. In addition to the presented novel PCMs, the influence of different higher alcohol and fatty acid combinations on thermal properties of the higher esters' homologous series was also discussed in detail together with the outcomes of the other published researches. The developed empirical correlations provided accurate estimation of phase change temperature and enthalpy values of high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols without any instrumental analyses.Thermal energy storage systems provide the potential to attain energy savings, which in turn reduce the environmental impact related to energy use and phase change materials (PCMs) work as “latent heat storage units” which can store or release large amounts of energy. These materials have been utilized in different application areas like solar energy storage and transfer PCMs play a key role in thermal energy storage because they are capable of storing energy in the form of latent heat during the phase change process. Unlike sensible heat storage latent heat storage provides much higher storage density, with a small temperature difference between storing and releasing heat. These materials are classified into two main groups as inorganic and organic PCMs. The inorganic PCMs are the largest group, including salt hydrates, nitrates and hydroxides. They cover a broad temperature range with varying phase change enthalpies. However, they suffer principally from low chemical and thermal stability and corrosiveness. On the other hand, the organic PCMs are more stable materials with reliable thermal behavior. They are compatible with encapsulation materials and they have small supercooling degree with high rate of crystal growth. Paraffin waxes, fatty acids and high-chain fatty acid esters of lower alcohols like methanol or ethanol are the most widely covered organic PCMs in literature Compared to Based on the presented results of fatty acid esters in literature, the aim of this paper is to introduce five high-chain fatty acid esters of 1-octadecanol (stearyl alcohol) as new organic phase change materials to be further used in low-temperature heat transfer applications. The thermal properties of the synthesized materials are presented in terms of phase change temperature, enthalpy, specific heat capacity of solid and liquid phases, thermal reliability and thermal degradation with related statistical calculations. Additionally, mathematical correlations for enthalpy and phase change temperature estimation of high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols are also presented to provide reliable correlations with low standard error values for further researches on utilization of these esters in thermal energy storage. The high-chain fatty acid esters of stearyl alcohol were synthesized by using 1-octadecanol (>99%), 1-dodecanoic acid (>99%), 1-tetradecanoic acid (99–100%), 1-hexadecanoic acid (>99%), 1-octadecanoic acid (>98.5%) and 1-eicosanoic acid (>99%) from Sigma-Aldrich according to the published literature procedure The spectra of the synthesized high-chain esters were recorded on Perkin Elmer FT-IR Spectrum 100 spectrometer between 4000 and 600 Perkin Elmer Jade DSC was used for the calorimeter analyses of the introduced five organic PCMs. All DSC thermal analyses were conducted at 2 The DSC analyses were performed according to the ASTM standard test methods with designation numbers E 792-06 and E 1269-11, explaining the determination of enthalpies of fusion freezing, and specific heat of liquids and solids, respectively Perkin Elmer STA-6000 was used for determination of the thermo-gravimetric decomposition of the organic PCMs with temperature, including the decomposition character, onset and 5% weight loss temperatures of the materials. The analyses were carried out under inert nitrogen atmosphere at 20 The analyses were conducted according to the general principles given in BS EN ISO 11358:1997 Bio-Rad MJ Mini DNA thermal cycler was used to provide automated heating and cooling cycles in order to observe the thermal performance and reliability of the organic PCMs. Each PCM was cycled 1000 times in a temperature interval of 25 Instead of using the commonly known procedure of Fischer's esterification in the presence of acid catalyst, the presented five high-chain fatty acid esters of 1-octadecanol were synthesized under vacuum at approximately 4 The FT-IR spectra and DSC analyses show that the final products are pure and free of unreacted alcohol or fatty acid impurities, i.e. successive crystallization with acetone and ether is effective in removing unreacted impurities. The carbonyl stretching vibration of acyclic saturated esters, which is located at 1730–1750 The phase change characteristics of the reported high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols and also high-chain dicarboxylic acid diesters of 1-tetradecanol in literature are uniform with single and sharp phase change at constant temperatures The high-chain fatty acid esters of stearyl alcohol undergo phase change between 42 In addition to the single and sharp phase change characteristics, negligible supercooling tendency between melting and freezing temperatures is also important to provide appropriate heat transfer in thermal applications. Otherwise, the thermal response of a storage unit would not be effective to ensure proper heat transfer cycle. It has been stated in literature that supercooling degree more than a few degrees effects the heat extraction from the store, and 5–10 The temperature differences between melting and freezing onsets of the presented fatty acid esters of 1-octadecanol are less than 1.5 Besides the insignificant supercooling degree, the investigated organic PCMs have promising phase change enthalpy values. The phase change enthalpy of each organic PCM is higher than 200 Researches on thermal energy storage by using PCMs are mostly focused on latent heat values and phase change temperatures of the materials. However, the heat absorbed by temperature change in the form of sensible heat has also contribution to the total stored heat. Even if the amount of latent heat stored during the phase change is much higher than the amount stored in the form of specific heat, specific heat capacity and its change by temperature are also important for engineering design calculations. In this sense, the specific heat is presented as a function of temperature in both solid and liquid phases in A suitable PCM must preserve its thermal properties after extended thermal cycles. It is crucial for efficiency calculation of thermal energy storage units in engineering designs since it defines the effective utility time period of such thermal systems. Therefore, thermal reliability should be determined before introducing new materials to literature as novel PCMs. The introduced materials preserve their thermal properties after 1000 phase change cycles. They show insignificant changes in phase change temperatures and enthalpies which are less than 1%. The overlapped heat flow graphs show that their thermal response characteristics are not affected. The aged samples after 1000 thermal cycles still exhibit one sharp phase change curve at specific onset temperatures like the original materials. In like manner, the presented thermal reliability data prove that these materials are also chemically stable and do not undergo any degradation or phase segregation after extended thermal cycling. The percentage changes in the thermal properties are given in The overlapped heat flow graphs of 18–12 and 18–18 high-chain fatty acid esters show that the same thermal behavior is observed between original and aged samples in The thermal endurance limit of materials describes the extent that they can withstand an exothermic encapsulation and clarifies the highest temperature at which a material preserves its structure. Therefore, the 5% weight loss and onset decomposition temperatures are important in selecting a proper encapsulation process and application area to get the highest benefit from the PCM. The 5% weight loss and onset decomposition temperatures of all presented high-chain fatty acid esters of 1-octadecanol (stearyl alcohol) are above 250 The thermal characteristics and properties of materials are closely linked with their chemical structures. Different (fatty acid–alcohol) combinations directly affect the thermal data and thermal response of fatty acid esters by changing the carbon chain length and position of the ester bond on the chain ( As presented in The regularly increasing path of melting temperatures provides simple correlation development for all three alcohol groups with low standard error values. The developed correlations can be further used for estimating both melting and freezing temperatures since the high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols show insignificant supercooling tendency. The linear correlations between phase change temperatures ( 1-Tetradecanol (with even and odd carbon number): 1-Tetradecanol (with even carbon number): 1-Hexadecanol (with even carbon number): 1-Octadecanol (with even carbon number): Besides the stated phase change temperature correlations, the similarities of each distribution or associations between the homologous series with irregular enthalpy changes were described according to the non-parametric tests in order to find out whether a particular set of enthalpy data follow any specific statistical distribution. The Chi-squared distribution tests (χ According to the calculated likeness of the sole distribution of enthalpy values and similarities in the rankings of the ester groups, a proper factor has been described to smooth the disorder in 1-Tetradecanol (with even and odd carbon number): y ( 1-Tetradecanol (with even carbon number): y ( 1-Hexadecanol (with even carbon number): y ( 1-Octadecanol (with even carbon number): y ( It is intended with the presented mathematical correlations of high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols to guide researchers in estimating the thermal properties for proper PCM selection. They provide accurate estimation of phase change temperature and enthalpy values for future researches on utilization of these esters in thermal energy storage. According to the presented data in literature Their phase change temperature interval and high latent heat capacity make them suitable candidates for low-temperature thermal applications like solar units and devices, active storage systems used for shifting the electricity consumption to off-peak periods and passive storage systems containing PCMs in building components. The increase in energy demand and eventually increasing energy costs rise the production and operation costs of every item. Therefore, shifting the energy production from primary energy to renewable energy sources and enhancing the efficiency of energy producing and consuming units might help to reduce the production costs and total energy demand. A great portion of the produced energy is demanded for heating and cooling applications in which “thermal energy storage” units might help to lower the installed power and energy consumption. However, new PCMs with good thermal reliability and high thermal energy storage capacity are still needed in order to provide proper materials for different thermal applications. The introduced high-chain fatty acid esters of 1-octadecanol (stearyl alcohol) offer suitable thermal properties which are required for thermal applications. The melting temperatures of the high-chain fatty acid esters vary between 42 Additionally, several mathematical correlations have been presented in order to help researchers estimate the phase change temperature and enthalpy of higher esters to be further used in different thermal applications. In this way, the course of changes in thermal properties have also been associated with the changes in (alcohol–fatty acid) combinations to understand the influence of chemical structure changes on thermal characteristics. In conclusion, it can be stated that the high-chain fatty acid esters of higher alcohols are suitable PCMs for low temperature thermal applications with their non-toxic, non-corrosive nature and stable thermal behavior. The author thanks to the Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Arts and Sciences,