Cone mill is commonly used for the milling of wet and dry agglomerates in the pharmaceutical industry as it is capable of producing milled granules with desired size characteristics. The aim of this study was to evaluate the various cone mill process parameters in terms of milling rate and energy consumption for the comminution of roller compacted flakes. A placebo formulation containing microcrystalline cellulose, lactose and magnesium stearate was used to evaluate the milling performance. Results of this study showed that higher milling rate was obtained with the combination of higher impeller speed, teethed round sidearm impeller and grater screen surface profile. Either one of the later two parameters when present in any mill setting was found to be capable of shortening the residence time of flakes inside the milling chamber, thus resulting in a higher milling rate. On the other hand, selection of appropriate screen surface profile and impeller speed was very important at lowering the effective specific energy consumption during milling. Grater screen surface profile and impeller speed between 2000 and 2400rpm were found to act synergistically as the best combination for an energy sparing process. Impeller sidearm shape was found to have no significant effect on energy consumption.Size reduction is an important unit operation in pharmaceutical granulation process to produce granules of suitable size, size distribution and amount of fines which may affect subsequent operations such as flow and compaction, and in turn, content uniformity and dissolution characteristics of final dosage form. In particular, the milling step is even more crucial in dry granulation process due to relatively poorer binder distribution in roller compacted granules compared to wet or spray dried granules ( In a previous study, controlled comminution of roller compacted flakes was achieved by investigating various cone mill process parameters aimed at minimizing fines ( Energy consumption during milling of flakes depends on the mill type and process parameters such as impeller speed, impeller type, screen type and screen aperture size. Mechanical characteristics of flakes such as hardness and thickness will also have their effects. The improper selection of equipment and milling parameters may lead to undesirable changes in the milled material including softening and melting of low melting point materials, polymorphic transformation, increased rate of drug degradation and the build-up of static charges due to the use of excessive mill energy ( An ideal milling condition should also enable a high milling rate to produce granules of the desirable quality by careful selection of milling parameters. Higher milling rate will correspond with shorter residence time of flakes inside the milling chamber and resultant granules are quickly transverse through the screen as appropriately sized granules. In contrast, lower milling rate prolonged residence of material inside the mill and tended to reduce flakes into smaller sized granules or fines due to increased time of attrition. Moreover, prolonged residence time may cause temperature rise inside the milling chamber with possible consequence of degradation of the drug or change in the polymorphic form. Hammer mills commonly used to breakdown the flakes tend to produce granules with wider size distribution alongside causing a dusty process. Thus, the more versatile, precise and economical process of cone milling of flakes was the subject of investigation in this study. Much reported research work on the milling of wet and dry masses in wet granulation process had been on the effects of milling on granule characteristics. However, by comparison, relatively little research work had been undertaken on the comminution of roller compacted flakes. Commercially available α-lactose monohydrate (Pharmatose Lactose, MCC and MgSt were blended in the final weight ratio of 49.5:49.5:1, respectively, in a double cone blender (AR 400, Erweka, Germany) rotated at 40 The powder blend was roller compacted (Pharmapaktor Flakes were cone milled (Comil A gap between impeller and screen was maintained by inserting a spacer bushing at the base between them. The gap or clearance prevented metal-metal friction and avoided metal contaminants entering the product ( The milling rate of flakes in the cone mill was determined by using a weighing balance (PG 8000-S, Mettler Toledo, USA) connected to a computer through the USB-232 port. Granules after milling were collected by a stainless steel cylinder placed on the weighing balance. The flow of the milled granules into the cylinder was guided by a soft plastic chute. Dust escape was also prevented by the chute and milled granules fall freely into collecting cylinder. The cumulative weight of the milled granules was recorded at every second by implementing an algorithm developed under MATLAB software (R2007a, The MathWorks, MA, USA). Milling rate of the flakes was calculated by Eq. The energy consumption levels by the cone mill for the comminution of roller compacted flakes using different conditions were measured by an energy meter (Mk6 Genius, EDMI, Australia). The energy meter was clamped on the single phase wires supplying power to the cone mill. The voltage (V), current (A), active power (W), reactive power (W), active electric energy (Wh), phase angle ( Each batch of milled granules was collected and characterized for size using a nest of sieves of aperture sizes in √2 progression from 180 to 2000 In granule size determination, granules of particle size less than 180  Empty chamber or “no-load” power requirement of cone mill was increased (  The effect of impeller type on  It is imperative to comparatively evaluate the performance of different mill settings in terms of their milling efficiency and energy usage as a particular mill setting of good performance based on milling rate might not be for This study demonstrated the evaluation of cone milling process parameters for the comminution of roller compacted flakes, in terms of milling rate and energy consumption. From this study, it appeared that milling rate was influenced by all the parameters studied, i.e. impeller type, screen type and impeller speed. On the other hand, effective specific energy was mainly influenced by screen type and impeller speed. Grater screen and impeller speed around 2000–2400 The authors would like to acknowledge funding support from