An industrial medium, Corn Steep Liquor Powder Dextrose (CSD medium) was developed for constitutive expression of recombinant β-mananase by Pichia pastoris. The β-mananase activity (513U/mL) with CSD medium was 1.64- and 2.5-fold higher than with YPD and BSM in shaken flasks. The β-mananase productivity with CSD medium was 61.0U/mLh, which was 1.7- and 2.5-fold higher than with YPD and BSM in a 5-L fermenter based on a novel fed-batch strategy combining the real-time exponential feed mode with the DO-stat feed mode. The β-mananase activity, dry cell weight and the recombinant enzyme reached up to 5132U/mL, 110.0g/L and 4.50g/L after 50h cultivation in a 50-L fermenter. The high efficient expression of recombinant β-mananase by P. pastoris indicated that CSD medium and the novel fed-batch strategy have great potential for the production of recombinant β-mananase in industrial fermentation.Mannans, widely distributed in wood, tubers, plant seeds, beans and cell walls of certain marine algae ( The methylotrophic yeast In In our previous study, a strain of recombinant mannan endo-1,4-β-mannosidase In our previous study, the recombinant mannan endo-1,4-β-mannosidase The nitrogen contents of various nitrogen sources were determined using Kjeldahl method ( To determine the optimal nitrogen source, 50 Effects of inoculum volume, culture pH and glucose concentration on β-mannanase production and cell growth were studied in shaken flasks using Corn Steep Liquor Powder Dextrose medium (CSD medium). To determine the effect of inoculum volume on β-mannanase production and cell growth, 0.5, 2.5 or 5 To determine the effect of culture pH on β-mannanase production and cell growth, 5 To determine the effect of the glucose concentration on β-mannanase production and cell growth, 5 The supernatant was sampled every 12 The fed-batch fermentation in a 5-L fermenter (KF-5 l, koBIO Tech. Co., Ltd, Korea) was implemented with 1.2 L initial medium and 2.0 L feeding volume using YPD medium (20 The fed-batch cultivation in a 50-L fermenter (B. Braun BIOSTAT C plus) was implemented with 18 Dry cell weight (WCW) was determined by centrifugation (Centrifuge AG 22331, Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany) at 10,000 The amount of recombinant mannan endo-1,4-β-mannosidase (Man26A) was estimated by using the correlation between the β-mannanase activity (U) and the protein mass (mg): 1 Mannan endo-1,4-β-mannosidase activity was determined using the 3,5-dinitrosalicylic acid (DNS) method as described in our previous study ( Five milliliters of culture was centrifuged at 10,000 Contents of metal and non-metallic elements in corn steep liquor powder were determined using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP OES) according to the method of ( To determine the optimal industrial medium for the high-level expression of recombinant β-mananase by To facilitate the study of fed-batch fermentation, the effects of inoculum, glucose concentration and pH value on the expression of recombinant β-mananase were investigated in shaken flasks. The results showed that inoculum volume had no significant effect on β-mananase production and final cell concentration. However, 10% inoculum made cell enter into the logarithmic growth phase earlier. Thus, 10% inoculum was taken up in the following fed-batch fermentation. 60 To further investigate the expression of recombinant β-mananase by According to the above analysis, CSD medium (20 Based on the above findings, a novel fed-batch control strategy combining the real-time exponential feed mode and DO-stat feed mode was adopted to ensure the proper glucose concentration and DO level during the fed-batch process in a 5-L fermenter. As shown in The novel fed-batch strategy developed in a 5-L fermenter was also adopted in a 50-L scale fed-batch fermentation with optimizing the control of dissolved oxygen level. Compared with the 5-L fermenter, a higher dissolved oxygen level could be maintained in the 50-L fermenter which could provide higher stirring speeds, greater ventilation and higher tank pressure. Thus, during the fed-batch cultivation in the 50-L fermenter, DO level was maintained above 40%. Based on this fed-batch strategy, the highest biomass was 110.0 To further evaluate CSD medium, fed-batch cultivation of the recombinant The total cost of large-scale industrial fermentation includes capital cost, carbon source, nitrogen source, other medium source, power, steam, aseptic air, labor, maintenance, etc. The feedstocks accounted for about 30% of the total production cost ( A novel industrial medium (CSD medium) was developed for the fed-batch cultivation of This work was funded by the