Research into the application of microwave irradiation in the comminution of ores has made great progress in recent years, creating a demand to understand the effects of this technique on downstream processes, especially flotation. The present work investigated the floatability of untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite samples using potassium amyl xanthate and sodium oleate as collectors. The effects of the exposure time on each mineral’s recovery at different concentrations, pH and particle sizes were studied through microflotation, and the adsorption of the collectors was analyzed by electrophoretic zeta potential measurements. Microwave irradiation led to the decrease in the floatability of chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite in the presence of xanthate, at the pH values investigated, whereas no significant change was observed for pentlandite. The flotation of the microwave-treated minerals required greater sodium oleate concentration. The treated and non-treated pentlandite and pyrrhotite samples did not float at pH 10. Although the treated chalcopyrite and pentlandite displayed low recoveries at all pH values, the treated pyrrhotite displayed high floatability at acidic and neutral pH. The recovery of the microwave-treated sulphide minerals was more affected by the particle size in the tests with potassium amyl xanthate than with sodium oleate. The overall results presented by this work indicate potential conditions to achieve selectivity between the microwave-treated chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite.The application of microwave irradiation as an assisted grinding technique has shown great potential in reducing the energy required in comminution and improving the liberation of different types of ores Flotation exploits differences in surface properties of the minerals to achieve selectivity. Such differences can be natural or, in most cases, induced by using collectors to render a specific mineral’s surface hydrophobic Microwave irradiation promotes the oxidation of sulphide minerals during exposure Recent surface characterization studies have shown that microwave treatment affects the surface properties of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite differently This work details the effect of microwave irradiation on the floatability of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite in the presence of a sulphide and a non-sulphide collector. The influences of collector concentration, pH, Eh and particle size are addressed. The mineral samples were purchased from Excalibur Mineral Company (U.S.A.) (pentlandite and pyrrhotite – Worthington Mine, Canada) and from Ward’s Natural Science (U.S.A.) (chalcopyrite – Durango, Mexico). The samples consisted of crystal agglomerates ranging from 1 to 15 cm. Dry-crushing, pulverizing and sieving (following the ASTM The collectors investigated in this study were analytical grade sodium oleate (S-352, Fischer Scientific, U.S.A.) and potassium amyl xanthate (KAX 51, Prospec Chemicals, Canada), which required further purification. This reagent was purified using the method proposed by Rao The chemical composition of the untreated chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite samples was determined using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) ( Microwave treatment was conducted in a 3.0 kW, 2.45 GHz Amana RC30 multimodal microwave (Amana, U.S.A.). Each mineral had at least three replicates (20 g each) treated for each exposure time (5, 10 and 20 s). Microwave-transparent alumina crucibles were used as containers and were placed at the center of the cavity (215 mm × 330 mm × 380 mm) for all trials. The temperature was measured after exposure, using a HH23 Omega thermocouple (Omega, U.S.A.) and the sample weighed. Microflotation tests were performed in a modified Hallimond tube The adsorption of potassium amyl xanthate and sodium oleate and its effect on the minerals’ surface potential (zeta potential) were investigated by Electrophoretic Light Scattering (ELS) measurements using a NanoBrook 90Plus Zeta Particle Size Analyzer (Brookhaven Instruments, U.S.A.). To conduct the experiments, background electrolyte solutions (1 × 10 The collector’s dosage used in the ELS tests were determined such that the adsorption density (mass of reagent per available surface area, g/m The elemental analysis for the minerals ( The effect of KAX 51 concentration on the floatability of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite (treated and untreated) is shown in The effect of the pH on the floatability of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite is presented in The microflotation of the untreated and treated pentlandite samples ( The results indicated that the pyrrhotite recovery (treated and untreated) was not significantly influenced by the change in pH. However, the treatment led to a decrease in floatability with an increase in exposure time. The pyrrhotite samples exhibited a mixed potential three times larger at pH 4 than at pH 7 and 10, which is consistent with previous measurements conducted for magnetic pyrrhotite The effect of the irradiation on the floatability of the chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite depended on the particle size of these minerals, as displayed in The zeta potential of the untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite in the presence and in the absence of KAX 51 is shown in The zeta potential of pentlandite ( As presented in recent investigations The behavior of the untreated chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite in the microflotation with KAX 51 agreed with previous observations The decrease in the floatability of the chalcopyrite upon irradiation contrasts to a higher adsorption of KAX 51, suggesting that the oxidation layer formed after the treatment Besides the presence of oxidized patches or non-uniform oxidized layer, the rate of degradation of the oxide sites (dependent on the specific surface area, the surface porosity and the oxidation depth) should be considered when understanding the decreased recovery of the irradiated chalcopyrite. As proposed in The floatability of the irradiated pyrrhotite appears to be influenced by a combination of a patchy oxidized surface and a decreased adsorption for pH 7 and 10. Although the sulphide sites are present on the surface of the mineral after treatment, alike chalcopyrite, the oxidation process appears to be more aggressive for pyrrhotite The exposure to microwave radiation did not impact the pentlandite recovery in flotation, which contrasts to the chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite results. Among the three minerals, pentlandite displays a much higher specific surface area (which doubled after irradiation) and porosity and the thickest oxidation layer While the floatability of untreated chalcopyrite is not influenced by the particle size, the floatability of pentlandite and pyrrhotite are affected: pentlandite floats more as finer particles and pyrrhotite is better recovered at coarser size fractions. Although the particle size has been previously shown to have an effect on the flotation kinetics of chalcopyrite, similar recovery can be achieved for coarse and fine particles given enough time The irradiation led to an overall decrease in the floatability of the minerals at different particle sizes: chalcopyrite presented a significant drop in recovery for the size fraction −75 + 38 µm, whereas pentlandite and pyrrhotite showed around 50% reduction in floatability for the coarser size fractions (−212 + 75 µm and −425 + 212 µm). As the maximum temperature of chalcopyrite was observed at coarser particle sizes, in agreement with previous studies The effect of particle size on the bulk temperature of microwave-treated granular materials such as copper-nickel ores and its common sulphide minerals ( The floatability of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite as a function of sodium oleate (S-352) concentration is presented in The floatability of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite was affected by the change in pH, as shown in A more detailed investigation on the behavior of the untreated and the microwave-treated chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite, in the pH range between 7 and 10, is shown in The effect of particle size on the floatability of untreated and microwave-treated chalcopyrite, pyrrhotite and pentlandite with sodium oleate S-352 is shown in The difference in the zeta potential of the untreated and the irradiated chalcopyrite samples displayed a maximum net value for the samples treated for 5 s ( The zeta potential for the untreated and microwave-treated pentlandite, with and without the presence of sodium oleate, is shown in The zeta potential curves for pyrrhotite indicate adsorption of sodium oleate onto the surface of all the samples, untreated and microwave-irradiated. The untreated ( The flotation performance of sulphides with sodium oleate or other carboxyl collectors has not been extensively studied The exposure to microwave radiation and, consequently, the extent of the oxidation clearly influenced the concentrations required to float chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite as well as the flotation performance at different pH conditions. The more oxidized chalcopyrite surface lost its natural floatability with exposure times longer than 5 s The lower recovery of the untreated pyrrhotite and pentlandite at higher pH suggests the oxidation layers and their stability could have a detrimental effect on the mineral’s recovery. The most abundant species found in the oxidation layers (iron oxides and oxyhydroxides) also showed a lower in the floatability at alkaline pH conditions. This was explained by the greater stability of the ferric hydroxides The low recovery displayed by irradiated pyrrhotite and pentlandite at alkaline pH might be due to the fact that these minerals already presented a more developed oxidized layer before treatment as opposed to chalcopyrite, therefore behaving similarly to the untreated samples, according to the mechanism previously proposed. The greater effect of microwave irradiation on the floatability of chalcopyrite and pentlandite in comparison with pyrrhotite could be interpreted in terms of the phases formed onto the surface of the minerals upon treatment. Although pentlandite is oxidized more easily than chalcopyrite, more alike pyrrhotite, it presented more abundant iron oxyhydroxides/hydroxides sites, behaving similarly to chalcopyrite. The pyrrhotite samples were the most oxidized among the minerals and displayed a predominance of iron oxides upon irradiation The results on the effect of particle size on the floatability of the microwave-treated chalcopyrite and pentlandite indicate that this variable has no significant influence on the recovery of the microwave-treated minerals and, although pyrrhotite displayed a greater drop in the floatability for the coarser particles, more detailed research should be conducted to understand the effect of particle size on the recovery of microwave-treated sulphides with sodium oleate. The results of the present work indicate that the floatabilities of chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite are affected differently by microwave irradiation, either in a system with potassium amyl xanthate (KAX 51) or with sodium oleate (S-352). The formation of non-uniform oxidation or patched layers after treatment was suggested to result in a decreased recovery of chalcopyrite and pyrrhotite with KAX 51, even with a greater adsorption, whereas the surface of pentlandite was already naturally oxidized due to its high specific surface area and porosity, leading to insignificant change in its recovery after the treatment. The overall results provided by this work indicates that the treatment can be beneficial to sulphide flotation as the chalcopyrite recovery can be restored by increasing the collector dosage, the floatability of the pentlandite samples is not remarkably affected by the treatment and the recovery of pyrrhotite is lower after irradiation, even after raising the collector concentration. The floatability of chalcopyrite with sodium oleate (S-352) was found to greatly decrease after microwave irradiation, whereas pyrrhotite and pentlandite showed more limited reductions. As the treated chalcopyrite and pentlandite required higher dosages than pyrrhotite to be floated, the results demonstrated that the oxidation process promoted by the treatment might be used to depress the valuable chalcopyrite and pentlandite and float pyrrhotite with the use of sodium oleate. These differences in floatability are suggested to depend upon the relative amount of oxides or oxyhydroxides/hydroxides sites at the surface of the treated minerals, on the oxidation of Fe As the research on the application of microwave irradiation in mineral processing advances, it becomes essential to better understand how the treated minerals might behave in downstream processes. By investigating the floatability of microwave-treated chalcopyrite, pentlandite and pyrrhotite, the minerals which could be present in Cu-Ni sulphide ores, this study was able to provide a glimpse of how microwave treatment could affect flotation. These results might be used as a preliminary guide to adapt the traditional sulphide flotation circuits, to design new flotation systems with an oxide collector or even a process with mixed collectors. The authors are grateful for the financial support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), Vale Base Metals, Teck Resources Ltd., Barrick Gold Corp., COREM, SGS Canada Inc., Shell Canada, Flottec and XPS Consulting & Testwork Services, under the Collaborative Research and Development Grants Program (CRDPJ 445682-12). The authors would also like to thank the financial support from the Brazilian National Council for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq, 249940/2013-2).