The 3D Unified Pipe-Network Method (UPM) is applied to simulate the acidizing process in fractured carbonate rock. Fractures and porous media are represented by their equivalent connected fracture pipes and matrix pipes, respectively. The UPM combined with a two-scale continuum model is a numerical approach to wormhole development. Benchmark tests are attempted against commercial software and a sensitivity analysis is carried out with respect to the rock porosity heterogeneity magnitude and injection rates. The influences of the geometric properties and permeability of a fracture on wormhole propagation and the amount of reaction fluid per pore volume required to reach a breakthrough (PVBT) are analysed.Stimulation methods, such as acid fracturing and matrix acidizing, are commonly employed to decrease the damage caused by invading fluids in the process of drilling, completion and production The physical properties of specific carbonate rocks should be taken into consideration in the matrix acidizing process. Carbonate rocks are characterized by their porous media, which contain not only matrices but also vugs and fractures with different geometries Fractures in the formation are of particular interest in the acidizing process since they have relatively higher conductivities than the rock matrix. Acid flow will be redirected when approaching fractures. During this redirection, ramified wormholes are likely to be produced in the presence of a random distribution of fractures. The leak-off phenomenon is another issue to be addressed for a fractured media. It is possible for large volumes of acid to enter a matrix via fluid flow and diffusion along fractures, leading to the reduction of the amount of acid in the dominant direction, and thus decreasing the acid penetration distance. The acidizing mechanism is also influenced by both fractures and vugs. The finial acidizing effect largely depends on how well the acid dissolves the fractures and vugs. In addition, connected fractures filling with acid fluid redistribute the stress fields around the wellbore, which may lead to wellbore instability. Therefore, it can be said that optimised acidizing designs cannot be achieved without considering the fractures in a rock matrix. Numerous experiments and theoretical studies have been carried out for the matrix acidizing designs. Of these studies, linear core flooding experiments are classic and very effective for investigating wormhole efficiency as these experiments consider various factors, including acid properties, injection rates, rock properties, reaction kinetics, pressure, temperature and generated gaseous phases Carbonated acidizing models are generally established on the basis of experimental findings. These models include the capillary tube approach, the transition pore theory, and the network model, are classified and their strengths and weaknesses are specified in the details of Fredd and Miller Three-dimensional acid-fracture interaction models are mainly adopted in the process of acid fracturing design In the present study, the 3D Unified pipe-network method (3D UPM) is introduced to simulate the process of wormhole formation in the framework of a 3D two-scale continuum model. The merit of the combination of finite element and finite volume-based methods lies in its convenience for coupling porous rock matrices and discrete fracture networks in pipe-network systems In the following context, the proposed 3D two-scale continuum (TSC) model is briefly introduced, and the fluid flow and mass transportation equations for fractures are described. The discrete forms of the model equations are established based on the unified pipe-network method, and the matrix-fracture coupling process is specified in detail. The verification of the proposed numerical method is then implemented. The proposed method is first benchmarked by the commercial software COMSOL Multiphysics 5.2 The 3D two-scale continuum model is currently used to simulate the transport and reaction of acidic fluids, which are described by the interaction between the Darcy scale and pore scale fluid flows in carbonate rock. Only a brief introduction of the model is presented here. A detailed formulation is seen in A single-phase linear flow is assumed in the matrix (porous media). Darcy’s law can be employed to describe the flow. Combined with the continuity equation, Darcy’s law can be written as In the 3D reactive transport model, the convection-diffusion-reaction equation is used to track the concentration of acid, such that A first order irreversible reaction is considered for the reaction kinetics of HCl. This kinetics equation can be written as In view of the balance between the dissolution of solids and the consumption of the acid, the porosity evolution equation was formulated by The initial and boundary conditions can be described as As the acid is injected from the inlet boundary, the porous media is dissolved and the porosity inside develops with time. The changes in the local pore-scale properties include those of its permeability, pore radius and interfacial surface area. This structure-property relationship can be described by the modified Carman-Kozeny correlation as presented by the following pore-scale equations: The relation between the local mass-transfer coefficient The aperture of the fracture in our model is generally assumed to be small and to vary smoothly. The two dimensional and laminar flows of the incompressible acid fluid in the fractures are described by the cubic law For the acid transport within the fracture, the reaction effect is not considered. Therefore, the chemical transport equation can be written as follows. In the pipe-network framework, the 3D porous media is mathematically reconstructed using pipes connected as tetrahedrons. The pressures and concentrations within each tetrahedral element, as shown in These four nodes control volumes in each tetrahedron and are generated via the Voronoi diagram. To be more specific, the control volume at each node is constructed by the pipes connected to the node and the faces perpendicular to their corresponding pipes. For instance, the control volume for node The acid fluid flow in each node obeys the nodal law. The mass conservation condition can be represented by the nodal law for the saturated incompressible fluid flow. Therefore, for each node Similarly, the mass transport equation in a 3D porous media can be discretised in the same form as the aforementioned fluid flow equation. The amount of substance transferred from one node to an adjacent one can be equivalent to the transport of acid in the pipe between these two nodes. In pipe The reaction can be discretised as The fractures in a 3D porous media are assumed to be 2D elliptical discs for simplicity. Within a tetrahedron mesh framework, fracture discs are represented by triangular prisms with thicknesses similar to the equivalent fracture hydraulic aperture. Based on the cubic law, the intrinsic fracture permeability Similarly, the equivalent diffusion coefficient In a 3D fractured porous media, fractures are considered as within a 2D plane. Both matrices and fractures can be reconstructed by 1D flow pipes. In addition, the interface pipes are generated at the fracture-matrix interface where fracture pipes and matrix pipes merge together Similarly, the mass transportation for all nodes can be written as The backward Euler scheme as well as the Newton-Raphson iteration method are used for the above two governing equations to solve the overall equations. The current UPM-based fluid flow and transport method is verified against the commercial software COMSOL. The dissolution process of a simple cuboid model with a fluid injection from one side is simulated to derive the acid fluid flow, mass transportation and acid-rock interactions. A parametric study is implemented with regard to the parameters of the acid injection rate and the magnitude of the initial heterogeneity of the porosity in a porous media. The parameters and dimensionless values used in these two sets of simulations are listed in A cuboid shaped 3D porous media with dimensions of 1.4 cm × 1.4 cm × 3.50 cm, as shown in  It should be mentioned that the acid-rock reactions and dissolutions are not considered in this model verification, but will be considered in the following sensitivity analysis. In this sensitivity study, the process of the chemical effects is modelled. The concept of an acid breakthrough is introduced to describe the permeability (or pressure drop) evolution by updating the concentration and porosity. Acid breakthrough is defined as the point when the overall pressure drop is decreased by a factor of 100 The injection rate, a significant engineering parameter in the field acidizing treatment, is usually determined in the matrix acidizing physical test. The classic experiments carried out by Fredd and Fogler  The rock heterogeneities, such as the inhomogeneous distribution of porosity, permeability and rock mineral components, have significant effects on the acidizing process. In the present study, the wormhole morphology is modelled by varying the porosity heterogeneity magnitude The effect of fracture properties, including the fracture geometry and permeability, are then investigated. An elliptical flat fracture is contrived and discretised with unstructured triangular elements and is then embedded into the 3D domain, which is identical to that of the above verification simulation. An adaptive conforming technique is employed to discretise the matrix with unstructured tetrahedral elements. The mesh quality is evaluated. The basic fracture parameters in simulation are listed in In the current simulation, fracture geometry is varied by changing the length of the minor axis of the elliptical fracture The results from the simulation with the aforementioned fractures are given in The influence of the inclination angle The fracture permeability is controlled by the fracture aperture based on the classic cubic law. In this simulation, In the case of fractures with large apertures, as shown in In this study, a 3D matrix acidizing process is simulated using the unified pipe-network method combined with the two-scale continuum model. The coupling of fluid flow, mass transportation and acid-rock reactions is incorporated into UPM for the first time. The whole set of the model is verified by COMSOL and a sensitivity analysis that considered the injection rate and porosity heterogeneity magnitude, which demonstrates the reliability of the proposed numerical method for acidizing modelling. Unstructured tetrahedral elements combined with the adaptive conforming mesh method enable fractures with arbitrary geometric properties to be embedded into a 3D domain with high mesh quality. Fluid flow and mass transport models are also integrated into the fracture system. Thus, the acidizing processes in fractured porous media are unprecedentedly and effectively simulated. The influences of fracture geometry and the inclination angle between the normal direction of fracture surface and the injection direction on acidizing effects is analysed. For an elliptical fracture, more and longer wormhole branches are generated before the acid reaches the fracture, with higher values of It is worth mentioning that the limitations of the current model lie in the assumptions of single-phase acid fluid flows in the domain and the constant temperature during the whole acidizing process. It is understood that multiphase flow is involved and controlled by pressure, injection conditions and temperature in practical scenarios. In addition, the influence of a fracture network on acidizing effects is much more complicated than the simplified description of the current numerical study. The combined impact of fractures and vugs has not been taken into account to reflect the real physics of carbonate rock. Future works will be devoted to the improvement of the current model. Acid-rock reaction kinetics will be investigated using physical experiments to derive the relevant parameters for numerical simulations. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support from the Research Training Program (RTP) of the