TiO2 nanoparticles were synthesized via the laser pyrolysis of titanium tetrachloride-based gas-phase mixtures. In the obtained nanopowders, a mixture of anatase and rutile phases with mean particle size of about 14nm was identified. Using the thermal heated laser nanopowders, mechanically stable films were produced by immobilizing titania nanopowders on glass substrates (the doctor blading method followed by compression). The photocatalytic activity of the prepared films was tested by the degradation of 4-chlorophenol in an aqueous solution under UV-illumination. By referring to known commercial samples (Degussa P25) similarly prepared, higher photocatalytic efficiency was found for the laser-prepared samples.Titania is a very versatile material with attractive applications as pigment in paintings, in the production of electrochemistry electrodes, capacitors, solar cells, catalysis and photocatalysis. Current progress in the area of TiO Nanosized TiO In our previous studies we have successfully reported on the synthesis of anatase/rutile mixed nanopowders using the laser pyrolysis technique as a single-step reaction route The laser synthesis technique is based on the resonance between the emission of a CW CO Complementary Ar flows are employed for the confinement of reactant gases/nucleated particles towards the flow axis and for flushing the windows, respectively. The focused IR radiation was intersecting at right angles the reactant flows. The aggregation of the hot, freshly nucleated particles is rapidly stopped by the sudden cooling/freezing outside the reaction zone. TiO The obtained titanium oxide nanostructures were characterized by XRD, TEM and HRTEM. XRD patterns were recorded on a computer-controlled DRON DTAR UM2 diffractometer equipped with a graphite monochromatized Cu anode. Scherrer crystallite sizes and the relative amounts of anatase and rutile titania were evaluated from the TiO The S All electrochemical and photo-electrochemical measurements were performed with a commercial scanning electrochemical microscope (CH Instruments Model 990B) in a 3-electrodes setup. As working electrode a platinum microelectrode ( Nanopowder samples S X-ray powder diffraction analyses were performed to determine the crystallinity of the TiO From the diffractograms of In the inset of Low-magnification TEM micrographs for TiO  The associated SAED patterns (not presented here) confirm the results of XRD analysis showing that the titania nanoparticles are a mixture of anatase and rutile. The heat treatment of the samples prior the mixing of emulsion resulted in a significant change of color. This can be described as a change from dark grey to light white, which could be indicative for the removal of the contamination carbon (the unwanted carbon resulted from the synthesis procedure Using the scanning electrochemical microscopy and an amperometric approach, the photocatalytic activity of the prepared films was tested by the degradation of 4-chlorophenol in an aqueous solution under UV-illumination. The ongoing photo degradation process was monitored at the TiO According to previous studies on 4-chlorophenol photo degradation It seems obvious that the mean particle sizes of the laser samples is lower than the Degussa sample and that this difference could prevail on the photocatalytic activity of the analyzed nano titania samples. Recent results show the dependence of nanocrystalline TiO Using the laser pyrolysis technique, crystalline nanopowders with sharp diameter distributions, with mean sizes of about 14 Support of this research by the SCOPES IB7320-110854/1 JRP Project of the SNSF and by the NUCLEU PN-06360102/2006 Grant is gratefully acknowledged.