Froth stability plays a major role in determining the mineral grade and recovery in flotation operations, and it depends on the type and amount of both frother and suspended particles. Furthermore, there are other parameters such as quality of the process water which may affect the froth stability. In plant practice, the recycling of process water instead of using fresh water is increasingly being common. However, using recycled water normally leads to building up salts and surfactants in solution. Therefore, the effect of the process water chemistry on froth stability and metallurgical performance is important. In this study, the effect of water quality, including pH, and type and concentration of salts (CaCl2, AlCl3 and NaCl) on froth stability and its relationship with mineral particles zeta potential and slurry viscosity was studied. It was found that the forth stability is higher in the presence of multivalent metal ions. Addition of CaCl2 and AlCl3 considerably increased both froth stability and pulp viscosity. This may be due to bridging effect of polyvalent metal ions between the ore particles.Froth flotation is widely used in mineral processing. Froth flotation utilises differences in physicochemical surface properties of various minerals to achieve separation. Frothers are added to stabilise bubble formation in the pulp phase and to create a stable froth. The significance of froth stability in mineral flotation has been reviewed recently Froth structure and froth stability are known to play a major role in determining the valuable mineral grade and recovery in flotation process. Froth stability not only depends on the type and concentration of frother, but also on the amount and properties of the suspended particles In this study, the effect of salt with different ion valance (Al The ore used in this study was a zinc sulphide rich ore. The average head grade of the main elements in the ore is shown in The froth stability was measured using a previously developed laboratory sparged column as shown in The viscosity of ore slurries (flotation pulp) were measured using a Haake RotoVisco 1 viscometer with a cup and bob measuring system. Measurements were made at a strain rate of 40 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis was performed using a Kratos Axis-Ultra photoelectron spectrometer with a monochromatic AlKa X-ray source. The atomic concentration for each element was determined from survey spectra peak areas and their respective sensitivity factors. Fitting of individual, high resolution spectra were used to determine the chemical species of elements. XPS is one of the major techniques for surface analysis of minerals with the advantages of having good surface sensitivity, straightforward elemental and chemical state analysis and reliable quantification of the data The atomic percentage of surface species obtained from XPS (  For better understanding the observed pH dependency of the froth stability, the viscosity of ore slurry and also the zeta potential of the ore particles were also studies. Zeta potential indicates the degree of repulsion between adjacent, similarly charged particles in a suspension. Colloids with high zeta potential are electrically stable while colloids with low zeta potentials tend to aggregate, the latter can result in increased viscosity.  The maximum froth height ( The effect of metal ions on the froth stability is presented in Mining and mineral processing operations need substantial amounts of water to carry out their activities. However, many of these operations are located in places where either water is in short supply, or economic developments are putting water supplies under pressure. Many mining companies are forced to reduce fresh water consumption, increase using recycled and also low quality water (such as saline water, grey water and industrial effluents). The poor quality make up water have a significant impact on the quality of process water and ultimately, can have adverse effects on the performance of mineral beneficiation processes. The results of the present study indicate that in order to control the froth stability, the process pH and the amount of metal ions (due to the presence of salts) need to be carefully controlled. It was found that AlCl The conclusion of the current study is that the froth stability can be related to the slurry viscosity and ore particle aggregation. However, it would be difficult to correlate the current findings with those reported by other researchers using different methodology. For example with the results reported by Kurniawan et al.