A fault gouge sample, recovered from 389m depth of the Disaster Prevention Research Institute (DPRI) 500m bore hole of the Nojima fault, which triggered the 1995 M7.3 Kobe earthquake, was examined with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). We observed different types of amorphous material containing tiny flakes of crystalline phases. TEM-EDX analysis of the matrix indicates a pure smectite composition suggesting that matrix and crystalline flakes have the same composition. The detection of tiny crystalline flakes in the amorphous material may confirm previous assumption from the alteration of pseudotachylyte into smectite in fault rocks.The Nojima fault drilling project was conducted immediately after the 1995 Kobe earthquake. It was designed to study the properties and recovery processes of the Nojima Fault, which moved during the earthquake ( The alteration of pseudotachylyte into smectite is well documented in several TEM studies of meteorite impact glasses (e.g. The Nojima fault is a right-lateral active fault with a reverse component and runs along the northwestern margin of the Awaji Island ( The selected fault-gouge sample contains a yellow-brown and a dark gray gouge zone ( Microstructures were analyzed using a FEI Tecnai G2 F20 X-Twin transmission electron microscope (TEM/AEM) at GeoForschungsZentrum (GFZ) Potsdam equipped with a Gatan Tridiem energy filter, a Fishione high-angle annular dark field detector (HAADF), and an energy dispersive X-ray analyzer (EDX) to determine chemical composition. To avoid preparation-induced damage, the samples for TEM studies were prepared with a focused ion beam (FIB) device (FEI FIB200TEM) at GFZ (for more details see TEM imaging shows that parts of the ultra-fine fault gouge matrix are amorphous as indicated by TEM diffraction patterns, which are characterized by a broad diffuse scattering intensity ( TEM-EDX analysis of the amorphous material including crystalline flakes indicates a pure smectite composition ( Pseudotachylyte material found in a DPRI fault gouge (drill core) sample shows a glassy structure, non-crystalline diffraction patterns and pure smectite composition. In view of these characteristics, we suggest that the observed amorphous material is the result of frictional melting. Estimates of frictional heating from seismic faulting at a slip rate ~> The presence of tiny smectite flakes in the amorphous material may indicate the beginning of alteration from amorphous material to smectite. This confirms previous assumption that alteration of pseudotachylyte may form smectite layers in fault rocks. Our observations present the first microstructural evidence for a glass–smectite transformation in a fault gouge. Assuming frictional heating by fault motion ( We thank Manuela Dziggel for help with drafting figures, Stefan Gehrmann for sample preparation, and Anja Schreiber for TEM foil preparation using FIB technique. We are also thankful for the constructive review of Jafar Hadizadeh.