Automated, continuous ore sorting is a mature technology that has only been used to a limited extent in the hard rock mining industry. However, sorting has been applied in many industries ranging from food preparation and recycled scrap recovery, to diamond mining, industrial minerals, and precious metals processing. A major barrier to widespread implementation in hard rock mining is a knowledge gap: sorting equipment manufacturers have made modest footholds in the mining industry, while miners and plant operators are largely unaware of recent developments and the state-of-the-art technology. Most importantly, a widespread understanding of how ore sorters can be implemented and their significant economic impacts is lacking. The impacts of ore sorting on the economics and the process flow sheet of an existing semi-autogenous milling circuit of a US copper mine are discussed.The hard rock mining industry faces rising energy costs, falling ore grades, tightening environmental regulations, and shrinking access to resources. Compounded by global recession, the industry has seen mines close due to their inability to compete on a global scale. Largely in response to this trend, several new technologies have been developed. This work will evaluate one technology in particular: ore sorting. In typical hard rock mining operations, the ore that is collected for processing, the run-of-mine (ROM), contains both the metal values (ore) and waste rock (gangue). Depending on the metal being mined, and its specific mineralogy, grades of the ROM vary widely. Therefore, a majority of the ROM stream is material that has no economic value and is essentially an energy and resource sink, costing the producer money to process and eventually separate from the ore through physical or chemical means. Ore sorting is a class of technology that identifies those stones in a ROM stream that contain economically viable levels of ore for further processing and separates them from the gangue ( Introduced in the 1930s and 1940s, sorting technology first took root in mining applications with relatively simple sorting criteria, low throughput, and/or high value minerals and metals ( The manner in which the ore sorting is performed is largely dependent on the metal(s) and ore mineral(s) to be sorted. To date several different technologies have been investigated, including X-ray fluorescence, X-ray transmission, radiometric sorting, and optical sorting ( The economic viability of hard rock sorting is currently limited to discrete applications, but as sorter capacity increases, the viability in additional operations increases. Coal operations were one of the earliest adopters for DE-XRT sorting because it could be used to de-stone coal (to reduce ash content and create streams with different heating values) and to desulfurize coal (by identifying and rejecting pyrite inclusions). Therefore, sorting as applied to the coal industry is a powerful example of how throughput has increased nearly ten-fold over the past decade ( The goal of ore sorting technology is to differentiate between ore and waste. Sorting is an age-old practice, with documented examples of hand-picking in the medieval workshops of alchemists ( For many hard rock applications, including the ones presented here, X-rays provide the necessary interaction with the minerals of interest. X-ray transmission (XRT), which analyzes the energy of X-rays that transmit through a sample, is particularly useful in sorting stones ( Because DE-XRT sorters examine the full contents of the individual stones, the ROM material does not need to be exceptionally dry or clean, and no particular orientation is required in order for the sensor to detect the ore. Much like the X-ray scanners at airport security checkpoints, DE-XRT instruments see through the stones being examined. Unlike many surface techniques used in the industry ( Identifying the appropriate point in a process to implement ore sorters is critical. Because they reject waste, sorters should be installed as early in the flow sheet as possible so as to minimize the energy, reagents, and capacity investments in gangue that should otherwise be eliminated from the circuit. Current DE-XRT sorters can process a maximum size on the order of 200 Ore sorting affects nearly every point in the mineral processing flow sheet. At the front end, because sorting allows a mine to either increase throughput at the same cost per ton or reduce costs while maintaining production rates ( To bring ore sorting technology to the hard rock mining industry as quickly as possible, it is important to understand how it can interface with an existing circuit. An operating copper mine in the southwestern USA was used as a platform to study how modern ore sorters impact a circuit. This discussion uses operational data from the mine combined with performance data from typical, commercial scale sorters to estimate the impacts expected with the installation of sorting technology. The scope of these estimates is intended to be conservative so that a base case scenario can serve as the framework around which future studies and considerations can be made. The mine studied here uses two semi-autogenous (SAG) mills to process approximately 1200 The capacity of ore sorter throughputs requires that high volume material streams be distributed across several parallel conveyor belts. However, because the pebble circuit is a smaller volume of material (on the order of hundreds of tons per hour, instead of thousands), minimal redistribution of material is required and the entire capacity can be handled by a few sorters. Accordingly, minimal capital investment beyond the ore sorters is required to install this equipment in an existing SAG pebble circuit. The proposed flow sheet for a SAG circuit augmented with ore sorting is presented in This analysis assumes that the grade of the pebble circuit is the same as the head grade of the ROM material (namely, 0.45% Cu) for simplicity. A detailed study of how the grade of the pebble circuit changes with different sorting efficiencies is required in future work. Furthermore, the grade of the material rejected as waste by the sorters has been assumed based on previous studies with refractory sulfide ores ( The two flow sheets presented here ( The real value of ore sorting in this application is that it would allow the copper mine to produce more metal by mining at a higher rate without increasing its milling and flotation costs. As shown in The actual performance of a sorting system in a mineral processing circuit is determined by the ore, mineral composition and its dispersion in the host rock, desired throughput, and numerous other factors. However, this exercise seeks to examine how sorter performance affects the economics of a plant so these other variables have been omitted. It should be noted that these sorter performances are well within the bounds of typical rates achieved commercially ( In considering the operating data, the feed grade (the ROM grade) is unchanged by sorters. This analysis assumes no changes in the mine plan and no additional mining equipment, because the circuit is currently operating below design capacity. The overall circuit recovery (including flotation and downstream processing) is assumed to be 80% in all cases. As before, because the ratio of ROM feed to pebble circuit feed is so high, the improvement in grade to the ball mills and flotation will be minor (in contrast to the analysis performed by However, as the rejection rate increases in the sorters, the grade of copper contained in the waste material will also increase. With low rejection rate, the stones that are ejected will contain essentially zero copper. However, as the rejection rate (or alternatively, the cutoff grade) is increased, some of the stones will contain very small amounts of copper. Higher and higher Cu grades in the waste material may eventually require secondary processing. However, given that the grade of Cu in the waste is expected to be at least an order of magnitude lower than the traditional head grade of the ROM material, it is unlikely that many economically viable solutions for processing this extremely low grade material exist. The mine operators have to ask themselves if they can realistically afford to process such low grade material. To decrease these Cu losses, the sorter needs either higher resolution or a lower cutoff grade. The operating data in With the additional ROM material processed, there is additional mining and waste rock haulage cost. However, it must be noted that no additional cost is incurred at the ball mills and beyond. The same throughput to the ball mills means that no additional power is consumed despite the fact that more copper is being produced. Essentially, copper is produced on a lower dollars-per-ton basis. Additional mining costs associated with the higher ROM feed and waste rock are outlined. Finally, the sorters themselves have an additional cost. Interestingly, the sorter cost is tied mainly to the rejection rate. The primary energy consumer in the sorters is the air compressor used to eject stones with blasts of air at the end of the conveyor belt ( Sorters allow the SAG circuit to decouple from the ball mill circuit. It is typical to find that plants running SAG mills can become capacity-limited in their SAG mills and/or their ball mills depending on the hardness of the ore being processed. However, because sorters can be used to reject barren waste stones, the capacity through both the SAG and ball circuits can be modulated to minimize capacity imbalances. The details of this decoupling analysis from an economic perspective are beyond the scope of this work. In summarizing To understand the net cash flow (NCF) with sorters installed per Positive cash flow in The results outlined here are important because they represent the types of results achievable with sorting technology available in 2015. For many years, the major assumption about ore sorting was that capacity limitations prohibited installations in existing circuits ( Ore sorting is clearly a technology that offers significant positive effects and has the potential to generate a step change in how new resources and existing mines are evaluated for future development, how mining projects are marketed, and how circuits are designed and operated. In light of this, it is surprising how slowly the technology has been adopted over the past ten years. Granted, when first introduced at its infancy, the technology had room for significant improvement; the recent developments in sensors and computing power have made ore sorting a viable solution for many of the mining industry’s challenges. The analysis of Many of the initial detractors to the technology cited the low throughput across the first generation of sorters, and this belief remains even though it is no longer necessarily true ( Furthermore, this analysis presents an interesting business opportunity for mining operations looking to invest in ore sorting. By demonstrating that ore sorting is cost effective – and even profitable – at small scales, mine operators can pursue a pilot-scale research program on ore sorting. By implementing sorting on side-streams or recycle loops, the overall impact on the process is small. Therefore, no major disruption in plant productivity will be expected as operators and engineers gain familiarity with the technology. All this time, though, ore sorters are making a profit; there are very few true pilot-scale operations in the mining industry that can turn a legitimate profit for their owners. Typical pilot-scale operations are understood to be long-term investments with the real pay back only being realized once the technology under study can be scaled up fully. Here, though, it is shown that a pilot-scale sorting operation need not be a money-losing venture. The success (and revenue) generated at the small-scale can then be used to justify (and fund) larger scale installations. In part, this scale-up may be contingent upon the availability of high capacity sorters. It is difficult to predict what the breakeven point will be: when will capacity of an individual sorter be high enough to justify large-scale implementation of the technology? In all likelihood, a confluence of factors – rising energy and water costs, ores that are more challenging to process through traditional means, and higher capacity sorters – will arise that bring the industry’s perceived demand for ultrahigh capacity (>1000 As the scale at which ore sorting is performed increases in the hard rock mining industry, step function changes in processing philosophies will likely result. The idea that the mining and metals industry is in desperate need of disruptive change has started to gain traction ( As In order to realize this future, sorting manufacturers need to improve the sensitivity of their sensors to boost throughput. They also need to connect with miners and find common ground: namely economics. On the other hand, miners need to be receptive to a new innovation paradigm. Most notably, the argument that it is still profitable to throw some ore away (as waste in the sorter reject) must be fully grasped and embraced. The two industries must collaborate so that sorting manufacturers are working on the latest challenges the miners are facing and the miners are running the most state-of-the-art equipment. At this interface, technology providers and EPCM (engineering, procurement, construction, and management) companies can provide the resources to appropriately design new circuits that take advantage of all that ore sorters offer. In such a scenario, the entire industry and all of its major stakeholders have a role to play. Ore sorting is a technology that can address many of the challenges currently faced by the hard rock mining industry. For many years, sorting technology has been viewed as a niche application that lacked the throughput required for widespread adoption by the mining community. However, recent advances in the technology have made it ready for implementation. This study demonstrated that ore sorters can be installed in the pebble circuit of an existing SAG process and achieve payback within 20