The production of electric and electronic equipment (EEE) is one of the fastest growing areas. This development has resulted in an increase of waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE). In view of the environmental problems involved in the management of WEEE, many counties and organizations have drafted national legislation to improve the reuse, recycling and other forms of recovery of such wastes so as to reduce disposal. Recycling of WEEE is an important subject not only from the point of waste treatment but also from the recovery of valuable materials.
                  WEEE is diverse and complex, in terms of materials and components makeup as well as the original equipment’s manufacturing processes. Characterization of this waste stream is of paramount importance for developing a cost-effective and environmentally friendly recycling system. In this paper, the physical and particle properties of WEEE are presented. Selective disassembly, targeting on singling out hazardous and/or valuable components, is an indispensable process in the practice of recycling of WEEE. Disassembly process planning and innovation of disassembly facilities are most active research areas. Mechanical/physical processing, based on the characterization of WEEE, provides an alternative means of recovering valuable materials. Mechanical processes, such as screening, shape separation, magnetic separation, Eddy current separation, electrostatic separation, and jigging have been widely utilized in recycling industry. However, recycling of WEEE is only beginning.
                  For maximum separation of materials, WEEE should be shredded to small, even fine particles, generally below 5 or 10mm. Therefore, a discussion of mechanical separation processes for fine particles is highlighted in this paper.
                  Consumer electronic equipment (brown goods), such as television sets, video recorders, are most common. It is very costly to perform manual dismantling of those products, due to the fact that brown goods contain very low-grade precious metals and copper. It is expected that a mechanical recycling process will be developed for the upgrading of low metal content scraps.The production of electric and electronic equipment (EEE) is increasing worldwide. Both technological innovation and market expansion continue to accelerate the replacement of equipment leading to a significant increase of waste electric and electronic equipment (WEEE). In west Europe, 6 million tonnes of WEEE were generated in 1998, the amount of WEEE is expected to increase by at least 3–5% per annum Due to their hazardous material contents, WEEE may cause environmental problems during the waste management phase if it is not properly pre-treated. Many countries have drafted legislation to improve the reuse, recycling and other forms of recovery of such wastes so as to reduce disposal Recycling of WEEE is an important subject not only from the point of waste treatment but also from the recovery aspect of valuable materials. The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has identified seven major benefits when scrap iron and steel are used instead of virgin materials. Using recycled materials in place of virgin materials results in significant energy savings (as shown in Currently, recycling of WEEE can be broadly divided into three major stages: Disassembly (dismantling): selective disassembly, targeting on singling out hazardous or valuable components, is an indispensable process. Upgrading: using mechanical/physical processing and/or metallurgical processing to upgrade desirable materials content, i.e. preparing materials for refining process. Refining: in the last stage, recovered materials return to their life cycle. Consumer electronic equipment (brown goods), such as television sets, radio sets, and video recorders, are most common. However, it is very costly to perform manual dismantling of those products, due to the fact that brown goods contain very low-grade precious metals and copper. A mechanical process is interest for upgrading recycling of WEEE because it can yield full material recovery including plastics. It is expected that a mechanical recycling process will be developed for the upgrading of low metal content scraps. Waste electric and electronic equipment is non-homogeneous and complex in terms of materials and components. In order to develop a cost-effective and environmentally friendly recycling system, it is important to identify and quantify valuable materials and hazardous substances, and further, to understand the physical characteristics of this waste stream. WEEE consists of a large number of components of various sizes and shapes, some of which contain hazardous components that need be removed for separate treatment. Major categories of hazardous materials and components of WEEE that have to be selectively treated are shown in Waste electric and electronic equipment is a complex material containing various fractions. The Association of Plastics Manufactures in Europe (APME) released figures on materials consumption in electric and electronic equipment in western Europe 1995 ( The main economic driving force for the recycling of electronic scrap is the recovery of precious metals. However, the content of precious metals in WEEE is steadily decreasing Waste electric and electronic equipment, being a mixture of various materials, can be regarded as a resource of metals, such as copper, aluminum and gold, and plastics. Effective separation of these materials based on the differences on their physical characteristics is the key for developing a mechanical recycling system. Therefore, an in-depth characterization of this specific material stream is imperative. The magnetic susceptibilities, density, and electric conductivity of some materials used in electric and electronic equipment are given in Particle size, shape and liberation degree play crucial roles in mechanical recycling processes. Almost all the mechanical recycling processes have a certain effective size range. Characterization of personal computers (PC) scrap and printed circuit boards (PCB) scrap shows, after secondary shredding by a laboratory scale hammer mill, that the main metals present are in the −5  It is well known that diversified particle shapes have a significant impact on material processing, both comminution and separation. On the other hand, differences in particle shape have been utilized in shape sorting technique. Koyanaka et al. investigated the particle shape properties of copper milled by a swing-hammer-type impact mill  In Disassembly is a systematic approach that allows removal of a component or a part, or a group of parts or a subassembly from a product (i.e. partial disassembly); or separating a product into all of its parts (i.e. complete disassembly) for a given purpose The areas of disassembly that are being pursued by researchers are focused on disassembly process planning (DPP) and innovation of disassembly facilities. The objective of disassembly process planning is to develop, procedures and software tools for forming disassembly strategies and configuring disassembly systems Input and output product analysis: In this phase, reusable, valuable, and hazardous components and materials are defined. After preliminary cost analysis, optimal disassembly is identified. Assembly analysis: In the second phase, joining elements, component hierarchy and former assembly sequences are analyzed. Uncertainty issues analysis: Uncertainty of disassembly comes from defective parts or joints in the incoming product, upgrading/downgrading of the product during consumer use, and disassembly damage. Determination of dismantling strategy: In the final phase, it is decided whether to use non-destructive or destructive disassembly. Research on disassembly process planning has been an active area in the last decade. Hundreds of papers have been written on this subject. A detailed survey of disassembly was presented by Gungor and Gupta In addition to generating a good disassembly process plan, the implementation of disassembly needs highly efficient and flexible tools. Several patented disassembly tools were highlighted in the paper by Feldmann et al. The most attractive research on disassembly process is the use of robots. The automated assembly of electronic equipment is well advanced. Unfortunately, full (semi) application of automation disassembly for recycling of electronic equipment is full of frustration. Currently, there are only a few pilot projects for automated disassembly of keyboards, monitors and printed circuit board, and there is no (semi-) automated solution for the PC itself In the practice of recycling of waste electric and electronic equipment, selective disassembly (dismantling) is an indispensable process since: (1) the reuse of components has first priority, (2) dismantling the hazardous components is essential, (3) it is also common to dismantle highly valuable components and high grade materials such as printed circuit boards, cables, and engineering plastics in order to simplify the subsequent recovery of materials. Most of the recycle plants utilize manual dismantling. Ragn-Sells Elektronikåtervinning AB in Sweden is a typical electronics recycling operation. A study of potential future disassembly and recycling technologies for the electronics and the automotive industry was carried out by Boks and Tempelman between November 1996 and March 1997 Fortunately, research in the field of product design for disassembly has gained momentum in the past decade. One good idea is self-disassembly which is called active disassembly using smart materials (ADSM). Chiodo Screening has not only been utilized to prepare a uniformly sized feed to certain mechanical process, but also to upgrade metals contents. Screening is necessary because the particle size and shape properties of metals are different from that of plastics and ceramics. The primary method of screening in metals recovery uses the rotating screen, or trommel, a unit which is widely used in both automobile scrap and municipal solid waste processing. This unit has a high resistance to blinding, which is important with the diverse array of particle shapes and sizes encountered in waste. Vibratory screening is also commonly used, in particular at non-ferrous recovery sites, but wire blinding is a marked problem Shape separation techniques have been mainly developed to control properties of particles in the powder industry Shape separation by tilted plate and sieves is the most basic method that has been used in recycling industry Magnetic separators, in particular, low-intensity drum separators are widely used for the recovery of ferromagnetic metals from non-ferrous metals and other non-magnetic wastes. Over the past decade, there have been many advances in the design and operation of high-intensity magnetic separators, mainly as a result of the introduction of rare earth alloy permanent magnets capable of providing very high field strengths and gradients. In copper alloys with relatively high mass susceptibility (Al multi-compound bronze); copper alloys with medium mass susceptibility (Mn multi-compound bronze, special brass); copper alloys with low mass susceptibility and/or diamagnetic material behavior (Sn and Sn multi-compound bronze, Pb and Pb multi-compound bronze, brass with low Fe content). Electric conductivity-based separation separates materials of different electric conductivity (or resistivity) ( In the past decade, one of the most significant developments in the recycling industry was the introduction of Eddy current separators whose operability is based on the use of rare earth permanent magnets. The separators were initially developed to recover non-ferrous metals from shredded automobile scrap or for treatment of municipal solid waste The rotor-type electrostatic separator, using corona charging, is utilized to separate raw materials into conductive and non-conductive fractions. The extreme difference in the electric conductivity or specific electric resistance between metals and non-metals supplies an excellent condition for the successful implementation of a corona electrostatic separation in recycling of waste. To date, electrostatic separation has been mainly utilized for the recovery of copper or aluminum from chopped electric wires and cables Triboelectric separation makes it is possible to sort plastics depending on the difference in their electric properties ( Several different methods are employed to separate heavier materials from lighter ones. The difference in density of the components is the basis of separation. Gravity concentration separates materials of different specific gravity by their relative movement in response to the force of gravity and one or more other forces, the latter often being the resistance to motion offered by a fluid, such as water or air The number of waste streams containing fine metal particles is foreseen to grow substantially in the near future The rotating Eddy current separators have been successfully utilized in several non-ferrous metals sorting and recovery operations, most common is the sorting of non-ferrous metals from shredded automobile scrap and municipal solid waste In recent years, there have been some development of Eddy current separation processes designed to separate small particles Before the 1990s, intensive theoretical work was carried out by Schlömann In the early 1990s, theoretical work was done by Fletcher et al. An important work involving the separation of small particles using the ECS method was carried out by Rem and co-workers Based on the analysis of separation mechanisms, proposals were made to improve the separation selectivity of small particles. A number of novel design concepts of ECS were highlighted by Rem et al. The prototype designed by The Netherlands Organization (TNO for Applied Scientific Research) combines a small pole width of approximately 20 Norrgran A vertical Eddy current rotating separator, designed to increase the separation efficiency and to reduce the cost of the separation equipment, was proposed by Schlett et al. Corona electrostatic separation is an important technique suitable for fine particles with the size range of 0.1–5 In corona electrostatic separation, electrode system, rotor speed, moisture content, and particle size have the greatest effect in determining the separation results. Both fundamental and practical aspects concerning the design of new electrode system have been investigated and developed by Iuga et al. Comparing the foregoing processes with the mineral processing industry processes, one finds that larger liberated particles with 5–8 One of the advantages of electrostatic separation in cable recycling is to obtain a metal-free product. However, in some cases, the specific resistance of certain types of flexible PVC and rubber used to make cables falls below 4×10 Jigging, one of the oldest methods of gravity concentrations, is widely utilized in the mineral processing industry to concentrate relatively coarse materials. If the feed is fairly uniformly sized (e.g. 3–10 Thus, the jigging process provides a good solution for sorting small pieces of metals by density separation. Advantages of wet jigs are their robustness, high capacity per unit surface, low operating costs and suitability to process large amounts of small particles. According to de Jong and Dalmijin One of the important applications of the jig in recycling industry is separation of light and heavy products in recycling demolition rubble. Wet jigging enables a high-grade heavy product to be achieved. Plant-scale testes were carried out at Groot B.V., a Dutch company in Heilo The Netherlands. The test was designed to reduce the light product content of the recycle stream to at least a maximum of 0.1% by weight Before the 1990s, this process had also been utilized for sorting of non-ferrous metals pro-concentrated of light steel scrap processing (hydraulic jigs) and from cable scrap (pneumatic jigs). Recently, Schmelzer Significant heterogeneity and high complexity of WEEE make it difficult to operate a jigging process. Complicated scrap pieces, particularly wiry materials impede the separation process considerably and can prevent a separation into layers  Waste electric and electronic equipment has been taken into consideration not only by the government but also by the public. With the climate change being of concern, mechanical/physical processing will play an essential role in upgrading of WEEE. Characterization of WEEE provides a sound and solid foundation for developing effective separation techniques. However, WEEE is significantly heterogeneous and complex in terms of the type, size, and shape of components and materials. Therefore, an in-depth study should be done with a goal of clearly understanding this special waste stream. In order to be separated, WEEE must be shredded to small even fine-sized particles, usually below 10 Eddy current separation, corona electrostatic separation, and jigging are three important processes that have been developed in recycling of automobile scrap, waste cables, and building materials, respectively. For sorting fine WEEE, the foregoing also provide alternative approaches to current systems. In recycling of WEEE, investigations to date have mainly focused on the recovery of precious metals from personal computer scrap and printed circuit boards scrap. However, it is important that recycling of the electronic scrap that contains very low-grade precious metals, such as brown goods, should be investigated. The authors are grateful for financial support and approval of publication for this paper from the Minerals and Metals Recycling Research Center (MiMeR), Sweden.