In this study, a new concurrent flotation column that simulates the plug flow reactor was designed with the use of a static mixer, a froth separator column and an optional additional bubble generator for fly ash beneficiation. The objective was to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of unburned carbon removal from fly ash by minimizing energy costs. Cleaning tests were performed with and without the additional bubble genarator. Without the additional bubble generator unburned carbon in the ash product could be reduced to only 2.53%. Incidental loss of carbon particles and insufficient bubble generation were the main causes of poor carbon separation performance. By turning on the additional bubble generator it was aimed to assist bubble generation, to compensate bubble rupture and to recapture the detached or free carbon particles leaving the froth phase. With the additional bubble generator and under optimized conditions a froth product with 95% carbon recovery and a cleaned ash product with less than 1% unburned carbon was obtained. The separation process through the static mixer (feeder) and the separator column and the energy consumption of the unit were analyzed. It was seen that around 80% energy could be saved with the concurrent flotation column compared to conventional flotation.Fly ash is a waste product of solid fuels combustion. It is a solid, fine and powdery material that consists of mainly non-combustible inorganic materials and unburned carbons. Discharging fly ash into the atmosphere with the flue gas is avoided due to environmental concerns. This is achieved by collecting the fly ash in bag-houses or in electrostatic precipitators prior to discharge through stacks. Potential areas for the utilization of fly ash vary from plastic fillers, high temperature ceramics to activated carbon and cement production Completely stirred reactor (CSTR) is a common type of flotation machine used in industrial scale. A completely stirred reactors (CSTR) is a mechanical flotation machine, and the conditioned slurry is fed into the flotation tanks. The target particles attach to the air bubbles, forming the froth at the top and the froth is removed by scraping. If CSTR's kinetics of flotation is slow, so many CSTRs (as high as 20) should be used in series to achieve effective cleaning with sufficient recovery In this study, a new concurrent flotation column was developed for fly ash cleaning. This new design simulates a plug flow reactor. The concurrent flotation column is a combination of a static mixer, a froth separator for fly ash cleaning and a bubble generator to aid bubble formation. The objective was to improve throughput and to reduce energy and operation costs of unburned carbon removal by accelerating flotation kinetics (rate) and increasing the process efficiency. The fly ash sample, used in this study is classified as “Class F” type according to ASTM C618 classification. The sample was characterized by Atomic Absorption Spectrometry and the results are presented in The unburned carbon in the fly ash and the flotation products were found by Loss On Ignition (LOI) analysis in accordance with the ASTM D7348-07 standard LOI value (unburned carbon) of as-received fly ash was found as 5.90% ( Using 300 g sample, particle size analysis was performed from − The details of the concurrent flotation column are shown in To ensure sufficient turbulence and effective bubble–particle collisions multiple packing units were installed into the static mixer ( For the cleaning process, a slurry with 10% pulp density (solid. by weight) was formed and agitated in a mixer for 10 min. Then, collector, depressant and frother were added subsequently. Conditioning between the addition of each reagent was allowed. Conditioning times were 3 min for the collector, 3 min for the depressant and 1 min for the frother. The test conditions and reagents used are presented in The goal in the flotation cleaning of fly ash is to obtain an ash product with less than 1% carbon while keeping the energy consumption minimum. The concurrent flotation column would be operated by turning on or off the optional additional bubble generator. Operation with the additional bubble generator would increase the overall energy consumption. Thus, it was first attempted to clean the fly ash without operating the additional bubble generator (S2). The unburned carbon content of the feed was reduced from 5.50% to 2.56% with 88.35% recovery of cleaned ash after single stage operation. The recovery was acceptable, but carbon removal was quite limited without the additional bubble generator. It was assumed that floatable carbon particles should have accumulated in the froth phase and the froth should have floated to the top of the column remaining stable. The cleaned ash-rich tail should have been discharged from the bottom without interfering with the froth. The results partially denied these ideal conditions when the additional bubble generator was off. Insufficient carbon removal occurred due to several reasons. It was anticipated that some carbon particles did not attach to the bubbles due to insufficient bubble amount and/or ineffective collisions. Rupture of air bubbles would have occurred due to the shear in the static mixer and the sudden release of the positive pressure at the mixer exit, leading to further detachment of carbon particles from air bubbles. There is no collection effect below the exit point without the additional bubble generator, thus the detached or free carbon particles reported to underflow and were discharged with the ash product. The unburned carbon content in cleaned ash would be reduced to less than 1% through multi-stage roughing-scavenging, but multi-stage operation would obviously increase the energy consumption while decreasing the recovery of the cleaned ash. The tests were continued by turning on the additional bubble generator, S2. The additional bubble generator was expected to improve the cleaning performance in two ways; it would compensate the bubble rupture in the separator column; and would provide a collecting effect below the exit of the static mixer (S1) to recapture free or detached carbon particles before these particles incidentally report to the underflow. To optimize the cleaning process a series of tests were performed varying the airflow rate, pulp flow rate and the collector dosage. The test conditions are presented in In tests E to H the pulp flow rate was changed between 1.77 and 0.58 l/min ( The collector dosage (FO The efficiency of carbon removal with the concurrent flotation column mainly depends on the efficiency of the static mixer, S1. In the static mixer generation of air bubbles and particle–bubble attachment occur, so particles should be dispersed and well-distributed throughout the static mixer. Particle suspension in the static mixer is based on the turbulence caused by the flow along the channels between the packings. With a sudden change of the flow direction between adjacent packing units, the turbulence facilitates dispersion and distribution of the particles. This turbulence may be explained by Reynolds number relative to a particle The void fraction and the hydraulic diameter of the static mixer were 77.87% and 1.68 mm, respectively. With a static mixer of 1.60 cm The packing units in the static mixer form several intersecting channels. Air bubbles are generated at the intersections of the packings due to the shear forces between the plate and the turbulence. Besides the generation of the air bubbles, bubble size, bubble stability and bubble amount are effective on the efficiency of the carbon removal. Bubble size, bubble stability, amount of bubbles, surface tension, frother amount and airflow rate are all related. It was reported that the bubbles in a static mixer had a narrow size distribution and the size of ≈ The relations between the bubble size, bubble stability, bubble amount, surface tension, frother amount, channel number and air flow rate were established based on the above equations and presented in It should be noted that unlike conventional flotation, by-passing and short-circuiting were reduced in a static mixer due to several adjoining units and the frequent change of the flow regime. This leads to more effective particle–bubble interactions since the opportunities for particle–bubble collisions increase. Flotation through the column has two phases: collection zone occurs between the static mixer (S1) and the additional bubble generator (S2). Cleaning zone occurs between the static mixer (S1) and the top of the separator column. Air bubbles rise through the column filled with slurry, as reported by Finch and Doby At a superficial gas velocity of If For a first-order rate process in a plug flow condition (a collection zone of high length and narrow diameter), the fractional recovery, Since In the separator column, the recovery of the particles is closely related to the collection efficiency, To analyze the energy consumption of the concurrent flotation column, the commonly used industrial scale Denver flotation machine was taken for comparison. Characteristics of the Denver machine, used in coal flotation, are given in The overall energy consumption of the concurrent flotation column involves the energy consumed by the static mixer (S1), the additional bubble generator (S2) and the air compressor. The conditions and parameters for calculating the energy consumption of the static mixer (S1) were presented in The energy requirement of an air compressor depends on the air flow rate and the required air quantity. In general, the volume ratio of air to pulp is 1. For an air compressor, operating at the sea level with a delivered free air rate of 2.8 m A concurrent flotation column involving a static mixer and an optional additional bubble generator was set up to overcome operating cost and efficiency problems in fly ash cleaning. Without using the additional bubble generator, unburned carbon was limited and the carbon content could be reduced only from 5.50% to 2.56% in the cleaned ash product. Using the additional bubble generator significantly contributed to the separation performance and solved problems like insufficient bubble generation and amount, absence of a secondary collection point for missing carbon particles, etc. With the additional bubble generator, a cleaned ash product with less than 1% unburned carbon could be achieved at optimized process conditions and the carbon recovery in the froth product was quite high (> In view of the results of the separation performance and the energy analysis, the concurrent flotation column would be suggested as a promising alternative for fly ash beneficiation, particularly to flotation with mechanical cells or column flotation. Facilitating a static mixer allows the beneficiation of various features of slurry flow so that the process is simplified and improved in several aspects; It offers a higher throughput than both column and conventional flotation while consuming much lower energy. The first cost of the system is another subtle advantage as the system provides an effective carbon removal with a single unit rather than multiple units as in the case for conventional and column flotation. The system does not require sophisticated parts and is easy to construct. The operation and maintenance is not different than the well-known column flotation. Yet, it is essential to carry out systematic tests to optimize the separation and for scaling-up, similar to other physical and/or physicochemical separation processes. These advantages would facilitate in extending the processing of fly ash and its potential use as a raw material.