This work studies single bubble–single particle interactions of interest to flotation applications. An experimental device has been developed where a standing bubble is approached at prescribed flow velocity by an aqueous dispersion of particles – much smaller than the bubble. Two separate high-speed cameras are employed to monitor the bubble surface from two different Cartesian directions allowing thus a 3D perspective of particles trajectories and collisions with the bubble. A special feature of the device is that the velocity of the suspension and the size of the bubble can be independently adjusted in a range of values that corresponds to the flotation process. This paper presents experimental trajectories and velocities of particles as they approach and flow past a bubble. A theoretical model has been developed to describe such particle trajectories and velocities. Comparison between experimental observations with model predictions allows a detailed assessment of governing forces and better understanding of their contribution to particle–bubble interactions. It is shown that microhydrodynamic drag has a distinct role in matching experiments with predictions.Interaction between solid particles and air bubbles in aqueous solutions is of academic and practical significance. It is a typical process in nature, but it also plays an important role in several industrial applications. Flotation is one of these applications in which bubble–particle interactions constitute a key process; flotation is a separation method used in the recovery of coal and valuable minerals from ores Although flotation is known for very long time, a systematic analysis of the governing sub-processes has attracted attention the last 50 years only. The main individual elementary steps of flotation are (a) collision of a solid particle with a bubble, (b) attachment of a particle to a bubble and (c) detachment of a particle from a bubble. Proper description of these steps is essential for the determination of the efficiency of the flotation process and the determination of its kinetics Bubble–particle encounter includes many kinds of interactions and forces – hydrodynamic, gravitational, surface and capillary. The three identified sub-processes (collision, attachment, detachment) are not entirely discrete, but rather grade one into another In past studies of bubble–particle collision, bubbles with immobile surface have been mostly considered on the premise that surfactants and impurities adsorb on a bubble surface making it immobile Only a few attempts have been reported in the literature aiming to investigate isolated bubble–particle collision and attachment. In most of these studies, a bubble is pinned at the tip of the capillary, and its surface is recorded by a high-speed camera while it is approached by particles settling inside a stagnant liquid This work is about experimental trajectories and local velocities of small spherical particles flowing around a large spherical bubble. The presently reported trajectories/velocities are those of relatively large particles – still smaller than the bubble – that move chiefly under gravitational settling. In order to describe particle trajectories/velocities a theoretical model has been developed incorporating the effects of governing forces, e.g., gravity, inertia, microhydrodynamic drag. Reynolds numbers of the liquid flow ranks to intermediate values and thus it is not possible to use either Stokes or potential flow for its description. The improvement in flow field description (composite flow) field is also presented in this paper. It is noted that the model developed here is not the main scope of the present work, but it is a tool for the explanation of experimental data. Despite this, the model is a state-of-the-art since for first time, particle trajectories are calculated including hydrodynamics for the flow field different from the two idealized ones (Stokes and potential flow). The apparatus used in this project is the opposite of conventional flotation apparatuses; instead of having many bubbles rising through dispersed particles floating freely in the liquid, the situation is simplified and reversed. A single bubble is kept at a fixed position, and the suspension of particles moves against it. The bubble is created at the tip of a vertical capillary tube of external diameter of 600 The approaching velocity of particles to the bubble is adjusted by a pump in combination with a control valve. Particles are dispersed in water inside a small reservoir where the desired amount of particles, surfactant and liquid are mixed. Right after mixing, the suspension is pumped through narrow tubes (diameter 5 After going past the bubble, the suspension enters a big Plexiglas tank at the bottom of the apparatus where an axial impeller maintains particles in suspension for the pump to re-circulate them. The overall view on the device is shown in The experiments shown in this work are performed using spherical hydrophobic particles (polystyrene crosslinked with divinylbenzene, (Micropore Technologies Ltd.) with an average diameter The bubble was formed just exactly before taking the video of the interaction and due to the motion of the liquid, surfactants that could attach to the bubble surface were swept to the rear of the bubble and thus, its surface remained practically clean with the Marangoni effect not being strong enough to alter the velocity field around the bubble. The mobility of the bubble surface was checked by the evolution of the velocity in dependence on the position as seen in Video sequences of particles colliding with bubbles of different diameter (500–1700 The image analysis software NIS-Elements is used for the detection of particle trajectories. Original sequences are represented by images in the .bmp format; it enabled to cut unnecessary images (images with no particles) and then to create a video in the desired format (.nd2). The calibration of distances on images is based on the diameter of the capillary (600 During the present experiments, collision of particles with the bubble is observed at different flow regimes but adhesion of particles on the bubble surface is never observed. This is most likely due to the low SDS concentration. However, such low SDS concentration was necessary to study particles trajectories around a mobile bubble surface which is indeed the scope of our work. The quantification of particle–bubble collision outlined in The term on the left-hand side of the BBO (Eq. For easier handling of the BBO equation, dimensionless values are introduced by dividing the appropriate dimensional values by their characteristic values. Fluid and particle velocities are scaled by the bubble slip velocity In Eqs. Due to possible instabilities during calculation with time derivatives (small changes in time can cause considerable changes in the particle polar coordinates), it is more convenient to transform Eq. Then, Eq. To solve the differential equations showed above, the initial conditions describing the system are required. Their determination is based on the fact that the particle velocity sufficiently far away from the bubble surface is not influenced by the bubble and thus the velocity is equal to the liquid velocity plus the particle terminal settling velocity, giving: The minus sign in the initial condition for the radial velocity (Eq. A particle approaching the bubble surface is significantly influenced by the drag force which is well described by the Stokes law far from the surface. When the particle approaches the bubble, an intervening liquid film is formed, and the hydrodynamic resistance increases rapidly. This increase can be accounted for using hydrodynamic resistance functions The microhydrodynamic resistance functions depend on the inter-surface separation distance as well as the bubble surface mobility. For mobile bubble surface, equations for the microhydrodynamic functions in tangential and radial direction are When the bubble and particle surfaces are far apart ( The Stokes or potential flow describing the liquid flow field has a limited range of successful usage Equations for the particle motion (Eqs. In the calculation of the trajectory, the contact of the particle with the bubble is tested (separation distance The grazing trajectory, from which the encounter efficiency is calculated, can be found using the condition that there is no contact point between the particle and the bubble surface on the trajectory following the grazing one. The initial position is varied; the particle position corresponding to the particle position obtained from the experiment is initially set to start the numerical integration, and the particle trajectory is calculated It is important to note that the parameter Comparison of trajectories of particles going around the bubble obtained experimentally and theoretically is provided in this section. Trajectories of particles passing the bubble at the vertical equator were chosen for further processing. At first, an image summarizing trajectories of particles of different initial position is shown in For further discussions, single trajectories from the green, red and black zones were used (A, B, C in The principle of display of According to the initial position of the particle, trajectories showed different behaviour ( Different trajectories corresponding to different effects used in calculations are depicted in When comparing experimentally obtained trajectories with those resulting from the equations described in the theoretical part of this paper, contributions of different effects are assessed (microhydrodynamic drag, inertia forces, and gravity effects). Although particles are of relatively large diameters, their density ( Contrary assumption, microhydrodynamic drag does not affect the trajectories presented in this work considerably. Without microhydrodynamic effects included in the calculation, the particle approaches the bubble with just a small deviation from the trajectory caused by the liquid flow and the particle collides with the bubble (separation distance, If microhydrodynamic effects are incorporated to the calculation, the drag taking place in short inter-surface separation distance “pushes” the particle away from the bubble surface while it is forced by the liquid flow to collide at the same time. It results in the diversion of the trajectory that can be seen in Next, velocities of particles obtained from experiments and the respective velocities calculated at different locations around the bubble are compared to assess further the significance of different acting forces. In From the comparison of the experimental velocity of the particle with the calculated one, it is possible to examine which of the effects taking place during the bubble–particle interaction are dominant. Although experimental and theoretical trajectories appear quite similar, the velocity counterparts are different for every setting of the model. Cases A and B of the interaction provided in Another interesting issue must be pointed on; if the particle slides along the bubble surface (only the tangential motion is allowed), there is a terminal point defined by the tip of the capillary and the bottom of the bubble or the capillary as the lowest possible horizontal coordinate of the particle edge (particle's centre Although particle attachment to the bubble is possible theoretically under certain conditions, this is not observed during the present experiments. There are a few possible explanations for this discrepancy. A first explanation refers to the morphology of the employed particles. Their surface is perhaps too ideally spherical and too smooth and thus a particle can touch the bubble surface at a point only. This extremely small area of contact may prevent the intervening liquid film between the bubble and the particle from rupture, and as a result, the particle eventually slides away along the bubble Another interesting phenomenon observed in the present experiments is that particles continue their motion in an almost straight line after passing the bubble horizontal equator if they did not slide (clearly visible in the case C in It is noted that the bubble in general deforms as the particle approach to it A new device is developed to yield experimental trajectories and velocities of particles flowing around a bubble standing still in an aqueous surfactant solution. Trajectories and velocities are computed from the analysis of high-speed images. The experimental velocity profiles of particles around the bubble indicate that the surface of the bubble is pretty mobile that is not surprising based on the employed low surfactant concentration. Experimental trajectories and velocities are compared to respective quantities predicted by a model that is also developed herein. A sensitivity analysis reveals that under the experimental conditions interception is the dominant collision mechanism, whereas the other mechanisms has a small but non-negligible effect. However, gravity and inertia gain gradually importance as the size of particles increases and the microhydrodynamic effect increases its importance as the initial position of the bubble's centre is shifted closer to the axis of symmetry. Thus, it can be concluded that the primary mechanism of collision is interception in this case. It is also suggested that the never observed experimentally attachment of particles onto the bubble, despite the favourable physicochemical conditions, is rather due to the specific morphology of the employed particles. These particles are too spherical and too smooth and probably touch the bubble surface at one point only. Therefore, the time and area of the contact are not sufficient for the rupture of the intervening thin film between the bubble and particle. This work was performed under the umbrella of COST Action MP 1106: Smart and Green Interfaces likewise the support of PASTA/ESA (PArticle STAbilised Emulsions and Foams) was appreciated.