The stability analysis of an abandoned underground gypsum mine requires the determination of the mine pillar's strength. This is especially important for flooded abandoned mines where the gypsum pillars become saturated and are subjected to dissolution after flooding. Further, mine pillars are subjected to blast vibrations that generate some level of macro- and micro-fracturing. Testing samples of gypsum must, therefore, simulate these conditions as close as possible. In this research, the strength of gypsum is investigated in an as-received saturated condition using uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) and point load index (PLI) tests. The scale effect was investigated and new correlations were derived to describe the effect of sample size on both UCS and BTS under dry and saturated conditions. Effects of blasting on these parameters were observed and the importance of choosing the proper samples was discussed. Finally, correlations were derived for both compressive and tensile strengths under dry and saturated conditions from the PLI test results, which are commonly used as a simple substitute for the indirect determination of UCS and BTS.Determining the mechanical properties of gypsum rock is important in many engineering projects including the stability of abandoned underground gypsum mines, especially for mines that become flooded after mining operations have been completed ( An alternative approach to avoid time-consuming and expensive sample preparation for UCS is to use indirect methods such as point load index (PLI) tests to determine the UCS. Although PLI tests can be conducted axially and diametrically on cylindrical samples as well as on samples with irregular shapes, the diametrical tests on cylindrical samples are considered more reliable and are commonly used in design (e.g. Another important parameter in the stability analysis of underground mines is the roof rock's tensile strength. It is difficult to measure the tensile strength of rock directly, thus an indirect method, i.e. the splitting tensile strength test (commonly known as Brazilian tensile strength (BTS) test), is used. The accuracy of the BTS test, however, is somewhat compromised due to excessive stress concentrations at load contact points ( Finally, in flooded abandoned mines, pillars that were unsaturated during mining operations become saturated. Although the effect of saturation on gypsum strength has been studied (e.g. In this study, the mechanical properties of Michigan Basin's gypsum and the effects of sample size, blasting and saturation on these properties were investigated. This was necessary for the stability analysis of an abandoned gypsum mine in Michigan, which is located under a busy highway. The main objectives of this study were (i) to determine the mechanical properties of Michigan Basin's gypsum and understand the scale effect on its compressive and tensile strengths by developing equations correlating sample size with UCS and BTS, (ii) to determine the effect of blasting on UCS of gypsum, (iii) to understand the effect of saturation on mechanical properties (UCS, elasticity moduli, BTS and PLI) of gypsum determined by testing dry and saturated samples, and (iv) finally to establish correlations between PLI, UCS and BTS. This study is part of a project concerning the stability of the Domtar mine, an abandoned underground gypsum mine near Grand Rapids, Michigan, USA ( Gypsum blocks were obtained from the National City Quarry near Tawas, Michigan and transported to the Rock Mechanics Laboratory at Michigan Technological University. Samples were cored at the following three diameters: (a) 2.8 cm (1.1 in), (b) 5.4 cm (2.1 in) and (c) 7.6 cm (3 in). Following coring, the samples were cut on a diamond saw to a height ( Gypsum samples with different diameters were prepared to investigate the effect of sample size on strength parameters. After the sample preparations, UCS values of dry and saturated samples were measured according to Gypsum samples from Tawas quarry had two distinctive white and pink colors along with secondary gray impurities. To determine the composition of samples, carbonate content tests were conducted on the samples. The test results are summarized in The PXRF results of eight samples, which determine the percentage by weight of the main chemical components, are listed in The UCS values of air-dried samples with different sizes are summarized in Eq. The UCS values of saturated samples with different sizes were also measured, and the test results are summarized in Three types of elasticity moduli ( The results of PLI tests on dry and saturated samples are summarized in It should also be noted that the trend lines were forced to pass through zero as the authors believe that having an arbitrary constant ( Indirect tensile strengths of air-dried samples with three diameters were measured using BTS tests. The results are summarized in An attempt was made to develop a criterion explaining the relationship between sample size and BTS, as shown in From the correlation between sample size and BTS (Eq. In  The BTS values of nine saturated samples were also tested ( Mechanical properties of Michigan Basin's gypsum in dry and saturated conditions were investigated in this study. Based on the results of this study, the following conclusions were drawn: For the gypsum samples from the Michigan Basin, the average standard UCS values, The elasticity moduli of samples decreased by 30%–50% due to saturation. The PLI to UCS conversion factors of 6.6 for dry samples and 7.7 for saturated samples were measured for blasted gypsum from Michigan Basin. When the testing samples are in a wide range of sizes (e.g. samples used for UCS tests in this study), the scatter in the test results is more noticeable in smaller samples than in larger samples. This is because when preparing small samples, one sample could be prepared with minimum flaws while the concentration of flaws in another sample is high. In contrary, almost all of the large samples have a high amount of micro-flaws. On the other hand, the BTS test results tend to have less scatter since the range of sample sizes is smaller than that for UCS test. Scale effect on UCS of dry and saturated gypsum samples is different and can be presented using Eqs. While PLI and BTS of dry samples did not show a high correlation, a PLI to BTS conversion factor of 2.4 was found for saturated samples of 7.6 cm in diameter. We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. We would like to thank the National City Quarry in Tawas, Michigan for providing the samples used in this research.