Batch supercritical antisolvent precipitation (SAS) process was used to coprecipitate Cefuroxime Axetil amorphous (CFA, antibiotic) and Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP-K30) for preparing drug–polymer composite particles. Solutions of CFA and PVP-K30 in methanol with overall concentrations of 50–150mg/ml and polymer/drug ratios of 1/1–4/1 were sprayed into the CO2 at 70–200bar and 35–50°C with drug+polymer solution injection rates of 0.85 and 2.5ml/min. Spherical particles having mean diameters of 1.88–3.97μm, distribution ranges of 0.82–9.7μm (the narrowest distribution) and 0.91–46.64μm (the broadest distribution) were obtained. Mean particle size was not affected significantly with the change of process parameters. It was only affected by pressure change. On the other hand particle size distribution was affected by pressure, temperature, drug+polymer solution injection rate and concentration. It was observed that temperature and polymer/drug ratio affected the particle morphology most. The drug release rate of SAS-coprecipitated CFA–PVP (1/1) particles was almost 10 times slower than the drug alone. As the ratio of the polymer increased drug release rate also increased due to the wetting effect of PVP.CFA, an ester prodrug of cefuroxime (1-acetoxyethyl ester of a β-lactamase-stable cephalosporin), exists as a mixture of diastereomers A and B. CFA, which is a cephalosporin antibiotic, is used in the treatment of common community acquired infections due to its broad spectrum of activity against gram-positive and gram-negative microorganisms. Commonly, it exists in polymorphous form as crystalline or amorphous structures of which the latter exhibits a higher bioavailability and adequate chemical stability upon storage Composite particles are described as homogenous dispersion of one (or more) solid phase(s) in another continuous solid phase or as core of a material coated by another solid phase. The former is called Most controlled drug delivery systems focus on the production of drug-loaded polymeric particles by incorporation or encapsulation of drug within a polymer. There are several techniques to produce drug-loaded polymeric particles such as emulsion/solvent evaporation, phase separation, spray-drying, freeze-drying and interfacial polymerizaion. Excessive solvent use and disposal, thermal and chemical degradation of products, trace residues, inter-batch particle size variability and multistage processing are the main drawbacks of these methods. Therefore, in the past two decades processing of pharmaceuticals alone or preparation of composite particles of drug and polymer using supercritical fluid (SCF) technology has emerged as an alternative and promising method which avoids most of the drawbacks of the traditional methods mentioned above The basic principles of supercritical particle processing techniques used in the production of drug-loaded polymeric systems are impregnation, inclusion complexation with cyclodextrins, particle coating and coprecipitation of drug and polymer Methanol (Lab-Scan 99.8%) was used as the solvent to dissolve CFA and PVP. CO The experimental setup ( Initially, the high pressure cell was heated with circulating water bath and filled with CO Morphology of samples was analyzed by JEOL JSM-5910LV or JEOL-JSM5410LV scanning electron microscopes. The particles were coated with gold/palladium mixture using a sputter coater (Quorum Technologies SC7620) before analysis. Particle size analyses were performed by Sympatec Helos & Rodos particle size analyzer with laser diffraction method. Particle size distribution given in Run 5 was chosen to test the repeatability of the experiments and to define the experimental error in terms of mean particle size and size distribution. This experiment was repeated three times, and particle size analysis was performed for these three experiments. Mean particle sizes and size distributions were calculated as mentioned above. The standard deviation of the repeated experiments can be considered as a measure of repeatability and experimental error. Therefore, standard deviations of mean particle sizes and size distributions obtained from these three experiments were calculated. For these three repeated experiments, standard deviations of mean particle sizes and size distributions were defined as ±0.94 XRD analyses were performed at ambient temperature with diffraction angles from 10° to 75° with CuKα radiation at operating parameters of 40 FT-IR equipment (Perkin Elmer) was operated at the wavenumbers of 4000–450 The thermal analyses were performed with a DSC (Perkin Elmer DSC 4000). Thermograms were measured by heating the sample from 35 to 200 Drug content of particles was determined by HPLC. MeOH The drug loading of the particles was expressed as the ratio of the mass of loaded drug to the mass of the sample: Drug release tests were performed by the dissolution tester (SOTAX AT7 Smart) with the USP apparatus 1 (basket method). CFA–PVP particles were placed in three different dissolution vessels containing 500 Before coprecipitation experiments, CFA was precipitated alone (run 1 in PVP was also precipitated alone (run 2 in CFA and PVP were coprecipitated to prepare drug–polymer composite particles. The effects of process parameters such as pressure, temperature, solution concentration, drug It is interesting that when CFA and PVP were precipitated together, spherical particles of smaller sizes were obtained while larger and plate-like particles were obtained when CFA or PVP was precipitated alone. The precipitation mechanism and rates could be different in coprecipitation experiments compared to precipitation of original substances alone. For the precipitation CFA alone, this may be caused by inhibition effect of polymer on drug nuclei. When CFA was precipitated alone the growth mechanism of nuclei may be more dominant causing formation of large and irregular-shaped particles. As known, polymers generally inhibit particle growth of some substances by blocking surface of particles resulting in increased surface area and smaller particle size. Thus, precipitation of the drug with polymer may weaken the growth of drug nuclei resulting in reduced particle sizes and different morphologies compared to CFA precipitation alone. When PVP is precipitated alone the precipitation rate may be slower. The precipitation rate is related to the solubility of the materials, solution concentration, supersaturation concentration and rate. PVP is more soluble in methanol than CFA (the maximum solubility of CFA in methanol is about 80 Indeed, interaction between CFA and PVP was observed both in physical mixture and in composite particles of CFA–PVP (1/1). This can be clearly seen in IR spectrums ( In the spectrum of physical mixture and composite particles these peaks of amine, carboxylic groups and C–O, C–O–C and C–N stretching become sharper and distinct and sometimes shift to the left, which indicate that strong hydrogen bonding effect in the inner structure of CFA disappears, and CFA interacts with PVP. The interaction of CFA with PVP in composite particles is stronger than physical mixture. While two peaks of amine groups are still observed at 3476.25 and 3367.97 In addition, the positions of the DSC peaks of physical mixture and composite particles are different from original materials ( Solutions having concentrations of 50–150 As seen in In this work the variability of the results with concentration can also be explained, as mentioned in the literature, in terms of the variability of the operating point in the solute–solvent–SCF ternary phase diagram and the precipitation mechanism with increasing concentration. Thermodynamic analysis of phase behavior of ternary systems of solute(s)–organic solvent–antisolvent plays an important role in terms of the design of coprecipitation processes in supercritical medium. But there is a lack of study in this area because determination of the phase behavior of multi-component systems which contain polymers may be difficult due to complicated nature of polymers. Solutions were sprayed into high pressure cell in the pressure range of 70–200 As the pressure increased particle morphology did not change between 100 and 200 The temperature was varied between 35 and 50 Increase of the temperature did not affect the mean particle size significantly. The variation of mean particle sizes is in the range of experimental error. However, particle size distributions exceed this range. As seen in It can be concluded that the operating temperature and The polymer/drug ratio of the solutions was varied between 1/1 and 4/1. As the polymer/drug ratio of the solution increased from 2/1 to 3/1 a significant coalescence was observed ( Although the mean particle size was not affected significantly with the increase in the polymer/drug ratio, particle size distribution was much more affected as seen in Drug The products obtained at 150 It is seen in 50% of CFA was released from composite microparticles obtained with 2/1 and 3/1 polymer/drug ratios at the end of 30 and 15 The coprecipitation of CFA–PVP composite microparticles was achieved successfully by batch SAS process. In all experiments generally spherical or slightly agglomerated spherical particles were obtained. Effects of process parameters such as pressure, temperature, solution concentration, drug There are both agreements and disagreements between this work and those given in the literature. Several controversial papers are present and general observations from these studies emphasize the challenges of the designing specific particle shape and size for different types of polymer–drug couples. The production of microcomposites using SCF technique is still under development, and there is a lack of information about the exact mechanism of the process, since in pressurized systems the balance of thermodynamic and kinetic properties which drive the precipitation process may be very complicated, and it is difficult to determine to what extent they affect the product properties. All of these constraints make the interpretation of experimental results difficult necessitating optimization of production conditions for each polymer/drug combination and development of predictive and reliable models to describe the process. This work was funded by