BiFeO3/[0.93(Bi0.50Na0.50TiO3)–0.05BaTiO3–0.02K0.50Na0.50NbO3] (BFO/BNBTKNN) bilayered thin films were fabricated on Pt/TiO2/SiO2/Si substrates without any buffer layers by a combined sol–gel and radio frequency sputtering route. Effect of BNBTKNN on electrical properties of BFO/BNBTKNN thin films was investigated. A higher phase purity and a denser microstructure are induced for the BFO/BNBTKNN bilayered thin film by using the bottom BNBTKNN layer, resulting in its lower leakage current density. Moreover, the enhancement in dielectric behavior is also demonstrated for such a bilayer, where a high dielectric constant and a low dielectric loss are obtained. The BFO/BNBTKNN bilayered thin film has an improved multiferroic behavior: 2P
                     r
                     ∼76.8μC/cm2, 2E
                     c
                     ∼378.1kV/cm, 2M
                     s
                     ∼52.6emu/cm3, and 2H
                     c
                     ∼453.6Oe, together with a low fatigue rate up to ∼1×109 switching cycles.Much attention has been recently given to the multiferroic bismuth ferrite (BiFeO Some measurements have been used to improve ferroelectric properties of BFO thin films by reducing the leakage current density, such as a single crystal substrate In the present work, the BFO thin film has been fabricated by using the BNBTKNN as a buffer layer for reducing its leakage current density, where the BFO/BNBTKNN bilayered thin film has been grown by using a combined route of sol–gel and radio frequency ( Two layers of BNBTKNN and BFO were grown by the sol–gel and The phase structure of thin films was measured by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (DX-100, Dandong, China). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Philips, XL30) was employed to study the cross section and surface morphologies of thin films. Fatigue behavior and ferroelectric properties of thin films were conducted by the Radiant precise workstation (RT2000 Tester, USA). The magnetic behavior of thin films was carried out by the superconducting quantum interference devices (SQUID, San Diego, CA). Dielectric properties of thin films were measured by Hp4294.    It is important to understand the relationship between the dielectric constant of the thin film and applied electric fields.    Multiferroic BFO/BNBTKNN bilayered thin film was fabricated on Pt/TiO The author gratefully acknowledges the support of