Ultra-fine grain (UFG) Cu–0.69wt.% Cr alloy with the average grain size ranging from 320nm to 550nm was prepared by equal-channel angular pressing (ECAP) with 4–6 passes. The high-cycle fatigue behaviors were studied experimently by loading in stress-control at a frequency of 30Hz. The relevant coefficients on the energetic approach for fatigue crack initiation (FCI) life assessment were also tested and estimated with the conventional mechanical data for UFG Cu–0.69wt.% Cr alloy. Two different models, the energetic approach and the Basquin's expression, were selected to compare and found that the fitted values of parameters based on the energetic approach are much closer to the experimental points than those of Basquin's expression. Based on the energetic approach, excellent agreement was obtained between the theoretical prediction of the fatigue crack initiation life and the experiments for the UFG materials. The fatigue limit, Δσ
                     c, and the equivalent endurance limit (Δσ
                     eqv)th, increase with increasing number of ECAP passes.Ultra-fine grain (UFG) materials prepared by severe plastic deformation (SPD) have attracted more interests during the last decade due to their promising physical and mechanical properties without any contamination or porosity In the viewpoint of engineering applications, the prediction of the fatigue life of structures, the rational design of structure with longer fatigue life and prolonging fatigue life, etc. are main concern for fatigue research. The fatigue life of a component can be divided into two parts rationally, i.e., the fatigue crack initiation life and the fatigue crack propagation (FCP) life. Though there are at least 50 models for cumulative fatigue damage and life prediction by now, such as the classical Manson–Coffin relation From an engineering viewpoint, the interest lies in relating the fatigue life of structural components to the allowable range of cyclic loading. Semi-empirical methods are frequently used to obtain useful results. Manson In the case of monotonically rising load, plastic deformation may be involved. The structural component, as a whole, is in elastic state under service loads but plastic deformation may cause the formation of a small plastic zone due to stress concentration. The dissipation of ductility in the plastic deformation processes has been realized to be the main reason for fracture. Similar to macro-plastic yielding, i.e., plastic deformation does not occur as long as the applied stress or strain is less than some critical value, we could assume a critical strain or stress for cyclic loading. Thus, there exists a fatigue endurance limit strain, the hypothetical element does not fracture if the cyclic strain deformation is smaller than the limit strain, and therefore the fatigue life is unlimited long or greater than 10 From above discussions, it can be seen that the load contributes to fatigue damage only when the local strain or fatigue endurance limit is up to the critical value. So the value of critical local strain, Many investigators expounded this hypothesis, and the local strain approach has also been developed to predicting FCI life of fatigue elements. Based on the above hypothesis, Zheng et al. Furthermore, an energetic approach-based modification to the local strain fracture model has been proposed in Ref. From the above Eq. The FCI threshold, Δ Once the values of constants However, whether the energetic approach for FCI life prediction is suitable to UFG material has not yet been checked. In this paper, we employed UFG Cu–Cr alloy prepared by ECAP to study its fatigue behavior, especially fatigue crack initiation life. The fitted results based on energetic approach and Basquin laws are compared. Furthermore, the energetic approach of fatigue crack initiation life prediction is checked by the test data of fatigue crack initiation life for the ultra-fine grain Cu–Cr alloy. The Cu–0.69 The billets of 14.5 The microstructure of the alloys was observed by using a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JEOL 200CX). Thin foils for TEM observation were prepared by a twin-jet polishing technique using a liquid of 33% nitric acid mixed with 67% methanol by volume percent. Optical microscope with a magnification of 50× was employed for the observation of fatigue crack at the fracture surface.  The conventional mechanical properties of the UFG Cu–Cr alloy are listed in  In order to predict the fatigue endurance limit Δ The empirically linear correlation was given for steel material in Ref. The fatigue crack initiation resistant coefficient, From Conclusively, all above results indicate that FCI lives of UFG material can be better predicted by the energetic approach from conventional mechanical data involving parameters such as From  Ultra-fine grain Cu–0.69 The authors would like to show their thanks to Sino-Czech bilateral project (Grant No. 2004-37-17) entitled “fatigue behavior of ultra-fine grain Cu and Mg alloys”, National high technology research and development program of China (863 plan) (Grant No. 2002AA331110) and the Doctorial Foundation of Xi’an Jiaotong University (Grant No. DFXJTU 2003-4).