There is increasing demand to optimise yield and increase capacity of crushing plants. Research in this area has resulted in the development of numerous optimisation tools, and resent research has shown that the economic aspects of production have great influence on the optimisation results. The profitability of a product is influenced by several parameters, and control of all these parameters is necessary to use some sort of optimisation software.
                  In this paper, we present a case study of a typical crushing plant, with the goal of reducing the number of crusher while keeping the plant capacity and quality. By reducing the number of crusher the plant will need less maintenance which will decrease the operating costs. The article presents a method to combine crushing plant simulation and optimisation with quality and economic considerations in order to successfully study alternative configurations of the plant.The goal of crushing plants is the optimised production of certain sized rock fractions, and in some cases, the achievement of a certain level of product quality. In order to control the yield and quality of the product, it is necessary to use a set of several different crushers whose main purpose is to reduce the rock size to the wanted dimensions. Such a crushing plant, with three crushing stages, is shown in The operator of the crushing plant can vary the crusher settings to achieve a certain product quality. The most common change is in the closed side setting (CSS), which enables the production of rock products in the desired size range. Machine parameters, such as stroke or speed, are rarely changed on a daily basis due to the fact that changing them is a time consuming process. These parameters are set when the crusher is initially put into commission in the crushing plant. Material characteristics also influence the quality of the product, and include parameters such as feed size and distribution, which may be controllable. The rock in a quarry is typically categorised as one or two rock types. The quality of the specific rock type varies for all material parameters, e.g., strength, structure, etc. As a result, it is almost impossible for the operator to control the variation of rock properties in a certain rock category. However, if the quarry has two or more types of rock, these can be sorted so that they are crushed and screened separately. For instance, diabase rocks sometimes occur in the same quarry as granite, in which case the diabase rocks can clog the screen due to their flakiness. It would be of great advantage to separately handle the diabase rocks in order to increase the capacity in the screen. The operator must consider both machine and material parameters when controlling the plant. Some parameters influence the outcome to a great extent, while some parameters have a lesser effect on the outcome. It is therefore suggested that a schematic protocol be created for the dominant parameters that influence the product quality. This protocol would allow the operator of the plant to tune the process so that a desired product quality can be achieved. The problem with optimisation models that focus on size and shape is that there are few available models that can simulate how the crushing plant should be controlled in order to optimise certain product parameters. In addition, even if there are models available, it is unlikely that process operators or plant managers are using these tools to tune the plant. This paper aims to show how process optimisation can be used in a scale quarry in order to optimise yield and product quality for a wide range of aggregate sizes. Simulations and optimisation results are verified with measured data from a crushing plant. A major advantage of the cone crusher is its ability to limit the amount of waste material produced. A disadvantage is the poor shape in most fraction sizes. Previous work carried out by the authors By using a VSI (vertical shaft impact) crusher it is possible to produce cubical particles in all fraction sizes, In theory, it is possible to produce cubic particles for all feed distributions in a cone crusher. In reality, however, there is a maximum crushing force that will limit the actual reduction and prevent particles from becoming more cubical. It is considered common knowledge that in order to produce as cubic a product as possible, the feed distribution should be as wide as possible and contain as few fines as possible since fines lead to a compact bed with low void content that in turn causes a power peak in the crusher and low reduction. In this paper, a novel method of optimising the crushing plant performance will be presented. This optimisation considers both the economic and technical aspects of the crushing plant. The aim of this work is to present a method for modelling the outcome of a cone crusher in order to predict particle size, shape, and crushing pressure. The experiments were conducted on a full scale crushing plant located in the western part of Sweden. This particular crushing plant is in a quarry that produces approximately 500,000 ton of aggregate each year. The lack of mining plants in southern parts of Sweden motivated our decision to choose a quarry rather than a mining plant. The crushing behaviour of the quarry is, however, similar to that of a mining plant. Specifically, we studied the third crushing stage, shown in The flakiness index test comprises two screening sessions. A sample is divided into fractions The crushers used in the third stage are named 3/36, 4/36, and 7/36 which can be translated to the chamber appearance on each crusher. For instance the 3/36 crusher has a fine chamber and is fed with rocks smaller than 3 The experiment was conducted in the following manner. Each crusher was operated separately in order to control the product size distribution. The crusher’s CSS was set according to the test plan shown in For each CSS, a sample was taken via a belt cut from the conveyor after the crusher that was carrying the 0–50 The 3/36 crusher was excluded from this experiment since it was irregularly fed with a feed size that ranged from 8–11 By using the shape model presented by The measurements of the yield indicate that the CSS should be approximately 16.5 For the 7/36 crusher, both the measurements and the model indicate that the CSS should be set as low as possible; this is limited by the maximum load allowed. In this case, the power reaches a peak when the CSS is approximately 16 The utilised power for both crushers was measured. This measurement was used as a guideline for the suitable range for the CSS, see In order to evaluate the performance of the final crushing stage, simulations in combination with optimisation were utilised. The optimisation method was described by The layouts of crushing plants differ a great deal from site to site. Plants are designed differently due to variations in the type of rock, the use of the products, the size of the quarry, plant history, and many other factors. The plant model is formed by connecting the various production unit models to each other. The rock material feed is defined and used as the input. In order to optimise the plant, it is necessary to have detailed information about the operating cost of each production unit. Finally, the product demand sequence, desired product quality, and product price must be defined. To find the optimal performance of the crushing plant model, an optimisation routine is needed. This routine will use the information generated by the simulation routine to identify the solutions that will maximise the cost function. The optimisation problem can be classified as large and discrete. It does not have a large number of parameters, but there are a large number of combinations of settings for the plant. A number of different optimisation routines are suited for these types of problems, including s In this work, the The PGSL algorithm is based on Gaussian distribution functions on all optimisation parameters. The distribution is defined within the nominal values on which the parameter values can be adjusted on the given equipment. There are in many cases other constraints that restrict the parameter interval but for the given optimisation task it are often impossible to determine these constraints since they depend on other parameters. Instead this is done after evaluation of the set of parameter values. If the values are within the constraints the set of parameter values can be approved. The first step in the PGSL algorithm is to generate a set of solutions to evaluate, for the first iteration the selection on parameter values are done using a unified distribution function. The selected sets of parameter values are evaluated using the simulation routine combined with the cost function. The resulting value from the cost function is used to rank the solutions. The best solution is used to configure the Gaussian distribution functions. The mean of each distribution is set at the corresponding value of the best solution. From now on the selections of parameter values are done using the Gaussian distribution function. After evaluation of the cost function and ranking of the tested solutions there are two possible outcomes. It could either be better or worse then the best solution. If a new best solution is found the distribution functions are recalculated around the new parameter values. Otherwise the distribution around current best solution is narrowed in order to increase the probability of selecting solutions close to the current best. The process of randomly selecting new parameter values using the changing distribution functions are repeated until either a maximum number of solutions have been tried or that the parameter values have not changed for a determined number of iterations. The cost function used to optimise the plant was gross profit in the same way as described by The actual parameters of the current plant were first input into the simulation in order to determine the current operating performance. This information was then used to identify a suitable change of the plant layout in order that would make the process more efficient while maintaining the quality of the main products. The current third stage of the crushing plant was modelled in the developed software, which consisted of a modified version of Plant Designer ( The plant was operated with the coarsest product (16–25 After rerouting the flow sheet and deleting one of the three crushers, a study was performed in order to determine the throws and CSS of the new plant using the developed optimisation routine. The results are illustrated in the flow sheet shown in As seen in the flow sheet, the updated crushing plant produces products of similar quality as the original plant. The crushers are utilised with larger throws and require more power. In order to achieve this, larger motors are needed on both crushers. The power draw for the complete plant dropped to 157 The simulated particle shape shown in the stockpile is a combination of three different shape simulations. Depending on the capacity from each crusher it will affect the final shape in the stock pile. In the 16–25 The model used for the 7/36 The empirical model we used can predict the shape of different fraction sizes with good accuracy. The model was originally calibrated for a medium chamber but seemed to work reasonably well even when predictions for a medium coarse chamber are made. There are, however, larger discrepancies when simulating the medium coarse chamber, which might suggest that the geometry of the chamber influences the quality of the model output. The stroke and speed were the same for both crushers. The model was calibrated for a crusher with high stroke. The optimisation outcome revealed that the settings in the crushing plant can be changed quite dramatically in order to maximise the yield and achieve optimal product quality. There is a need to further investigate certain economic aspects of the optimisation results before one can fully rely on the settings suggested by the optimisation. Although, as optimised, the modified plant would increase gross profit by approximately 3%, further studies of the process economics are needed to determine whether the suggested structural change should be made. The influence of chamber geometry, stroke, and speed on particle shape need to be investigated further. The empirical model also needs to be developed further so that other parameters such as chamber geometry, stroke, and speed can be incorporated into the model. Furthermore, is it necessary to investigate the influence of the ore on particle shape. The rock properties also need to modelled and added into the empirical shape model in order to achieve a more general model. We thank Bengt-Olof Tjell at Sandvik Mining and Construction in Svedala for all his help with the laboratory tests. The personnel at Angereds Krossen are gratefully acknowledged for their help with conducting full scale tests. Plant manager Risto Corell and District Manager Magnus Niklasson are acknowledged for their dedication to these tests. Skanska Teknik and Sandvik Mining and Construction are also acknowledged for their financial support.