In this work cells of Lactobacillus pentosus, growing on 20g/L of glucose for 15h at 31°C, were subjected to sequential fermentation and extraction processes with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) in order to study the capacity of L. pentosus to regenerate biosurfactants after various fermentative and extractive cycles. After a first extraction cycle, it was observed that, in absence of nutrients, L. pentosus, dissolved in PBS, does not have the capacity to induce the formation of new biosurfactants, although the extraction process almost did not affect the cell viability. However, when this biomass was recycled and subjected to three sequential fermentative processes, in presence of fresh fermentative medium, with their respective extraction procedures, L. pentosus cells recovered its capacity to produce more biosurfactants, observing an increase in the biosurfactant/biomass ratio, achieving a total biosurfactant concentration of 2.7g/L, being the highest reported at the moment in the literature for L. pentosus growing on glucose. Moreover, Concerning the fermentation of hexoses, Rodrigues et al. [ As it can be observed, the amount of cell-bound biosurfactants produced in each batch is very low in comparison with other metabolites produced by biotechnological processes. Hence, it is necessary to design biotechnological processes that allow to obtain higher concentrations of cell-bound biosurfactants, otherwise their industrial applications will be very restrictive. For instance, Khondee et al. [ The aim of this work was evaluate the recycle of  Fermentations were carried out in 250 In order to obtain the cell-bound biosurfactant extract, once finished each fermentation process, Afterwards, the solutions, containing the cell-bound biosurfactant extract, were dialyzed against demineralized water at 4 On the other hand, in order to evaluate if all the biosurfactants were extracted from cells, the biomass, containing Alternatively, the biomass of In total 3 consecutive cycles were carried out recycling all the biomass obtained after each cycle. Two different sets of experiments, with their corresponding cycles were established: in one set it was used regular biomass (RB) subjected to one extraction process, whereas in the other set of experiments, before recycling, biomass was subjected to a complete extraction of biosurfactants by 3 consecutive extraction processes. This biomass was named exhausted biomass (EB). Biosurfactant in PBS was quantified based on the surface tension (ST) value of the extract. Under the critical micellar concentration (CMC) it can be established a linear relationship between the increase in the ST and the concentration of a specific biosurfactant in an aqueous solution. Thus, for establishing this relationship, solutions in PBS, with different concentrations of this biosurfactant extract, were prepared, and filtered with cellulose filter paper (45 Additionally, biosurfactant extract was subjected to FTIR analysis using a Niocolet 6700 FTIR spectrometer (Thermo Scientific) by applying the protocol employed in previous works [ Colony forming units (CFU) were the units used to estimate the number of viable Biomass was quantified by determining the optical density of the fermentation medium at 600 Fermented medium (5 The color of aqueous solutions containing the biosurfactant extracted from The CIELAB color system is widely accepted by both the scientific community and industry, since is the most ‘perceptually uniform’ of the color spaces [  Eq.  On the other hand, aqueous solutions of this biosurfactant seem to have colorimetric properties compatible, with industrial applications, for instance in the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industries; although the best way to evaluate these properties is through a colorimetric analysis. Table 1S (see the Supplementary material) includes the color parameters obtained with the CIELAB and Tristimulus color systems. It can be observed that L* values, that measure the lightness of the samples, are about 100 indicating that the solutions containing biosurfactant extracts are almost white, this fact was corroborated by the values of x and y, around 0.3, for both variables, indicative of the white color in the Tristimulus system. Those samples with higher amount of biosurfactant gave higher L* values. The studies dealing with the production of cell-bound biosurfactants are scarce in the literature in comparison with extracellular biosurfactants and none of these works have contemplated the recycling of biomass, once the biosurfactants were extracted. In this work, a biosurfactant was produced by After a first extraction 89.6% of biosurfactant was obtained, whereas the rest, 10.4%, was released after a second extraction process. A third extraction step gave absence of biosurfactant (see Fig. 1S in the Supplementary material). In absence of nutrients, Therefore, various fermentative and extractive cycles were carried out in order to elucidate if the consecutive extraction of biosurfactants can induce or restrict the production of biosurfactants by Additionally, three consecutive fermentative and extractive processes were carried using the biomass already subjected to three consecutive extraction processes (  The amount of biomass increased slightly after the 3° consecutive fermentative-extractive processes. The yield biosurfactant/biomass ratio (g/g) obtained after the first feeding was 0.31 It can be speculated that Substrate concentration, at a minimal level, allowed optima microbial growth without catabolite repression or substrate inhibition, and substrate was utilized for biosurfactant production rather than biomass formation. It is known that most of the microorganisms can undergo substrate and product inhibition, thus the sequential addition of substrate could improve the yields of fermentative processes avoiding the presence of high substrate concentrations. On the other hand, many microorganisms suffer from product inhibition; therefore, the sequential extraction of fermentative products can avoid the product inhibition, improving the yield of fermentative products. This is the first work where it is demonstrated that the biomass of lactobacilli cells can be recycled after extracting the biosurfactants, bounded to their plasmatic membrane, increasing the productivities and yields achieved in regular fermentative processes. Additionally, it was observed that the cell viability of G. Bustos-Vázquez acknowledges to the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: