Environmental legislation is forcing industrialized countries to rehabilitate contaminated lands. Expensive solutions are available to treat soils contaminated by metals (e.g., solidification, stabilization, and landfilling). Physical remediation techniques, which are less expensive, are able to efficiently separate metals from contaminated soils under specific physical conditions. In the current study, densimetric and mineralogical characterization of fractions of soil between 0.25 and 4 mm contaminated by municipal solid waste (MSW) ashes and metallurgical waste was performed. This characterization confirmed the usefulness of the jig and wet shaking table for separating the metal contaminants from the soil. Mineralogical characterization allowed the prediction of treatment efficiencies and potential limits. The jig performance was optimized based on densimetric characterization. Water washing coupled with ferrous material extraction using magnetic separation, and, attrition scrubbing coupled with the jig and wet shaking table, led to a removal yield varying from 42.1% to 83.4% for Ba, Cu, Pb, Sn, and Zn from the fraction of soil >0.25 mm contaminated by MSW ashes. The recovered treated mass varied from 57.1% to 73.4% (by weight). For the fraction of soil >0.25 mm contaminated with metallurgical residues, Cu and Zn removal yields were higher than 57.5%. The recovered treated mass from this soil fraction corresponded to 64.8% (by weight). Depending on the level and leachability of contaminants, the soil fractions <0.25 mm were recommended for appropriate treatments (solidification or stabilization) or for safe disposal via landfills.Heavy metals generally refer to a group of toxic compounds, usually used in the industry and in various modern technologies ( The selection of the most appropriate soil remediation method depends on the concentration and the nature of pollutants to be removed ( Physical separation is a non-destructive technique, generally associated with the ore-processing industry. It aims to concentrate metals into a small volume through processes such as particle size separation, attrition scrubbing, magnetic separation, and gravimetric separation. A strong magnetic susceptibility of pollutants or a high liberation degree of the mineralogical phase containing heavy metals is often sought to ensure satisfactory efficiency of heavy metal removal ( Wet shaking table tests show good potential in isolating inorganic contaminants from soils contaminated via various sources. For instance, treating soils contaminated with weapon ammunition using a shaking table removed up to 96% of Pb ( As mentioned above, the development and optimization of a process train—including physical treatments (e.g., using a shaking table or jig)—usually require numerous randomized trials, increasing both treatment costs and rehabilitation time. Previous papers have mentioned the helpfulness of numerous analysis tools in the choice of decontamination processes and for the establishment of relevant strategies for the rehabilitation of contaminated sites. In fact, microscopic examination of contaminated particles coupled with energy dispersive spectrometry can provide substantial information about the dimension, surface characteristics, and composition of both the pollutant-bearing phase and its carrying phase (  The estimation of heavy particle distributions in a soil sample through the use of dense media separation (DMS) using tetrabromoethane (TBE: C In this paper, a mineralogical characterization of Pb, Sn, Cu, and Zn-bearing phases found in the fraction of soil samples >0.25 mm contaminated with MSW incinerator ashes and metallurgical residues was performed in order to predict the fate of different types of contaminated particles in gravimetric devices (i.e., a shaking table and jig). In addition to previous work on the prediction of the performance of wet shaking tables, this study exploits densimetric characterization data to: (i) evaluate the applicability of gravimetric devices; (ii) define the highest limit of separation; and (iii) optimize the performance of the laboratory jig used. Finally, the paper assesses the performance of a proposed complete process train composed of physical treatment to remediate soils with different types and levels of inorganic pollution. Two abandoned industrial sites in the province of Quebec, eastern Canada, were studied. Based on a previous sampling and characterization campaign, these sites were sectioned in three different areas according to the spatial distribution of contaminants. According to the reported data, the first site, situated in Quebec City, was used as a landfill to dispose MSW ashes from 1940 to 1960. The site was also a snow-dumping ground ( A fourth soil sample (MR1) was collected from the most contaminated section of the second site. This latter, situated in Montreal, was polluted with slags and smelter residues. This site is known to have been an important area of industrial expansion between 1848 and 1939 and had been occupied by metallurgical and steel production industries (  Prior to characterization and physical treatment, a grid was used to remove the fractions of soil >12 mm and fractions of soil between 4 and 12 mm for the soil samples MSW1, MSW2, MSW3, and MR1. Remediation techniques available to treat these fractions are limited. Larger fractions are generally safely disposed via landfills or treated using a physical separation column, attrition scrubbing process, magnetic separation, or crushing and physical-chemical treatment ( Previous research has reported the usefulness of densimetric and mineralogical characterization of soils contaminated with MSW incinerator ashes in predicting the efficiency and limitations of gravimetric processes including wet shaking and jig treatment ( In order to examine the mineralogy of contaminants in soil fractions of 2–4 mm, 1–2 mm, and 0.25–1 mm and to study the applicability of gravimetric separation techniques, thin sections (0.05 µm) of concentrates (>2.9 g/cm The elemental composition of metals present in soil fractions of 2–4 mm, 1–2 mm, and 0.25–1 mm for the studied soils was investigated. For each sample, the chemical composition including the levels of Ba, Cu, Sn, and Zn was determined before and after treatment. For this, soil samples were finely grinded (∼80 µm) and mineralized according to the “aqua regia” protocol defined by the Centre d’Expertise en Analyse Environnementale du Québec (CEAEQ; MA. 100 – For each sample, the fraction of soil >4 mm was treated using magnetic separation to adequately separate the ferri/ferro magnetic fraction from the non-magnetic fraction. To do so, based on particles sizes, 4 kg of the soil fraction >12 mm and 3 kg of the 4–12 mm fraction were randomly sub-sampled to ensure maximum representativeness of the samples. Each sub-sample was then spread on a flat surface, and ferrous particles were separated from non-ferrous particles using a hand magnet (0.3 T) positioned at a height of a few millimeters. The mass of metals was then determined. The separated non-ferrous particles were then crushed with a jaw crusher (Fritsch, Pulverisette 1) and subjected to chemical analysis. A Denver laboratory mineral jig (tank volume = 140 cm   At the end of the jig treatment, the metal removal efficiency ratio (R   A Wilfley laboratory table (Outokumpu Technology, 13A-SA), characterized by 1.02 m of length and 0.46 m of width was used to separately treat the soil fractions of 0.25–1 mm and 1–2 mm. Previous work by 1–2 mm soil fraction of MSW1: 12°, 12 mm, 375 0.25–1 mm sol fraction of MSW1: 11°, 11 mm, 352 1–2 mm soil fraction of MSW2: 10.5°, 11 mm, 432 0.25–1 mm soil fraction of MSW2: 11°, 11 mm, 352 1–2 mm soil fraction of MSW3: 11°, 12.5 mm, 300 0.25–1 mm soil fraction of MSW3: 10.5°, 11 mm, 432 1–2 mm soil fraction of MR1: 12°, 12 mm, 375 0.25–1 mm soil fraction of MR1: 11°, 11 mm, 353 S/min, and 5 L/min. The mass of generated products, the corresponding densities, as well as the residual concentration of metals present in treated samples, were evaluated in order to determine the performance of the wet shaking table.  Total metal analysis in bulk soils showed that MSW3 was the most contaminated (Ba = 1000 mg/kg, Cu = 1160 mg/kg, Pb = 2010 mg/kg, Sn = 784 mg/kg, and Zn = 1630 mg/kg) followed by MSW2 and MSW1. MR1 was highly contaminated with Cu (3060 mg/kg) and Zn (3110 mg/kg). According to the mass balance, heavy metals were heterogeneously distributed in the different soil fractions. However, for MSW1, MSW2, MSW3, and MR1, the majority of contaminants were concentrated in the soil fraction <0.25 mm. Consequently, volume reduction of the soil fraction <0.25 mm can potentially contribute to reducing a portion of inorganic contamination in these soils. In order to define the most problematic fractions, a comparison was made with the heavy metal limits imposed by the Land Protection and Rehabilitation Regulation in the province of Quebec, Canada (  Firstly, particles derived from MSW ashes showed both homogenous and heterogeneous mineralogical properties owing to the presence of mono/multi mineralogical phases. Such a typical complexity in the composition of contaminated particles is the result of initial heterogeneous composition of waste, thermal transformations of metals in a multi-component system during the incineration process (i.e., complete/partial melting, oxidation, and surface intergrowth of melted pieces with mineral components), and geochemical transformations in soil ( In the 0.25–1 mm, 1–2 mm, and 2–4 mm soil fractions, Pb, Sn, and Cu were mainly found in totally liberated phases. Most Pb, Sn, and Cu oxides present were identified and their mineralogical forms were as follows: Pb The microscopic examination of the 0.25–1 mm, 1–2 mm, and 2–4 mm soil fractions of MR1 showed several mineralogical scenarios of Cu and Zn particles. The first group identified contained totally liberated Cu and Zn carbonates/oxides, namely Cu Previous research has discussed the usefulness of densimetric characterization (DMS) in predicting the performance of wet shaking tables and for optimizing the parameters of gravimetric devices to separate metals from the 1–2 mm and 0.25–1 mm fractions of MSW1, MSW2, MSW3, and MR1. Metals such as Cu, Pb, and Sn were successfully removed from the 0.25–2 mm fraction of soils contaminated by MSW ashes when subjected to a TBE separation process (with 47.5%–94.7% of metals being removed). DMS was also efficient at removing Cu and Zn from the 1–2 mm and 0.25–1 mm fractions of MR1, with removal yields higher than 87.9%. The proportion of heavy metals in the 2–4 mm fraction of soils was also determined. The corresponding results are presented in Based on both the mineralogical and physical characterization results, satisfactory Cu, Pb, and Sn removal yields are expected if using gravimetric devices to treat the 0.25–1 mm, 1–2 mm, and 2–4 mm fractions of soils contaminated by MSW ashes. Low to moderate efficiencies of separating Ba and Zn are expected. Regarding MR1, satisfactory Cu and Zn removal yields are also expected when using gravimetric separation to treat the 0.25–1 mm, 1–2 mm and 2–4 mm soil fractions. Prior to jig optimization, attrition scrubbing, known to promote the efficiency of gravimetric processes (  Each time the sample was passed through the gravimetric device a small quantity of metals was removed corresponding to a mean value of 2.72 ± 1.30% (by weight)/pass/soil. For each soil, the density of concentrate was generally maintained high until the sample was passed Satisfactory removal yields of Cu from the 2–4 mm fractions of MSW1, MSW2, MSW3, and MR1 were obtained, ranging from 50.3% to 70.8%. The R The current results are consistent with those described in previous research. Indeed, the jig effectively extracted Pb, Cu, and Sn from the 2–4 mm (>40% removal) and the 0.85–2 mm (43% and 89% removal) soil fractions with different levels of contamination from MSW ashes ( In the case of RM1, according to the mineralogical analysis of the 2–4 mm particles ( Generally, for all soils, densimetric characterization was effective at predicting jig performance. However, the complexity of mechanisms involved during jig operation (i.e., differential acceleration, hindered settling, and interstitial trickling) (  For MSW1 (  According to For MR1 ( Overall, with respect to the physical treatment of the >0.25 mm fraction, the level of heavy metals in soils contaminated by MSW ashes was considerably reduced. The removal yields of Ba, Cu, Pb, Sn, and Zn varied from 50.8% to 64.7%, 42.1% to 71.9%, 56.9% to 80.1%, 66.7% to 83.4%, and 65.4% to 69.2%, respectively, depending on the level of inorganic pollution. The treated mass recovered from the >0.25 mm soil fraction ranged from 57.1% to 73.4%. This indicated the high efficiency of physical processes in concentrating metals in a small and acceptable volume of soil. For MR1, considering the >0.25 mm fraction, the removed mass of Cu and Zn varied from 57.6% to 65.5%. A satisfactorily treated mass was recovered from the >0.25 mm soil fraction, corresponding to 64.8% removal. This work confirms the efficiency and broad applicability of physical processes in treating several types of heterogeneous contaminated soils when metals are potentially separable, as predicted based on densimetric and mineralogical characterization. For instance, Inorganic contaminants were heterogeneously distributed in fractions of soils contaminated by MSW ashes and the soil contaminated by metallurgical residues. A specific treatment of each soil fraction was, consequently, needed. Mineralogical and densimetric characterization revealed the usefulness and limitations of using gravimetric processes, namely, the jig and the wet shaking table, to reduce the level of metals in polluted soils. When using the TBE separation, Cu, Pb, and Sn in the 0.25–1 mm, 1–2 mm, and 2–4 mm fractions of soils contaminated by MSW ashes, were highly concentrated in the heavy fraction. In the same way, during the TBE separation, Cu and Zn in the 0.25–1 mm, 1–2 mm, and 2–4 mm fractions of soil contaminated by metallurgical residues, were, too, highly concentrated in the heavy fraction. Satisfactory removals yields of these contaminants, when using gravimetric separation, were then predicted. The mineralogical investigation of 2–4 mm, 1–2 mm and 0.25–1 mm soil fractions enabled the estimation of mean densities of particles and their corresponding concentration criterion to predict their fate under gravimetric forces. Contaminated particles derived from MSW ashes and metallurgical residues were therefore classified into three major groups. The first and the second groups consisted of totally liberated contaminants and contaminants found bound to a heavy phase. Such contaminated particles were characterized by a mean density higher than 3.90 g/cm As well as predicting the efficiency of gravimetric processes, TBE separation enabled the optimization of the jigging process while minimizing the number of assays. By comparing the contaminant mass removed using the jig and DMS the number of passes required through the device was determined. Approximately 3, 5, 10, and 20 passes were required to effectively treat the 2–4 mm fraction of MSW1, MSW2, MSW3, and MR1, respectively. The removal yields of Cu, Pb and Sn, from the 2–4 mm fraction of soils contaminated by MSW ashes, was moderately to highly close to that, obtained by the TBE separation (ranging from 25.3% to 70.8%). The removal yields of Cu and Zn were too close to that obtained by the TBE separation (ranging from 35.3% to 70.1%). After exhaustive characterization of soil fractions, the global physical remediation process was established. Water washing coupled with the use of a permanent magnet (>4 The authors acknowledge Foncer Mine de Savoir, the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article:  