A numerical model for recuperated power cycles for renewable power applications is described in the present paper. The original code was written in Python and results for a wide range of working fluids and operating point conditions are presented. Here, the model is applied to subcritical and transcritical Rankine cycles. It comprises a brute-force search algorithm that covers a wide parametric study combining working fluid, resource and cooling temperatures as well as high-side pressures in order to ascertain the best working fluid for a given resource temperature and operating point. The present study determined the fluids that maximise the specific energy production from a hot stream for a range of low-to-medium temperature (100–250 °C) resources. This study shows that for the following resource temperatures: 100 °C, 120 °C, 150 °C, 180 °C and 210 °C, R125, R143a, RC318, R236ea and R152a were found to maximise specific energy production, respectively. In general, the inclusion of a recuperator within the power cycle results in greater specific energy production for a given operating temperature. However, it was found that for all fluids there was a threshold pressure above which the inclusion of a recuperator did not enhance system performance. This may have design and economic ramifications when designing next-generation transcritical and supercritical power cycles.The use of steam-based Rankine cycle power systems has been the main-stay of electricity production The thermodynamic analysis, including comparison of working fluid performance and optimisation of These studies are complemented by techno-economic analyses presented by other authors (e.g., Nevertheless, results for various working fluids and for a wide range of temperatures and pressures while considering the inclusion of a recuperator in the system has been less well reported. The inclusion of a recuperator can adjust the overall rank of performance of a fluid relative to another. Here we present a full set of algorithms that can be used to determine the operating conditions to make best-use of any temperature resource as well as the results for a range of fluids at operating temperatures between 100 °C and 250 °C and pressures up to 6.1 MPa. These results serve as a starting point for further system design investigations, such as turbine design. This model and was originally reported as part of the body of work presented in Ref. A simplified flow diagram of the cycle, including the key state points, components, features, and simplifications assumed, is presented in The subcritical and transcritical cycle configurations covered by the model are presented in The model runs by performing parametric sweeps of the following variables: fluid type, high-side operating pressure, In the present model, the pressure and heat losses occurring between each stage are considered negligible For the present study, a range of resource fluid temperatures between 100 °C and 250 °C were tested using a step size of 10 °C. Similarly, a range of high-side operating pressures between a minimum and maximum of 300 kPa and 6100 kPa were considered. For the fluids considered, pressures above ∼6000 kPa were found to yield only minimal performance gains, thus setting the constraint for the maximum pressure considered. The model starts by calculating the thermodynamic state points (Section  This section covers the calculation of the working fluid thermodynamic state points. These calculations follow the state points denoted in the flow and temperature–entropy ( A set of parameters have to be simultaneously satisfied so that the solutions obtained are considered valid by the model. This corresponds to the cycle feasibility check stage illustrated in In general, the properties that are either inputs or calculated in the model must lie within the limits of the equation of state and data available in Initially, a large-scale sweep of a variety of working fluids was carried out in order to ascertain a list of candidate fluids that were subsequently studied in greater detail. These fluids were a mix of fluorinated and non-fluorinated hydrocarbons encompassing many common refrigerants; the thermophysical properties of which are available in It should be noted that not all fluids available in The concept of  Another trend the results presented in These calculations allowed the identification of the best performing fluids for the considered resource fluid temperature bands. In order to develop an appreciation of the average relative performance of the different fluids across the temperature range investigated, we report a metric called the average normalised fraction of These values were then averaged for each fluid across its applicable ranges in the temperature set: The results presented in the previous section provide an indication as to the best matched fluid for the resource temperatures investigated as well as average performance across the temperature range, but do not provide the detailed information with respect to the system operating pressure yielding the maximum values of It was also decided to additionally include  Overall, the recuperated energy versus the energy transferred into the system via the hot-side heat exchanger was found to play a less significant role for higher high-side pressures. This is more pronounced in some fluids, such as Recalling the information provided in Overall, there is little variation in terms of maximum specific energy production, For resource fluid temperatures of 140–150 °C the highest values of The performance of Results for Results from the current set of calculations identified A numerical model for subcritical and transcritical recuperated power cycles was written in For resource fluid temperatures of: 100 °C, 120 °C, 150 °C, 180 °C and 210 °C the working fluids: While the analysis presented in the present study can determine the thermodynamically best-performing cycle configurations for a given resource temperature, it does not account for a number of important additional steps that must be completed in order to generate in-depth knowledge of the best cycle configurations. These steps pertain mainly to turbine design. For instance, this model does not calculate the efficiency or aerodynamic/mechanical design feasibility of the turbomachinery employed in the cycle. Rather, the model assumes a constant efficiency for the turbine independently from the considered operating conditions. Moreover, it assumes that a design is possible for such components independently from the operating conditions. The present methodology would benefit from the incorporation of suitable turbine models that will allow a practical map of optimum working fluids to be developed. This is the focus of subsequent work. This study was supported by the Queensland State Government, The University of Queensland and The University of Queensland International Research Tuition Awards (  state points specific energy production (from resource) [kJ/kg; kW/(kg s specific heat capacity at constant pressure [J/(kg K)] function of [–] enthalpy (specific) [J/kg] number of current segment [–] mass flow rate [kg/s] total number [–] pressure [Pa; kPa]/power [kW] vapour quality [–] heat transfer rate [W] entropy [J/kg K] temperature Set [–] temperature [K; °C]  variation/difference [–] efficiency [–] normalised fraction of  absolute outlet of cold-side heat exchanger outlet of the pump inlet of the turbine/outlet of hot-side heat exchanger outlet of the turbine cooling fluid cold-side cold-side heat exchanger referring to the generator heat exchanger hot-side hot-side heat exchanger number of current segment inlet maximum referring to net power outlet referring to the pump recuperator resource fluid isentropic referring to the temperature set segment step total to static total to total referring to temperature referring to the turbine working fluid