In this study sinterability of the two class F fly ashes were investigated as a function of sintering temperature and sintering time. For this aim, Çatalağzı and Sugözü thermal power plant fly ashes resulted from burning of bituminous coals were first pressed into cylindrical specimen, and then sintered to form ceramic materials without the addition of any materials like organic binders or inorganic additives. Sintering efficiency was evaluated in terms of ceramic specifications such as density, water absorption, shrinkage and splitting tensile strength. Furthermore, phase developments and microstructural changes due to sintering process were determined with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses. Overall results have shown that Sugözü fly ash seems to have better sintering properties than Çatalağzı fly ash due to the better microcrystalline structure, higher density and strength with the lower porosity, water absorption and shrinkage values.Many coal fired thermal power plants have been constructed for about eighty years due to increasing demands to the generation of more electric power. As a result, huge amount of combusted waste in the form of fly ash, bottom ash and slag have been generated. Today, worldwide annual production of coal fly ash is estimated around 500 million tones, constituting about 75–80% of the total coal ash production. Therefore, the amount of coal fly ash has been increasing throughout the world, and the disposal of this waste product has become a serious environmental problem Fly ash can be defined as the main waste residue produced during the pulverized coal combustion and collected by the electrostatic precipitators in a thermo-electric power station In 2010, total production of fly ash in the USA was 67.7 million tones while this production in Europe (EU-15 Countries) was 34.3 The sintering process is one of the most widely known methods in the production of conventional ceramic materials. Sintered ceramic products have been commonly used in the construction industry for a long time. The ceramic industry needs high amounts of natural raw materials such as quartz, feldspar and clay in the process. Supplying of these raw materials in sufficient amount to the ceramic industry is vital importance. This situation has prompted researchers to look for alternative raw materials for the ceramic industry, considering the high amounts of raw materials necessity and the conservation of the natural sources There is a considerable amount of literature on the sintering of coal fly ash with the addition of natural raw materials, various waste products and organic binders, but limited amount with the use of coal fly ash alone. On the whole, mineralogy, chemistry and physical properties of unsintered materials and crystallinity, microstructure and physical properties of sintered products were studied in these researches. Moreover, the process parameters like compaction pressure, milling, sintering temperature and sintering time were investigated on the physical and mechanical properties, microstructure, and mineralogy of sintered products In this study, two class F fly ashes obtained from Çatalağzı and Sugözü thermal power plants in Turkey have been sintered by using conventional powder processing based on powder compaction and firing without the addition of any inorganic additives or organic binders. Sintered samples were characterized in terms of physical and mechanical properties generally used in ceramic industry. In addition, phase developments and microstructural changes due to sintering process were investigated for further characterization of the sintered fly ash samples. The coal fly ash samples used in this study were obtained from Çatalağzı and Sugözü thermal power plants in Turkey. Both of the samples are resulted from burning of bituminous coals. The major chemical compositions of the fly ash samples were determined with a Spectro IQ X-ray fluorescence (XRF) spectrometer using glass discs prepared by fusing the ash sample with lithium tetraborate. Loss on ignition values of the samples were determined in an air oven at 850 It is clear from the table that SiO Heavy metal contents of the fly ash samples were also determined. The samples were analyzed using microwave-assisted acid digestion (MW-AD) followed by inductively coupled plasma (ICP)-mass spectroscopy (MS) for eight elements. Since fly ash mainly consists of aluminosilicate, a combination of HNO As seen from For further characterization, basic physical properties such as density, particle size and porosity of the fly ash samples were also determined. Particle size analyses were determined using Mastersizer 2000 Particle Size Analyzer. Porosity measurements were done using mercury porosimeter. Because of the powder composition of the fly ash, only the pore size distribution of micro pores and total porosity values can be obtained. Density measurements of the samples were carried out using helium pycnometer. Basic physical properties of the samples are given in According to Mineralogical compositions and microstructures of the as-received fly ash samples were determined with X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses. The XRD results showed that the main constituents of the both as-received fly ash samples are quartz and mullite. A small amount of hematite phase was also detected in the samples. According to SEM images, fly ash particles mainly contain small, glass like particles of spherical shape and irregularly shaped particles. In sample preparation, a composition of 95% fly ash and 5% distilled water was used to prepare cylindrical specimens. The fly ash samples (a total of 20 The sintered class F fly ashes were characterized for a number of physical and mechanical properties generally used in ceramic industry. Bulk density, axial and radial shrinkage, water absorption and porosity analyses were carried out as physical measures of sintering efficiency. Bulk density was calculated from the measured weight and specimen dimensions (ASTM C 134) Phase developments and microstructural changes due to sintering process were determined with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses. The sintered fly ash samples were analyzed by XRD to determine the mineralogical changes in crystalline phases. XRD patterns were recorded by using a Rigaku MiniFlex X-ray diffractometer operated at 40 SEM investigations were performed by using JEOL Model JSM-6400 operated at 20 The two class F fly ash samples obtained from Çatalağzı and Sugözü thermal power plants in Turkey were sintered without the addition of any organic binders or inorganic additives. A number of experiments were carried out in order to determine optimum compaction pressure and hold an opinion about temperature and time intervals used in this study. The optimum condition for preheating temperature and time were also determined from our previous experiments. As a result of these preliminary experiments, the compaction pressure was selected as 65   Another important measure of sintering efficiency is porosity (total of open and close porosity). Water absorption (a measure of open porosity) results of both SFA and CFA as a function of sintering temperature and sintering time are shown in Axial and radial shrinkage were also used as measures of sintering efficiency. Overall, Phase developments and microstructural evolution of the two class F fly ash samples due to sintering process were investigated with X-ray diffraction (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analyses. According to JCPDS data files, the major crystalline phases identified in the both as received fly ashes were quartz (SiO SEM investigations were carried out on the two sintered class F fly ash samples to observe the microstructural evolution of the samples. There was also only one more experiment performed with SFA sample for the processing conditions of 1200 In this study, the highest density are not coincident with the maximum values of STS for both SFA and CFA, and the results show that though the density is increasing, the STS is decreasing in the case of high temperature and long processing time samples, those processed at 1100 In this study, a significant increase in strength was developed as a result of sintering process of Çatalağzı and Sugözü fly ashes. According to Overall results put forward that the better microcrystalline structures (smoother fracture surface), higher density and strength with the lower porosity, water absorption and shrinkage values make Sugözü fly ash a better candidate for ceramic industry than Çatalağzı fly ash. This result is logical due to the higher density with lower particle size and total porosity values of Sugözü fly ash as a raw material. It was stated by numerous researchers that chemical composition and particle size play an important role on the properties of sintered fly ash samples. As the two samples have very similar chemical composition, it can be easily said that the difference in sintering properties is mostly resulted from particle size and porosity. Finally, the best overall conditions for both Çatalağzı and Sugözü fly ash samples were achieved at the sintering temperature of 1150 The two class F fly ash samples were sintered based on powder compaction and firing without the addition of any materials like organic binders or inorganic additives. Rather complex relationships among physical, mechanical and microstructural properties of the sintered samples were investigated as a function of processing conditions including sintering temperature (1000–1150 The financial support by