Flocculation properties of cationic potato starch derivatives (2-hydroxy-3-trimethylammonium-propyl starch chloride) with degree of substitution (DS) up to 1.54 were investigated in kaolin dispersions at various solid/liquid ratios and ionic strengths by means of turbidity measurements and colloid titration. It was found that flocculation has occurred long before the kaolin surface charge neutralization was reached. Flocculant amount required for a complete phase separation decreased with the increase of DS, and dispersion restabilization was observed at polymer overdose for all the studied starch derivatives and solid/liquid ratios. The mechanism of the kaolin dispersion flocculation with cationic starch derivatives was suggested to be a combination of bridging and “charge patch” processes. Addition of electrolyte proved to enhance the dispersion flocculation through lowering the required polymer dose and broadening the flocculation window, although no substantial influence of ionic strength on adsorption of the starch derivatives was found.Natural starch has a capacity to acquire properties significantly extending its possible applications in food and non-food industrial sectors as a result of physical and chemical modification. This is the main reason for a worldwide sustained growth of demand for starch products at approximate annual rate of 4%. Although a substantial amount of non-food starch derivatives is used in mineral processing industry The efficiency of starch performance in the paper-making process is closely related to its ability to bind coating fillers and pigments as well as to retain on the cellulose fibers. Different types of starch have found application in paper coatings developed to improve smoothness, light-scattering ability, print gloss, and ink receptivity of paper. Several studies were focused on investigation of interaction between one of the most industrially important paper filler—kaolin, and various starch derivatives However, most of the works cited above were carried out for cationic starch with very low degree of substitution (DS Aside from the coating process in papermaking, cationic starches, especially those with high DS, have a high potential for application in closed white water systems due to the efficient flocculation of anionic trash and its fixation to larger fibers In this paper we discuss the effect of DS, solid/liquid ratio, and salt addition on adsorption and flocculation in the system kaolin/cationic starch derivatives with DS values in the range from 0.25 to 1.54. Kaolin (USP-type, Sigma) was used in all experiments as supplied. Kaolin dispersions in water (with and without KCl additions) and in Tris–HCl buffer solution (pH Cationic starch derivatives (2-hydroxy-3-trimethylammonium-propyl starch chloride) with DS from 0.25 to 1.54, corresponding to 25 and 154 quaternary ammonium groups per 100 glucose units, respectively, were synthesized according to the route described elsewhere Other chemicals were of analytical grade. Distilled water with conductivity <1 Flocculation was investigated as batch tests in a series of ten beakers, each containing 50 Dispersions for floc size characterization were prepared according to the above described procedure for flocculation tests at cationic starch doses corresponding to the complete solid/liquid separation. Floc sizes were measured at various rotation speeds (500–3500 Charge densities of cationic potato starches and kaolin dispersions were determined by colloid titration until zero charge point in PC-controlled system connecting particle charge detector (PCD-03, Mütek, Germany) and 702 SM Titrino (Metrohm, Switzerland). Kaolin dispersions containing different amounts of starch were prepared according to the same procedure as for flocculation tests; aliquots for titration were taken under constant stirring. Solutions of sodium polyethylene sulfonate (PES-Na) or polydiallyldimethyl ammonium chloride (PDADMAC) were used as titrants for cationic and anionic systems, respectively. Charge density (CD) (mequiv. Adsorption of cationic starch derivatives on kaolin was investigated at 22 Cationic starch derivatives studied were water soluble and showed high positive zeta potential over broad pH range due to the presence of quaternary ammonium groups. Molecular dispersion of cationic starch in the solution was ensured by high substitution degree, providing sufficient electrostatic stabilization. Colloid titration of starches at pH The main fracture of potato starch is represented by highly branched, “bushy” amylopectin molecules. It was shown Flocculation experiments, as well as investigation of starch adsorption on kaolin surface, were carried out at pH  As a result of adsorption of cationic starch on kaolin surface, expressed as  Interesting findings in In accordance with Comparison of the flocculation experiments and adsorption results shows that the optimum cationic starch dose corresponds to 25–35% of the maximum adsorption value, so that flocculation occurs long before the surface saturation is reached. Strong electrolytes are always present in industrial solutions including those of papermaking process. Thus, it is important to know the influence of ionic strength on flocculation effectiveness of the polymers used. The effect of electrolyte concentration on kaolin dispersion stability in the presence of cationic starches was investigated at 1, 10, and 100 Addition of electrolyte results in compression of the electrical double layer and decrease of the gyration radius of starch in the solution, although the former parameter is affected to remarkably higher extent. The effective thickness of the electrical double layer is around 1000 An interesting feature of the flocculation in the presence of salt is a considerable widening of the flocculation window. Such a behavior having electrostatic origin was qualitatively predicted by DLVO theory and experimentally proved in several charge-stabilized systems In most of the previous investigations of cationic starch flocculation properties, the bridging mechanism of the flocculation was suggested. The only exception, as far as we know from the literature search, concerns highly substituted cationic starch, so called fixative, where the possibility of the charge patch mechanism was discussed We assume that for highly charged cationic starch derivatives no explicit difference between the charge patch and bridging mechanisms can be outlined. Taking into account the fact that the length of the polymer should exceed the double layer thickness, one can see that possibilities for the bridging flocculation in aqueous dispersions without electrolyte addition are very limited, since the thickness of the diffuse layer (1000 It is well known that the higher the charge density of polyelectrolyte, the flatter its conformation upon adsorption, and the lower the possibilities for bridging. Taking into account high affinity of cationic starches to substrate and strong correlation between cationic starch CD and required flocculant dose, we can conclude that electrostatic interactions are the main driving force in flocculation of kaolin dispersions, although contribution from bridging, increasing with decreasing cationic starch DS, should not be neglected.  Apparent charge density of the cationic starch derivatives obtained was proportional to DS up to 0.7. Further increase of DS resulted in lower CD than it can be expected from the linear correlation found. Steric hindrances and possible charge spacing mismatch in complex formation between amylopectin and oppositely charged polyelectrolytes due to highly branched structure of the former were suggested as possible reasons for behavior deviations. Adsorption of cationic starch derivatives on kaolin surface was found to be of high affinity type, with maximum adsorption value decreasing with increasing polymer substitution degree up to DS All investigated starch derivatives showed high flocculation efficiency at optimum flocculant doses that correlated well with CD of derivatives: the lower CD, the higher amount of starch derivative was required for complete phase separation. Overdosing of the flocculants resulted in dispersion restabilization in all studied cases. Addition of electrolyte significantly enhanced flocculation and widened flocculation window, however, it did not have a noticeable effect on adsorption of starches. Simultaneous contributions from both bridging and charge patch mechanisms were suggested for flocculation of kaolin dispersion by cationic starch derivatives. Financial support from Arbeitsgemeinschaft Industrieller Fördervereinigungen e.V. (AiF) under the project 13558BG is gratefully acknowledged.