Enhanced coalbed methane (ECBM) can be recovered by injecting a gas such as carbon dioxide into the reservoir to displace methane. The contrast between density, viscosity, and permeability of the resident and displacing fluids affects the efficiency of ECBM recovery. The prediction of earlier breakthrough becomes complex as the permeability may vary by orders of magnitude during gas injection and methane recovery. Predominantly, the reservoir permeability is modulated by the pore pressure of the sorptive gas (CH4 and CO2) and effective stresses. Here we explore the possibility of early breakthrough and its implications for managing coalbed reservoirs during CO2 assisted ECBM. A coupled finite element (FE) model of binary gas flow, diffusion, competitive sorption and permeability change is used to explore the effect of CO2 injection on net recovery, permeability evolution and injectivity in uniform and homogeneously permeable reservoirs. This effect is evaluated in terms of dimensionless pressure (pD
                     ), permeability (kD
                     ) and fracture spacing (xD
                     ) on the recovery of methane and permeability evolution for ECBM and non-ECBM scenarios. We have considered two scenarios (4MPa and 8MPa) of constant pressure injection of CO2 for ECBM. The increase in production rate of CH4 is proportional to kD
                      but inversely proportional to xD
                     .
                  Further, a reservoir with initial permeability heterogeneity was considered to explore the effect of CO2 injection on the evolution of permeability heterogeneity – whether heterogeneity increases or decreases. The evolution of permeability heterogeneity is investigated for the same two CO2 injection scenarios. For the specific parameters selected, the model results demonstrate that: (1) The injection of CO2 in coalbed reservoirs increases the production nearly 10-fold. (2) At higher injection pressures the recovery is rapid and the production increases dramatically – the production increases 2-fold on increasing the CO2 injection pressure from 4MPa to 8MPa. (3) However, CO2 breakthrough occurs earlier at higher injection pressures. (4) The permeability heterogeneity in the reservoir is reduced after a threshold time (∼500days) although the overall heterogeneity is increased relative to the initial condition and is overall increased for both non-CO2 and CO2 injection scenarios. This indicates that the homogenizing influence of CO2-sorption-swelling is outpaced by CH4-desorption-shrinkage and effective stress influences. This leaves the reservoir open to short-circuiting and earlier breakthrough of CO2 rather than having this effect damped-out by the homogenizing influence of swelling. (5) The cumulative volume of CO2 produced and stored in the reservoir is proportional to the injection pressure.Enhanced coalbed methane (ECBM) recovery may be promoted by the injection of carbon dioxide as CO Coalbed reservoirs are self-sourcing with the majority of the CH There are multiple demonstration sites around the world exploring both CBM and ECBM. The Allison unit in the San Juan basin (US), for example explored CO These observations from experimental, pilot plant, and simulation studies may be exploited for optimizing CO The objective of this study is to develop a dual porosity FE model for binary gases (CH The coal is conceptualized as component solid blocks (coal matrix) attached together with springs as fractures, as shown in The following assumptions were implemented for the development of the FE simulator. The CBM reservoir consists of a dual elastic continuum representing matrix and fracture. They are homogeneous, isotropic and isothermal. The water in the reservoir is immobile and the gas flow obeys Darcy’s Law for a single phase. The gas present in the pores of the reservoir is ideal and its viscosity is a function of pressure but not temperature as the reservoir is isothermal. A zero strain condition exists in the reservoir. A coalbed methane reservoir often contains more than 80% CH If the concentration The gas adsorbed in the coal matrix follows the Langmuir sorption relation and the gas volume adsorbed per unit of coal mass can be calculated using the Langmuir equation The adsorption of two (binary) or more than two gases in an adsorbent may be expressed by the Extended Langmuir Isotherm (ELI) as follows (Eq. The total sorption induced strain can be calculated by summing the strain caused by each species as, Typically a CBM reservoir is partially dewatered first to produce gas. The onset of water removal occurs when the seam pore pressure is below a critical pressure usually corresponding to saturation pressure (1) The primary porosity system A detailed analysis may be found in previous publications The convective velocity The transfer flux The porosity for the coal matrix can be defined If the sorption is caused by a binary mixture of gases then the volumetric strain term in Eq. Similarly, the porosity of the fracture system can be expressed as The permeability of the matrix can be expressed as Based on our previous work In the context of ECBM recovery, a high viscosity fluid (CO If the porosity is assumed to be equal on both side of the sweeping front then Eq. In a unit volume of fracture, the mass of the species and its rate of change is the net result of advection of the species into the volume which is governed by Darcy flow Eq. Dividing Eq. For simplicity the one dimensional form may be written as The dimensionless variables in Eq. The dimensionless form of the mass conservation relation can be written as The physics implemented in this study simulates the behavior of CO We have utilized conservation of mass for each gas together with flux transfer between matrix and fracture depending on the pressure difference. The exchange of gases (CH Also, permeability heterogeneities are employed in the model with mean permeability defining behavior indexed to that of the homogeneous system. The range of the permeability varies from very low (same as that of matrix) to very high (equal to one Darcy). This allows us to investigate the effect of CO For the sake of simplicity only a one-quarter section, as outlined with the red dotted line in All boundaries of the simulated area are fixed. The unique values of the properties used in this model are taken from the literature The initial permeability of the fracture network is assumed homogeneous The total cumulative production from the CBM reservoir in 30 The surface map of methane mole fraction in the matrix ( Based on the dimensionless analysis (Eq.  The fracture permeability evolution was more dramatic than the permeability transformations in the matrix. The change in matrix permeability is as high as ∼10% while the change in fracture permeability may vary by ∼200%. The fracture permeability is principally governed by the concentration of sorptive gases, their mole fractions and effective stresses  The dimensionless analysis of Eq. The evolution of dimensionless permeability with fracture spacing is investigated for the 4 The natural fracture network of a coalbed reservoir offers a wide range of spatial variation in permeability due to the variation in the fracture apertures from one location to another. This spatial distribution of permeability is referred to as permeability heterogeneity. To the best of our knowledge, previous models developed for CO The initial permeability heterogeneity may increase or decrease with the progress of injection for various CO The evolution of the standard deviation of the permeability for the no injection scenario suggests that the reservoir shifts towards a more heterogeneous permeability configuration with continued production ( The evolution of permeability in matrix and fracture is investigated for the reservoir with initial permeability heterogeneity. Enhanced production for CBM reservoirs is observed with CO The mole fraction of production on a volume basis is shown in The CO The majority of CO In this work, the interactions between binary gas mixtures (CO The injection of CO At higher injection pressures the recovery is rapid and the production increases dramatically – the production increases 2-fold on increasing the CO However, CO The permeability heterogeneity in the reservoir is reduced after a threshold time (∼500 The cumulative volume of CO This work is a result of funding by ConocoPhillips. This support is gratefully acknowledged. We thank two anonymous reviewers for their insightful comments which improved the manuscript.