The results of a leaching kinetics study of spent nickel oxide catalyst with sulfuric acid are presented. The effects of spent catalyst particle size, sulfuric acid concentration, and reaction temperature on Ni extraction rate were determined. The results obtained show that extraction of about 94% is achieved using −200+270 mesh spent catalyst particle size at a reaction temperature of 85 °C for 150 min reaction time with 50% sulfuric acid concentration. The solid/liquid ratio was maintained constant at 1:20 g/ml. The leaching kinetics indicate that chemical reaction at the surface of the particles is the rate-controlling process during the reaction. The activation energy was determined as about 9.8 kcal/mol, which is characteristic for a surface-controlled process.The increasing demand for metals in the world has required intensive studies for the extraction of metals from low-grade ores and/or secondary resources. Extraction of nickel can be performed from secondary resources like spent catalysts, fly ash, and boiler ash. There are many papers reporting on the extraction of nickel from spent catalyst using different reagents. However, the kinetics of leaching have not been sufficiently studied. The applied conditions for kinetics studies are different from those used for industrial extraction of Ni. In industry, leaching of Ni is carried out at high solids content, high nickel sulfate product concentration and stoichiometric amounts of sulfuric acid using coarse spent catalyst.    Traditional methods of recovering nickel and vanadium from oil-fired fly ash were to burn and concentrate the ashes to raise the grade of nickel and vanadium then treat the concentrate together with the oil slag in a process of sodium carbonate roast-leaching This study investigates the kinetics of leaching nickel from spent catalyst (NiO/Al Spent nickel oxide catalyst used in this study was kindly provided by El-Nasr Fertilizers and Chemicals Company in Talkha (Egypt). The spent catalyst was ground and sieved. The elemental compositions of the different size fractions are given in Twenty grams of spent catalyst was added at one time to the agitated sulfuric acid solution (400 mL) of the required concentration at the required temperature. The reaction mixture was agitated at a rate of 500 rev/min. At selected time intervals, 2-mL solution samples were taken using a syringe filter of 1 μm pore size and the solids corresponding to that volume were discarded. Consequently, the solid/liquid ratio was maintained constant at 1: 20 g/mL. The cumulative volume removed by sampling was not significant compared to the original solution (about 6%). The samples were chemically analyzed for determination of nickel content using atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS). After that, the percentage extraction of nickel was calculated. The effect of particle size on leaching of spent nickel oxide catalyst was studied using different size fractions (−80+170 mesh, −170+200 mesh and −200+270 mesh). Within the series of tests, the initial sulfuric acid concentration and leaching temperature were kept constant at 30% and 75 °C, respectively. The solid/liquid ratio was 1: 20 g/mL. The results are given in A plot of Ni extraction against time is presented in The effect of reaction temperature on Ni extraction at different reaction times is plotted in Nickel oxide present in the spent catalyst reacts with sulfuric acid according to the following reaction equation The matrix (α-alumina) is not reacted with sulfuric acid (a) Rate control by chemical reaction at the particle surface ( Based on the experimental data in (b) Rate control by diffusion through the product layer When diffusion through the product layer is rate-controlling, the kinetics may be correlated graphically using the Valensi equation: Again, based on the experimental data in (c) Calculation of the activation energy. The activation energy of a diffusion-controlled process is characterized as being 1 to 3 kcal/mol Leaching of spent nickel oxide catalyst with sulfuric acid was studied. Extraction efficiency of about 94% of the NiO present in the spent catalyst was achieved under the following conditions: particle size −200+270 mesh, temperature 85 °C, reaction time 150 min, sulfuric acid concentration 50% and solid/liquid ratio 1:20 g/ml. The kinetic study indicates that the leaching of NiO is a surface chemically controlled process. The activation energy was calculated as about 9.8 kcal/mol (41.1 kJ/mol) which is consistent with values of activation energies reported for surface-controlled reactions.