In this study, the beneficiation of two lignite tailings by Multi Gravity Separator (MGS) was investigated. The tailings samples from the Tunçbilek/Kütahya and Soma/Manisa regions have ash contents of 66.21% and 52.65%, respectively. Significant operational parameters of MGS such as solid ratio, drum speed, tilt angle, shaking amplitude, wash water rate, and feed rate were varied. Empirical equations for recovery and ash content were derived by a least squares method using Minitab 15. The equations, which are second-order response functions, were expressed as functions of the six operating parameters of MGS. The results showed that it is possible to produce a coal concentrate containing 22.83% ash with a recovery of 49.32% from Tunçbilek coal tailings, and a coal concentrate containing 22.89% ash with a recovery of 60.01% from Soma coal tailings.Coal washing plants in Turkey use gravity separation to beneficiate coal particles larger than 500 In the past, beneficiation of fine coal tailings used the most commercially viable concentration processes such as jigs, dense-medium cyclones, spirals, shaking tables, and flotation, either individually or in combination In this study, the applicability of MGS to recover two different fine coal tailings has been investigated, and the results from this study have been used to create an empirical equation of recovery and ash content for each coal tailings. Furthermore, it aims optimization of six operational variables for a MGS (pulp solid ratio, drum speed, tilt angle, shaking amplitude, wash water rate, feed rate), which are expected to be important in coal upgrading. Therefore the use of regression analysis with a mathematical software package, already successfully applied in beneficiation test and it is well suited to the main and interaction effects of the variables on clean coal using a MGS. Two lignite coal tailings obtained from Tunçbilek Coal Preparation Plant of G.L.I of Turkish Coal Enterprises (Kütahya-Turkey) and Soma Dereköy Coal Preparation Plant of Aegean Lignite Enterprises (Manisa-Turkey) were used in this study. The samples were taken from slurry waste with standard of TS ISO 5667-10 A number of qualitative and quantitative analysis techniques were used to characterize the coal tailings. The chemical composition of the tailings was defined by X-ray fluorescence (XRF). The mineral composition of the tailings was determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) method using a Rigaku-Giger Flex analyzer. The particle size distribution of the tailings was obtained using a Retsch AS200 Sieve Shaker and Fritsch-Analysette 22 Particle Size Analyzer. The specific gravity of the tailings was determined by Quantachrome Ultrapycnometer 1000. The ash and sulfur contents of the tailings were determined according to ISO 1171 and ISO 351, respectively. In addition, the calorific value was determined based on ISO 1928. Following the characterization tests, the beneficiation studies were immediately initiated before any physical and chemical decomposition of tailings. First, a series of classification tests were performed using a hydrocyclone to separate the clay and/or carbonate minerals from the coal before the MGS studies. In these tests, a small diameter hydrocyclone (44 To obtain a required solids ratio in the feed, measured quantities of solids and water were mixed in a slurry tank. The MGS variables were adjusted at necessary levels. The feed slurry was pumped into the MGS drum at the required flow rate using a peristaltic pump while the MGS was in operation. The products from the clean coal and tailing streams were collected at a steady-state condition. After the separation, the products were filtered, dried, and analyzed for ash content, and to calculate the combustible recovery which, was calculated from: The results of the chemical analysis for the coal tailings used in this study are presented in The XRD analysis results for the tailings indicated that the main minerals for Tunçbilek tailings are kaolinite, illite, mica, smectite, quartz, feldspar, siderite, dolomite, and pyrite ( The total sulfur content and calorific value of the Tunçbilek and Soma coal tailings were determined as 1.38%-1835 A 44 The optimum result was achieved at 5% and 10% solids, 2.2 and 3.2 The variables and results obtained from the MGS beneficiation tests for Tunçbilek and Soma coal tailings are given in  The results obtained from the experiments were summarized below. It can be observed from The effect of drum speed is shown in The effect of the tilt angle on the separation was studied at three levels, i.e., 0°, 2°, and 4° to the horizontal. If a rising column of water is flowing at a velocity between the settling velocities of the two minerals then the heavier and bigger minerals will be able to sink and the lighter and smaller minerals will be lifted by the water and hence a separation of the two minerals can be made. It should be noted from The effect of the shaking amplitude on the separation was also studied at three levels, i.e., 10, 15, and 20 The effect of the wash water rate on the separation was studied at three different flow rate, i.e., 1, 3, and 5 The effect of the feed rate was studied at three different flow rates, i.e., 1, 2, and 3 Eqs. (2)–(5) were derived from In the final MGS beneficiation tests of Tunçbilek coal tailings, the outcome of test number 7 is chosen optimum in the basis of ash content and the recovery ratio of the clean coal and the results are 19.72% and 44.38%, respectively. However, the clean coal which has the lowest ash content of 16.75% is produced by test number 4; and the highest clean coal recovery ratio of 78.57% is produced by test number 6. On the other hand final MGS beneficiation tests with Soma coal tailings showed that the optimum result according to the ash content and recovery rate of clean coal is test number 6 and the results are 22.89% and 60.01%, respectively. With Soma coal tailings the test number 4 resulted lowest ash content of clean coal with 22.89% and at test number 6 the highest recovery with 60.01% were obtained. In this study, the recovery of fine coal from the lignite tailings (Soma and Tunçbilek) was studied with enhanced gravity methods after classification with a hydrocyclone. The utilization tests have been supported by a mathematical model. The following conclusions may be drawn from the results: The characterization studies for the coal tailings showed that the LOI of Soma tailings is higher than Tunçbilek. This was attributed to the amount of organic material (coal) and CaCO While the tilt angle was determined as a major variable on the reduction of ash content of Tunçbilek coal tailings, the dominant parameter for Soma tailings was found to be the feed solids. The mathematical model of Minitab 15 has been found more effective for Tunçbilek tailings than Soma tailings. The following equations were supposed to utilize clean coal from tailings for Tunçbilek (Eqs. (6) and (7)) and Soma (Eqs. (8) and (9) coal plants: Consequently, a coal product containing 22.83% ash was obtained with a recovery of 49.32% for Tunçbilek coal tailing in pulp solid ratio of 15%, drum speed of 201