The dissolution rates of urea, sodium bicarbonate, and sodium carbonate in water and aqueous solutions were determined using the rotating disc technique. The experiments showed that the dissolution rate increases with increasing disc surface area, temperature, and rotating speed, while it decreases with the solute concentration increase in the dissolution medium. The comparison between experimental values for the dissolution rate and those calculated from Levich equation evidenced a satisfactory agreement in the case of the urea dissolution and poor compliance for the sodium bicarbonate and sodium carbonate dissolution. This poor results and the lack of a good model for making predictions in different situations determined the generation of empirical and semiempirical models (black and grey box approaches) which include neural networks developed with Clonal Selection algorithm (belonging to the Artificial Immune System class) and combination between neural network and phenomenological model. Satisfactory results were obtained with neural networks (black box models) and hybrid models (grey box models).Dissolution of solid in liquid phase is an important step in many processes, such as chemical engineering, nuclear engineering, mineral processing, agriculture, pharmaceuticals, electrochemical processes, environmental protection, and so on Dissolution of solids in liquids is complex and is influenced by a number of factors that characterize the properties of solvent and solute and working conditions. The process takes place in several successive stages, two of which being the most important: passage of solute molecules from the solid and transfer of separated molecules towards the bulk liquid phase A number of researchers have used various techniques to study the dissolution of solids in liquids and, based on the relations determined, they proposed models of mass transfer in the dissolution process. Since the surface mass transfer is constant and the hydrodynamic parameters can be easily controlled, one of the most commonly used technique for solid dissolution is represented by the rotating disc technique The rotating disc technique has been used in a number of carbonate minerals dissolution studies due to the importance of this family of minerals in a variety of natural and industrial processes: calcite and dolomite dissolution in various aqueous systems The theory of the dissolution by rotating disc method was developed by Levich In 1986 Tudose and Petrescu Rotating disc technique was used by Ozmetin The complexity of real world processes such as those encountered in the chemical engineering field is often translated into great difficulties when trying the capture their dynamic and behaviour into a model. In the majority of cases, the tools used to create these models are represented by the mathematical relations describing the physical and chemical laws that govern the systems. However, these laws are complex and difficult to apply requiring specialized software (as in case of In the present work, the dissolution rate of solids with different solubility in distilled water and in aqueous solution of the solute was studied, along with the influence of disc surface area, dissolution medium temperature, and rotating speed of the disc on the dissolution rate. It should be noted that, compared with other known studies, this work was carried out using solutions with high concentrations. A comparison between experimental and calculated dissolution rate, based on the only available model of Levich Empirical models represent acceptable alternatives to phenomenological ones, the open literature containing a multitude of variants from which biological inspired algorithms represent promising tools. The current work employs an approach based on two bio-inspired algorithms: (i) Clonal Selection algorithm (CS) belonging to the Artificial Immune System (AIS) and (ii) Feed Forward Neural Network that is a particular case of an Artificial Neural Network (ANN). AIS is a group of computational paradigms represented by highly abstract models of the biological immune systems ANNs are computational structures inspired by neuro-science, having specific characteristics such as parallel processing, learning, and fault tolerance. They are excellent mathematical tools that can be used for dealing with complex, non-linear problems. Also, they are able to extract system features from experimental data using no prior knowledge about the process Although AIS algorithms are used for solving a great range of problems from different domains, in the chemical engineering field the applications are scarce Neural network designed in an optimal form with CS algorithm and hybrid models represented by combinations between ANNs and phenomenological Levich model were the models developed in this work. The main contribution of this paper is related to the designing of new good (accurate) models, easy to develop and use, which can provide supplementary information about the process through predictions for inexperienced conditions, in terms of saving materials, time, and energies. Another benefit of the developed models derives from the possibility to include them into optimal control procedures. Compared to the existing (enumerated above) phenomenological models, our models provide accurate results and work on a large condition domain because they are based on input–output data. Three solids, urea, sodium carbonate, and sodium bicarbonate, were chosen as the solute in this study, based on their practical importance in agriculture, chemical, pharmaceutical, and food industries. The solubility in water of the three substances is different and decreases from urea to sodium bicarbonate. The dissolution medium was either distilled water or aqueous solution of urea (30 The solute and dissolution medium properties were determined from the literature A rotating disc/stationary fluid system is simple to construct and provides reproducible data via a design equation based on fluid mechanics and forced convection principles. The latter characteristic is important since it links the flux or dissolution rate with transport quantities (diffusion coefficient and viscosity), with solubility, surface area, and stirring rate. The dissolution method is based on the mass transfer from the disc of solute (urea, sodium carbonate, or sodium bicarbonate) to dissolution medium (distilled water or aqueous solution of urea, sodium carbonate, or sodium bicarbonate). Both the dissolution rate and dissolution flux describe how fast the solute is released from solid surface into dissolution medium: Sometime, if the surface area of the disc is constant, the dissolution flux is preferred because it is normalized for surface area. According to Levich model, the dissolution flux for the solute transfer from the surface of the disc to the bulk solution In this expression, the flux is proportional with the concentration gradient ( The dependence of the dissolution flux on the square root of the rotating speed of the disc indicates that, under mass transfer limitation, a linear relationship will exist between dissolution flux and square root of the rotating speed. Generally, this old phenomenological model works with a series of approximations (enumerated above) and does not provide satisfactory results for dissolution rate for solute transfer from the surface of the disc to the bulk solution. The release tests were carried out in an experimental lab-scale setup ( A quantity of solute was weighted and transferred to a stainless steel die. The powder was compressed at 250 In the solid dissolution, the effects of five parameters were investigated: the solubility of solid, the dissolution medium, temperature, rotating speed of the disc, and surface area of the disc. The parameters used in the present study are given in During each experiment, the temperature has been kept constant with hot water circulated in the vessel jacket. The sample temperature was measured with a digital thermometer placed in the vessel. The duration of the experiments was measured with a digital chronometer. The dissolutions time was 20–300 In order to model the considered process, specific techniques belonging to the area of artificial intelligence were used. In the following sections a series of theoretical and practical aspects are presented and the proposed modelling algorithm is detailed. Various theories, mathematical and computer models related to the biological artificial immune systems exist in the literature, from which a series of intelligent methods can be extracted When an animal is exposed to an antigen (Ag), the immune system tries to identify it as non-self and initiates a response by producing antibodies (Ab). Two mechanisms are used: (i) cloning and hyper-mutating the best existing Ab, and (ii) creation of randomly Ab by the bone marrow. When cloning and hyper-mutating, the number of good Ab rises and the response to pathogens is improved. This is characterized by the capacity to learn and to have memory, the response being facilitated through pattern recognition, clonal selection, negative selection, and affinity maturation Based on the mechanism they implement, AIS algorithms are grouped into two main categories: network based (include continuous models and discrete models) which use the idiotypic network principles, and population based (includes clonal selection, negative selection, and bone marrow models) From the main subgroups of algorithms included in the AIS class, Clonal Selection algorithm (CS) is the most used. Its inspiration comes from the interaction between the B cells (a set of cells from the adaptive immune system) and the Ag Although based on different biological inspiration theories, CS and evolutionary algorithms (Darwinian evolutionary principles) are very similar, the researchers classifying them as population-based search and optimization procedures Various algorithms belonging to CS class can be encountered in the literature, most of them having the same features As in the case of an evolutionary algorithm, the initialization of antibodies represents the first step. It is recommended to scatter the antibodies uniformly over the entire feasible search space, so that the algorithm can better scan the search space and faster find the optimum locations In the selection step, based on the affinity value of the antibodies (computed using an affinity function), the population is evaluated and a series of solutions are selected for the cloning procedure. After computing the affinity of each Ab, a percent or a fixed number of the best affinity individuals is selected for cloning. With the scope of improving the Ab affinity in relation to the Ag, the generated clones are submitted to a process of variation and selection called affinity maturation. Two steps are involved: (i) somatic hyper-mutation (local search) and (ii) selection of the better matched Ab (global search) In this work, a modified combination between a CS algorithm and Feed Forward Multilayer Perceptron neural network (called CS-ANN) is used to perform a grey and black box modelling of the solid dissolution by rotating disc method. Distinctively from other CS implementations, the CS-ANN algorithm has a super-hypermutation operator composed of three mutation principles (Gaussian, non-uniform, and pair wise interchange hypermutation) Another characteristic of CS-ANN consists in the mechanism used for removing antibodies with low affinity. It is based on a combination of an age characteristic with affinity. A medium affinity value is computed and, if the antibodies are old enough and did not manage to evolve so that their affinity becomes higher than the medium value, then they are removed from the population. In order to improve the CS-ANN algorithm proposed in The approach using a validation set determined a change on how the affinity function is computed. If in the variant proposed in When models are constructed entirely from prior knowledge and physical insight, they are called knowledge-based (or white box models), the relationships between state variables having physical meaning. There are situations when the physical and chemical laws that govern a system are not known, the available information consisting only of measured data. In order to model such a system, the most used approach is the black box modelling which generally provides models with good flexibility and acceptable performance Taking into account the level of prior knowledge, the white and black box models represent the extremes. There is a third class of models called grey boxes, based on parameters determined with both physical insight and observed data. Sjober et al. A black box model can be viewed as a highly parameterized structure capable of realizing any input–output mapping, its identification being represented by the determination of the parameters that lead to the minimum prediction output errors. It is characterized by structure (interconnection with the rest of the system, internal complexity) and type of nonlinearity In a general, nonlinear case, the black box structure uses a function series like: Many techniques (neural networks, fuzzy sets, fuzzy rules wavelet models, nearest neighbour models, hinging hyperplanes, etc.) fit Eq. The black box modelling ( The difference between classical approaches related to the use of black-box neural models and the one proposed in this work consists in the introduction of the optimizer (CS algorithm) as a mean of determining the optimal internal parameters and structure of the neural network ( A grey box model is a system combining mechanistic (physical and chemical laws) and black box (empirical) components, the main idea being to minimize the extra-experimentation and research Depending on the origin on the model (white or black), the typical applications and limitation of grey box system vary. In Ref. In our work, two of the three approaches presented in  Variation of the dissolving flux depending on the speed of rotation at 25  The results presented in Concerning the influence of dissolution medium on the dissolution flux, in all cases, the dissolution flux in solution is lower than in distilled water and this is because the driving force of the dissolution (difference from solute concentration at the saturation and solute concentration in dissolution medium) decreases in solute–solution system in comparison with solute–distilled water system. The mass transfer is also influenced by the solution physical properties and is considerably lower as the solution concentration increases.  The influence of temperature is complex: the solubility of solid increases with increasing temperature (and therefore the driving force), but also, the diffusion coefficients of solute and solvent viscosity are influenced. It can be seen that the influence of temperature is higher at higher rotating speed. Increasing the rotating speed of disc increases the dissolution flux of solute because the hydrodynamic layer thickness and the mass transfer film thickness decreases with rotating speed. The thickness of the hydrodynamic layer can be determined as a function of dissolution medium properties and rotating speed The experimental thickness of boundary diffusion layer is given by Nernst–Brunner equation: The thickness of hydrodynamic layer and the experimental thickness of boundary diffusion layer are illustrated in The rotating speed increase significantly influences the thickness of hydrodynamic layer, while the influence of temperature is very low. In addition, it can be seen that the rotating speed of the disc has a small influence on the thickness of diffusion boundary layer and the temperature has no influence. Similar variations were obtained for sodium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate in distilled water and aqueous solution of solute. It is interesting to notice that the thickness of diffusion layer, According to Eq.  For the systems urea–urea solution, the theoretical values of dissolution flux are higher than the experimental values which can be explained by the high values of solute concentration in the dissolution medium ( For the dissolution of sodium carbonate and sodium bicarbonate in distilled water and in solution, significant differences between the experimental and calculated dissolution rate were observed. These differences could be explained by the existence of multiple ions in solution with different diffusion coefficients. Other studies have shown a low dissolution flux, particularly by increasing the HCO In the current work, the CS-ANN algorithm was used in four distinct cases: black box and grey box modelling with serial, parallel, and serial–parallel configurations. Initially, it was developed to work as an optimizer for neural network model (black box). Then it was further extended and coupled with phenomenological model, its performance in different grey box variants being tested. In order to obtain the best neural model, some simulations were performed using various settings for CS-ANN (number of maximum neurons in the hidden layers, initial population of chromosomes, and number of maximum generations allowed) ( For the neural network structure, if some parameters are fixed and determined by the characteristics of the process modelled (such as inputs and outputs), other are flexible (number of hidden layers and number of neurons in the hidden layers). In the literature, various rules for setting these values are encountered, but none of them is fail proof. Since for the chemical engineering processes the majority of models had just one hidden layer, in this work the network structure was limited to one hidden layer. The maximum number of neurons in this hidden layer, denoted in On what concerns the initial population of individuals the CS-ANN algorithm starts with, a small number leads to a slow search of the available space, while a high value generates a huge number of clones that is computationally costly. Consequently, to obtain a trade-off between performance and resources consumed, the values tested for initial population of individuals (“Pop.” in In The average values presented in In order to determine if the best neural network obtained is better than the existing phenomenological model (PhM), a comparison between the two was performed. For the PhM: When computing the percentage error (PRE) between experimental and ANN predictions, for the data from Although the ANN model is better than PhM, it does not count for the inner physical and chemical laws that govern the considered process. In addition, its performance is not good enough. Consequently, a combination of phenomenology with empirical character represented by black and white box approaches is used for determining better models. In this work, three approaches are employed: serial, parallel, and a configuration including serial and parallel elements. In the serial approach ( Along with the serial, parallel variant was also tested ( In this case, the best model obtained, 6:16:1, is better than the PhM on all the data sets and better than the neural network only for validation and testing phases. An attempt to improve the model is represented by a combination between serial and parallel configurations ( In addition to the MSE and affinity, another measure used to compare the results obtained with the phenomenological model, empirical and hybrid approaches is represented by PRE. A list with all PRE results is presented in Also, the serial–parallel grey box approach proved to be the best alternative. In order to visually assess the performance of the PhM, black and grey box models, a comparison between them and experimental data is performed in By comparing all the best models obtained with each approach, from the affinity point of view, the serial–parallel variant produced the best results. In addition, the analysis performed on the testing data indicates the same thing, with an overall PRE around 11% or 5.8% (when two points are eliminated). In this paper, the dissolution rates and dissolution flux of three solids in distilled water and in aqueous solution with high concentration was determined using a rotating disc technique. The aim of experiments was to reveal the influence of solute, dissolution medium nature, temperature, surface area of the disc, and rotating speed on the solid dissolution. Experimental results have shown that the dissolution rate: (i) increases with the increase of solute solubility, temperature, surface area, and rotating speed of the disc; and (ii) decreases with the increase of solute concentration in the dissolution medium. A good concordance between experimental data and results provided by Levich's model was observed for dissolution in water at low rotating speeds and low temperatures. When the dissolution occurs in concentrated aqueous solutions, the experimental results are different from the Levich model. The experimental study was completed with a simulation part including different types of approaches: phenomenological, empirical, and hybrid modelling. Phenomenological model is represented by the Levich model. The black-box modelling is based on neural networks developed in an optimal form with Clonal Selection algorithm (CS-ANN methodology) and grey-box approaches combined the two types of models, applying different configurations (serial, parallel, and a novel one called serial–parallel because it combines specific elements from both serial and parallel structures). The algorithm CS-ANN contains new elements related to the determination of network overtraining and early stopping. This idea is based on the cross-validation procedure usually used along with the Back Propagation training algorithm. The results reveal that the best variant for modelling the dissolution process is represented by serial–parallel configuration, with an 11% error obtained in the testing phase. This error is much lower compared with the phenomenological model and consequently, it can replace it in various optimization procedures. Research has been carried out with the financial support of the project POSDRU CUANTUMDOC “DOCTORAL STUDIES FOR EUROPEAN PERFORMANCE IN RESEARCH AND INNOVATION” ID79407, financed by the