Introduction
                  Osteocalcin (OC) is the most abundant non-collagenous bone protein and is determinant for bone mineralization.
                  We aimed to compare OC bone expression and serum factors related to its carboxylation in hip fragility fracture and osteoarthritis patients. We also aimed to identify which of these factors were associated with worse mechanical behavior and with the hip fracture event.
               
                  Methods
                  In this case-control study, fragility fracture patients submitted to hip replacement surgery were evaluated and compared to a group of osteoarthritis patients submitted to the same procedure. Fasting blood samples were collected to assess apolipoproteinE (apoE) levels, total OC and undercarboxylated osteocalcin (ucOC), vitamin K, LDL cholesterol, triglycerides and bone turnover markers. The frequency of the apoε4 isoform was determined.
                  Femoral epiphyses were collected and trabecular bone cylinders drilled in order to perform compression mechanical tests. Gene expression of bone matrix components was assessed by quantitative RT-PCR analysis.
               
                  Results
                  64 patients, 25 submitted to hip replacement surgery due to fragility fracture and 39 due to osteoarthritis, were evaluated. Bone OC/collagen expression (OC/COL1A1) ratio was significantly lower in hip fracture compared to osteoarthritis patients (p
                     <0.017) adjusted for age, gender and body mass index. Moreover, OC/COL1A1 expression ratio was associated with the hip fracture event (OR ~0; p
                     =0.003) independently of the group assigned, or the clinical characteristics. Apoε4 isoform was more frequent in the hip fracture group (p
                     =0.029). ucOC levels were higher in the fracture group although not significantly (p
                     =0.058). No differences were found regarding total OC (p
                     =0.602), apoE (p
                     =0.467) and Vitamin K (p
                     =0.371).
                  In hip fracture patients, multivariate analysis, adjusted for clinical characteristics, serum factors related to OC metabolism and gene expression of bone matrix proteins showed that low OC/COL1A1 expression ratio was significantly associated with worse trabecular strength (β
                     =0.607; p
                     =0.013) and stiffness (β
                     =0.693; p
                     =0.003). No association was found between ucOC and bone mechanics. Moreover, in osteoarthritis patients, the multivariate analysis revealed that serum total OC was negatively associated with strength (β
                     =−0.411; p
                     =0.030) and stiffness (β
                     =−0.487; p
                     =0.009).
               
                  Conclusion
                  We demonstrated that low bone OC/COL1A1 expression ratio was an independent predictor of worse trabecular mechanical behavior and of the hip fracture event. These findings suggest that in hip fracture patients the imbalance of bone OC/COL1A1 expression ratio reflects disturbances in osteoblast activity leading to bone fragility.Hip fractures are the most severe clinical consequence of osteoporosis leading to high morbidity and mortality and constitute a major economic burden Mature osteoblasts synthesize and secrete osteocalcin (OC) and other bone matrix components such as type I collagen (COL1A1) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP). Their expression varies according to osteoblast maturation stage and this is influenced by Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX2) and Osterix (OSX) that are essential transcription factors for osteoblast differentiation at an early stage, are involved in the production of bone matrix proteins and are known to inhibit osteoblast late stage differentiation and maturation OC gene expression is restricted to terminally differentiated osteoblasts while collagen is expressed from the pre-osteoblast stage OC is produced by mature osteoblasts Given the current evidence, we hypothesize that impairment in OC function and/or availability leads to a derangement of the mineralization process and influences bone mechanical behavior in the elderly ultimately leading to a hip fracture event. In this work, we aimed to compare serum factors related to OC γ-carboxylation (total OC, ucOC, vitamin K, apoE polymorphisms) and OC bone expression in hip fragility fracture and in osteoarthritis patients. We also aimed to identify which of these factors were associated with worse mechanical behavior and with the hip fracture event. In this case-control study we have enrolled hip fragility fracture patients submitted to total hip replacement surgery within 8 Only patients with more than 50 A clinical questionnaire The study was conducted in accordance with the regulations governing clinical trials such as the Declaration of Helsinki, as amended in Seoul (2008), and was approved by the local Ethics Committee. Fasting blood samples were used to assess serum calcium and phosphorus, ALP and bone-specific ALP (BSALP). Serum crosslinked C-telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX-I) and serum amino-terminal propeptides of type I procollagen (P1NP) levels were measured on fully automated Elecsys® electrochemiluminescent immunoassay analyzers (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland). Concentrations of apoE, LDL-cholesterol and triglycerides were measured in an automated ADVIA 2400 chemistry system (Siemens, USA). Tartrate resistant acid phosphatase 5b (TRAcP5b; Immunodiagnostic systems, USA) levels were determined by enzyme-linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA) according to the manufacturer's recommendations. Vitamin K was measured through high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). Total OC was measured on fully automated Elecsys® electrochemiluminescent immunoassay analyzer (Roche Diagnostics, Switzerland) with a sensitivity of 0.5 ucOC was measured by ELISA (Takara Bio, Japan) with a sensitivity of 0.25 Genomic DNA was extracted from a blood sample using a commercial kit (QIAamp DNA blood mini kit, Qiagen, Germany). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was used to amplify a 283‐pb sequence of the apoE gene, including two single nucleotide polymorphisms sites at positions rs429358 and rs7412 present in exon 4. The three major isoforms of human apoE (apoε2, apoε3, and apoε4) are coded for by 3 alleles (ε2, ε3, and ε4). The three isoforms differ in amino acid sequence at two sites, residue 112 (position 3937 of exon 4) and residue 158 (position 4075 of exon 4). ε3 is the most frequent isoform Reaction was performed with 50 80 Reverse transcription cDNA synthesis was performed on 60 Each cDNA template (3 Primers for the housekeeping and target genes ( Primers for the housekeeping and target genes (Supplementary Table) were designed using the software Probefinder ( Real time PCR results were analyzed using the standard curve analysis. The conversion of the C For histological observation, bone samples were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin solution and then decalcified in 10% EDTA. After dehydration in increased ethanol concentrations (70%, 96% and 100%), samples were embedded in paraffin, sectioned and stained with hematoxylin and eosin for morphological examination. Immunohistological were performed using anti-osteocalcin (10 After the orthopedic procedure the femoral epiphyses were immediately stored at − Compression tests were performed in a universal testing machine (Instron 5566™, Instron Corporation, Canton, USA) with a load cell of 10 In a subset of 27 patients, femoral neck areal bone mineral density (aBMD) of the contralateral hip was measured by DXA scan using a Lunar Prodigy densitometer (GE Healthcare, United Kingdom) four days after surgery. Baseline characteristics are presented as median (interquartile range difference) or percentage. All continuous variables were tested for normality with the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test and were compared between groups with Mann–Whitney test. Categorical data were tested using Chi-square or Fisher's exact tests. Factors related to OC pathway and expression of osteoblast transcription factors RUNX2 and OSX were compared across groups using general linear model (GLM) analysis adjusted for differences in baseline characteristics identified as possible confounders. To analyze the association between RUNX2 and OSX and bone mechanical properties within groups we used Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. Multivariate linear regression models were used to explore the association between bone mechanical behavior (strength and stiffness) and factors related to OC pathway within the two groups of patients. Serum levels of total OC and ucOC, serum factors related to OC carboxylation (vitamin K and apoE), bone gene expression of ALP, OC/COL1A1 ratio and the presence of the apoε4 allele were considered potential predictors. The clinical variables that showed significant differences in baseline (age, gender and BMI) were also included in the model. The selection of covariates was stepwise by backward selection, according to the level of significance < Multivariate logistic regression was used to explore the association between hip fracture event and gene expression of bone matrix components (OC/COL1A1 and ALP). Other potential predictors of fracture such as baseline clinical characteristics were also included in the model. Statistical analyses were performed using Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) Statistics Software, v.17.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, USA) and a two-tailed 64 patients submitted to total hip replacement surgery, 25 due to primary osteoporosis fragility fracture and 39 due to osteoarthritis were evaluated. Fragility fracture patients were older ( Femoral neck aBMD was significantly lower in hip fractures patients ( Regarding serum levels of bone turnover markers, CTX-I ( There were no significant differences in total OC between groups. Also, there were also no differences regarding serum levels of relevant co-factors of OC carboxylation, namely apoE and Vitamin K. All patients had serum vitamin K values within normal range ( The ucOC/total OC ratio, which could reflect the rate of synthesis of OC and not vitamin K levels, was not different between groups. The apoE genotypes distribution at positions rs429358 and rs7412 were in accordance with the Hardy–Weinberg equilibrium. Apoε4 was previously documented as the risk isoform ε4 was present in 16% of all patients. Thirty-six percent of the hip fragility fracture patients were ε4 carriers while only in 13% of osteoarthritis patients ε4 was present ( Gene expression of bone matrix proteins was assessed in trabecular bone and compared between hip fracture and osteoarthritis patients, adjusting for age, gender and BMI. OC expression was significantly lower in hip fractures as compared to osteoarthritis patients ( Bone expression of RUNX2 and OSX was also determined in both groups as they are the two most important transcription factors that regulate osteoblast commitment from mesenchymal stem cells. No significant differences were found in bone expression of RUNX2 ( We have performed histology and immunohistochemistry in 2 patients with osteoarthritis and 3 patients of fragility fractures. In a qualitative evaluation we found more resorption sites in fragility fractures. We also performed immunohistochemistry for ALP and OC and found that ALP staining in osteoblasts was similar between osteoarthritis and fragility fracture patients. However OC staining is lower in osteoblast from fragility fracture patients ( Using both groups of patients we performed a univariate analysis and found that ε4 presence (OR Univariate analyses were performed in order to assess the relation between bone mechanical behavior and factors related to OC pathway within groups ( In hip fracture patients, low OC/COL1A1 expression ratio was associated with worse strength ( In hip fragility patients no association was found between serum OC related factors metabolism and trabecular mechanical behavior. In osteoarthritis patients, high levels of serum total OC were significantly associated with lower strength ( Reduced trabecular strength ( In order to identify which of the studied factors were associated with trabecular bone mechanical performance, we performed a multivariate analysis adjusted for patient's clinical characteristics. In hip fracture patients only OC/COL1A1 expression ratio was correlated with trabecular strength ( We also looked for the association between bone expression of RUNX2 and OSX with trabecular bone mechanical behavior within groups. No association was found between RUNX2 and strength ( In this work, we have compared differences in OC related factors pathway (OC bone gene expression, serum OC, apoE polymorphisms) in hip fragility fracture and osteoarthritis postmenopausal women and men over 50 We also addressed the association of serum markers of OC γ-carboxylation with hip fragility and with bone mechanical behavior. We did not found differences in serum levels of apoE and Vitamin K between hip fracture and osteoarthritis patients. Moreover, there were no significant differences in total OC between groups. However, ucOC, although not significantly, was higher in the fracture group, which is in accordance with the higher bone turnover found in the fragility fracture patients. Although serum levels of total OC, ucOC and vitamin K are reported to be associated with fragility fractures in large population studies On the other hand, total OC levels were associated with reduced trabecular strength and stiffness in osteoarthritis patients. In agreement, previous studies have shown that osteoarthritis patients had increased serum biomarkers, such as OC and ALP One of the limitations of this work is that the fracture event Also, serum levels of bone turnover markers might be changed in the early post fracture period Osteoporosis is a complex multifactorial disease which has an important genetic background. Several genes were identified to be responsible for bone fragility and predictors of fractures In summary, using a large panel of serum and bone factors that are relevant in osteocalcin pathway, we demonstrated for the first time that in hip fracture patients low bone OC/COL1A1 expression ratio was significantly associated with worse trabecular mechanical behavior and with the hip fracture event. These findings suggest that in hip fracture patients the imbalance of OC/COL1A1 expression ratio reflects disturbances in osteoblast activity, affecting bone metabolism and bone matrix/mineral ratio, ultimately leading to bone fragility. We anticipate that interfering with the regulators of bone OC/COL1A1 expression ratio might be a possible therapeutic target for osteoporosis. The authors declare no conflict of interests. AMR, JPP and AS recruited and evaluated the patients. JCL and AL carried out the molecular genetic studies. IP carried out the immunoassays. ACV and IA participated in the mechanical testing procedures. BV performed the histological and immunohistochemistry techniques. AMR and HC participated in the design of the study and performed the statistical analysis. AMR, JCL, JM, MFV, JEF and HC conceived the study, and participated in its design and coordination and performed draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The following are the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at This work was supported by unrestricted grants from A special thanks to the surgeons and nurses from Orthopaedics department of Hospital de Santa Maria that have collaborated with the collection of samples. Thank you Dr AS Pena, Dr A Faustino, Dr E Vieira-Sousa, nurse L Narciso and Dr. JC Romeu from the Rheumatology and Bone Metabolic Diseases Department from Hospital de Santa Maria for the clinical data collection and DXA performance and analysis. PM Amaral, PhD was also of great help in the advice of the mechanical tests set up.