The effect of stress on storage particles within a lithium ion battery, while acknowledged, is not fully understood. In this study we identify three non-dimensional parameters which govern the stress response within a spherical storage particle, and we carry out numerical simulations to characterize the stresses that are developed. The non-dimensional parameters are developed using system properties such as the diffusion coefficient, particle radius, lithium partial molar volume and Young’s modulus. Stress maps are generated for various values of these parameters for fixed rates of insertion, with boundary conditions applied to particles similar to those found in a battery. Stress and lithium concentration profiles for various values of these parameters show that the coupling between stress and concentration is magnified depending on the values of the parameters. The resulting maps can be used for different materials, depending on the value of the dimensionless parameters. Finally, the value of maximum stress generated is calculated for extraction of lithium from the particle and compared with those generated during insertion.As battery technologies are being applied to large scale portable devices e.g. automobiles, it is being realized that the ageing and subsequent failure of the battery are not very well understood. The US government has specified a list of requirements In During the discharge process, i.e. extraction of electrical energy from the battery, lithium stored in the anode is oxidized to its ionic form and moves through the electrolyte to the cathode. The electrons flow through the external circuit as they cannot pass through the electrolyte in the separator. The electrons flow into the storage particle in the cathode through the current collector. The lithium ions recombine with the electrons and remain in the storage particle in the cathode. During the charging process the reverse occurs, with lithium leaving storage particles in the cathode and moving into storage particles in the anode. The process of removing or inserting lithium ions into the storage particles is known as intercalation. This can be formally defined as the insertion of a guest species into normally unoccupied interstitial sites in the crystal structure of an existing stable host material This shrinking and swelling of storage particles can lead to comminution of the particles. Depending on the material being used as much as 100% of the lithium can be extracted, which leads to significant shrinkage Porous electrode theory Single particle models have been used to examine what occurs within the particle in much more detail with stress and diffusion coupled. Christensen and Newman Previous work has shown that the storage particles within the battery electrodes develop cracks over time and eventually comminute A common theme running through all of these studies is that they are material specific. The complications which arise while taking all the material parameters and their concentration dependence into account can sometimes obscure the result. Moreover, no property maps are developed which are generic, i.e. that can be used across a variety of materials. A map for the stress as a function of the discharge rate and particle radius has been provided for lithium manganate and graphite in In this paper we aim to develop such property maps in order to identify the parameters which determine the stress response within storage particles for a variety of materials. We first develop a model for diffusion based on the work of Bohn In this section the model for the coupled diffusion-stress model is modified and non-dimensionalized. We consider the particle to be spherical in shape. Although in an actual electrode the particles do not have a regular shape, it is prudent to consider a regular shape initially for ease of calculations. The resulting analysis will also be clearer and help in our understanding of the coupling between the stress and concentration profiles. Bohn The intercalation solution is assumed to be ideal. The storage particle expands and contracts isotropically during intercalation/de-intercalation of lithium. The strain is small and thus the mechanics of infinitesimal straining can be applied. The partial molar volume is assumed to be independent of lithium concentration. There is no interaction between lithium ions in the storage particle; i.e. the excess Gibbs free energy is taken to be zero. The vector flux, On combining Eq. Other formulations for lithium diffusion in a storage particle include those derived using multi-component diffusion From conservation of mass we get Earlier simulations, for both insertion and extraction of lithium from a storage particle, used two types of boundary conditions. The particle initially has a uniform concentration (0 or We wish to simulate conditions closer to those used in practice, without resorting to using a battery simulator. We replicate these conditions by doing the following In the case of insertion, the particle has a uniform initial lithium concentration Extraction is treated similarly. In this case the initial SOC is 1.0 and the lithium concentration in the particle is uniform. The lithium is extracted galvanostatically with uniform flux through the particle surface until the lithium concentration at the surface is zero, i.e. until The point at which the boundary conditions are changed from galvanostatic charging to potentiostatic charging is referred to as the transition point. This procedure is quite close to the boundary conditions as applied using a battery simulator (Butler–Volmer kinetics). During galvanostatic lithium insertion or extraction, the exchange current density and the surface overpotential do not change greatly, consistent with a steady lithium flux at the surface of the particle. When the lithium concentration at the particle surface reaches its extreme (i.e. Furthermore, the surface concentration of lithium in the storage particle determines the lithium chemical potential there (at least in the absence of stress at the free surface, see Eq. To ensure that the study is generic and applicable to a wide range of materials, battery designs and performance indicators, the equations are non-dimensionalized. Following Zhang et al. In non-dimensional form, the diffusion equation for lithium transport in the storage particle reduces to The model is implemented using the finite element method using the commercial code COMSOL We choose an appropriate range for the parameters based on values from literature for storage particles composed of lithium manganate (Li For a spherical particle of radius 15 A typical maximum upper limit for the lithium concentration in lithium manganate storage particles is Taking these numbers as a baseline, a range of values extending from 0 to 1500 for A special note should be made for the case of The maximum tensile stress experienced by a spherical storage particle during insertion of lithium is the radial stress at the center of the particle. In The dependence of stress on The maximum lithiation strain for lithium manganate is around 8%, and, as noted above, it has a value of We observe that the trend in maximum stress with To enable a better understanding of the development of the stress, the evolution of the concentration profile across the particle is plotted in In In For The fact that the maximum stress is experienced some time after the transition point is reached would also explain why the maximum stress as seen in In  In Finally in In order to look at the way stress histories develop for the different cases of insertion and extraction, the stress histories for the two different cases are plotted in For the lower values of current, the values of stress are comparable for the cases of extraction and insertion. The plots for insertion for these currents as seen in the inset in  Finally, for the sake of completeness, plots of the stress history during insertion are shown in We now comment on some features of stress generation in storage particles, some of them well known. Our results show that high values of dimensionless current during lithium extraction cause larger tensile stresses than during insertion. At lower currents, the values of maximum stress for the cases of insertion and extraction are similar. During extraction, the maximum stresses occur at the particle surface, whereas during insertion they occur at the center of the particle. Thus if a battery were cycled, it would be during extraction of lithium that cracks would grow, the assumption being that pre-existing cracks are found preferentially at the surface. Nevertheless, the values of the maximum stresses in both insertion and extraction are large enough to be of concern and are potentially large enough to cause particle fracture and comminution. The results also indicate that certain materials might be better suited to charging at fast rates than others with respect to the stress developed within the particle. High values of It is important to note that part of the prefactor arises from the concentration dependent mobility. If we assume that the mobility is concentration independent, then we arrive at the formulation of Zhang et al. The effective value of the dimensionless current The results we have provided are for an idealized case of a spherical particle. Most images of storage particles indicate that the shapes are not spherical, displaying many facets and irregularities. The presence of sharp re-entrant corners will influence the concentration of stress within the particle, causing them be more prone to fracture and comminution. Given the coupling between diffusion and stress, it is likely to be important to investigate how the lithium concentration gradient develops at sharp, re-entrant corners, and how that influences the maximum stresses that are generated. A model for diffusion of lithium in storage particles has been developed. A non-dimensionalized set of equations was implemented with three important non-dimensional parameters, the dimensionless current, By developing a non-dimensionalized set of parameters, we are able to highlight clearly the effects of the different material and system properties on the overall behavior of the system, including the generation of stress within storage particles. The results confirm the highly-coupled nature of lithium concentration and stress within the particle. Although simplifying assumptions have been made, our model enables insights to be obtained regarding the behavior of lithium storage particles during battery charging and discharging. We note also that our model can be applied to a variety of materials by choice of the appropriate values of the three different dimensionless parameters, The research in this paper is supported by a contract with the Robert Bosch Corporation and a grant from the University of California Discovery Program. We thank Esther Bohn and Thomas Eckl from Robert Bosch GmbH, Stuttgart, Germany