Cone crushers are used in the aggregates and mining industries to crush rock material. A model was previously developed to predict the worn geometry of a cone crusher. In that model there was some disagreement between predicted and measured geometry. A suggested explanation for the discrepancy is that the flow model used is not accurate enough to predict the pressure and wear on the liners. In this study an alternative flow model is presented that is better adapted for pressure and wear prediction. In the new model, the same mode of motion as in the old model is assumed to occur but only below the choke level of the crusher. Above the choke level it is assumed that downward flow is stopped by other particles that are squeezed further down. To determine the size distribution and bulk density above the choke level, an iterative process was necessary. Simulation results show that the new flow model has improved the accuracy in the prediction of operating parameters of the rock crusher, such as hydraulic pressure, power draw, and close side setting, CSS. There is also some improvement of the prediction of worn geometry as compared to the old model.Cone crushers are widely used in the mining and aggregates industry to crush blasted rock material. The two main crushing parts are the mantle and the concave. The main shaft of the mantle is suspended on a spherical radial bearing at the top and in an eccentric at the bottom. A hydraulic cylinder supports the bearing that carries the thrust force on the main shaft. The hydraulic pressure in this cylinder is called the hydroset pressure. As the eccentric is turned the rock material will be squeezed and crushed between the liners (see A typical process layout for an aggregates producer is shown in In the example in Previous research ( Other suggested explanations are nonlinear dependency between pressure and wear, shear stress at the interface between rock and liner, dependency between particle size and wear rate and inaccurate pressure prediction. Among the other suggested explanations, the prediction of pressure on the liners is assumed to be an important factor. The existing model is sufficiently accurate to predict breakage and capacity, but not as accurate in predicting hydroset pressure and power draw. To predict the pressure more accurately it is necessary to further develop the flow model. The aim of the present work is to improve the existing flow- and pressure model. A model for cone crushers was presented by The distance a particle falls during a stroke is called a crushing zone. The amount of material that enters the inlet zone, i.e. the first crushing zone, determines the capacity of the crusher. During operation at normal eccentric speeds the material does not entirely fill the inlet zone due to dynamic and boundary effects. The Evertsson model has been proven to be sufficiently accurate for modelling capacity and breakage in cone crushers ( The cross sectional area of the crushing chamber varies at different levels of the chamber, see The level where the cross section is at a minimum is called the choke level. The cross sectional area at this level is assumed to limit the amount of material that can pass through the crusher. In the Evertsson model it was assumed that it was the closing of the mantle that limited downward transportation. In the new model, it is assumed that the material squeezed at the choke level restricts the flow of material above the choke level. The Evertsson model is hence used from the choke level and down. In order to compute the mass flow, the bulk density at the choke level is needed. This is not known a priori, so an iterative procedure is necessary. The volume of the first crushing zone is guessed. Since the feed size distribution is known it is possible to compute the bulk density and the inlet zone mass. This amount of material is crushed using the size reduction model developed by If The factors limiting the downward flow above the choke level are thus different from those in the Evertsson model. Below the choke level the cross sectional area increases, as the material move downward, and there is more and more space between particles as they fall further down. Below the choke level, it is assumed that the Evertsson model is still valid. Since the bulk density of the material at the choke level is not known a priori, it is necessary to adopt an iterative procedure. The computational procedure is shown in A robust model would be able to predict capacity, hydroset pressure and power draw at different CSS’s for a large variety of chamber designs. To achieve this, another two scaling factors were introduced in order to be able to scale compression ratio and pressure distribution angle (see These factors do not have any impact on the capacity, but will clearly reduce the compression ratio and pressure distribution as compared to what is expected from the nominal geometry. The model parameter scaling the compression ratio is here denoted The volumes of the two boxes are assumed to be equal. The box changes its length by the factor The new flow model was implemented in the crusher simulation programme. The recordings were made in a quarry in Dalby in southern Sweden. As can be seen, the operating parameters capacity, hydroset pressure and power draw as a function of CSS are well predicted for different CSS’s. Losses in bearings, gears etc. are not computed by the simulation programme and loss in power draw and hydroset pressure were assumed to be 20 The model parameters were optimised for each measurement and for each crushing chamber separately. The average optimal model parameters for the two chambers are given in The ultimate objective of this study was to improve the wear prediction.  If the chamber geometry is slightly changed, such as a change of CSS as in The new flow model has improved the prediction of the operating parameters hydroset pressure, capacity and power draw. The prediction of worn geometry is also improved. If the chamber geometry is slightly changed, i.e. different CSS, the model will still predict operating parameters well. This indicates that the model is suitable for wear simulation, since wear only yields a slight change of the chamber geometry. The model parameters will need to be verified if a significantly different crushing chamber is selected, i.e. a fine crushing chamber versus a coarse crushing chamber. There are issues that are interesting to investigate further, for example the dependency between particle size and wear rate and the influence of shear forces on wear rate.