The mineralization process for 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) at pH ca. 3 has been studied by advanced electrochemical oxidation processes (AEOPs), such as electro-Fenton and photoelectro-Fenton processes, in which a Pt anode and a carbon–polytetrafluoroethylene O2-fed cathode, for in situ production of H2O2 are used. A solution of 230 ppm 2,4-D with a low salt content can be completely mineralized by the photoelectro-Fenton process at low current, whereas the electro-Fenton process leads to ca. 90% of mineralization. In both methods, 2,4-D is quickly destroyed at the same rate. The high degradation power of these AEOPs is due to the large production of oxidizing hydroxyl radicals by reaction between electrogenerated H2O2 and Fe2+ added to the solution. The higher mineralization rate found for photoelectro-Fenton is accounted for by the fast photolytic decomposition of some intermediates by UV light. Classical anodic oxidation with a graphite cathode and anodic oxidation in the presence of electrogenerated H2O2 are much less efficient methods to degrade 2,4-D and its oxidation products. 2,4-Dichlorophenol, 4,6-dichlororesorcinol, chlorohydroquinone and chlorobenzoquinone have been identified as intermediates by GC–MS and their evolution for each process has been followed by reverse-phase chromatography. Chloride ion is released from these chloroderivatives and accumulates in the medium. Short-chain acids, as glycolic, glyoxylic, maleic, fumaric and oxalic, have been detected by ion-exclusion chromatography. A general reaction pathway involving all these intermediates is proposed.2,4-Dichlorophenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) is a herbicide widely used for the selective control of weeds in gardens and farming. Although some pharmacokinetical studies have shown that it is not accumulated in the human body, in 1982 the World Health Organization considered this herbicide as moderately toxic (class II) and recommended a maximum 2,4-D concentration of 100 ppb in drinking water. On the other hand, 2,4-D is a poorly biodegradable pollutant, because in fresh waters it can be mineralized (i.e. converted to CO Several advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have been applied to try to mineralize 2,4-D in aqueous solutions. These processes are based on the chemical, photochemical and photocatalytic production of hydroxyl radicals (OH Under an UV irradiation, the mineralization process can be accelerated by the photolysis of Fe On the other hand, effective electrochemical methods have also been developed for the treatment of wastewaters with toxic and refractory organic pollutants. The most usual technique is anodic oxidation, where divided cells with conventional (Pt) or high oxygen overvoltage anodes (PbO Recently, we have proposed two new electrochemical procedures for the detoxification of acidic wastewaters, the so-called electro-Fenton and photoelectro-Fenton processes, and have tested their good efficiencies for the mineralization of aniline ( The aim of this work was to clarify whether 2,4-D can be efficiently mineralized by AEOPs, such as the electro-Fenton and photoelectro-Fenton processes. The study was carried out with a 230-ppm herbicide aqueous solution with a low salt content (0.05 M Na Reagent grade 2,4-D and analytical grade sulfuric acid were purchased from Merck (Darmstad, FRG). Anhydrous sodium sulfate and ferrous sulfate heptahydrate, both puriss. p.a., were obtained from Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). All the other chemicals were either reagent or analytical grade from Merck, Fluka and Aldrich (Steinheim, FRG). Solutions were prepared with water obtained from a Millipore Milli-Q system (Molsheim, France). All the electrolyses were performed with an Amel 552 potentiostat-galvanostat (Milano, Italy). The cell voltage was determined with a Demestres 6005 digital multimeter (Barcelona, Spain). The solution pH was measured with a Crison 2000 pH-meter (Alella, Spain). Total organic carbon (TOC) of treated solutions was determined on a Shimadzu 5050 TOC analyzer (Kyoto, Japan). The 2,4-D decay and the evolution of stable organic intermediates in electrolyzed solutions were followed by reverse-phase chromatography with a Waters system (Milford, MA, USA). It consisted of a Waters 600 HPLC liquid chromatograph, fitted with a Spherisorb ODS2 5 Electrolyses were conducted in an open, undivided and thermostated cylindrical cell of 100 ml capacity. The cell characteristics for each tested process have been described previously ( 100 ml samples of 230 ppm 2-4-D (corresponding to an initial TOC of 100 ppm) in 0.05 M Na Before the analysis of the treated solutions, all samples were filtered through PTFE filters of 0.45 To characterize the ability of the system to accumulate the H The current efficiency for H When 1 mM Fe No hydrogen peroxide was detected when the 0.05 M Na Degradative electrolyses of a 230 ppm 2,4-D solution at pH 3.0 were initially performed at 100 mA during 6 h. All methods tested led to reproducible values for TOC removal, and in all experiments, the solution pH remained practically constant with final values close to 2.9. Since an increase in the applied current causes a higher production of oxidizing OH Taking into account the fact that oxalic acid has been detected as oxidation product of 2,4-D by Fenton’s reagent ( The decrease in 2,4-D concentration for the different degradation processes tested at 100 mA was followed by reverse-phase chromatography. The results obtained are depicted on Reverse-phase chromatograms of degraded solutions always exhibited several additional peaks with characteristic retention times Taking into account the stable intermediates identified, the additional peaks in the reverse-phase chromatograms obtained for all 2,4-D solutions degraded at 100 mA were identified as 2,4-dichlorophenol (  Ion-exclusion chromatography revealed the presence of glycolic acid, glyoxylic acid, oxalic acid, maleic acid and its The release of chloride ions during the mineralization of a 230 ppm 2,4-D solution was confirmed by the potentiometric titration of the electrolyzed solutions with AgNO The above results indicate that in all treatments 2,4-D is mineralized to yield carbon dioxide and chloride ion as final products, according to the following oxidation process: It is noteworthy that the initial ACE for the two AEOPs is ca. 100%. This can be inferred, for example, from the initial rate for H A general pathway for the mineralization of 2,4-D at pH≈3 by the different treatments studied is proposed in The oxidation of the herbicide is initiated by the breaking of its lateral chain via C(1)O bond to give 2,4-dichlorophenol and glycolic acid. The dichloroderivative can then be hydroxylated by an OH An aqueous solution of 230 ppm of 2,4-D of pH 3.0 with a low salt content and containing 1 mM Fe These AEOPs have been studied with a more efficient carbon–PTFE O Stable chloroderivatives, as 2,4-dichlorophenol, 4,6-dichlororesorcinol, chlorohydroquinone and chlorobenzoquinone, have been detected as intermediates by GC–MS and quantified by reverse-phase chromatography. Dechlorination of these products yields Cl The authors wish to thank Carburos Metálicos S.A. for financial support received for this work.