We report a metal-organic framework-derived Co9S8 nanoflakes on reduced graphene oxide sheet composites as an advanced sodium-ion battery anode. Using a galvanostatic intermittent titration technique, we reveal that the sodium diffusion coefficient of the composite is higher than that of its counterpart. Ex-situ scanning electron microscopy images suggest the excellent mechanical stability of Co9S8 nanoflakes on the reduced graphene oxide sheet electrode during cycling, thereby facilitating cyclic stability. The partial surface-induced capacitive effect also contributes to electrochemical performance. With the reduced graphene oxide, the Co9S8 nanoflakes on the reduced graphene oxide sheet electrode deliver a high discharge capacity of 551 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, a good rate capability at 10 A g−1, and an excellent cyclic stability up to 500 cycles. rGO/Co9S8 shows potential for practical applications in Na3V2(PO4)3‖rGO/Co9S8 full cells.With energy consumption and global environmental issues, the development of efficient energy storage devices has become increasingly imperative Metal sulfides as anode materials with higher theoretical capacity than carbon (hard carbon or expanded graphite) anode show potential for the application of SIBs Herein, we report for the first time a Co rGO was synthesized using modified Hummer’s method In this procedure, 50 mg of rGO and 1.3 g of 2-methylimidazole (Hmim, C The phase of the samples was analyzed by using X-ray diffraction (XRD) data, which were collected using a Rigaku D/max2500 powder diffractometer (Cu Kα, λ = 0.15405 nm). The morphological characteristics of the samples were characterized under a scanning electron microscope (SEM; FEI Nova NanoSEM 230, 10 kV). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) mapping were scanned using a Tecnai G2 F20 transmission electron microscope (TEM). Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) spectra were obtained with an FT-IR spectrometer (Nicolet 6700). Raman spectra were recorded with a laser Raman system (LabRAM HR800) from 100 cm The electrochemical performance of the samples was examined via stainless steel coin cells (CR 2016). Working electrodes were prepared by mixing 70% rGO/Co  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at  XPS ( TEM was conducted to further confirm these composites. In The electrochemical performances of Co The rGO/Co To explore the effect of the reduced graphene oxide, the ion diffusion and conductivity properties of the both electrodes was measured by using Galvanostatic Intermittent Titration Technique (GITT) and calculated based on Eq. as follows where where A high rate performance plays a significant role in the application of electrode. The rate capability of rGO/Co The rate capability is mainly determined by diffusion constraint or an increase in ohmic contribution at a fast scan rate or The electrochemical property of Na We successfully synthesized a MOF-derived Co This work was financially supported by the