Background
                  Locking plates for open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF) of proximal humeral fractures are widely used. We observed an unusually high number of patients with complications referred to our institution. It was the purpose of this study to report these complications, as well as their treatment and outcome.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  From 2003 to 2010, all patients treated for complications after ORIF with locking plates for proximal humeral fractures were prospectively collected and retrospectively analyzed. Patients were followed up clinically and radiographically.
               
                  Results
                  In total, 121 patients (67 women and 54 men; mean age, 59 years) were referred after primary locking plate ORIF; 80% had a 3- or 4-part fracture. A mean of 3 complications occurred per patient, including malreduction, primary screw cutout, malunion, nonunion, avascular necrosis, and infection. Secondary screw cutout was found in 57% of patients, causing glenoid destruction in 33% of patients. A mean of 1.5 revision surgeries were needed. Hemiarthroplasty, total shoulder arthroplasty, and reverse shoulder arthroplasty improved the mean Constant score (24 to 55 points, P < .05; 29 to 54 points, P = .3; and 25 to 48 points, P < .05, respectively) after a mean of 24 months. In 6 patients, glenoid implantation was no longer possible because of the destruction by perforated head screws.
               
                  Conclusion
                  In this negatively selected series, complications resulted in secondary arthroplasties in over 50% of the patients. Shoulder function, though improved, remained substantially restricted even after revision surgery. Glenoid destruction by locking screws was the most devastating and previously almost unseen complication, which limited the options of treatment.More than 80% of fractures of the proximal humerus are nondisplaced or minimally displaced and can be treated conservatively. For displaced and unstable fractures, various techniques of closed or open reduction and fixation are used. Fracture reduction and anatomic healing become more difficult with a higher number of fragments, with greater displacement and comminution of the fragments. Thus, 3- and 4-part fractures, especially in elderly patients with osteopenia, are particularly challenging for surgical treatment. During the last several years, an increasing number of complications after treatment of proximal humeral fractures with locking plates have been referred to our institution, which serves as a tertiary referral center for shoulder problems. Some of these complications seem to be new and clearly related to the implant. In particular, iatrogenic destruction of the glenoid due to perforated head screws was previously unknown. It was the purpose of this study to analyze and group all complications seen in our institution after angular stable fracture treatment of the proximal humerus. Furthermore, we report our treatment strategies and their proper outcome. Between January 2003 and September 2010, 121 patients (119 referred patients and 2 patients initially treated at our institution) with complications after open reduction and locking plate fixation of a fracture of the proximal humerus were consecutively collected. There were 67 women and 54 men. The mean age was 59 years (range, 24-85 years) at the time of the fracture. Of the 121 patients, 114 had complete radiographic follow-up including radiographs of the initial fracture. In 7 patients, the initial fracture radiographs were missing but the remaining films were completely available including the immediate postoperative radiographs after open reduction–internal fixation (ORIF). Therefore, the fractures could be classified in 114 patients (96%). The 114 fractures were classified according to Neer Malreduction was considered present when either 1 or both tuberosities or the head fragment were not surgically reduced within 1-cm linear or 45° angular displacement from the normal anatomy. Malunion was considered present when the tuberosities or the head fragment did not heal within 1-cm linear or 45° angular displacement from the normal anatomy. Nonunion was considered established when the fracture line was still visible 8 months after ORIF. AVN was assessed radiographically and considered present when the humeral head had collapsed and had lost its spherical contour. A primary screw perforation was diagnosed when the tips of screws were seen above the cortical level of the head on the postoperative radiograph. The secondary screw cutout was assessed on subsequent radiographs. Furthermore, erosion or destruction on the glenoid side was assessed on radiography and confirmed on computed tomography scans. An infection was defined when cultures from tissue samples at first revision were positive. The different treatment modalities and number of revisions per patient were assessed. Clinically, the preoperative Constant and Murley score At presentation in our unit, imaging consisted of standard radiographs (including true anteroposterior, in internal rotation, as well as axial and outlet views) and computed tomography scans. After revision surgery, patients were radiographically followed up with standard radiographs. The Mann-Whitney test, the Wilcoxon test and, for normally distributed data, the The different fracture patterns are listed in The shoulders in our cohort had a mean of 3.1 (range, 1-6) of the previously defined complications; their classification is listed in Initially, 7 two-part fractures and 60 three- or four-part fractures were seen ( Primary screw cutout (14 patients, 12%) was seen frequently together with malreduction (9 patients). Malunion (76 patients, 63%) was observed in 57 patients after primary malreduction and in 19 patients after secondary displacement. Initially, there were mainly complex fractures (64 patients with 3- or 4-part fractures, 7 with fracture-dislocations, and 10 with head splitting). Nonunion (16 patients, 13%) of at least 1 fracture part was found after a mean of 13 months (range, 8-28 months). All fractures were treated with a mean of 5.8 (range, 4-9) angular stable head, a mean of 3.2 (range, 2-5) shaft screws with at least 1 locking type. Fourteen nonunions were isolated at the surgical neck. In 1 case, both tuberosities, in addition to the surgical neck, did not heal, and in another patient, the greater tuberosity and the anatomic neck did not heal. Nonunion (10 of 16 patients) was most frequently associated with malreduction. AVN (82 patients, 68%) was found in 37 cases with malreduced fractures and in 13 cases with secondary displacement. In 9 patients the necrosis was associated with nonunion. In total, we found 33 patients with AVN who had a correct reduction result after primary ORIF. Sixty-seven patients initially had 3- or 4-part fractures, and the length of the calcar fragment was shorter than 8 mm in 75 of these fractures. AVN developed in 11 of the 13 fracture-dislocations. Five patients had primary infection after ORIF: two were referred to our clinic for infect revision, whereas the other three had already undergone revision surgery at the institution of primary treatment. Fifty-nine cases of secondary screw cutout occurred in conjunction with AVN, of which 23 were initially well reduced. Another 8 were caused by malunion and 2 by nonunion. On the computed tomography scans of 71 patients with either primary (6) or secondary (65) screw cutout, 40 cases with non-contained destruction of the glenoid bone stock were observed ( Of the 121 patients, only 14 (12%) were treated conservatively ( Primary re-osteosynthesis (RO) of either the humeral head (7 patients) or the greater tuberosity (1 patient) was performed in 8 patients (mean age, 58 years), mostly after primary malreduction and subsequent malunion, after a mean of 11 months (range, 1-20 months). Only 3 patients needed no further revision surgery after RO; their clinical data, as well as the overall outcome in the RO group, are shown in We treated 10 younger patients (mean age, 54 years) with primary shoulder arthroscopy (SAS) including total or partial hardware removal, capsular release, and/or subacromial debridement after a mean of 16 months (range, 4-28 months) after ORIF. The indication was persistent pain in relation to beginning AVN and screw cutout (6 patients). The goal was to improve shoulder function and delay secondary arthroplasty. Three patients needed secondary arthroplasty because of progression of AVN, 2 of whom needed reverse arthroplasty for an additional rotator cuff tear. The forward flexion of neither the overall SAS group nor the patients without further revision surgery could be significantly improved ( Primary screw removal was performed in 16 patients (mean age, 63 years) in the case of primary or secondary screw cutout mainly due to early AVN, when the fracture was not healed yet. All but 3 patients needed further revision surgery, mostly ending in secondary arthroplasty (7 patients) because of progression of the AVN. One patient had an infection after hemiarthroplasty (HA) and underwent revision with an antibiotic-loaded cement spacer ( Primary THR (with or without arthrolysis) was performed in 41 patients (mean age, 56 years), mainly because of AVN and secondary screw cutout (26 patients) in radiographically consolidated fractures. Twenty-one patients did not have further revisions. They significantly improved with regard to forward flexion ( A total of 61 patients were treated with secondary arthroplasty at our institution. Three patients were referred with already secondary HA. Of the 61 patients, 3 had an infection with a cement spacer at the time of latest follow-up ( Fifteen patients (mean age, 59 years) were treated with THR and HA in step as first revision after ORIF. Twelve of them had an intact rotator cuff and good glenoid cartilage. The indication was mainly AVN and/or malunion with or without additional screw cutout. Three patients had a severely destructed glenoid due to screw cutout, which did not allow the implantation of a glenoid component; thus only HA implantation was performed. Of the patients who were treated with HA as the first treatment, 2 needed revision of the HA because of early loosening and 3 underwent conversion to RTSA because of dissatisfactory shoulder function. One patient with glenoid destruction had an infection with anterior subluxation of the HA and underwent revision with resection arthroplasty. The shoulder function of all patients who were primarily treated with HA could be significantly improved ( Another 11 patients had HA implantation as further revision surgery ( TSA and THR as first revision in 1 step after ORIF were chosen in 4 patients (mean age, 68 years) with AVN or malunion, an intact rotator cuff, and glenoid cartilage erosion or destruction due to secondary screw cutout. Their final outcome could be improved at final follow-up, though not significantly. They have required no further revision so far ( In 6 patients, TSA implantation was performed after 1 or more previous revision surgeries mostly because of further progression of AVN or dissatisfactory shoulder function after HA with glenoid erosion, good bone stock, and an intact rotator cuff ( RTSA and THR in 1 step as first revision after ORIF were chosen in 13 patients (mean age, 69 years). These patients mainly had secondary screw cutout due to malreduction with further malunion or AVN, which enforced revision surgery. In these patients, HA or TSA was impossible because of lesions of the rotator cuff with painful pseudoparalysis. Their final outcome could be significantly improved at final follow-up, and only one patient has required revision surgery thus far. One patient underwent revision for painful RTSA first with unsuccessful SAS and debridement, ending in conversion to HA ( In 16 patients (mean age, 59 years), RTSA implantation was finally performed after 1 or more previous revision surgeries ( Since the introduction of angular stable implants for fractures of the proximal humerus, the complication rate varies mainly between 20% and nearly 40%, with a rate of revision surgery of up to 25%, in the literature. Both good and excellent results have been published with the use of these implants. The type of revision surgery needed varies from simple removal of the implant to secondary arthroplasty, and there is only sparse information about the outcome after these procedures in the actual literature. In our collective of patients with complications after locking screw ORIF of a proximal humeral fracture, we see a tendency toward overuse or abuse of these implants. Over 50% of patients had 4-part fractures and over 20% had fracture-dislocations or head splitting, which are usually indications for primary arthroplasty and known to have a high need for revision surgery. Of the patients with malunion, only a small number qualified for corrective osteotomy and RO. This was a treatment option in younger, high-demand patients with no signs of AVN and where the young age hindered us from secondary arthroplasty implantation as a first revision procedure. Although there was a trend toward better shoulder function, it turned out that these procedures had only a limited beneficial effect, and it was mostly at the cost of further revision surgeries ( SAS with arthrolysis for stiffness did not clearly improve shoulder function, especially in the presence of AVN. Progression of AVN, more than 1 year after the index surgery, was the main reason for further revision with secondary arthroplasty in this group of patients. Therefore, SAS in stiff shoulders with AVN remains questionable. Partial hardware removal and THR were the most common revision operations in our study, as well as in others. In our study, over 50% of the patients finally needed secondary arthroplasty. This highlights that primary surgery should, if possible, be definitive. It should also be noted that neither secondary HA nor TSA or RTSA yielded results comparable to primary arthroplasty. The 5% rate of prosthetic infection in our cohort ( This study has several limitations. First, because of the negative selection bias for patients with complications, it cannot generalize and address the value of the locking plate. Second, there is a possible bias in the initial fracture classification. Overall, there exists no reliable and reproducible fracture classification. We have chosen the Neer classification system, which is frequently used among shoulder surgeons and has been shown to be superior to, for example, the AO classification. After seeing the high number of severe complications, indications for locking plate ORIF of fractures of the proximal humerus should be considered carefully, respecting fracture patterns and the surgeon's skill. The chances to surgically restore shoulder function after failed ORIF were limited in our collective. This study is an alert, from the viewpoint of the revision surgeon, with a particular emphasis on the newly observed, severe iatrogenic destruction of the glenoid, an anatomic structure not affected by the fracture but only by the treatment complication. Therefore, locking plate ORIF is not a uniform solution for all proximal humeral fractures, and the actual broad spectrum of treatment options, ranging from conservative to primary reverse arthroplasty, should be respected. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.