Bioactive glasses (BGs) have a great potential for bone replacement and regeneration in bone tissue engineering applications. In this research, first, sol–gel derived magnesium substituted 58 S BGs (MBGs) series composed of 60SiO2–4P2O5-(36-x) CaO- xMgO, (x = 0; 1; 3; 5; 8 and 10 mol.%) were synthesized and stabilized at 700 °C to eliminate the nitrates and prevent the crystallization of MBGs. MgO was substituted for CaO in the BG formula up to 10 mol% and the effect of Mg concentration on in vitro bioactivity and cellular properties of the MBGs were investigated by immersing them in simulated body fluid (SBF) followed by structural characterization using X-ray diffraction (XRD), Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM) techniques. The effects Mg on proliferation and differentiation of osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells were also evaluated by 3-(4,5dimethylthiazol-2-yl)− 2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) and alkaline phosphate (ALP) activity.
                  Results revealed that magnesium-substituted 58 S BG with 5 mol% MgO (BG-5) had the highest formation rate of hydroxyapatite (HA) while substitution of 8 mol% and10 mol% MgO (BG-8 and BG-10) lowered the bioactivity. MTT and ALP results confirmed that the substitution of the MgO up to 5 mol% increased both proliferation and differentiation of MC3T3-E1 cells, while more substitution had a negative effect and resulted in a decrease of proliferation and differentiation in BG-8 and BG-10. The result of antibacterial test showed that MBGs exhibited antibacterial effect against methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) bacteria. Taken together, results suggest that, among all the synthesized MBGs, sample BG-5 is a promising candidate as multifunctional biomaterial for bone tissue engineering with maximum cell proliferation and ALP activity, good bioactivity and high antibacterial efficiency against MRSA bacteria. Eventually, the BG-5 is suggested to be used in segmental defects in rat model in vivo.As a consequence of discovery and development of new technology and innovation in bone tissue engineering and bone regeneration, design and synthesis of novel biomaterial is necessary to meet the specific requirements in this field. Regenerate and replace skeletal tissue lost through trauma, osteoporosis and other disease that caused over time by aging, or accident is a key factor in orthopedic tissue engineering Moreover, there are many investigation reported that the effects of various additive elements such as strontium Magnesium (Mg) is the second most common intracellular cation and fourth most abundant metal cation in the human body Despite a few studies on Mg-substituted BG, two issues have not been exactly addressed in previous researches. The first is the effect of Mg content in MBG composition on in vitro formation rate of hydroxyapatite (HA) on MBG surface and the second is the optimal amount of substituted MgO for CaO in MBG composition which enhances cell proliferation and activity. Some studies have been documented that Mg Ma et al. in 2011 showed that the incorporation of 10 mol% MgO did not suppress the HA formation ability of the SiO Another unclear issue is the optimal amount of substituted MgO for CaO in BG composition which has a significant increasing effect on the cell proliferation and activity. Saboori et al. Furthermore, infections around implanted biomaterials should be considered in orthopedic surgery The first aim of this research was to study the effect of substituting up to 10 mol% of MgO for CaO in sol–gel derived 60SiO Moreover, Live/Dead and DAPI/Actin staining techniques were employed to qualitatively assess cell viability and visualize the morphology of nuclei and actin fibers of MC3T3s in presence of Mg, respectively. Finally, based on the in vitro bioactivity, cell proliferation, ALP and antibacterial activity results, the optimal MgO content in MBGs composition was reported. Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), triethyl phosphate (TEP), calcium nitrate tetrahydrate Ca(NO Additionally, in order to in vitro biological investigation, MC3T3-E1, a mouse osteoblast-like cell line, was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Poole, UK). Cells incubated at 37 °C in a humidified, 5% CO The quaternary MBGs were synthesized through the sol-gel process. TEOS, distilled water, and 0.1 M HNO The SBF solution was prepared according to Kokubo's specification The in vitro bioactivity evaluation was conducted by maintaining a constant ratio sample area/fluid volume of 0.1 cm The concentrations of Ca, Si, P and Mg ions were investigated by using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES; Varian Vista Pro, Palo Alto, USA) and also, the variation of pH with immersion time in SBF was recorded after 1, 3, 7 and 14 days with a calibrated pH meter (Corning pH meter 340, USA). The 3-{4,5- dimethylthiazol-2yl}− 2,5-diphenyl-2H-tetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was used to evaluate the proliferation of the MC3T3-E1 after in contact with different MBGs powder. MTT assay is based on the reduction of tetrazolium salt to formazan crystals by living cells. ALP is known as a marker for early osteoblast differentiation by measuring the conversion of p-nitrophenyl phosphate to p-nitrophenol Qualitative cell viability was assessed using Live/Dead cell viability kit (Sigma-Aldrich). As illustrated in our previous works In Dapi/Actin staining, similar to previous study In order to investigate the effect of Mg on antibacterial activities in MBGs, the bactericidal percentages were calculated by counting the final colony-forming units per milliliter (CFU mL For this purpose, cultured MRSA in liquid lysogenybroth (LB) medium were diluted approximately to 0.5–2 × 10 All experiments were performed in at least three replicate sets. The results were given as means ± standard error (SE). Statistical analysis was performed by using GraphPad Prism software package, version 3.0 (GraphPad Prism, USA) and the *p < 0.05 was considered statistically significant (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001 and *** *p < 0.0001). The XRD patterns of synthesized MBGs after 7 and 14 days immersion in SBF are shown in On day 14th, the peak attributed to (200) plane at 2ϴ = 25.8° was revealed for BG-5 and for BG-0, two mentioned peaks became more pronounced due to the growth of the formed crystalline HA. Moreover, a diffraction peak corresponding to the (211) reflection of HA phase was observed for BG-1 and BG-3 while, still samples BG-8 and BG-10 did not show any crystalline phase after 14 days immersion in SBF. On the other hand, two new peaks at 32.18° (corresponding to (112)) and 32.86° (corresponding to (300)) were detected on BG-0 XRD pattern which affirmed the maturity of the formed HA on its surfaces In order to check the chemical composition of the detected globules on BG-5 surface, the EDS analysis was carried out ( Previously, Ma et al. reported that the higher MgO contents in SiO XRD results showed that crystalline HA was easily formed on the surface of MBG with moderate concentration of Mg (BG-5) or without Mg (BG-0), while at low substitutions (BG-1 and BG-3) and high substitutions (BG-8 and BG-10), an inhibition of HA formation was observed. In addition, BG-5 had the highest in vitro bioactivity as compared to other MBGs. The FTIR spectra of the synthesized MBGs after immersed in SBF for 7 and 14 days are presented in Based on the literature, The band located at 570 and 603 cm FTIR results with good accordance with their corresponding XRD patterns ( The variations of Ca, Si, P and Mg concentration in the SBF for different immersion periods up to 14 days are shown in  Previous documents reported that the incorporation of elements like Mg Substitution of ions with various ionic radius in BG network (i.e., Mg   The SEM images in The EDS spectrum showed the peaks of Si, P, Ca, Mg, O and Au ( To determine the cytocompatibility of the MBGs, we evaluated the proliferation of MC3T3-E1 cells cultured on synthesized MBGs for 1, 3 and 7 days ( After 3 days in culture, BG-5 showed statistically significant difference in comparison with the BG-0 (*p < 0.05). As seen in Previously, the influence of Mg in BGs composition on proliferation of cell lines was investigated by Saboori et. al The alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity of MC3T3-E1 cells, cultured on MBGs for 1, 3 and 7 days are shown in According to the MTT and ALP activity investigations, on the one hand, BG-5 exhibited the maximum proliferation and ALP activity of the MC3T3-E1 cells; and on the other hand, XRD and FTIR results confirmed that BG-5 had the highest bioactivity all among the synthesized MBGs. Hence, in this research, BG-5 was selected as a sample for comparison with BG-0 for Live-dead assay and Actin staining of MC3T3-E1 cells. The viability of MC3T3-E1 cells in presence of BG-0 and BG-5 was determined by Live/Dead staining after 1 and 7 days of culture is presented in F-actin-labeled cytoskeleton and nuclei of MC3T3-E1 treated with BG-0, BG-5 is shown in Live-dead and Dapi/Actin staining demonstrated that an addition a moderate amount of Mg in BG (5 mol. %), not only had not cytotoxic effects on MC3T3-E1 cells but also increased the numbers of live MC3T3-E1s compared with Mg-free BG (BG-0).  Results revealed that Mg exhibited remarkable dose-dependent antibacterial activity against MRSA bacteria, i.e. by increasing the Mg substitution in BG from 1 to 8 mol.%, bactericidal efficiency was increased significantly while, 10 mol.% substitution had a reverse effect and led to significant decrease of bactericidal efficiency in comparison with BG-0 ( Up to date, the exact mechanism responsible for the antibacterial effect of BGs is yet unknown In conclusion, the sol–gel derived 60SiO The appearance of C–O stretching and P–O absorption bands in FTIR spectra as well as the detection characteristic peaks of crystalline HA in XRD pattern confirmed the formation of HA on the surface of BG-5 after immersion in SBF solution for 7 days. SEM micrographs double confirmed that after 7 days of immersion, HA nuclei were grown and the surface of BG-5 was fully covered by aggregates of spherical HA particles. Based on in vitro biological evaluation, 58 S BG substituted 5 mol% MgO in the composition (BG-5) not only had not cytotoxic effects on MC3T3-E1 cells but also increased the numbers of live MC3T3-E1s compared with Mg-free BG (BG-0). Live-dead and Dapi/Actin staining qualitatively demonstrated that with substitution a moderate amount of Mg in BG (5 mol. %), the numbers of live MC3T3-E1s were increased with relatively lower proportion of dead cells in compared with Mg-free BG (BG-0). Magnesium enhanced the antibacterial efficiency of MBGs against MRSA bacteria. Meanwhile, the BG-5 exhibited a significant bactericidal efficiency against MRSA bacteria with respect to BG-0. BG-5 is suggested as a promising candidate for bone tissue engineering with increased cell proliferation and improved ALP activity as well as antibacterial efficiency against MRSA bacteria. Eventually, the BG-5 is suggested to be used in segmental defects in rat model in vivo.