Intermetallic phases in Au-Cu nanoparticles has been synthesized chemically in liquid phase. The heat-treatment of these nanoparticles at 180 °C for 1 h in solution phase led to the formation of Au-Cu alloy nanoparticles with nearly spherical shapes and monodispersed size of ∼10 nm. Subsequent heat-treatment at 300 °C for 30 min of these Au-Cu alloy nanoparticles not only revealed structural transformation to intermetallic phases (tetragonal AuCu (tP4) and cubic Cu3Au (cP4)) but also shape change occurs from spherical to rods having average aspect ratio ∼3.0. The structural determination at the particle has been carried out through nano-beam electron diffraction coupled with simulation of electron diffraction patterns and high resolution phase contrast images. These Au–Cu intermetallic nanoparticles exhibit an excellent surface enhanced Raman spectroscopic activity with methylene blue compared to that of Au-Cu alloy nanoparticles.Intermetallic nanocrystals of controllable shape, size and chemistry are important for their applications in catalysis, plasmonics, and Surface Enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) Two grams (2 g) hexadecylamine (HDA) (Alfa Aesar) and 125 mg cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB)(Alfa Aesar) were melted at 180 °C A 100 µM stock solution of methylene blue (MB) was prepared in ethanol and was further diluted in ethanol to lower the concentration to 1 µM. The 0.3 mL of 1 µM MB was added to Au-Cu nanopowders. The mixture was then re-dispersed using an ultrasonicator and left undisturbed for 24 h. Finally, the mixture was drop cast on Si-substrate and dried using hot air blower prior to the SERS measurements. Nearly spherical and monodispersed NPs of average size ∼10 nm was observed at 180 °C for 1 h ( The representative TEM image with aspect ratio (length/width) as inset and corresponding SAD pattern of Au-Cu nanoparticles processed at 300 °C for 30 min are presented in  Au-Cu intermetallic NPs is investigated using 1 µM MB as shown in In summary, we have reported a facile non-aqueous synthesis of rod-shaped Au-Cu intermetallic nanoparticles of average aspect ratio ∼3.0 through solution phase heat-treatment at 300 °C for 30 min. The NBD and simulated DPs revealed tP4 AuCu and cP4 AuCu There are no conflicts to declare.