In the present study, a comparison of the amenability of a monazite and xenotime (both rare earth phosphates) sample to treatment via alternative extraction techniques was conducted. Monazite and xenotime concentrates were studied under the effects of organic acids and mechanochemical pre-treatment. Maleic, tartaric, citric and oxalic acids have shown the ability to increase the dissolution of phosphorus in the monazite concentrate. Oxalic acid demonstrated to enhance the release of phosphorus (>30%) at pH < 1.3, room temperature up to 72 h (Lazo et al., 2017) as opposed to xenotime, which underwent very little dissolution under similar conditions (0.2 M, pH 2 for 24 h and 25 °C). Using mechanochemical activation prior to sulphuric acid leaching significantly increased the dissolution of rare earth elements (REEs), P and Fe in monazite (milled 300 RPM for 15 min) whereas in xenotime increased only slightly from a very low starting point. The difference in crystal structure and electronic configuration may play an important role in the more refractory nature of xenotime.While both minerals are rare earth phosphates, monazite contains the natural light rare earth elements (cerium group) and often has large quantities of thorium and uranium ( Earlier research performed by the authors addressed the initial success of using organic acids in the extraction of rare earth elements in monazite ( Mechanochemical activation was also considered as another method for achieving a chemical conversion of the rare earth phosphate minerals to a species that could be readily leached. It involves physicochemical changes in the material produced by applying mechanical energy ( This paper describes the attempts to use these processes to treat both monazite and xenotime concentrates and the observation of the significantly more refractory nature of xenotime. The concentrations of key components in both the monazite and xenotime concentrate samples used are given in Solutions were prepared by dissolving the required proportion of the organic acid in an agitated beaker and the pH was adjusted as necessary with sodium hydroxide and/or sulphuric acid. The solution was then transferred to a volumetric flask and made up to the mark. Direct leach experiments were conducted in 250 mL Erlenmeyer flasks to which 5 g of rare earth concentrate and 50 mL of leach solution were added. Samples were placed in a Labwit ZWY-211B incubator shaker for the required time. The organic acid species (listed below), solution pH, residence time and temperature were varied to examine the impact of each. Solutions were analyzed by an ICP-OES (Agilent 5100 Synchronous Vertical View-SVDV). The lactic, maleic, crotonic, sodium oxalate Mechanochemical activation experiments were also carried out using a Planetary Ball Mill (PBM) Restch type 100. The study involved two stages. First, 50 g of monazite and 40 gr of xenotime were grounded using a 50 cm Xenotime leach tests were performed to define the impact of several acids at pH 2 ( Samples of monazite and xenotime were placed in the planetary ball mill for 15 min at both 100 and 300 rpm and subsequently leached in both sulphuric and oxalic acids ( While proportionally large increases in dissolution were observed from the xenotime sample with milling, the overall release of elements is still very low, remaining more than an order of magnitude lower than observed in monazite. Again, there is benefit to the treatment but this is not sufficient to overcome the resistance to leaching displayed by the xenotime sample. This suggests that surface interference such as a passive layer is not a major factor contributing to the poor response of the xenotime material. While these tests have eliminated some potential factors that may reduce the reactivity of the xenotime sample, there is not clear evidence to point to a particular governing property. Given that altering reaction conditions and mechanochemical activation had minimal impact on the reactivity of xenotime in these systems with respect to monazite, there is a clear difference in the reactions. The chemical similarity of the REEs is such that it seems unlikely to be a major factor, in terms of weaker binding to leaching agents or lower energy bonding with phosphorus in the crystal. It is therefore suggested that one of the following (or a combination thereof) are impacting the reactions: a) a crystal structure that is of much lower energy, b) a structure that provides fewer active sites for chelation or acid attack or c) the predominance of yttrium having a strong bearing given it is less chemically similar than the lanthanide series. There are many studies showing that organic acids increase the dissolution of many minerals relevant to rare earths. In previous study, oxalic acid was able to enhance the dissolution of phosphorus in monazite concentrate. Monazite and xenotime are both rare earth phosphates having similar chemical composition. However, in the case of xenotime, organic acids have shown almost no capability to solubilize the mineral. Furthermore, mechanochemical activation has been used in several processes to improve leach efficiency. This process improved the dissolution of REEs, P and Fe from the monazite. While an increase was also observed in xenotime dissolution, it remained an order of magnitude lower than that of monazite. It is suggested that the likely difference between monazite and xenotime in this case relates to either crystallographic influences or the predominance of yttrium (or both), however there is no clear evidence to suggest what specifically may be underpinning varied reactivity.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the