A condensed fully coupled beam element for thin-walled laminated composite beams having open or closed cross sections is presented. An analytical technique is used to derive the cross-sectional stiffness of the beam in a systematic manner considering all the deformation effects and their mutual couplings. An efficient finite element approximation is adopted for the transverse shear deformation, which has helped to conveniently implement the C1 continuous formulation required by the torsional deformation due to incorporation of warping deformation. The performance of the element is tested through the solution of numerical examples involving open section I and channel (C) beams and closed section box beams under different loading conditions, and the obtained results are compared with model as well as experimental results available in literature.The problem of modelling thin-walled laminated composite beam/beam like slender structures having open or closed cross-section as one dimensional condensed beam elements has drawn a significant amount of attention of researchers over the last decades, and a number of investigations have been carried out to study the different aspects of this problem. A few representative studies relevant to the present context are given in The studies carried out so far may broadly be divided into two groups, based on the approach adopted for the evaluation of the constitutive matrix of the beam, defined as the cross-section stiffness coefficients. The first and most common approach is based on an analytical technique, while the other approach requires a two-dimensional finite element analysis to obtain the cross-section stiffness matrix. Hodges and co-workers In this context it should be mentioned that Hodges and co-workers (e.g., Volovoi et al. In the present investigation, an analytical (closed-form) approach is adopted for the derivation of the cross-sectional stiffness matrix considering different effects and their coupling to yield a general formulation, which includes a torsional warping moment in addition to the classical (and well known) de St. Venant torsion contribution, an axial force, bi-axial bending moments and bi-axial transverse shear forces. In total this yields a 7 For the finite element approximation of the beam element, the torsional deformation requires C Considering these aspects, the finite element implementation of the bending deformation in the present formulation is carried out with a different approach based on a concept proposed by the first author A computer program has been written in FORTRAN for the implementation of the proposed fully coupled composite beam element, which has been used to solve numerical examples of composite beams having open I and channel (C), and closed box sections. The results obtained in the form of deflections, angles of twist, and bending slopes are compared with analytical, experimental and/or other finite element analysis results available in literature. The results show a very good performance of the proposed element in terms of convergence and solution accuracy. The developed element is also utilized to derive some new results, which are presented for future references.  In For beams with closed cross sections, the effect of the warping function is not as significant as for open cross section beams, as has been nicely demonstrated by Ye et al. Considering the effect of shell bending and transverse shear deformation, the corresponding displacement components at a point away from the shell mid-plane may be expressed as The strain components at the corresponding point in the local axis system ( Assuming the normal strain component The above equation can further be rearranged in matrix form as Considering the transverse shear deformation of the laminated shell wall Assuming Using Eqs. All the elements of the cross-sectional stiffness matrix [ For the one dimensional finite element implementation, a quadratic approximation has been adopted for the axial deformation, which follows a Lagrangian type formulation. The torsional deformation is based on a Hermetian formulation as mentioned earlier, where a cubic approximation has been adopted. The approximation of the bending deformation coupled with transverse shear deformation is based on the concept proposed by Sheikh It should be noted that The unknowns ( The generalized strain vector With the above equation, the strain energy In the following a number of numerical examples involving composite beams with I, channel (C) or box cross sections are analysed using the proposed element, and the results obtained are compared with analytical, experimental and/or numerical results available in literature for most of the cases. The analyses are usually based on plane stress conditions, unless specified otherwise. In all examples the beam walls are assumed to be constituted by identical layers of the same thickness, but the layers may have different orientations. The geometry of the beam sections are defined in terms of their centre line dimensions. A 2.5 A box beam clamped at both ends, and subjected to uniformly distributed transverse load of 6.5 A 0.762 The variation of deflection, bending slope and twisting rotation along the length of the beam are plotted in A 0.762 A 2.5 The results for the angle of twist at the simply supported end obtained by the proposed element are presented with those obtained by Kim et al. A fully coupled beam element has been developed for the analysis of thin-walled laminated composite beams of open and closed cross sections including axial displacement, torsion, out of plane warping, bi-axial bending and transverse shear deformations. The constitutive equations of the beam element are derived analytically considering the coupling of all the modes of deformation, i.e., the beam model is fully coupled. The resulting composite beam theory is applied to laminated composite beams of open I and channel cross sections, as well as to laminated composite beams of closed box cross sections. The incorporation of transverse shear deformations demands a C The work presented was carried out as part the Innovation Consortium “Integrated Design and Processing of Lightweight Composite and Sandwich Structures” (abbreviated “KOMPOSAND”) funded by the Danish Ministry of Science, Technology and Innovation and the industrial partners Composhield A/S, DIAB ApS (DIAB Group), Fiberline Composites A/S, LM Glasfiber A/S and Vestas Wind Systems A/S. The support received is gratefully acknowledged. The work has been carried out during the presence of first author (A.H. Sheikh) in Aalborg University, Denmark from February 2006 to October 2007. A.H. Sheikh is grateful to Professor O.T. Thomsen (second author) for providing the opportunity of working as Associate Professor (Research) with his group in Aalborg with full financial support during the above period. The explicit expressions for the elements of the matrix [ For the open section I profile as shown in For the open section channel profile as shown in With the above quantities, the elements of the matrix [ For the closed section box profile as shown in