Run of Mine granite is passed through a grizzly (45.7 The first exercise is to determine Q Step 1 According to the data, the undersized would be = (11.5/45.7) Hence the actual amount to be crushed would be (100 − 24.2) Step 2 Determine K, from From  Since adequate screen analysis data are not available we shall use In this case: Say x = 20 Again F Substituting values, assuming cubic shaped particles where the shape factor = 1.7, we have: F and P Hence: Since the comparative reduction capacity of the jaw crusher is given, the crusher dimensions may now be determined. For a jaw crusher the thickness of the largest particle should not normally exceed 80 to 85% of the gape. Assuming in this case the largest particle to be crushed is 85% of the gape, then the gape of the crusher should be = 45.7/0.85 = 53.6 From the data given by Taggart ( To choose the appropriate jaw crusher therefore, the nearest size commercially available crusher will be used to meet the performance required. The size distribution of an ore to be crushed in a closed circuit jaw crusher was logged as the following table: If the crusher set is 25.4 Step 1. For a single set of feed and product size distributions, the values of K For interval 2: Similarly, for the other intervals:  From Hence by substituting in Step 3: Assuming the voltage = 415 The first stage of size reduction of hard and large lumps of run-of-mine (ROM) ore is to crush and reduce their size. Softer ores, like placer deposits of tin, gold, mineral sands etc. do not require such treatment. Large scale crushing operations are generally performed by mechanically operated equipment like jaw crushers, gyratory crusher and roll crushers. For very large ore pieces that are too big for receiving hoppers of mechanically driven crushers, percussion rock breakers or similar tools are used to break them down to size. The mechanism of crushing is either by applying impact force, pressure or a combination of both. The jaw crusher is primarily an compression crusher while the others operate primarily by the application of impact.. Jaw crushers are designed to impart an impact on a rock particle placed between a fixed and a moving plate (jaw). The faces of the plates are made of hardened steel. Both plates could be flat or the fixed plate flat and the moving plate convex. The surfaces of both plates could be plain or corrugated. The moving plate applies the force of impact on the particles held against the stationary plate. Both plates are bolted on to a heavy block. The moving plate is pivoted at the top end (Blake crusher) or at the bottom end (Dodge–type crusher) and connected to an eccentric shaft. In universal crushers the plates are pivoted in the middle so that both the top and the bottom ends can move. The Blake crushers are single or double toggle drives. The function of the toggle(s) is to move the pivoted jaw. The retrieving action of the jaw from its furthest end of travel is by springs for small crushers or by a pitman for larger crushers. As the reciprocating action removes the moving jaw away from the fixed jaw the broken rock particles slip down, but are again caught at the next movement of the swinging jaw and crushed. This process is repeated until the particle sizes are smaller than the smallest opening between the crusher plates at the bottom of the crusher (the closed set). For a smooth reciprocating action of the moving jaws, heavy flywheels are used in both types of crushers.   The factors of importance in designing the size of primary crushers, like a jaw crushers, are: These dimensions vary as individual manufacturers have their own specifications and their catalogues are a good guide to the geometry and design of individual makes. The size of a jaw crusher is usually described by the gape and the width, expressed as gape For sizing a crusher and ancillaries for open circuit operations,  These relations are in turn helpful to size the opening of the scalping screens that are placed in the ore stream before the crusher. The purpose of scalping screens, also called grizzly screens, is to reject lumps of ore greater than the size of the gape. Placement of scalping screens result in smooth and uninterrupted operation of the circuit and also prevent any damage to the crusher by extra large lumps. Primary jaw crushers typically operate in open circuit under dry conditions. Depending on the size reduction required, the primary jaw crushers are followed by secondary and tertiary crushing. The last crusher in the line of operation operates in closed circuit. That is, the crushed product is screened and the oversize returned to the crusher for further size reduction while the undersize is accepted as the product. Flow sheets showing two such set-ups are shown in Jaw crushers are installed underground in mines as well as on the surface. When used underground, jaw crushers are commonly used in open circuit. This is followed by further size reduction in crushers located on the surface. When the run of mine product is conveyed directly from the mine to the crusher, the feed to the primary crusher passes under a magnet to remove tramp steel collected during the mining operation. A grizzly screen is placed between the magnet and the receiving hopper of the crusher to scalp (remove) boulders larger than the size of the gape. Some mines deliver product direct to storage bins or stockpiles, which then feed the crushers mechanically by apron feeders, Ross feeders or similar devices to regulate the feed rate to the crusher. Alternately haulage trucks, front-end loaders, bottom discharge railroad cars or tipping wagons are used. In such cases, the feed rate to the crusher is intermittent which is a situation generally avoided. In such cases of intermittent feed, storage areas are installed and the feed rate regulated by bulldozers, front loaders or bin or stockpile hoppers and feeders. It is necessary that the feed to jaw crushers be carefully designed to balance with the throughput rate of the crusher. When the feed rate is regulated to keep the receiving hopper of the crusher full at all times so that the volume rate of rock entering any point in the crusher is greater than the rate of rock leaving, it is referred to as choke feeding. During choke feeding the crushing action takes place between the jaw plates and particles as well as by inter-particle compression. Choke feeding necessarily produces more fines and requires careful feed control. For mineral liberation, choked feeding is desirable. When installed above ground, the object of the crushing circuit is to crush the ore to achieve the required size for down stream use. In some industries, for example, iron ore or coal, where a specific product size is required (iron ore −30+6 The ore or rock is fed to the crusher where the jaws are furtherest apart, i.e. at the maximum opening or gape. When the jaws come together the ore is crushed into smaller sizes and slip down the cavity. In the return stroke, further reduction of size is experienced and the ore moves down further. The process is repeated till particles having size less than the bottom opening or set pass through as product. The rule of thumb applicable for operating a jaw crusher with respect to its design characteristics can be summarised as follows:  During the operation of a crasher the bulk density of the material increases and the particle size decreases. With time, wear on the plate surfaces develops resulting in a change to the crusher surface profile. This could alter the throughput and size of the crusher product. The operation of jaw crushers has been best described mathematically by Whiten [ The values of K or  The capacity of jaw crushers is a measure of the mass or volume of crushed material produced in unit time of operation. The capacity is primarily a function of: Crusher design characteristics like, width and depth of the crushing chamber, Open and closed side settings, Options on feeding method, e.g intermittent feeding, (manual or direct by haulage trucks) and continuous by conveyor belt, Operating characteristics like the length of stroke, the number of strokes per minute, the nip angle. Mathematically the capacity can be expressed by the general formula:  Following the above concepts several workers, like Hersam [ Hersam’s empirical expression given in Although it is not truly applicable to hard rocks, for soft rocks it is reasonably acceptable [ Rose and English [ The distance, h, between A and B is equal to the distance the particle would fall during half a cycle of the crusher eccentric provided the cycle frequency allows sufficient time for the particle to do so. If ν is the number of cycles/min, then the time for one complete cycle is [60/ Then for a fragmented particle to fall a distance h in the crusher, the frequency must be less than that given by  Rose and English [  The relationship between the frequency of operation and capacity of the jaw crusher can be seen in  At this critical frequency the maximum capacity is given by:  The size distribution of the feed, The break down characteristics which could be different for hard, brittle and friable ores, The packing characteristics, The initial density of the ore, Surface characteristics of the particles. Rose and English defined the packing characteristics, P P The capacity is then dependant on some function which may be written as  As the closed set size must be less than the feed size, For actual crusher speeds, the actual crusher capacity is given by; The capacity of a jaw crusher is given by the amount of crushed material passing the discharge opening per unit time. This is dependent on the area of the discharge opening, the properties of the rock, moisture, crusher throw, speed, nip angle, method of feeding and the amount of size reduction. In order to calculate the capacity of crushers, Taggart [ The 80% passing size is chosen as data has shown that this is a convenient point where the distorting effect of coarse slabby material on the shape of the size distribution has been removed.  The The comparative reduction tonne is a standard for comparison and applies for the crushing conditions of uniform full capacity feeding of dry thick bedded medium-hard limestone where K = 1. The factor K is determined for different conditions and is a function of the material crushability (k To evaluate K, the relative crushability factor, k The moisture factor, k The feed factor k For continuous manual feeding, k For continuous mechanical feeding, k Taggart used the comparative reduction ton (tonne) to estimate the size of the Blake type crusher required for a given duty and its productivity. The procedure is summarised below: The reduction ratio of the operation is estimated from screen analysis of the feed and product. Where a screen analysis is not available, a rough estimate can be obtained if the relation between the cumulative mass percent passing (or retained) for different size fractions is assumed to be linear (   The 80% passing size of the feed may be approximated by:  The method is illustrated by To determine the capacity of jaw and gyratory crushers, Broman [ This area is defined by the conditions at the discharge end.  Extending the concept to the entire chamber, Broman deduced the capacity of the crusher, Q, as In Michaelson [ Taggart [ All dimensions are in meters. For a set of crusher sizes and set openings, the calculations obtained from the work of Rose and English and others can be compared with data from equipment manufacturers. It can be seen that Broman’s method yields a higher capacity than the other methods and deviates considerably from the nominal operating capacity. The theoretical analysis by Hersham [ To estimate the critical speed of operation it is required to determine the time and distance travelled at the speed of operation of the toggle corresponding to the maximum production rate. Referring to To determine this distance assume the particles travelled freely due to gravity during the time taken for the toggle to make half a cycle between successive compactions. Let us assume it travels through a distance h and the crusher is set at L From the laws of dynamics, the distance h travelled by the particles by gravity from a position of rest in time t is given by:  Hence, Equating Replacing G as equal to R. L According to  At a constant reduction ratio, an increase in throw decreases the critical speed, With an increase in reduction ratio, the crusher could be run at higher speeds  The critical speed calculated by use of A number of workers [ The expression for computing the power consumption (P) derived theoretically by Rose and English [ Also, to establish the P   Simplifying For operating a jaw crusher it is necessary to know the maximum power required consistent with the reduction ratio and the gape and closed side settings. The maximum power drawn in a system will occur at the critical speed. Thus for maximum power, Q in The largest size of ore pieces mined measured 560 The maximum operating capacity of the crusher The optimum speed at which it should be operated. Step 1. Assume that the largest size of ore = 0.9 That is 0.560 = 0.9 Hence Gape = 0.560/0.9 = 0.62 Length of Throw, L Width: (assume) = 1.3 Step 2. Determine From and from Also from Step 3. Neglecting S Step 4. Optimum Speed: ν Lynch [  This expression has been applied with success. Application of this expression in practice is illustrated by The models for determining the power required for operating jaw crushers have mostly been derived using Bond’s work index. While these gave satisfactory estimations of power it must be remembered that Bond’s expression was derived using a tumbling mill where the forces of comminution are not quite the same as that in jaw crushers. Andersen et al [ Morrell, Napier-Munn, and Andersen [ If the observed power actually drawn by the crusher under load was P  The concept of this method has been tested for cone and gyratory crushers and found to be satisfactory with values of Sf ranging from 1.2 – 1.55. Its application is discussed in Air-dried limestone was crushed continuously in a laboratory single-toggle Blake jaw crusher designed to provide a throw of 228 the optimum RPM of the toggle the maximum annual capacity of crusher with 99% availability Power consumption at the optimum speed A single toggle Blake jaw crusher with 22.8 Assuming the SG of the ore was 5.4, calculate; Optimum frequency of the toggle cycle Maximum frequency of the toggle cycle The power required.  The compressive strength of the mineral was 20 HINT: Rittinger’s Law may be written in the form: A Blake jaw crusher had the following dimensions: Gape=160 Determine: Capacity of crusher Power consumption if the work index of the material is 12.5 Operating speed Minimum level at which the feed should be maintained in the feed-hopper. A cement manufacturer needed to produce lime at the rate of 140,000 Determine: The rate of the toggle movement that would meet the target production. If the toggle rate was reduced by 25  Crusher size Rate of crushing, (Q A jaw crusher had a gape of 685 The angle between the crusher faces (assume flat) Operating speed and critical speed of operation The rate of crushing when the angle between plates are increased by 2 The angle between the straight faces of a Blake jaw crusher was progressively altered from 22° to 28° in steps of 2°. 1200 The adjustments to the set that would be necessary each time to maintain same production rate The mathematical relation between the angle of nip and the set. Iron ore was crushed in a jaw crusher. The average sizes of the feed (F HINT: In the simplified form Kick’s equation for energy required to break a particle may be used in this case: i. e. E = K In (F/P) A single toggle jaw crusher crushed limestone having an average size of 75  The closed set of an operating jaw crusher was 125 The maximum speed, ν The maximum capacity at the maximum operating speed of the toggle. Data: S.G. of the ore = 2.9