A quantitative relationship between WC grain size, Co content and coercivity has been derived using data from a wide range of WC–Co alloys. The relationship has been found to agree with data from independent investigations.Measurements of magnetic saturation and magnetic coercivity are used in the WC–Co industry to assess the quality of the material (e.g. The magnetic saturation provides quantitative information on W concentration in the binder and overall C content, while the coercivity has been providing only qualitative information on WC grain size. The reason being that while the magnetic saturation of WC–Co of known Co content depends only on the W concentration in the binder (which is related to the overall C content) the coercivity does not depend only on WC grain size but also on the W content (e.g. The relationships between magnetic saturation and composition, which are most commonly used in the WC–Co industry are the following It would be useful to have a quantitative relationship between coercivity, WC grain size and Co content. The relationships proposed in the literature seldom agree with each other, although most investigations were carried out using the same techniques, namely, the procedure recommended in the International Standard ISO 3326 for the measurement of the coercivity and linear analysis for the measurement of WC grain size. However, after measuring the linear WC grain intercepts some researchers assumed the mean grain size to be the arithmetic mean linear intercept (e.g. Therefore the main reason for the lack of agreement may be the different methods of computing the mean grain size, although other possible reasons are the different ranges of WC–Co grades investigated (e.g. For the present investigation the wide range of WC–Co grades available had been produced specifically for the investigation, with particular attention to the C level The grain size was measured by linear analysis as described by Exner and Hougardy Although the magnetic saturation was not a subject of this investigation because relationships between magnetic saturation and composition are already available in the literature (see Eqs. The WC–Co grades used in this investigation are listed in The grain size taken as typical of each group of grades is the average of the grain size of the grades in each group (given in The coercivity results were plotted against Co content at constant WC grain size and against grain size at constant Co content. The equations for the curves obtained were derived using standard data analysis packages.    The equations of the straight lines in The slope ‘ The intercepts with the coercivity axis of the straight lines in Thus the grain size of a grade of known cobalt content can be derived from coercivity measurements using the following equation: Eq. Therefore, the constants appearing in Eq. Eq. However, in the case of other data published in the literature (e.g. Among the relationships between coercivity, composition and microstructural parameters of WC–Co found in the literature, the closest to Eq. Eq. This investigation has shown that it is possible to use coercivity results to calculate the mean grain size of WC–Co grades of known Co content to an approximation of 5–10%. The relationship presented in this paper (Eq. The coercivity of WC–Co is known to depend on the overall carbon content of the material (e.g. Since the residual stress distribution strongly affects the coercivity of WC–Co The authors are grateful to the