The effectiveness of sulfuric acid (H2SO4), sodium hydroxide (NaOH), hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), and ozone pretreatments for conversion of cotton stalks to ethanol was investigated. Ground cotton stalks at a solid loading of 10% (w/v) were pretreated with H2SO4, NaOH, and H2O2 at concentrations of 0.5%, 1%, and 2% (w/v). Treatment temperatures of 90°C and 121°C at 15psi were investigated for residence times of 30, 60, and 90min. Ozone pretreatment was performed at 4°C with constant sparging of stalks in water. Solids from H2SO4, NaOH, and H2O2 pretreatments (at 2%, 60min, 121°C/15psi) showed significant lignin degradation and/or high sugar availability and hence were hydrolyzed by Celluclast 1.5L and Novozym 188 at 50°C. Sulfuric acid pretreatment resulted in the highest xylan reduction (95.23% for 2% acid, 90min, 121°C/15psi) but the lowest cellulose to glucose conversion during hydrolysis (23.85%). Sodium hydroxide pretreatment resulted in the highest level of delignification (65.63% for 2% NaOH, 90min, 121°C/15psi) and cellulose conversion (60.8%). Hydrogen peroxide pretreatment resulted in significantly lower (p
                     ⩽0.05) delignification (maximum of 29.51% for 2%, 30min, 121°C/15psi) and cellulose conversion (49.8%) than sodium hydroxide pretreatment, but had a higher (p
                     ⩽0.05) cellulose conversion than sulfuric acid pretreatment. Ozone did not cause any significant changes in lignin, xylan, or glucan contents over time. Quadratic models using time, temperature, and concentration as continuous variables were developed to predict xylan and lignin reduction, respectively for sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide pretreatments. In addition, a modified severity parameter (log
                     M
                     0) was constructed and explained most of the variation in xylan or lignin reduction through simple linear regressions.Growing concerns over the environmental impact of fossil fuels and their inevitable depletion have led to intense research on the development of alternative energy sources that can reduce the United States dependence on foreign oil imports. Biomass, which includes animal and human waste, trees, shrubs, yard waste, wood products, grasses, and agricultural residues such as wheat straw, corn stover, rice straw, and cotton stalks, is a renewable resource that stores energy from sunlight in its chemical bonds ( Currently, corn is the primary raw material for ethanol production in the United States. Starch, which constitutes about 70% of the corn kernel, is easily broken down into glucose that is then fermented to ethanol. However, the corn to ethanol industry draws its feedstock from a food stream and is quite mature with little possibility of process improvements ( A variety of physical (comminution, hydrothermolysis), chemical (acid, alkali, solvents, ozone), physico-chemical (steam explosion, ammonia fiber explosion), and biological pretreatment techniques have been developed to improve the accessibility of enzymes to cellulosic fibers ( Cotton ( To fully utilize cotton stalk as a feedstock for ethanol production, optimal pretreatment is required to render the cellulose fibers more amenable to the action of hydrolytic enzymes. This study was therefore initiated to: (1) investigate the effect of sulfuric acid, sodium hydroxide, hydrogen peroxide, and ozone pretreatments of cotton stalks, (2) develop models to predict lignin degradation and xylan solubilization percentage during sulfuric acid and sodium hydroxide pretreatments, and (3) identify pretreatment(s) which provide the highest cellulose to glucose conversion during subsequent enzymatic hydrolysis. Cotton stalks, harvested in early October 2003, were obtained from Cunningham Research Station in Kinston, NC. The stalks were shredded and bailed in the field soon after the cotton was picked, and then transported to North Carolina State University in Raleigh, NC. Prior to composition analysis, the biomass which consisted primarily of stalks, leaves, cottonseed, and cotton residue, was ground to a 40 mesh particle size. The feedstock was ground to pass a 3 The total solids, acid soluble lignin, and acid insoluble lignin (acid-insoluble material) content of the untreated cotton stalks and the solid fraction remaining after pretreatment were determined by Laboratory Analytical Procedures (LAP) from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) ( The carbohydrate contents of the untreated cotton stalks and pretreated solids were determined by measuring the hemicellulose (xylan, galactan, and arabinan) and cellulose (glucan) derived sugars. The composition of the hydrolysate from enzymatic hydrolysis was determined by measuring glucose and xylose using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). The LAP-002 analysis procedure from NREL was modified for use with a Dionex-300 HPLC system ( Sulfuric acid (H Ozone pretreatment was performed by continuously sparging ozone gas through a 10% (w/v) mixture of cotton stalks and deionized water for 30, 60, and 90 The pretreated solids were washed with 750 Cellulase from Pretreated cotton stalks at 5% solids loading (grams dry weight per 100 A similar equation was used to determine percent xylan conversion. The experimental design was crossed and complete with respect to temperature, time and concentration. Factorial effects models with main and interaction effects, on lignin reduction and xylan and glucan solubilization by sulfuric acid, sodium hydroxide, hydrogen peroxide, and ozone pretreatments, were fit using PROC GLM in SAS (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). Multiple comparisons among treatment means were carried out using Tukey’s procedure to control the experiment wise error rate at 0.05 for each response variable. In cases where interaction effects were significant, the SLICE option was used with the LSMEANS command of the GLM procedure to test for simple treatment effects of one factor while holding the other two factors constant. Empirical quadratic models with time, temperature, and concentration as continuous numeric variables were developed using SAS to predict percent lignin reduction for sodium hydroxide pretreatment and xylan solubilization for sulfuric acid pretreatment and were of the form The squared temperature term ( In addition, modeling based on combining the effects of time, temperature, and concentration into one single parameter was used to develop a linear model expressing the relationship between pretreatment severity and lignin reduction or xylan solubilization. A modified severity parameter was later developed by This equation was adapted for application to sodium hydroxide pretreatment by replacing the acid concentration with the alkali concentration and calculating a different The chemical composition of cotton stalks varies depending on the growing location, season, harvesting methods, as well as analysis procedures ( The acid-insoluble material content of the cotton stalks (27.9%) was higher than expected. It was comparable to the acid-insoluble material content of hardwoods (18–25%), rather than that of herbaceous species and agricultural residues (10–20%) ( The composition of cotton stalks used in this study agreed with that of cotton gin residue (immature bolls, cottonseed, hulls, sticks, leaves, and dirt) analyzed by Dilute acid pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass is one of the most effective pretreatment methods which predominantly affect hemicellulose with little impact on lignin degradation. The lignin reduction, xylan and glucan solubilization during sulfuric acid pretreatment of cotton stalks is shown, respectively in The filtrate from the lignin analysis was used to quantify the remaining hemicellulose and cellulose. The xylan content, which makes up the largest portion of hemicellulose in the cotton stalks, is the most important indicator of pretreatment effectiveness. Arabinan and galactan, although making up 1.3% and 1.1%, respectively of the untreated sample, were below the HPLC detection limit after pretreatment, and therefore xylan was the only hemicellulose sugar determined hereafter. Sulfuric acid pretreatment effectively solubilized 14.57% of the xylan for the least severe pretreatment (0.5%, 30 The percentage of glucan solubilization due to sulfuric acid pretreatments was between 10.00% (0.5%, 60 Using sodium hydroxide to pretreat lignocellulosic materials is an alternative to sulfuric acid pretreatment. The main effect of sodium hydroxide pretreatment on lignocellulosic biomass is delignification by breaking the ester bonds cross-linking lignin and xylan, thus increasing the porosity of biomass ( As in acid pretreatment, elevation in temperature, residence time, and alkali concentration increased the loss of solids during NaOH pretreatment ( Although xylan solubilization due to sodium hydroxide pretreatment was lower than that by sulfuric acid pretreatment ( The solubilization of glucan during NaOH pretreatment was between 12.82% (1%, 30 Hydrogen peroxide pretreatment utilizes oxidative delignification to detach and solubilize the lignin and loosens the lignocellulosic matrix thus improving enzyme digestibility ( Hydrogen peroxide pretreatment led to 6.22% (0.5%, 90 The solubilization of xylan due to H The percentage of glucan in the pretreated solids remaining as a result of H Pretreatment of lignocellulosic biomass with ozone gas has been reported to reduce both the lignin and hemicellulose contents of the treated materials ( Acid pretreated samples resulting in maximum glucose availability (2% H Cellulose conversion of pretreated samples after 72 The difference in cellulose conversion during enzymatic hydrolysis is largely dependent on the difference in lignin composition. The sulfuric acid and hydrogen peroxide pretreated samples had 2.2 times and 1.4 times the amount of lignin, respectively, compared to sodium hydroxide pretreated samples. Lignin is not attacked by the enzymes and therefore shields the cellulose during hydrolysis (  After eliminating the insignificant terms ( The percent lignin reduction model for sodium hydroxide containing significant terms from the Type III Sum of Squares ANOVA table (data not shown) had an  Sulfuric acid pretreatment substantially solubilized xylan in cotton stalks and temperature had the most significant effect on xylan solubilization. Data analysis indicated that there is a linearly increasing relationship between xylan solubilization and pretreatment severity. The most significant effect of sodium hydroxide pretreatment was on delignification with concentration of sodium hydroxide being the significant factor. Lignin reduction increased linearly with increase in pretreatment severity of sodium hydroxide. Hydrogen peroxide pretreatment resulted in lower lignin and xylan solubilization than expected. This was probably due to decomposition of hydrogen peroxide to water at high temperatures. Ozone pretreatment also did not perform as effectively as expected. Possible explanations include insufficient time, low ozone concentration, or uneven distribution of ozone throughout the sample. Compared with other pretreatments, sodium hydroxide pretreatment resulted in significantly ( The empirical quadratic models successfully predicted percent xylan solubilization and percent lignin reduction and may be used in the development of better estimation tools. In addition, this study can serve as a step towards the optimization of pretreatment of cotton stalks. Nevertheless, different combinations of treatment factors, perhaps using higher temperatures or concentrations and application of higher pressures could be investigated. In addition, enzymatic hydrolysis using optimized pretreatment factors and ethanol fermentation need to be studied for bioethanol production since they could not be addressed in this study.