This paper deals with the effect of perfluoroglutaric acid in the presence and absence of antimony(III) on the cathodic current efficiency, energy consumption and polarisation behaviour of the cathode during electrowinning of zinc from acidic sulphate solutions. Surface morphologies and crystallographic orientations of the zinc deposits were also examined using scanning electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction analysis. Perfluoroglutaric acid was found to increase the current efficiency, decrease the energy consumption and produce better surface morphologies. Voltammetric studies revealed that perfluoroglutaric acid when present in the solution depolarised the cathode which was also reflected in the deposit morphologies showing bigger size crystal planes than the deposit obtained in its absence. Presence of antimony(III) in the solution deteriorated the deposit quality and resulted in corrugated deposits at higher concentrations.During zinc production, the electrowinning step is quite energy intensive and consumes around 3130 Metallic impurities play complex roles ( Antimony [Sb(III)] is one of the most harmful impurities whose presence in the electrolyte produces spongy and dark deposits. However at very small concentrations beneficial effect is seen when organic compounds are also present in the electrolyte ( Glue ( In our previous work we have studied the effect of some perfluoro monocarboxylic acids on zinc electrowinning ( A stock solution of the zinc was made from AnalaR grade zinc sulphate (S.D. Fine Chem. Ltd., India) in doubly distilled water. The solution was further purified by cementing out the residual impurities by adding 2 A double walled electrolysis cell of 250 A PAR model 362 scanning potentiostat connected to an Deposit morphology was examined by using Scanning Electron Microscope (Philips, SE 101B) and preferred crystal orientations of the zinc deposits were determined by using a X-ray diffractometer (Philips, PW 1050) and comparing the peaks with that of ASTM standard zinc powder. With additive-free solution the CE obtained for zinc deposition was 89.3% ( The effect of Sb(III) addition in the presence and absence of the PFGA on CE are also reported in EC is about 50 The cyclic voltammetric responses ( Addition of Sb(III) to the electrolyte containing PFGA further strongly influenced the polarisation curves by shifting the deposition potential to more positive value due to the catalytic production of hydrogen. Antimony is capable of forming volatile hydrides by combining with hydrogen in the double layer ( The zinc deposit obtained from the additive-free zinc sulphate electrolyte was pale bright and not very smooth. It consisted of hexagonal platelets of moderate size with (1 In the presence of 0.02  The CE increases from 89.3 in additive-free acidic zinc sulphate solution to ∼94.7% in the presence of 1 In the presence of PFGA, even 0.01 Irrespective of the presence of PFGA and/or Sb(III) at all concentrations depolarisation of the cathode occurs. PFGA is found to produce smooth and bright zinc deposits with better surface morphology than additive-free solutions. Presence of PFGA in the solution increases the size of the zinc platelets. However, in the presence of Sb(III) grain refining effect was seen. Concentrations of ⩾0.04 The authors thank B.K. Mohapatra and B.S. Acharya for analysing the electrodeposits by SEM and XRD, respectively. They also thank the Director, IMMT for his encouragement and permission to publish this work.