This study evaluated the recovery of palladium (Pd) by ion exchange resins from hydrochloric acid solutions using a combined method of adsorption and incineration. Lewatit MonoPlus TP 214 was selected as a representative commercial ion exchange resin and its adsorption performance was evaluated. Kinetic and isotherm experiments revealed that Pd(II) adsorption equilibrium was reached within 21h, and the maximum uptake estimated by the Langmuir model was 241.1±11.6mg/g. To recover Pd as a solid form, the Pd ions-loaded resin was incinerated. The effects of incineration temperature and Pd amount were examined to enhance the recovery efficiency and purity of the recovered Pd. SEM–EDX and XRD analyses were used to confirm existence of Pd phase in ash incinerated in air at 600°C and 900°C. Both the incineration temperature and Pd amount significantly affected the recovery efficiency and purity. The form of Pd was changed from PdO to Pd0 as the incineration temperature was increased from 600°C to 900°C. At 900°C and 258.5mg/g of Pd(II) uptake, metallic Pd was successfully recovered with 99.0% of recovery efficiency and 96.1% of purity. Consequently, it can be claimed that the sorption–incineration process is likely an effective way enabling simple and fast recovery of precious metals as a metallic form from waste solutions.Precious metals, especially platinum group metals (PGMs) such as ruthenium (Ru), rhodium (Rh), palladium (Pd), osmium (Os), iridium (Ir), and platinum (Pt), are of great significance in various industries due to their specific physical and chemical properties. They are widely used in many fields, such as catalysts in various chemical processes, electrical and electronic componentry, medicine, and jewelry. As a result, the demand and commercial value of PGMs are steadily increasing, but as natural resources, they are limited all over the world and are becoming depleted Processes for the recovery of PGMs from various wastes include hydrometallurgical and pyrometallurgical processes. The hydrometallurgical processes have been used successfully for the recovery of PGMs, and they have been used more frequently than the pyrometallurgical processes. The hydrometallurgical methods include solvent extraction, precipitation, adsorption and ion exchange to separate and recover PGMs in high-level liquid waste Anion exchange resins can easily sorb PGM ions, which are present in the form of anionic chloro-complexes in wastewaters with high chloride concentrations and low pH To recover precious metals, desorption methods are often used and evaluated using various eluting agents such as HCl, thiourea, EDTA, and NaOH In the present work, a combined method of adsorption and incineration was used for the separation and recovery of Pd from hydrochloric acid solutions using TP 214. Pd(II) adsorption performances on the TP 214 were evaluated through kinetic and isotherm experiments, and the effects of incineration temperature and Pd amount were investigated in order to enhance the recovery efficiency and purity of Pd. Lewatit MonoPlus TP 214 was purchased from LANXESS Korea Ltd. and chosen as a representative ion exchange resin, which can sorb anionic precious metals owing to its good capacity for platinum metals, gold and silver. The general characteristics of TP 214 are as follows: cross-linked polystyrene matrix, macroporous type, thiourea functional group, 2.0 A 1000 The kinetic experiment was conducted with 90 The isotherm experiment was conducted with 1.0 The Pd(II) uptake ( The adsorption kinetics was described using pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models, which are represented in their non-linear forms by the following equations: The adsorption isotherm was described using the Langmuir isotherm model as follows: Incineration experiments were conducted for the recovery of Pd from Pd(II)-sorbed TP 214 resins. After Pd(II) adsorption, the Pd(II)-loaded resins were separated by centrifugation, and the concentrations of Pd(II) remaining in the supernatants were measured by ICP-AES. The settled resins were washed with distilled water several times and dried at 60 To evaluate the effect of incineration temperature, the dried Pd(II)-loaded resins were placed in alumina crucibles and incinerated in air at different temperatures (600–1000 To examine the effect of Pd content, samples with various Pd(II) uptakes were first prepared. These samples were then incinerated in air at 900 Four types of samples, TP 214 resin, Pd(II)-sorbed TP 214 resin, Pd-containing ash incinerated at 600 In order to verify the crystallized form of Pd in the ash, X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded on a Rigaku D/max 2500 diffractometer equipped with Cu Kα radiation ( The adsorption kinetics in wastewater treatment is very important because it provides valuable insights into the mechanism and reaction pathways of an adsorption reaction The experimental adsorption kinetic data were described by pseudo-first-order and pseudo-second-order models. The isotherm study was also conducted to evaluate the maximum Pd(II) adsorption capacity of TP 214. The experimental data were plotted using Langmuir isotherm model, which is shown in An incineration method can be used to recover precious metals in metallic form from precious metal-loaded sorbents To confirm the form of Pd in ash, SEM–EDX and XRD analyses were conducted. XRD analysis was additionally conducted to verify the form of Pd recovered at 600 To enhance the recovery efficiency and purity of Pd, the amount of metal was considered as another major factor in the incineration process. For this evaluation, Pd(II) adsorption experiments were conducted with initial Pd(II) concentrations of 44.4, 181.1 and 358.6 From the results of the effects of incineration temperature and Pd amount loaded on the resin, it can be concluded that metallic Pd with high purity is recovered with the conditions of high incineration temperature and high Pd amount. This means that the combined method of adsorption and incineration can be efficiently used for the recovery of metallic precious metals from precious-metal-bearing aqueous or waste solutions. This method is also simple and eco-friendly compared to the conventional hydrometallurgical methods, which involve multi-step extraction, precipitation and chemical reduction using toxic chemicals. The following conclusions were drawn with regard to the recovery of metallic Pd from Pd(II)-bearing hydrochloric acid solutions through the combined method of sorption and incineration by TP 214 ion exchange resin. Kinetic and isotherm experiments showed that Pd(II) sorption equilibrium was attained at around 21 The incineration temperature affected the recovery efficiency and purity of Pd recovered by incineration. According to the SEM–EDX and XRD analyses, the Pd in ashes incinerated in air at 600 When Pd(II)-sorbed resins were incinerated in air at 900 This work was supported by the