Commercially pure magnesium was processed by ECAP from the as-cast condition and also processed by rolling followed by ECAP. The evolution of the microstructure was tracked in both processing routes and compared. The mechanical behavior was evaluated by compression and tensile tests. The results show that ECAP refines the grain structure of magnesium but leads to heterogeneous grain size distribution. The use of an intermediate step of rolling facilitates grain refinement and leads to homogeneous grain structure. Compression tests were carried out at three different orthogonal directions and the results show the development of anisotropy. Significant twinning activity is observed when the material is compressed perpendicular to the die channels. Tensile tests show that ECAP decreases the yield stress and increases the elongation of the material processed by rolling.Techniques of severe plastic deformation (SPD – severe plastic deformation) are widely used to refine grain structure and improve the mechanical properties of metallic materials. These techniques differ from conventional metal forming processes because the plastic deformation is introduced without changing the cross section of the samples ECAP has been widely used to refine the grain structure of metallic materials. Processing is usually carried out at room temperature and homogeneous grain refinement is observed throughout the material volume. However, processing magnesium alloys by ECAP is not trivial. Due to the material brittleness, processing is usually carried out at high temperature and the mechanism of grain refinement may lead to heterogeneous grain structure with multi-modal grain size distribution The material processed by ECAP may present mechanical anisotropy, where their stress-strain behavior as well as the yield stress and work hardening rate may vary according to the direction of load application with respect to the orientation of processing by ECAP The present paper aims to develop a processing route able to produce a homogeneous distribution of grain sizes in commercially pure magnesium (CP-Mg) by the introduction of a preliminar step of rolling before ECAP and compare the grain structure with the structure produced by ECAP processing only. Also, the present work aims to evaluate the development of anisotropy in the mechanical behavior of CP-Mg processed by ECAP. The material used in this work is commercially pure magnesium provided by Rima as as-cast slabs. Prismatic billets with 10 Additionally, samples with ∼10 The microstructure of the material was evaluated using conventional metallographic procedures. Samples were extracted from the as-cast condition, the material processed by ECAP, the material processed by rolling and from the material processed by rolling and ECAP. The samples were mounted using polymeric resin, ground in abrasive papers #180, #400, #600, #1000 and #4000 and polished using 1 The stress,     Early papers have shown anisotropy in the stress vs. strain curves of magnesium alloys in tension The occurrence of twinning during compression along the Y-direction was confirmed by the microstructural observations, where a significant amount of twins are observed in the material subjected to a strain of only ∼0.04 in compression along the Y-direction. The amount of twins observed after similar level of strain in the other directions was significantly lower. Thus, the present results show that CP-Mg develops anisotropy after processing by ECAP and that significant twinning takes place when the material is compressed along the direction perpendicular to the die channels, Y-direction. The tensile behavior of the CP-Mg after rolling exhibits higher yield stress and lower uniform elongation compared with its counterpart processed by rolling The present results show that different microstructures are obtained in CP-Mg when processed by ECAP, or rolling, or rolling A model that incorporates the different mechanism of grain refinement in magnesium alloys has been proposed Processing magnesium by rolling at a higher temperature leads to the formation of larger grains which are illustrated in The introduction of an intermediate step of processing before ECAP has been used to process magnesium alloys for a while. The most used method of intermediate processing is extrusion and the processing route is known as EX-ECAP Commercially pure magnesium was processed by ECAP with and without an intermediate step of rolling from the as-cast condition. Compression and tensile tests were used to determine mechanical behavior and the microstructure was evaluated. The following conclusions are drawn: ECAP introduces anisotropy in the CP-Mg and significant amount of twinning is observed when the material is compressed perpendicular to the die channels. ECAP softens and improves the ductility of the rolled CP-Mg. Processing by ECAP leads to heterogeneous distribution of grain sizes and persistence of coarse grains after multiple passes. Processing by rolling The authors declare no conflicts of interest. This work was supported by