In this study, the influence of non-metallic inclusions on the fatigue behavior of 30MnVS6 steel containing different inclusion sizes and surface roughness has been investigated. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) was used to examine fatigue fracture origins. It was concluded that the non-metallic inclusions were dominant fatigue crack initiation sites in both smooth and rough specimens. This was justified by the calculation of stress intensity factor generated by both surface roughness and non-metallic inclusions, based on Murakami’s model. In addition, it was found that for a given stress, the critical inclusion size could be increased by eliminating the surface roughness.Many industrial components that are subjected to repetitive or fluctuating stresses fracture at stresses lower than those expected from their nominal strength. This phenomenon is called fatigue fracture In the present paper, the aggregate effects of nonmetallic inclusions and surface notches on the fatigue behavior of two types of commercial 30MnVS6 steels (this type of steel is widely used in automotive industry), having same strengths and different inclusion sizes and surface roughness have been investigated. The chemical compositions of two types of commercial 30MnVS6 steels, which were used in this study, are listed in  It is concluded from the SEM observations of fracture surfaces that the non-metallic inclusions are the main origins of fatigue cracks in all groups of specimens. In For steels, when surface notches act as crack origins, fatigue strength can be calculated by Itoga et al. It is expected from Eq. Murakami According to Eq. It is worth mentioning that the difference between the fatigue limits of the rough and smooth specimens for both steels is nearly the same. This proves that similar surface roughness would produce the same influence on the fatigue properties due to creating similar stress intensity. In fact, once the crack is initiated from fatal inclusions located at or near the surface, the stress localizes on the crack tip As was proposed by Tanaka and Akinawa From the integration of Eq.  The lowest values of In the present study, with the purpose of comprehending the interaction between nonmetallic inclusions and surface roughness, rotating bending fatigue tests were performed on two types of 30MnVS6 steels and the following conclusions were drawn: The fatigue strength of steels significantly improved using specimens with smooth surfaces and small size inclusions. Fatigue cracks tended to initiate and propagate from nonmetallic inclusions when they are large enough to generate higher stress intensity than surface roughness. In rough specimens, the total stress intensity generated by nonmetallic inclusions and surface roughness led to a noticeable decrease of fatigue strength. For a given stress, the critical inclusion size increased by the elimination of surface roughness. Financial support for this project was provided by Iran Alloy Steel Company. The authors wish to thank R&D and laboratory departments of this company for their experimental supports.