Deactivation of a bulk catalyst derived from NiAl2O4 spinel during the oxidative steam reforming (OSR) of raw bio-oil has been studied. The experiments were performed in a continuous system with two units in series: a thermal treatment unit at 500 °C for the controlled deposition of pyrolytic lignin, and a fluidized bed reactor (700 °C; S/C, 6; O/C, 0.34; space time, 0.15 gcatalysth·gbio-oil
                     −1; time on stream, 1, 2, 4 and 6 h) for the OSR of the remaining oxygenates. The deactivation affects the reforming of bio-oil oxygenates according to their reactivity (from lower to higher), with the reforming of phenols being rapidly affected. The causes of deactivation are: i) coke deposition on the Ni0 sites and on the Al2O3 support (6 wt% of each coke type after 6 h on stream), and; ii) sintering of Ni0 crystals (with an increase in crystal size from 10.8 to 17.7 nm (measured by TEM)). The catalyst deactivation rate increases with time on stream, with the bio-oil oxygenates being the main coke precursors.The large-scale use of H The industrial implementation of bio-oil SR is curtailed by the high energy requirements due to its endothermic nature. The co-feeding of O One of the main challenges for the large-scale implementation of bio-oil OSR is to maintain the catalyst stability. This can be achieved by using stable and regenerable catalysts, as well as reaction equipment and operating conditions that minimize deactivation. Accordingly, advances in the SR of bio-oil Ni-based catalysts are the most used in the reforming processes due to their low cost and relative high stability in the presence of steam. These catalysts are mainly deactivated by blockage of the active sites (Ni Several authors have studied the effect of operating conditions (temperature and steam-to-carbon ratio) on deactivation of Ni supported catalysts in the steam reforming (SR) of bio-oil. Ochoa et al. The afore-mentioned works evidenced the role that deposition of pyrolytic lignin (PL) plays on the catalyst deactivation. This carbonaceous solid is formed by re-polymerization of phenolic oxygenates contained in bio-oil. The use of an original reaction system with two units in series, previously proposed by the authors, was proved to decrease the coke deposition on the catalyst, and therefore the deactivation rate Although catalyst deactivation can be attenuated by using improved catalysts and suitable reaction conditions, it is an unavoidable effect. This fact involves that industrial implementation of raw bio-oil reforming would require suitable operating strategies, such as successive reaction-regeneration cycles The main objective of this paper is to gain knowledge on the deactivation mechanism of Ni spinel derived catalyst during the OSR of bio-oil, carried out at suitable reaction conditions (700 °C, S/C = 6 and O/C = 0.34). For this purpose, the evolution with time on stream (TOS) of bio-oil conversion and product yields have been related to the deterioration of catalyst features, which have been thoroughly characterized by using several techniques. The porous structure has been determined by N The bulk NiAl The physicochemical properties of fresh, reduced, and deactivated catalyst samples were characterized by several techniques. The specific surface area, average pore diameter and pore volume were determined by N The content, nature and location of the coke deposited on deactivated catalyst samples was analyzed by Temperature Programmed Oxidation (TPO) in a The morphology of the coke was analyzed by transmission electronic microscopy (TEM) in a The raw bio-oil was supplied by The OSR experiments have been carried out in a continuous two-unit reaction equipment ( An injection pump Prior to each OSR reaction, the catalyst was reduced in-situ under a H The OSR reactions have varying duration in order to analyze the evolution with TOS of products distribution and catalyst properties. After each experiment, the deactivated catalyst sample was characterized as described in The kinetic behavior of the catalyst was quantified by the following equations: The conversion of bio-oil oxygenates (denoted as bio-oil conversion): The yield of H The yield of carbon-containing products (CO The cause-effect relationship of catalyst deactivation has been studied in order to gain knowledge on the deactivation mechanism of the bulk Ni spinel catalyst. The effect that deactivation has on bio-oil conversion and product yields, as well as on the reforming of each bio-oil oxygenated family is studied in  The yields of H Based on these results, the duration of the different OSR reactions that were carried out to analyze the coke deposition and characteristics of the deactivated catalyst were: 1 h, 2 h and 4 h (corresponding to progressive deactivation states), and 6 h (deactivated catalyst, so that the reaction indices are similar to those obtained in the reforming of bio-oil by thermal routes The catalyst deactivation selectively affects the reforming reactions of oxygenated compound families, according to their different reactivity and the catalyst capability for reforming them. As a result, composition of the liquid products (non-reacted oxygenates and water) varies with TOS. The composition of the liquid collected in this work at different TOS values (quantified by GC/MS as described in After 1 h TOS the liquid is composed of acetone, acetic acid, and alkyl-phenols, with the concentration of the most reactive oxygenated compounds being negligible ( Interestingly, the concentration of acetic acid increases notably between 1 and 2 h TOS ( The TPO results of the coke deposited on the catalyst deactivated during reactions of different TOS are shown in Interestingly, two different combustion peaks are discerned within Coke I in the TPO results corresponding to the catalyst deactivated above 2 h TOS ( While there is no precedent in literature on different coke fractions in Ni spinel catalysts used in oxygenates reforming, it can presumably be considered that the coke deposited on the Ni sites located outside the catalyst particles (Coke Ia) can be discerned from the coke deposited on the Ni sites inside the particle (coke Ib), whose combustion kinetics would be limited by diffusion within the porous structure. The presence of two different combustion peaks within the combustion domain at low temperature (corresponding to encapsulating coke) has been also observed in the steam reforming of bio-oil over supported Ni catalysts The three combustion peaks increase as the coke deposition evolves ( The comparison of results in Furthermore, decomposition reactions of CH The BET surface area, pore volume and average pore diameter corresponding to the fresh-reduced catalyst and the catalyst samples with different deactivation degree are shown in The results of Ni  The Ni sintering observed in the afore mentioned results can be attributed to the high reaction temperature (700 °C) and the high water content in the reaction medium. Thus, Ni atoms show signs of mobility above 590 °C (Ni Tamman temperature, half of the melting point temperature), which leads to agglomeration of metal particles Characterization by TPO, XRD and TEM of the catalyst deactivated for different values of TOS evidences changes in the physicochemical and morphological properties during the OSR reaction of bio-oil. These changes are a consequence of the evolution of both causes of deactivation, i.e., coke deposition and Ni sintering, schematically outlined in The initial coke deposition, which occurs preferably far from the Ni sites (Coke II), can be attributed to the presence of bio-oil oxygenates in the reaction medium. However, as the concentration of these oxygenates increases in the reaction medium, there is a faster coke formation on the Ni Furthermore, although coke formation by decomposition of CH Similarly, the increase in Ni It should be noted that coke deposition results reported in this work correspond to reactions performed with low value of space–time, since it was intended to promote coke formation in order to study the rapid deactivation (within few hours of TOS). These results highlight the relevance of the concentration of oxygenates in bio-oil on coke deposition rate. Based on this mechanism, conditions of full bio-oil conversion (e.g., high space–time of catalyst) are advisable to avoid the presence of significant amount of oxygenates (coke precursors) in the reaction medium. Thus, the catalyst deactivation is attenuated, which is necessary for the operation to a higher scale. Deactivation of a bulk catalyst derived from NiAl Based on these results, although the accelerated deactivation conditions used in this work have been adequate to facilitate understanding of the deactivation mechanism, on an industrial scale conditions of full bio-oil conversion (with high space–time) are advisable to avoid the presence of significant amount of oxygenates in the reaction medium. Therefore, the catalyst deactivation is attenuated and its useful lifespan before replacement and subsequent regeneration is prolonged.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was carried out with the financial support of the