Ultimate pit limit is an important aspect of open pit mining. The optimal ultimate outline determines the tonnage of extractable ore, the volume of waste to be removed, the location of the subsidiary facilities, the location of ore and waste stockpiles, the life time of the mine and the estimated net present value (NPV) of the entire mining operation. Traditionally, there are two major approaches to optimizing the ultimate pit limit. One seeks to determine the ultimate pit using undiscounted profit maximization and the other by determining the optimal mining sequence of all blocks and discounting the value of the blocks. The outline with the highest cumulative NPV will be chosen as the final pit limit. For each of these approaches, different algorithms are presented. The aim of this paper is to present an analytical investigation about the mathematical relationship between sets of blocks of ultimate pits generated by each of these approaches in an ore body. This investigation is in fact the mathematical proof of the theorem that a discounted ultimate pit is smaller than or equal to the undiscounted pit. The results show that the discounted pit is always a subset of the undiscounted pit.Optimizing the final pit limit is one of the most important aspects of the design of open pit mining. In the last decades, there have been two major approaches to determining the final pit limit. The first approach is undiscounted profit maximization and the other is maximizing the NPV of the ultimate pit limit. For each approach, some methods and algorithms are presented. In the first approach, initially, the final pit outline with the aim of maximizing undiscounted profit is determined. Then achievement of the highest net present value (NPV) is planned for the pit production scheduling. Heuristic algorithms such as the floating cone ( Ideally, it is better to optimize the final pit by maximizing NPV rather than profit ( In the common methodology of open pit design, after ultimate pit determination short/mid/long-term production planning should be determined. Many researchers like Size of the pit outline obtained from each of the approaches (discounted and undiscounted block values), is an important indicator for comparing their performance. Tonnage of minable ore, volume of waste to be removed, location of subsidiary factories and facilities, waste and ore stockpiles, life time of the mine and the estimated NPV of the entire mining operation, depends on the size of the ultimate pit limit. In this regard, Ultimate pit optimization using NPV maximization means descending sort of the blocks which are subject to technical constraints and then determination of an outline that has the maximum cumulative NPV. Accordingly, the objective function of the optimization of block arrangement is presented in The number of decision variables within this problem is huge because the number of blocks in the deposits is huge. Within ore bodies, there are many useless waste blocks that do not have any effect on ultimate pit design. Thus, based on a technique provided by To investigate the mathematical relationship between sizes of DUP and UDUP, firstly it is assumed that the optimal extraction sequence of blocks within the BPP has already been determined using the objective function presented or by Roman's or Latorre-Golosinski's algorithms. Therefore, to use reductio-ad-absurdum analysis, the following assumptions are considered in this paper as the basic propositions: The optimal extraction sequence of blocks within BPP was determined. Economic parameters, price and cost, over the life of mining operation are constant. The discount rate is always less than one and greater than or equal to zero. The effect of change in grade on processing was neglected. 9 upper blocks must be mined prior to each block in 3D block models. The milling and refining constraints were neglected. According to the first assumption, instead of 3D indexing ( The main problem in this paper is the mathematical relationship between the sizes of UDUP and DUP. The solution process is based on reductio-ad-absurdum. Thus, at first an opposite proposition must be assumed. Subsequently, according to the results of the opposite proposition the framework of the problem will be explained. In this section, initially as the opposite proposition, it is assumed that the UDUP (LG) is smaller than the DUP. Therefore, there should be a point outside the LG pit where its NPV is greater than the NPV of the LG pit. Consequently, Eqs. As a result of the opposite proposition, we have the following preliminary assumption: Thus, Eqs. By removing the mutual part from both sides of Eqs. Now, in order to check the conditions of establishment for Eqs. Since, according to Eqs. So: According to the permissible domain obtained in Eq. The actual situation of the blocks' sequence according to the opposite assumption should be the following state: the first block after the LG outline must be waste, and the last block at the point of Sets The following mathematical relations are also recognized among For example, for the model in Following the previous explanations and the framework based on the opposite assumption, Eqs. According to Eqs. By multiplying both direct sides of Eqs. Eq. According to Eqs. On the other hand, the common coefficient On the right-hand side of Eq. In the negative terms of the right-hand side of Eq. According to the above four arguments for not changing the direction of Eq. After rearrangement of Eq. Using Eqs. The following can be obtained from Eq. Eq. If this argument is applied to each ore block after According to the analysis presented, the relationship between DUP and UDUP can be expressed as the following theorem: The size of ultimate pit outline is an important parameter for the economic assessment of mining operations, reserve estimation and its management. The traditional aim for ultimate pit design is based on undiscounted profit maximization. However, it is better to determine this boundary with NPV maximization. As proved analytically in the previous sections, the ultimate outline generated by the LG algorithm is greater than the other. In this regard the only constraints of the used objective function ( The final pit is an important determinant of the ore tonnage that can be extracted economically during a mine's life time. In the last decades, two major approaches have been adopted for the design of the optimum final pit based on the optimization goal. The first approach aims to optimize the ultimate pit outline through the maximization of undiscounted profit. Then, for the blocks within the final pit production, scheduling by maximizing NPV is being planned. In the second approach, initially, long-term production planning and the sequence of block extraction is determined. Subsequently, by discounting the value of the blocks, the ultimate pit with the highest NPV is considered as the final outline. Based on the second method, in this paper an objective function is presented to determine the optimum extraction time of each block presented. The BPP technique was then used to reduce the size of this objective function and to eliminate the rubbish blocks from the extraction determination process. Consequently, the proportion between the sizes of the pits generated by each approach was investigated mathematically. In this regard, the results show that the ultimate pit limit designed by NPV maximization is smaller than or equal to the final pit generated by the LG algorithm. This analysis proved the validity of Caccetta-Hill's theorem. This mathematical investigation is more global and more complete than previous studies concerning the aforementioned theorem. None declared. Authors state that the research was conducted according to ethical standards. None. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at