In this study, split-and-mix peptide libraries from one to four amino acids bound to functionalized beads were used to identify active morphogenesis peptides for the systems CaCO3 and dl-alanine. Density gradient ultracentrifugation was used to remove all beads without crystals as well as crystals homogeneously nucleated in solution. From the remaining fractions, beads were selected, which account for differences in crystal morphologies from the default crystal morphology on a micrometer scale and their amino acid sequence was analyzed. Our results show that multiple and different peptide sequences are found to be active in the morphogenesis of CaCO3 and dl-alanine. It was not possible to find a correlation, which connects active single amino acids with the sequences of di-, tri- and tetrapeptides. However, peptide charge was found to be important for morphogenesis. Peptides active in CaCO3 morphogenesis were enriched in basic amino acids while those active for dl-alanine morphogenesis contained more acidic amino acids. This can be explained by charge–charge interactions of the crystallizing species with the countercharged peptide moieties. Tests for chiral separation for the dl-alanine system showed that with the applied oligopeptide libraries, no enantioselective crystallization was achieved to a significant extent. The presented combinatorial crystallization assay provides an easy tool for crystallization control, which can be used for the straightforward selection of interesting species under a light microscope. However, suitable staining techniques to identify individual beads with crystals, which are for example a pure enantiomer still need to be developed.Biominerals such as bone, teeth, and shells are highly optimized organic–inorganic hybrid materials with favourable properties and hierarchical order. Their morphology, size, and orientation are driven by local conditions. In particular, the presence of proteins or other macromolecules The processes occurring As model for better understanding the control of crystal morphology by biomineralization polymers, previous work has focused on acidic polypeptides such as polyaspartic acid Another investigation with larger molecules was performed with an α-helical peptide designed to bind specific faces of calcite We envisioned on-bead screening of split-and-mix libraries An additional application that can possibly be achieved by crystallization on peptide functionalized beads is chiral resolution. The underlying principle in this approach involves the utilization of peptide functionalized beads as resolving auxiliaries in the crystallization of enantiomers. The hypothesis is that enantiospecific peptide beads will serve as selective chiral nuclei (seeds) during crystallization, lowering the formation energy for crystals of one enantiomer. Consequently, this enantiomer will crystallize in excess on the peptide functionalized beads, thereby enabling separation of this enantiomer from the crystallization solution. The feasibility of this approach was recently demonstrated All chemicals were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich, Senn Chemicals, Merck Biosciences and Bachem. The libraries were prepared on TentaGel resin (TentaGel S NH The combinatorial assays were performed by incubating the four different libraries (L1–L4) with saturated aqueous solutions of alanine and calcium carbonate, respectively. A total of at least three theoretical copies of the library were used per screening in order to ensure the presence of each library member Calcium carbonate crystals were grown on the beads by diffusion of carbon dioxide into calcium chloride solutions according to the gas diffusion method For After crystallization, 3 Control experiments with mineralized beads showed that the ultracentrifugation step does not remove the crystals from the surface of the beads. The supernatant over the discernable non-crystallized bead layer was removed and seven fractions (∼0.7 Each fraction was deposited on a glass slide and observed by optical microscopy (Nikon Eclipse E600 Pol equipped with crossed polarizers and a DXM 1200CCD camera and Olympus BX 41 equipped with digital camera). Most of the beads bearing crystals provided classical rhombohedral calcite crystals but some exhibited unusual morphologies showing the effectiveness of the procedure. Similar considerations are valid for It is important to note that small CaCO As a control experiment, precipitation of alanine and calcium carbonate was performed on negative control beads bearing simply acetylated amines in place of the peptides (acetylated amino functionalized TentaGel). In a small percentage of cases (<2%) adventitious crystals were observed on non-grafted beads presumably due to the presence of cracks formed during the synthesis or handling of the beads before the crystallization reaction ( In a typical crystallization experiment supersaturated Crystallization of CaCO Besides the beads with precipitates, a large fraction of the beads remained without crystals on their surfaces and could be removed as a layer after ultracentrifugation. These are all beads, which do not contain a peptide sequence inducing nucleation of a crystal. Although analysis of beads from this layer in principle could reveal peptide sequences for the inhibition of crystallization, the layer of beads without crystals also contains peptide sequences which are inert to crystallization so that no crystal nucleated as is the case for the non-functionalized beads. Therefore the beads without crystals were not further analyzed as a defined correlation of the peptide sequence and crystallization inhibition cannot be made. Similarly, all beads with crystals exhibiting the default crystal morphology (calcite rhombohedron and All investigated crystals exhibited a different morphology from each other and the default crystal ( If only the type of amino acid and not its position nor the specific side chain are considered but just the type of chemical function, still most of the amino acid types show no correlation between the libraries with respect to amid, polar, rigid, aromatic and apolar amino acids (see For Overall the charge of an amino acid depends on the isoelectric point (p To test chiral resolution and to look if the peptide functionalized beads can act as selective chiral seeds in the crystallization of Our results show that multiple and different peptide sequences are found to be active in the morphogenesis of CaCO This means in turn that a rational design of peptide amino acid sequences for active morphogenesis of crystals is not easily feasible by a step-wise approach starting from a single amino acid and extending the length of the peptide from this. If an active peptide sequence is identified for morphogenesis, it is not possible to deduce that the same sequence shortened or extended by one amino acid will also be active. This hinders the construction of larger peptide sequences with crystal morphogenesis activity. However, while the exact side chain chemistry and amino acid position showed no correlation between the libraries, the charge of the side chains proved to be of importance for both investigated crystal systems. While basic amino acids showed morphogenesis activity for CaCO While no clear correlations between different generations of libraries were found when the morphology selection criterium was applied in this study, the presented combinatorial approach proved to be successful for the identification of peptide sequences which are active in the controlled nucleation of silver colloids of a distinct size in the nm range The combinatorial split-and-mix library approach is a very simple, versatile and effective way of identifying active peptide sequences for mineralization control, as the results of the crystallization experiment can directly be observed in the light microscope after the uneffective beads have been removed by ultracentrifugation. This allows to search for peptides, which generate a defined morphology. Similar considerations could also apply if peptides for the distinct generation of a certain CaCO There are further possibilities, which can be imagined to optically distinguish between favourable and unfavourable crystals by optical microscopy either by selective staining methods or polarization microscopy. This shows the large potential of our simple crystallization screening method by combinatorial peptide libraries and will allow for the increase of the knowledge, how crystallization can be directed into a desired direction by peptide additives. This opens the possibility for a better understanding of the interaction of peptides with crystal surfaces or crystallization processes as such. Tali Menahem and Dana Medina from Bar-Ilan University are acknowledged for performing parts of the crystallization experiments during a research stay in Golm. We thank the Max-Planck Society for financial support of this work. Y. Mastai would like to thank the Minerva short-term research grants for financial support. Support from the Swiss National Science Foundation and BACHEM is gratefully acknowledged by H. Wennemers. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 