Nanocrystalline cementite phase has been synthesized from elemental iron and graphite powder by reaction milling in an efficient dual-drive planetary mill. The strong collision energy field of the dual drive planetary mill reduced the cementite formation time by 60% to 40 h as compared to over 100 h reported in earlier studies. In order to understand the mechanisms of reaction milling, the evolution of particle size, shape, surface areas and phases during different stages of reaction milling were studied. During the initial stage of reaction milling, the ductile powder exhibited flattened morphology with resultant increase in surface area and cold bonding assisted particle size enhancement. The subsequent work hardening of the particle was substantiated from the lattice strain measurement of the milled particle. In the final stage of milling, fracture of the cold worked particles was found to reduce the crystallite size to as low as 100 nm as well as increase the particle sphericity. The decomposition of the metastable cementite phase above 800 °C was observed during annealing of milled powder, which was reconfirmed through DTA.During the last four decades, significant work has been carried out in the broad area of mechanical alloying to synthesize wide variety of phases, including solid solution, intermetallics compound and amorphous glasses Cementite is an important phase of the steel, which is mainly responsible for its mechanical properties. It also holds a lot of promise as a dispersoid for the synthesis of several types of novel composites. There has been a considerable knowledge base developed for the proeutectoid cementite transformation for its technological importance in either avoiding formation of this brittle product, or using it as a strengthener in high carbon steels. However, there still exists a lack of knowledge with regard to the role of cementite in steel; particularly its morphology and distribution on the mechanical and physical properties of steel. Since cementite is hard and brittle at room temperature and meta-stable at higher temperatures, it is difficult to synthesize and isolate it as single-phase material under ordinary processing conditions. Faced with these challenges a novel approach involving reaction milling is adopted here to study the cementite phase in greater detail. Earlier studies have shown the possibility of cementite phase formation In the present work, a dual drive planetary mill ( Taking the minus sign for opposite direction of motion between the jar and the main shaft we get, The percent critical speed is calculated by considering the shaft speed and jar speed as 225 and 475 rpm. Therefore, Further details of mill design and mill kinetics have been given in detail elsewhere (see Chaira et al. Milling experiments were carried out with elemental iron and graphite powder of 99% purity as starting materials, with different iron to graphite powder weight ratios of 124.0, 13.93, 5.24, 3.93, 2.62 and 1.97, respectively. Milling was carried out for 40-hours in two jars each containing 250 gm of powder and 2.5 kg of 6 mm diameter steel balls. Stearic acid (1% by weight) was added to prevent agglomeration of iron powder during milling. In order to examine the evolution of powders during the experiments, the mill was stopped and cooled to room temperature after every 5 h for taking out powder samples for characterization. It was observed that a weight ratio of 13.93 provides maximum cementite yield and therefore this sample was characterized as a typical cementite powder. This composition corresponds to the stoichiomatric composition of cementite. The stability of cementite phase in the milled powder samples was examined by annealing in vacuum-sealed quartz ampules at 600, 700 and 800 °C for 1 h. Powder samples were characterized for particle size by laser particle size analyzer (Malvern master sizer 2000); phase and crystallinity analysis by X-ray diffraction (Cr Kα); particle surface area by BET analyzer (Coulter); phase stability analysis by DTA (Perkin Elmer), and microscopic characterization of grain and particle sizes by SEM (FEI Quanta), and TEM (PHILIPS). The DTA was carried out under argon atmosphere at a heating rate of 15 °C/min. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was performed on the milled and annealed powder to determine the average grain size and the grain size distribution. For the TEM analysis, the powder samples were dispersed in ethanol by ultrasonication for 30 min and mounting the dispersed liquid on a 3-mm diameter carbon coated Cu grid. The crystal size and lattice strain of the milled powder were determined from broadening of XRD peaks using Scherrer formula. The broadening due to particle size ( The evidence of cementite phase formation by reaction milling can be observed from the evolution of XRD patterns ( The planetary milling is characterized by a constant interplay of powder flattening, cold welding, work hardening, fracture and rewelding. The efficiency of reaction milling is governed by the optimal intensity of impact and particle size. The evolution of the particle size distribution as a function of milling time is presented in At later stage of milling work hardening of particles makes the particle brittle, resulting in fracture and reduction in particle size distribution. The accumulation of lattice strain during milling due to cold working resulting in peak broadening can be observed from The surface area of the particle as shown in Cementite is a metastable phase, which decomposes to iron and graphite at 800 °C. In order to examine its stability, 40-hours milled powder was annealed in a vacuum-sealed quartz tube at 600, 700 and 800 °C for 1 h. The XRD patterns of the annealed powders ( The internal structure of the reaction milled and annealed powders were investigated by the TEM. In the present work it has been demonstrated that the elemental iron and graphite powder can be milled in a dual drive planetary mill to produce nanocrystalline cementite. The milling in the dual drive planetary mill was found to efficiently produce bulk cementite in 40 h as compared to over 100 h required in the commercially available planetary mill. This 60% reduction in milling time has been attributed to the strong collision energy field of the dual drive planetary mill. The evolution of particle shape, size, surface area and phases during different stages of reaction milling was studied. The flattening of the powder during initial stage (2 h) of reaction milling was confirmed by scanning electron microscopy as well as by increase in surface area. The cold bonding assisted particle size enhancement was also observed in this stage. In the subsequent stage of reaction milling, work hardening of particle takes place. This was substantiated by the lattice strain measured from the XRD peak broadening of the milled particle. In the final stage of milling, fracture of the cold worked particles take place. This resulted in particle morphology change from flake to spherical shape as observed from the scanning electron microscopy. The reduction in crystallite size to as low as 100 nm during this stage was confirmed from the transmission electron microscopy. This was also substantiated by reduction in the particle size as measured by laser particle analyzer and crystalline size measurement from the line broadening of XRD patterns. The stability of the metastable cementite phase was examined by DTA as well as annealing studies. The recovery and recrystallization assisted reduction in lattice strain during annealing was evident from the sharpening of XRD peaks. The disappearance of cementite peaks in the XRD patterns as well as the endothermic peaks in the DTA spectrum showed cementite decomposition during annealing of milled powder. It can be finally concluded that the dual drive planetary milling provides an efficient method of bulk processing of intermetallic compounds.