Flexible insulating composites with superior thermal conductivity (usually below 5 W m−1 K−1 for the previously-reported composites) are highly desirable for further miniaturization of high-power electronics and portable devices. Herein hexagonal boron nitride (hBN)/thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) composites were readily fabricated by solution ball-milling of hBN and TPU in N,N′-dimethylformamide followed by precipitation in ethanol. The coagulated solids were then processed by hot-pressing to produce TPU composite films with well-dispersed hBN platelets. The amount of hBN in the TPU matrix was loaded as high as 95 wt% while retaining mechanical flexibility. The in-plane thermal conductivity variations' trend with hBN loadings exhibited a sudden jump happened with the loading level over 40 wt% in the polymer matrix. Intriguingly, the TPU composite film with 95 wt% hBN exhibits an in-plane thermal conductivity of up to 50.3 W m−1 K−1 (a 264-fold increase compared to pure TPU), due to the hot-compression induced alignment of hBN platelets and strong interactions in/with the TPU matrix. The corresponding out-of-plane thermal conductivity is also as high as 6.9 W m−1 K−1. The hBN/TPU composite films were further employed as heat spreaders for light-emitting diodes, resulting in a significant decrease by about 40 °C in the set-point and the saturation temperatures. Such superior thermal transport performance has rarely been reported in the polymer composites. The proposed method provides a facile and novel strategy for the scalable fabrication of high-performance polymer composites containing two dimensional layered materials.High-power electronics and portable devices such as smart phones, touch panels, and light-emitting diodes (LED) generate a large amount of heat during operation [ In recent years, many ceramic fillers such as aluminum nitride (AlN) [ Hexagonal boron nitride (hBN), also known as white graphite, has attracted much attention due to its high TC, low density, and a large band gap (nearly 5.9 eV), which make it suitable for applications in heat spreaders [ In this study, we report a novel approach to fabricate large area, high-filler-loaded, flexible and insulating hBN/thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU) composite films via solution ball-milling of hBN and TPU in The hBN powder (ranging from 10 μm to 30 μm, purity >99.5%) was purchased from Dandong Rijin Science and Technology Co., Ltd. The TPU 1180A10, was purchased from BASF (Germany). EVA used was Escorene Ultra LD 728 (vinyl acetate content 15 wt%). SEBS used was Kraton G1652. Other chemicals were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Beijing, China). All chemicals were analytical grade and were used as received without further treatment. The TPU solution (content 20 wt%) was obtained by dispersing 10 g of dried TPU into 40 g of DMF solvent followed by stirring for 4 h at 80 °C. 6.67 g of dried hBN powder was added to the TPU solution. The hBN/TPU dispersion was then continuously ball milled for 24 h in a planetary ball mill at a rotational speed of 400 rpm at room temperature. The reaction components were placed in a 250-mL grinding bowl with 260 g of agate milling beads (diameters = 4 mm, 6 mm, 8 mm, and 10 mm). The hBN sheets dispersed readily into the TPU solution by the shearing forces that were transferred from the rotating balls. This resulted in homogeneous hBN/TPU dispersion. Solid-state hBN/TPU mixture was obtained after the dispersion was added to excessive ethanol. The overall fabrication process was illustrated in The elemental mappings of the hBN/TPU composite films were measured with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX, APOLLO 10SDD) coupled with scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Quanta 250 FEG, FEI, USA). The sample morphologies were measured with SEM (Hitachi S-4800, 5 kV). The amount of hBN in the composites was quantified by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) with a thermogravimetric analyzer TG 209 F1 (NETZSCH, Germany) under air atmosphere with a heating rate of 10 °C/min. A FLIR A325sc infrared camera recorded the heat transfer on the hBN/TPU composite films. Morphology of hBN was examined with a SEM (Quanta 400 FEG, FEI, USA). The composition of hBN was evaluated with an energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX, coupled with SEM). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of hBN was collected using a powder XRD analysis. This was performed by an XRD (D8 Advance, Bruker AXS) with Cu Kα radiation at 40 kV/40 mA, with scan steps of 0.02° from 10° up to 80°. Raman spectroscopy was recorded with a LabRam HR 800 UV NIR using a 532-nm laser excitation. The thermal diffusivities ( Flexible insulating hBN/TPU composite films were fabricated by a combination of ball milling and hot pressing ( The distribution of TPU in the composite films was further characterized by EDX. This was performed on both the surface and the cross section of 95 wt% hBN/TPU composite film ( The hot pressing at high temperature followed by high pressure facilitated the in-plane orientation and physical contact between hBN sheets. This resulted in a densely packed and an ordered hierarchically arranged structure, as evidenced from representative SEM micrographs shown in By controlling the solution concentration and filler feeds before ball milling, a highly-filler-loaded hBN could be realized in hBN/TPU composite films. For example, further addition of hBN loading to 95 wt%, the hBN/TPU composite film showed a typical nacre-like structure (Fig. 3n,o), which was assembled through hot-pressing induced alignment. The nacre-like structure has been previously fabricated by vacuum-assisted filtration [  It was interesting to find that the TC of the sample reached 50.3 W m The formation of thermally-conductive pathways in the composites effectively improved the TC. Since hBN was hierarchically arranged in the composite films with all hBN loadings due to the hot-pressing induced alignment. The schematic models were shown in   Potential applications of hBN/TPU composite films in heat spreaders were examined by recording the temperature variations and distributions with a thermal imaging camera ( In summary, we report a novel approach to fabricate flexible, insulating elastomer-based 2D composite film with excellent TC via ball milling followed by hot pressing. In this composite film, the 2D platelets were hierarchically arranged due to hot-pressing induced alignment in the framework and formed a thermally conductive network, while elastomer was used as the structural component that provided flexibility. By controlling the solution concentration and hBN feeds, the amount of hBN could reach 95 wt% while keeping mechanical flexibility. The hot-compression induced alignment of hBN platelets and strong interactions in/with the TPU matrix were very effective to improve the thermal property upon the construction of thermally-conductive pathways. The 95 wt% hBN/TPU composite film displayed superior thermal property with the TC up to 50.3 W m This work was supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at