We studied the influence of the earthworm, Eisenia fetida, on the microbial populations during the vermicomposting of pig manure. Fresh pig manure was placed in replicated boxes with (two densities, 25 and 50) and without earthworms for a period of 16 d. Samples were destructively collected periodically and analyzed for microbial biomass nitrogen, microbial respiration, substrate-induced respiration (SIR) and substrate dehydrogenase activity. Microbial biomass N, microbial respiration, SIR and substrate dehydrogenase activity were significantly lower in the earthworm treatments after 8 d.Vermicomposting is a biooxidation and stabilization of organic material involving the joint action of earthworms and microorganisms. Although microbes are responsible for the biochemical degradation of organic matter, earthworms are the important drivers of the process, conditioning the substrate and altering biological activity. Invertebrates have indirect effects on the structure and activities of bacteria and fungal communities through inoculum dispersal, grazing, litter comminution, gut passage and aggregate formation The main objective of this study was to monitor the prime short-time changes in the microbial populations of pig manure during processing by the epigeic earthworm, Pig manure (100 g f m) with approximately 75% moisture content was placed in 200 ml plastic containers. The earthworms, adult specimens of The moisture content of the manure was determined by drying it at 60 The microbial biomass N was measured using the chloroform fumigation–direct extraction method One-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and separation of means based on the least significant difference (LSD, Earthworm biomass remained stable during the study. Mortality was relatively low (i.e. < 2% for all the microcosms) until day 8. After 16 d, mortality was higher (17.6% and 28% for the 25 and 50 earthworm microcosms, respectively). Earthworms had a negative effect on microbial biomass on day 8. A reduction in the Bio-N also occurred on day 4 in the 25 earthworm microcosms and although it was lower in the 25 earthworm treatment than in the controls (0 earthworms), these differences were not significant. After day 8, Bio-N increased progressively in the 50 earthworm treatment and remained relatively stable in the 25 earthworm treatment and in the control ( Similarly as microbial biomass nitrogen was significantly affected, there was a reduction of the basal and substrate-induced respiration on day 8. The differences between the two earthworm treatments were not significant, except for the basal respiration on day 8 ( Dehydrogenase activity was significantly lower in the earthworm treatments than in the control from day 4 until the experiment ended on day 16. After 8 d, this enzymatic activity remained stabilized in the earthworm treatments and decreased in the control ( Our results indicate that earthworms modify the activity of the microorganisms during vermicomposting of pig manure in a short-time period. From a morphological point of view, the earthworm-worked material was totally processed into a heterogeneous mass of casts and fibre particles after 48 h of processing, whereas the material without earthworms remained in compact clumps. Within the first 8 d, earthworms and their associated microflora seemed to rapidly destroy most of the easily biodegradable substances, as may be indicated by the rapid reduction in the amount of CO It is a well-known fact that earthworm activity in the soil enhances microbial population and biomass In summary, we have demonstrated that the first steps of vermicomposting, the passage of pig manure through the gut of the earthworm, This work was supported by a grant from the Xunta de Galicia (PGIDT99MA30102). We thank Clive A. Edwards for the revision of the paper providing comments that helped to improve this manuscript.