The cycling safety research literature has proposed methods to analyse safety and case studies to better understand the factors that lead to cyclist crashes. Surrogate measures of safety (SMoS) are being used as a proactive approach to identify severe interactions that do not result in an accident and interpreting them for a safety diagnosis. While most cyclist studies adopting SMoS have evaluated interactions by counting the total number of severe events per location, only a few have focused on the interactions between general directions of movement e.g. through cyclists and right turning vehicles. However, road users perform maneuvers that are more varied at a high spatiotemporal resolution such as a range of sharp to wide turning movements. These maneuvers (motion patterns) have not been considered in past studies as a basis for analysis to identify, among a range of possible motion patterns in each direction of travel, which ones are safer, and which are more likely to result in a crash.
                  This paper presents a novel movement-based probabilistic SMoS approach to evaluate the safety of road users’ trajectories based on clusters of trajectories representing the various movements. This approach is applied to cyclist-vehicle interactions at two locations of cycling network discontinuity and two control sites in Montréal. The Kruskal-Wallis and Kolmogorov–Smirnov tests are used to compare the time-to-collision (TTC) distribution between motion patterns in each site and between sites with and without a discontinuity. Results demonstrate the insight provided by the new approach and indicate that cyclist interactions are more severe and less safe at locations with a cycling network discontinuity and that cyclists following different movements have statistically different levels of safety.While there was a 6.7% increase in cycling mode share in the past five years, only 1.4% of Canadians cycle ( SMoS are used as proactive safety indicators that are based on events without a collision, occurring more frequently than accidents. Traditional SMoS are based on the observation of traffic conflicts, defined as situations in which two or more road users approach each other to an extent that a collision is imminent if their movements remain unchanged ( The safety of a site is usually analyzed globally, for example counting the number of severe traffic conflicts. Some studies may consider the locations of the events and the movements of the road users involved, with a coarse categorization based on the origins and destinations, e.g. northbound right turn, left turn and through movement. However, the road user movements are more varied at a high spatio-temporal resolution, e.g. thirty times per second. For example, right turning cyclist movements can vary between sharp and wide right turns, while left turning cyclist movements include vehicular left turns, and crossing the road on the far or near side walks ( In this paper, a movement-based PSMoS approach is proposed to evaluate the safety of road users’ trajectories, to help researchers and decision makers better understand the relationship of behaviour and infrastructure with safety. To the best of our knowledge, road user safety has not been analyzed based on clusters of trajectories representing various movements and strategies per origin destination at a site-level. The findings can identify whether wide turns result in riskier interactions compared to sharp turns. This is done by clustering road user trajectories into motion patterns and applying the PSMoS technique to evaluate the severity of interactions related to the range of motion patterns traveling in each direction. The safety of each movement (cluster) can then be compared. This approach is applied to two cycling network discontinuity locations and two control sites in Montréal where cyclists have been observed to follow several distinct motion patterns ( A summary of related past literature is presented in the following section. The data workflow and the movement-based PSMoS method are then described in the Methodology section. Descriptive analysis and test results are presented and discussed, and the paper is concluded in the final section. Reviewing the literature shows that cyclist SMoS studies have used four general data collection methods: self-reported conflicts, manual observation of traffic conflicts, semi-automated interaction detection, and automated analysis from video data. Additionally, two approaches are employed to analyse the results: interaction analysis and aggregated movement interaction analysis. The first class of conflict identification methods is conflict self-reporting. Aldred and Goodman studied over a thousand self-reported conflicts and found that cyclists with less than two years of experience have much higher conflict frequencies compared to cyclists with more experience ( The second category of data collection method relies on trained observers to record the number of traffic conflicts and assign a severity to the event based on estimated speed and proximity from field observations or video recordings (manual video analysis). Glauz and Migletz adapted the field observation method to record the traffic conflict and volume at intersections and found that left turning conflicts with through vehicles are more frequent at two-lane roads, and at roads with higher speed limits ( The third data collection method is the semi-automated analysis of video data. A study evaluating the seasonal safety in numbers effect utilized a semi-automated video analysis technique and extracted the number of conflicts based on the Swedish traffic conflict technique (TCT) ( Finally, automated methods of extracting conflicts from video data have been developed and used more recently in the literature. Stipancic et al. extracted SMoS from video data and evaluated cyclist safety at intersections ( Safety evaluation is done using either all the generated conflict indicators, or aggregated per general direction of movement. The majority of the mentioned studies above have analysed all interactions, summarizing the SMoS indicators per interaction. On the other hand, studies considering the cyclist movements focused on interactions involving a single general direction of movement such as through cyclists interacting with right and left turning vehicles. Madsen and Lahrmann investigated right and left turning vehicular movements with through cyclists and found right turning maneuvers to have a higher risk compared to left turning, specifically at locations where the cycling facility ended before the intersection and locations where cyclists shared the road with right turning traffic ( While the safety of interactions has been studied for specific movements at a coarse level, the review of relevant literature did not yield any studies evaluating and comparing the safety of different cyclist maneuvers in each movement category (e.g. different right turning strategies).  The first and second step to perform the microscopic movement-based PSMoS methodology is the case study site selection and video data collection. Cycling network discontinuity locations are identified in Montréal using the methodology presented in previous work ( The second discontinuity is a change in cycling facility type and change in number of road lanes at the intersection of Coffee Street and Elmhurst Avenue ( Video data was collected on weekdays in October 2015 from 7:00 AM for roughly seven hours, using a GoPro camera installed on a height-adjustable pole placed next to and secured to a light pole. Video data preparation includes the correction of the camera lens distortion, and a homography matrix is used to convert pixels in the image plane to world coordinates to track road user trajectories from the two-dimensional video frame in real-world coordinates. The next step, shown in For the analysis duration, tracking parameters are adjusted for each site by trial and error to optimize trajectory extraction. Furthermore, the road user trajectories for each video are observed and over-segmented objects that are tracked as two or more objects are identified and only one trajectory is kept for each road user. Classifiers are updated based on speed parameters of road users for each site, then the video is manually checked for misclassified road users and corrected. The final prepared dataset at each site is a set of trajectories (one for each road user) with their true road user class. A clustering algorithm developed in previous work ( For analysis purposes, only the motion patterns with cyclists, potentially affected by the discontinuity along their path, are considered in the analysis. These are the cyclist motion patterns with origins and destinations, that would have used the cycling facility if it was continuous. These motion patterns affected by the discontinuity are referred to as the motion patterns under study throughout the rest of the paper. The comparison of cyclist behaviour at discontinuity and control sites relies on the set of motion patterns associated with each direction of movement under study. The last step (see At the discontinuity location, Maisonneuve and Ste. Catherine, a total of 2342 road users are detected in two hours, 369 of which are cyclists. During the same time at the control site Maisonneuve and Prince Albert, out of the 848 detected road users, 343 are cyclists which is roughly the same as the discontinuity location. Looking at the Maisonneuve and Ste. Catherine discontinuity intersection ( Looking more specifically at the motion patterns under study, it is observed that cyclists travelling in both directions can be divided into four groups: those originating from inside the physically separated cycling facility and ending in the cycling facility, those originating from inside the cycling facility but ending on the road or sidewalk, those originating from outside the cycling facility and ending inside the cycling facility, and those originating and ending outside the cycling facility. Cyclists traveling At the discontinuity location, out of the interactions with a collision course (and therefore a TTC Comparing the two directions of travel, cyclists traveling Cyclists traveling  The second discontinuity location Coffee and Elmhurst has 1204 road users detected during the two hours, 26 of which are cyclists. At the control site Coffee and West Broadway, out of the 471 detected road users 34 are cyclists. The clustering algorithm applied to these locations resulted in 11 distinct cyclist motion patterns at the discontinuity location shown in Motion patterns at these locations can be categorized into right turning, left turning and straight movements, where right or left turning cyclists are affected by the discontinuity either by a change from a physically separated cycling facility to a shared roadway, or crossing two lanes of bi-directional traffic from a one-way road. The through cyclists are affected by the change from designated roadway to no facility north of the intersection. In the Straight moving cyclists traveling There is a total of 39 cyclist-vehicle interactions with a collision course (and therefore a TTC Considering the movement directions, cyclists Despite the small sample size, the KW test for the TTC Comparing the distribution of TTC This study proposes a maneuver-based safety analysis method and investigates the safety of cyclist maneuvers at locations with cycling facility discontinuities, compared to control sites. Four intersections are selected in Montréal, where the discontinuities include a change in cycling facility location on the road and a change in cycling facility type, with the control sites located one block east of their respective discontinuity sites. Video data is collected, and two hours are selected based on video quality (reduced shaking, glare, and large shadows) for each location. An automated video analysis tool is applied to extract road user trajectories and combine similar trajectories as motion patterns. The safety of cyclist-vehicle interactions is characterized using SMoS, namely TTC The KW test indicated that for both discontinuity sites and one of the control sites (Maisonneuve and Prince Albert), there are significant differences among the median TTC The movement-based safety analysis method can be applied to any area to identify geometric and infrastructural influences on cyclist behaviour and safety. Other SMoS, such as post-encroachment time (PET), may be used. With these results, more informed decisions on improving the design of a location can be drawn. Identifying and designing counter-measures to target the most unsafe maneuvers will significantly improve the safety of a location. The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: study conception and design: M. Nabavi Niaki, N. Saunier and L. F. Miranda-Moreno; data collection: M. Nabavi Niaki; analysis and interpretation of results: M. Nabavi Niaki, N. Saunier; draft manuscript preparation: M. Nabavi Niaki, N. Saunier. All authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript. This work was supported by the