This special issue is a collection of papers on automation in mining, minerals and metal processing. The majority of the contributions to this special issue have been selected from papers presented during the IFAC Workshop MMM 2009, which was held in Viña del Mar, Chile during October 14–16, 2009. This meeting brought together engineers and scientists to focus attention on new methodologies and challenging applications related to monitoring and control of mining, minerals and metal processes. The workshop attracted participants from industry and academia around the world. All submitted papers were reviewed by members of the international program committee (IPC) and the selected papers for presentation are now available on IFAC PaperOnLine The paper by Hodouin “Methods for automatic control, observation, and optimization in mineral processing plants” presents the real issues that constraints the use of advanced control in mineral processing plants, focusing on what is needed for successful application of some control theories, emphasizing that the so called peripheral tools (fault detection and isolation system, data reconciliation procedure, observers, soft sensors, optimizers, model parameter tuners) are as important as the controller itself. Bergh and Yianatos discuss how the characteristics of flotation processes, the quality of measurements of key variables, and the general lack of realistic dynamic models, are delaying the appropriate use of predictive control. In this context, the applications of multivariate statistics, such as PCA, to model the relationship between operating data for on-line diagnosis and fault detection and to build causal models are discussed in the paper “The long way toward multivariate predictive control of flotation processes”. The paper by Hodouin et al. “Suboptimal flowrate estimators and their application to the design of measurement strategies” presents a review of suboptimal direct estimation methods to design measurement strategies maximizing the performance of flow rates estimation, as compared to data reconciliation methods. This paper analyses a very important constraint in most of mineral processing industries, which is the lack of direct flow rate measurements. Haavisto and Hyötyniemi present the combined use of reflectance spectroscopy with the traditional X-ray fluorescence analysis for improved measurement of the mineral slurry contents in the paper “Reflectance spectroscopy in the analysis of mineral flotation slurries”. Effective monitoring and control of a mineral flotation process necessitates accurate and rapid on-line analysis of the elements or minerals in the slurry flows. The main improvement achieved by the supplemental reflectance spectral analysis is the significantly reduced sampling interval of the elemental analysis with respect to XRF. Thurly discusses the opportunity for online, non-contact, fully automated machine vision systems for measurement of particle size that can provide the necessary accuracy and fast feedback to facilitate process control and allow automatic control optimisation for both product size and energy efficiency, in the paper “Automated online measurement of limestone particle size distribution using 3D range data”. Jabri et al. present two related papers on mould level control in continuous steel casting, i.e. “Particle swarm optimization based tuning of a modified Smith predictor for mould level control in continuous casting” and “Cancellation of bulging effect on mould level in continuous casting: experimental validation”. The first contribution proposes a level control structure based on Aström's modified Smith predictor able to improve the bulging effect rejection. Unlike conventional methods, this control strategy decouples disturbance rejection from set-point tracking and therefore can be independently optimized. Using this scheme, the bulging rejection specifications are reformulated as an H-infinity problem. The tuning parameters are determined through a particle swarm optimization approach. Especially at high casting velocities, the bulging generates important level fluctuations which cannot be efficiently rejected by classical controllers. To address this problem, the second paper proposes an architecture which combines disturbance estimation and compensation techniques. The paper “Model-based trajectory planning, optimization, and open-loop control of a continuous slab reheating furnace” by Steinbeck et al. deals with a temperature control method developed for reheating steel slabs in an industrial furnace. The proposed hierarchical control concept computes desired heat inputs for each individual slab based on a discrete-time nonlinear model. Then, a quadratic program is solved to plan reference trajectories of furnace temperatures which optimally realize the desired heat inputs into the slabs. The paper “Optimum quality design system for steel products through locally weighted regression model” by Shigemori et al. presents a new quality design system for steel products using a type of Just-In-Time modeling. The paper focuses on how to determine the optimal manufacturing conditions for securing the target quality by using locally weighted regression. The proposed method can improve design accuracy and shorten design time in comparison with the conventional technique. The paper “Identification, prediction and detection of the process fault in a cement rotary kiln by locally linear neuro-fuzzy technique” by Sadeghian and Fatehi presents a nonlinear system identification method to predict and detect process fault of a cement rotary kiln. After selecting proper inputs and output, an input–output model is identified for the plant. To identify the various operation points in the kiln, a locally linear neuro-fuzzy (LLNF) model is used. This model is trained by the LOLIMOT algorithm which is an incremental tree structure algorithm. I wish to thank the authors for their contributions to this issue and the reviewers for their comments and suggestions that lead to substantial improvements of the papers.