The present work includes the effect of addition of graphite for improving the properties of Al6061–TiB2 composite using the high-energy stir casting method. The characterization was performed with X-ray diffraction, energy dispersive spectrum and scanning electron microscope. The thermal and mechanical behaviors such as thermo gravimetric analysis/differential thermal analysis, hardness, tensile strength using acoustic emission and fatigue behaviors were investigated. The composite of composition Al6061–20% TiB2 with 2% graphite shows the greatest improvement in mechanical behavior. An Acoustic Emission system was employed in all the tests to monitor the acoustic energy release during the whole deformation process and some useful conclusions were drawn.Aluminum-based particulate reinforced metal matrix composites (MMCs) have emerged as an important class of high performance materials known for light weight, high formability, high electrical conductivity and corrosion resistance applications. They find application in aerospace, automobile, marine, chemical, transportation, and mineral processing industries Different ceramic materials that are generally used to reinforce aluminum alloys in Al6061 MMCs are carbides (SiC, TiC, ZrC), borides (TiB Aluminum graphite particulate MMCs produced by solidification techniques represent a class of inexpensive tailor-made materials for a variety of engineering applications such as automotive components Fatigue property is a crucial factor in engineering design, where the cyclic load is inevitably involved The acoustic emission (AE) method has been widely used to characterize the behavior of many engineering materials In this investigation various Al6061 composites were prepared by reinforcing different weight fractions of TiB Commercial grade aluminum Al6061 was used as the base material and the details of the composition are given in  X-ray diffraction (XRD) shows the elements present in the composite. Thermal behavior of Al6061, Al6061–TiB Tensile test specimens were made as per the ASTM standard ASTM: E8/E8M-13a and tested in a FIE universal testing machine (UTM) (UNITEK 94100–100 Micro hardness test was conducted on the polished samples of Al6061 alloy and its hybrid composites by adopting standard testing procedure Fatigue life cycles were measured from the standard fatigue sample as per ASTM: E466-96. Fatigue tests were performed on an INSTRON 8801 servo hydraulic controlled dynamic testing machine with a load range of 0–100 AE is the sound wave produced when a material undergoes stress (internal change), as a result of an external force. This phenomenon occurs within the material when mechanical loading generates sources of elastic waves. Occurrence of emissions is the result of a small surface displacement of a material, produced by the stress waves generated when the energy in a material or on its surface is released rapidly. AE produces mechanical tensions and releases elastic energy. The tests were performed using electro-mechanically controlled UTM interface with AE recorder. The piezoelectric-micro 80 model sensor with 250 TGA/DTA thermogram is given in The tensile stress variation, ultimate stress and elongation of Al6061 alloy, 10%, 20% of TiB The fracture morphology of the tensile tested specimen of Al6061 alloy, 10%, 20% of TiB The results of the microhardness tests conducted on the prepared composite containing different weight % of TiB  The fatigue-fractured samples examined under SEM are shown in Composite Al6061–20% TiB AE data were analyzed by the AT Post software. This analyzer indicates that the AE signals are passed through the prepared specimen by sensors. The various AE parameters obtained from the test setup are via, count, time, hits, voltage and amplitude. The following figure shows the failure analysis of the prepared composite materials with online Acoustic set up. Basically, there are two types of AE signals: transient and continuous signals. The transient AE signals, having burst starts and end points, deviate clearly from background noise. The continuous AE signals have time and voltage variations but the signal never ends. The useful signals for AE testing at varying weight percentage of composite material are burst type signals originating from fracture or crack growth. Generated AE waves of the different composites are shown in  The time vs hit wave form of the composite with different proportions is shown in  The mechanical characteristics of stir cast Al6061–TiB XRD and EDS studies confirm the presence of Al, TiB The thermogram of TGA/DTA shows that the increase in % of TiB There is an improvement in the tensile strength, ultimate tensile strength and elongation with the addition of TiB The hardness value increases with the addition of reinforcements, TiB The results of fatigue tests reveal that the number of cycles of the specimens increases with the increase in the weight % of TiB The various AE parameters are determined for early crack detection. The extent of the Al6061/TiB