Flotation is an effective and clean separation technology to realize the recovery of metal in waste printed circuit boards (WPCBs). The flotation kinetic of metal and non-metal components was concerned in this study. In addition, the loading of bubbles, the collision and shedding of particles and bubbles were used to assist in proving the particle dynamics results. By analyzing the force on the particles, the load of bubbles on particles was analyzed, and the appropriate volume ratio of bubbles to particles was 1.5–8.0, depending on the particle density. Moreover, Clift model and Schiller-Naumann model has high fitting accuracy for the final bubble velocity. In addition, metal particles have greater settling velocity, which results in shorter collision time with bubbles. In the process of bubble-particle rising, the shedding probability gradually decreases, and the shedding probability of metal particles is much higher than that of non-metal particles. The results of flotation kinetics show that the removal of impurity particles represented by silicon mainly occurs in the initial stage of flotation process. The loss of copper increases with flotation time and collector dosage. This study reveals the flotation kinetics of particles from the perspectives of bubble loading, bubble-particle collision and shedding.The electronics industry is one of the largest in the world, with an estimated value of $400 billion by 2022. With the increase of residents' purchasing power and the progress of electronic technology, the life cycle of electronic products is gradually shortened, which leads to the explosion of the amount of electronic waste. It is reported that electronic waste reached 50 million tons in 2018, which will reach 56.2 million tons in the year of 2022 with an annual growth rate of 3-4% ( Printed circuit boards (PCBs) are the core constituent of almost all electronic devices. The PCBs contains a variety of metal elements. In the previous studies, the copper content in the WPCBs reaches 15.6%–26.8%, the iron content achieves 1.4%–11.7%, the gold content reaches 80-1120 ppm, and the silver content achieves 500-5210 ppm ( Flotation technology has also been applied to the separation of dissociated particles of WPCBs, which has proved to be an efficient and environmentally friendly method. In previous studies, kerosene was used as a collector, effect of aeration rate and agitation speed on the metallic grade and recovery efficiency was studied ( Therefore, this study presents the collision, adhesion and detachment process between bubbles and particles with different components in the floatation process of 1-0.5 mm WPCBs. Velocity of particles and bubbles are observed and calculated, which is used to reveal the flotation behavior of WPCBs powder. Furthermore, the effect of the collector dosage on flotation kinetics is also analyzed. The removal rate of impurities and metals is characterized by the recovery of silicon and copper to be floated in unit time, which is used to analyze the flotation kinetics of impurities and metal particles. The WPCBs was crushed by hammer crusher and shear crusher, and then screened. 1-0.5 mm WPCBs powder (CuO:30.96%; Fe In flotation process, the selective adhesion between hydrophobic particles and bubbles is the key factor to achieve separation, which is different from hydrophilic particles. In previous studies, the ion collector was synthesized by saponification of waste oil in kitchen waste. Subsequently, the renewable collector was proved to be effective for the flotation of WPCBs powder ( The position of bubbles at different time was recorded by camera, from which the bubble velocity could be calculated. The forces acting on bubbles were analyzed, and the final velocity of bubbles rising was theoretically calculated by force balance. The final velocity of bubble rising was verified by three models, Stokes model, Clift model and Schiller-Naumann model ( In order to analyze the flotation speed in the separation process of WPCBs powder, i.e. the variation of recovery rate of floatable particles in flotation pulp per unit time, flotation kinetics test was carried out. In the test, XFD The morphology and element composition of metal particles and non-metal particles in the sample are shown in  XRD results are shown in The sample XRD results show that the metal in the 1-0.5 mm sample is mainly copper, which can be proved by the significant diffraction peak of copper ( For particles of a certain diameter and density, it is necessary to match a bubble of the lowest size so that it can be floated. The critical condition is that the equivalent density of the bubble and the particle is less than the separation medium. For spherical particles, it is assumed that solid particles with radius R Thus: The density of pure copper particles is 8960 kg/m In fact, the actual particles are usually the associated particle of copper and glass fibers. Therefore, in order to realize the flotation of WPCBs powder, the bubble volume should be 1.5-8.0 times of the particle volume. The observed velocity of bubble and particles under different concentration of collector is shown in  As for the settlement of particles, it is obvious that the settlement speed of metal particles are much higher than that of non-metal particles due to the high density of metal particles, which are 0.12 m/s and 0.03 m/s respectively. In the actual flotation process, the movement of particles and bubbles is reversed. The higher the movement speed of particles is, the shorter the contact time of particle bubbles is, resulting in low adhesion probability, which is also an important reason why metal particles are not easy to float. The attachment process of particles on the bubble surface is shown in In traditional flotation theory, particles are usually spherical. However, particle size, shape and density play a more important role in the flotation of 1-0.5 mm WPCBs powder. In the coal flotation process, the particle size is usually less than 0.5 mm. For metal ores, the liberation size of particles should reach -0.074 mm. The diameter of bubbles is usually much larger than that of particles. Therefore, during the flotation process, particles with a certain velocity approach the bubble and make collision contact. The particles slip on the surface of the bubble and the attachment point can be anywhere in the bubble. For instance, particles attached to the bottom of the bubble experience an adsorption force equal to the effective gravity of the particles. It is obvious that the magnitude of the adsorption force has a crucial influence on the adhesion of the particles, which is related to the hydrophobicity of particles. For irregular particles, the bubbles need to be spread over the surface of the particles to ensure that the desired adsorption force is achieved, as shown in The probability that the particle to be floated (P) is equal to the probability of collision of the particle with the bubble (P If the number of bubbles generated by the flotation process is sufficiently large, P Two classical flotation kinetic models were used to analyze the flotation rate of different components in WPCBs. Model 1: First-order model with rectangular distribution of floatability: Model 2: Second-order model with rectangular distribution of floatability: The flotation results of Si are shown in As shown in With the increase of reagent dosage, the removal rate of Si increases significantly. When the dosage of collector increases from 1 kg/t to 3 kg/t, the recovery increases most obviously. The final removal rate of Si increases from 43.68% to about 95.01%. When the reagent dosage continues to increase to 5 kg/t, the growth trend slows down. The fitting results of the two models show that the two flotation kinetic models can achieve ideal simulation accuracy, which shows that the flotation of WPCBs powder is the same as that of traditional ore. The flotation results of Cu are shown in Because the flotation of WPCBs powder is a reverse flotation process, that is, the floated material is low-value components as tailings. Therefore, the recovery rate of Cu element is essentially the loss rate. As shown in Recycling metal resources from WPCBs can bring significant economic and environmental benefits. In this study, the adhesion and shedding of particles to bubbles and flotation kinetics of different component particles was concerned. For flotation of 1-0.5 mm particles, particle size and density play an important role. Based on force analysis, the adsorption of particles to bubbles has been proved. The volume ratio is between 1.5 and 8.0, which depends on the particle density. For a specific size of bubble, the particles that can be loaded are not only related to the hydrophobicity of particles, but also related to the density of particles. The simulation results of velocity model prove that Clift model and Schiller-Naumann model has high fitting accuracy for the bubble velocity. The settling velocity of metal particles is much higher than that of non-metal particles, which leads to shorter time of particle bubble adhesion. In addition, the detachment probability of metal particles is much greater than that of non-metal particles, which results in metal particles are not easy to be floated out. The results of flotation kinetics show that the impurity in WPCBs is removed at the initial stage of flotation. The loss of copper increases with the increase of flotation time and finally tends to be stable. This proves the consistency between WPCBs flotation and traditional ore flotation. The study is of great significance to reveal the flotation mechanism of WPCBs powder and further help to improve the flotation efficiency. Zhu X.N generated idea and designed the experiments with Zhang Y.K. Zhang Y.Q Yan Z.Q and Nie C.C guided the project and wrote the manuscript. Lyu X.J. and Tao Y.J. Qiu J. and Li L revised the paper. All authors contributed to the overall scientific interpretation and edited the manuscript. Xiang-nan Zhu generated idea, designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript with Xian-jun Lyu, Qiu Jun, Lin Li and You-jun Tao. Yuan-kang Zhang, Yi-Qing Zhang, Zheng-qing Yan and Chun-chen Nie guided the project. All authors contributed to the overall scientific interpretation and edited the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the