Microseismic data and post-fracturing production analysis have confirmed a positive correlation between fracture complexity and production enhancement in fractured wells. While operators are looking for modifications in their pumping schedules such as adding pumping hesitations to enhance fracture complexity, the physics behind the effectiveness of these trial and error efforts is not fully understood. In this paper, we try to investigate different scenarios that may enhance fracture complexity by introducing changes in the pumping schedule. Since field evidence shows effectiveness of these techniques more in the presence of natural fractures, we first present a comprehensive workflow to model hydraulic fracturing by accounting for interactions with numerous natural fractures. This model is a coupled fluid flow and deformation finite element model with adaptive insertion of three-dimensional cohesive elements to simulate fracture propagation through the rock matrix and a network of intersecting natural fractures. Simulations have been implemented for different natural fracture patterns. Our analyses have shown that in addition to the differential stress and fractures’ intersection angle, pumping rate and its breaks can play a significant role in fracture branching and its diversion into natural fractures. For continuously crosscutting natural fractures, higher injection rates are found to have a positive effect in overcoming the resistance of natural fractures in different directions. While in the case of discontinuously hierarchical natural fractures, this improvement can be very limited, while adding a hesitation in the middle of the pumping period can force the fractures to divert into other directions, which is effective to develop more complex fractures for different natural fracture patterns.Fracture opening Elasticity modulus Six components of elastic stiffness matrix of cohesive elements Surface force vector Cohesive energy Gravitational acceleration vector Formation volume change rate, dimensionless Initial cohesive stiffness Tangential permeability (flow mobility) Permeability matrix, m/s Void ratio Pressure gradient Midface pressure Pore pressures on the top and bottom element surfaces Pore pressure and initial pore pressure Mass flow rate along the fracture Injection rate at a known location denoted by the Dirac delta function, Normal flow rates into the top and bottom surfaces Fluid leak-off coefficients at the top and bottom surfaces Initial thickness of the cohesive element Maximum tensile strength Stress components predicted by the elastic traction-separation behavior for the strains without damage Fluid velocity Spatial vector Effective stress tensor Components of the total stress and initial stress Components of the strain tensor Nominal strain components corresponding to normal and two shear separations Kronecker’s delta function Displacements when the traction reaches Normal and two shear separations Virtual velocity vector Virtual strain rate tensor Body force matrix Biot’s constant Poisson’s ratio Fluid viscosity Fracturing fluid density Cohesive Zone Method Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics Traction-Separation Law Semi-circular Bending Test Hydraulic fracturing has been extensively utilized as a key technique to stimulate production in low permeability tight gas and shale reservoirs where many of these formations are naturally fractured reservoirs Natural fractures exist in different sizes, to be more precise, their distribution may follow power law or lognormal distribution The three-dimensional simulation of hydraulic fracturing has been often done using Linear Elastic Fracture Mechanics (LEFM) to study different problems such as in-situ stress contrast between barriers and pay layers In the following section, we briefly discuss the governing equations and the cohesive zone theory used for simulation of propagating hydraulic fractures. The cohesive parameters are obtained by matching the load-displacement curve obtained from laboratory experiments with the numerical models. A technique is also introduced for elements containing fracture intersection that satisfies fluid flow continuity. Then, we discuss situations and conditions to enhance complexity of the fracture network by changing pumping rates or including hesitations during the pumping stage. The process of fracture initiation and propagation can be considered as a progressive debonding process of rock grains. Features like potential paths of fracture propagation and cemented natural fractures can also be viewed as bonded interfaces where the interface thickness is small but not negligible and needs to be incorporated in the stress analysis. As the pore pressure in the cohesive layers is offsetting the compressive stress and exceeds the adhesive strength, cohesive interfaces begin to open and separate following the behavior dictated by the traction-separation law. The opening and separation of cohesive interfaces correspond to the initiation and propagation of fractures as well as activation (or re-opening) of cemented natural fractures. Hence, we employ cohesive zone methods (CZM) coupled with pore pressure to simulate hydraulic fracture propagation.  The variables used in the above equation are listed in the nomenclature at the end of this paper. The fracturing fluid is assumed to be an incompressible fluid. The mass balance and continuity equations can be defined as As pore pressure increases to a certain magnitude, damage in the porous rock initiates and evolves, accordingly, results in hydraulically driven fractures to propagate. Inside the fracture, the flow regime is assumed to follow Poiseuille flow (laminar flow). The fluid flow comprises two components: tangential flow within the fracture and flow normal to the fracture surface a.k.a. leakoff, as shown in The normal flow rate is defined as According to the fluid mass balance, a part of the injected fluid at a certain period fills the fracture and the rest will be lost to the rock matrix as shown in the following equation Then the governing equation for rock matrix involves coupling fluid flow and rock deformation as follows  The parameters are described in nomenclature. The elastic behavior along the cohesive zone can then be simply described by Hook’s law  When there is no damage to compressive stiffness, Previous experimental studies have revealed that granular materials are cohesive in nature. Laboratory measurement of cohesive parameters is necessary to use this model. Semi-circular bending test (SCBT) is a laboratory experiment that determines when the rock will fail under a particular applied force. The load versus displacement plot can be obtained from the experiment, while these parameters cannot be assigned to the cohesive layers in FEM directly. Therefore, we carried out the fitting simulation to inversely determine cohesive stiffness, strength, and energy properties. For a given element size, the cohesive parameters can be calibrated against the measured response in the lab. Cohesive parameters are obtained by fitting the load-displacement curve obtained from the laboratory experiments as shown in Results obtained from SCBT are hereafter considered as benchmark cohesive properties for the rest of our analyses. Traction-separation law (TSL) defines the constitutive behavior at the fracture process zone. The bilinear TSL is the simplest form of TSL where traction increases with opening linearly until reaching the maximum traction. Beyond this point, traction will decrease as opening continues to increase till traction diminishes (complete damage i.e. fracture initiation), as demonstrated in Damage initiation can be defined with either maximum tensile strength or critical separation. Fracture propagation can be defined by either cohesive energy or maximum allowable opening. In this work, we use the maximum tensile strength to determine damage initiation and cohesive energy for damage (fracture) propagation as both parameters can be measured more reliably for cementitious materials in the lab. Eqs. To examine different scenarios discussed in this paper and to make sure that our conclusions are not limited to a specific geometry of fractures, three different realizations of natural fracture patterns are considered for analysis. The first scenario is hydraulic fracturing in the presence of two orthogonal joint sets, similar to the situation in Marcellus shale as can be also seen in Marcellus outcrops Following what is described in the previous section, a 3D finite element model (FEM) incorporating coupled cohesive elements is built to simulate the growth of hydraulic fractures (see One may see the arrangement of the displacement and pressure nodes in As for the first example, we assume that W-E fractures share the same property with N-S fractures i.e. both fracture sets have been formed about the same geological time and gone through the same diagenetic processes. The cohesive parameters for these cemented fractures are listed in  The injection rate is regarded as an important engineering factor that can be adjusted with no significant costs to enhance the complexity of CFN in parallel to other factors such as proppant transport and fluid efficiency. For the second case, the stronger adhesive strength is considered for E-W cohesive zones compared to that of N-S cohesive zones to highlight situations where different natural fracture sets may have different diagenetic materials or diagenesis timings. Details of the material properties, used in our simulations, are listed in The bottomhole pressure and the corresponding fracture patterns is shown in Operating companies have noticed that during hydraulic fracturing in some areas, accidental failure of pumping units and then resuming injection after a short period of time may have some advantages in increasing post-treatment production enhancement. However, the success story has not been repeated in all formations. Nowadays, operators may not only halt pumping in the middle of the treatment, but injecting materials known as fluid diverters to temporarily clog induced fractures to divert fracture propagation into different directions of the reservoir. Pumping hesitation may provide almost a similar effect due to the leakoff of the fracturing fluid into the formation during the hesitation time. Fluid diverters usually plug fractures close to the wellbore but the location of fracture diversions after hesitation period is a function of the fluid leakoff rate, and higher leakoff rates make the diversion point closer to the wellbore. In addition, fluid pressure inside the open fractures gradually decreases over the hesitation period depending on the hydraulic conductivity of natural fractures and rock matrix permeability. Induced fractures and resultant leakoff may cause stress reorientation and even exchanges of principal stress directions. Stress rotation assists diversion of fractures to form a more complex network. In our simulation, the length of hesitation time is defined to be 60% of the period of the first-round pumping stage time to see obvious stress rotation even though pressure inside fractures are still in some places above closure stress. After the hesitation period, another round of pumping resumes. In this section, we discuss how the hesitation time will influence fracture network complexity. In this case, the intersection angle of E-W and N-S fractures is assumed to be 60 degrees. The injection flow rate is 20 bbl/min and decreases sharply to 0 bbl/min during the hesitation time.  The effects of pumping hesitation on the complexity of the fracture network is shown in Comparing injection pressure plot and fracture network patterns of One of the potential reasons believed to make pumping hesitation work is the potential reorientation of principal stresses due to pore pressure changes during earlier stage of hydraulic fracturing. In order to get a better understanding about how the fluid injection may change stress distribution during hydraulic fracturing, the re-orientation of principal stresses and its impact on fracture growth should be considered. Since there are no available outputs for stress orientations in commercial finite element packages, here we develop a set of codes to calculate the rotation angle of principal stresses by a Python script. According to the mechanics of materials, the values and directions of principal stresses can be calculated by rotating the coordinate axes to the new direction. Hence, we first access the software output files to obtain all direct and shear components of the stress tensor at the integration points of each element. Then we run loops to scale the deviatoric stresses and calculate the corresponding eigenvalues by transformation equations until all shear components become zero in some certain orientation of infinitesimal element. Thus, the unit direction vectors of principal stresses can be obtained, and the rotation angles with respect to the initial in-situ stresses can be calculated. Eventually, a python script is employed to create a new field output variable called rotation angle and the distribution maps before and after the hesitation period at each integration point are plotted and shown in Due to the limited time for completing operations in the field, hesitation can be practically done once or twice in each fracturing stage, and we found that longer hesitation does not make any difference as the closure of fractures have already happened within the time period considered in our simulation. However, the length of hesitation time is expected to be a strong function of leakoff (reservoir permeability) and different stress (difference between maximum and minimum horizontal stress). Any increase in these two parameters may reduce the required hesitation time. Following previous discussions, more complicated scenarios for the fracture network development is investigated through a set of hierarchical natural fractures inspired by an outcrop study. The corresponding pattern of this outcrop is shown in To construct the finite element model including joint details based on the outcrop image, an open-access Python Imaging Library (PIL) is first employed to capture the location of every intersection point. Then the python scripting developed in the finite element software is implemented to draw the sketch using the obtained coordinates and direction vectors. The meshes for reservoir and cohesive zones are generated by automatic insertion of cohesive elements, as shown in Considering the huge computational cost of including a large number of cohesive elements, the simulation of 2D case in plain strain configuration is first conducted. The three-dimensional model is established by extruding it 5 m. (8 layers) from the two-dimensional model in the height direction (    Based on the presented examples and discussions about pumping hesitation, we found that this technique may play an effective role in enhancing the complexity of the fracture network in hierarchical natural fractures, as shown in In this paper, a 3D coupled cohesive model is used to model discontinuous growth of hydraulic fractures in the presence of cross-cutting natural fracture sets. These cross-cutting natural fracture sets were developed by the automatic insertion of cohesive elements. Then using this model, we simulate complex fracture networks by accounting for the interaction between induced fractures and natural fractures based on CZM method. The Semi-circular bending test (SCBT) is used for calibrating the cohesive properties of the rock matrix and natural fractures, prior to full-scale numerical modeling. We used this model to simulate the growth of fracture through complex crosscutting joints in a model resembling Marcellus shale outcrops to investigate how different factors may affect fracture complexity. Based on the results, high pumping rate increases the net pressure and consequently increases the likelihood of overcoming the strength of natural fractures. This allows the formation of more complex fracture patterns. Additionally, hesitation time and resultant leakoff are also found to have an influence on the network complexity if natural fractures are laying in appropriate directions. During hesitation intervals, net pressure decreases due to the leakoff to the rock matrix and natural fractures, which cause the closure of propped fractures. The formation of propped fractures and built-up pore pressure due to leakoff can cause re-orientation of principal stresses which benefits the diversion of fractures to form complex fracture network. Abrupt increase of pumping rate following hesitation time can generate high transit pressure, which can also help overcome the cohesive resistances at the intersections. Under the effect of diverter, new fractures are forced to initiate and propagate, which adds to the complexity of fracture network. Finally, a complicated scenario incorporating three chronologically hierarchical natural fracture sets (based on outcrop data) are modelled through an open-access Python Imaging Library. In comparison, adding pumping hesitation has a more noticeable effect on enhancing fracture complexity than adjusting injection location and increasing pumping rate.