The separation efficiency and selectivity of flotation are directly proportional to recoveries of the mineral species in the feed due to true flotation and entrainment. In this study, effects of the hydrodynamic conditions on true flotation and entrainment were investigated by using a fractional factorial experimental design. A method previously described in the literature was applied to determine the contributions of true flotation and entrainment in flotation of a complex sulphide ore. In order to apply the method, the kinetic flotation tests were conducted under various hydrodynamic conditions defined by some physical variables. Some of these tests were conducted in the presence and absence of a collector to evaluate the self-induced floatability. The selectivity index of the mineral species for entrainment was seen to be suitable evaluation of the non-selectivity and efficiency of the entrainment. Furthermore, the results of the size-by-size analysis of the froth products indicated that the presence of the self-induced hydrophobic particles in the feed is as important as the presence of very fine particles for accurate estimation of true flotation and entrainment in flotation of a complex sulphide ore. In addition, the estimated results for entrainment in flotation of the complex sulphide ore can be misleading. Therefore, a new approach would be necessary to determine the contributions of true flotation and entrainment in flotation of a complex sulphide ore.Flotation, as a selective separation process, is applied for separating different minerals from each other, and utilizes the difference in physico-chemical surface properties of various minerals within an ore. Hydrophobic mineral particles (naturally or rendered hydrophobic by using a suitable surfactant) generally transfer to the froth product primarily by true flotation, but they can also be transferred by entrainment in the inter-bubble water, along with hydrophilic mineral particles. The true flotation and entrainment mechanisms may operate simultaneously for the same mineral depending on the size fractions present in the pulp. The fast and slow floating hydrophobic minerals generally reach the froth product by true flotation, but the slow floating hydrophobic minerals can also be recovered by entrainment like hydrophilic minerals. Several methods were proposed to determine entrainment and true flotation in the literature (  Entrainment is the micro-process by which slurry enters the flotation froth, moves upward with the froth, and finally leaves the flotation cell with the concentrate. In agitation flotation cells, the entrainment is determined considerably by the turbulent flow and, consequently, by the state of suspension in the pulp phase, in particular just below the pulp–froth interface. The stability of the interface, which can be considered as a wall preventing the froth from contamination by entrained particles, also depends on the turbulent flow. In mechanical flotation cells, turbulence should be held at an optimum level for achieving optimum true flotation, as well as minimum entrainment. In relation to the specific airflow rate, residence time and height of froth phase, dimensions of Plateau channels, the water recovery and many other important variables, the influence of turbulence at the pulp–froth interface has not been yet understood. In addition to these, Airflow rate is related to the bubble Reynolds number, and characterizes how fast the air bubbles exit the cell. If airflow rate (or air capacity number) is too high, the froth surface can be unstable. Air capacity number is proportional to the power distribution between the liquid and air/liquid phases, and characterizes the intensity of aeration in the system ( The entrainment of the fine particles can directly be related to the water recovery. The mechanisms proposed to explain the water recovery into the froth include the hydrodynamic boundary layer, the wake and swarm effect of rising bubbles. The formation of a wake is limited by the hydrodynamic conditions. The wake volume is a function of velocity of the bubble rise, the bubble size and the liquid viscosity. The wake volume can be described as a function of the bubble Reynolds number. The velocity of the bubble and the bubble size are dependent to amount and type of frother used in flotation, as well as airflow rate and impeller speed. Some of these operational factors can also be used to define the cell hydrodynamics. In addition, the froth removal rate, froth residence time and the stability of the pulp–froth interface directly affect to level of entrainment and the water recovery. It is known that the probability of bubble particle collision is determined by the hydrodynamics of the system, which is strongly affected by the particle size, bubble size and the turbulence of the system. In addition to these, turbulence is the main mechanism causing the particle detachment for mechanical flotation cells ( A composite sulphide ore sample was received from the fine ore bin of the Küre Copper concentrator (Turkey). The sample contains average 2.1% Cu and 24.5% Fe. The main copper mineral is chalcopyrite associated with the siliceous minerals and pyrite. The sample was crushed to minus 1.7 mm and it was representatively divided to use in the grinding tests by standard sampling procedure. Prior to flotation, each sample was ground to minus 0.075 mm to obtain a sufficient degree of liberation (> Flotation tests were conducted in Denver laboratory flotation machine with a two-litre cell. The flotation reagents used in this study were supplied by Cytec Industries, USA. The pulp was conditioned for 10 min of pH (11.5–12) and the collector, Aerophine 3418 A, was added at a dosage of 50 g/t and conditioned for a further 2 min. After 1 min of frother (Oreprep F-507) conditioning, the air was introduced. Since the results of the kinetic flotation tests are required to estimate entrainment and true flotation for the method, the froth product was collected at time intervals of 0.5, 1, 2 and 4 min for all flotation tests. As recommended by Since the recovery-time set of data for the solids and water are required to estimate entrainment and true flotation according to the method of A full factorial study of these three variables at three levels would have required 27 experiments. Instead, a face-centred cubic experimental design, involving only 15 tests, was used to reduce the number of experiments ( It is assumed that the recoveries of valuable mineral (Cp), gangue (  From works on entrainment in the literature, one can generally conclude that the gangue recovery (for fine particles) will linearly increase with an increase in the water recovery for fixed flotation conditions. It is apparent from the results given in It should be noted from Three contour plots of constant density of the pulp (or The recovery-time set of data estimated by the method was fitted to Eq. Recovery by true flotation of gangue is large as can be seen from As it is known entrainment is a non-selective sub-process. The amount of the fine sized mineral particles (valuable or gangue) to be recovered by entrainment is proportional to their specific gravity, shape and amount in the feed. It must be kept in mind that the ratio of gangue to valuable could be very high up to 20 in a complex sulphide ore and, therefore, it is expected that the most of the entrained particles consist of the gangue. In our case, the amount of chalcopyrite recovered by flotation or entrainment in terms of mass for a chalcopyrite recovery of 23.74% equals to the amount of the gangue recovered by flotation or entrainment in terms of mass for a gangue recovery of 1%. Even though the gangue recovery (in percentage) is much less than the chalcopyrite recovery (in percentage), the amount of the gangue in the concentrate could be more than the amount of chalcopyrite, resulting in the impairment of the concentrate grade and the separation efficiency. In addition to these, it is known that the separation selectivity of flotation can be measured by the selectivity index. Therefore, the mineral species selectivity index of the entrainment estimated by the method was seen to be suitable for evaluation of the effects of the factors on the entrainment. As described in details by The rate parameters were used to calculate the selectivity indices of chalcopyrite/pyrite (SI  On the other hand, the selectivity index values were less than one for all cases, as seen in From the results in Because of these findings and discussions above, the effect of the self-induced floatability and particle size on the levels of entrainment and true flotation must experimentally be determined to prove the above conclusions drawn. The levels of true flotation and entrainment were determined by the method of Approximately 30% of pyrite particles (both two fractions) in the feed were recovered by true flotation. Even if it was defined as a sulphide gangue mineral in this study, the high recovery due to true flotation is attributable to the self-induced floatability of pyrite rather than the presence of the locked particles in the feed. It is clear that the self-induced floatability of the sulphide minerals is a main difficulty for accurate determination of the contributions of entrainment and true flotation in flotation of this ore. A different test procedure, which resulted from the following assumptions, was adopted and used to overcome this difficulty. It is assumed that the recovery by entrainment in the collectorless flotation of the ore can be reduced to a negligible level by using a flotation test conducted under very quiescent flow condition, deep froth and addition of wash water. In this way, it is expected that most of the solids recovered by the collectorles flotation will be composed of the naturally hydrophobic particles, which collide the rising bubbles and can be attached to their surfaces. In other words, the only naturally hydrophobic particles in the ore can completely be recovered by using the collectorless flotation conducted under these flotation conditions. In order to test this, firstly a collectorless flotation test was performed to recover the self-induced floatable particles. Then, the pulp that remained in the cell was further conditioned with the collector and, a kinetic flotation test was performed in the second stage. In order to compare the results of these tests with the results of test 15 (see A clean concentrate was produced from the collectorless flotation and, the results given in The kinetic flotation tests were conducted to estimate true flotation and entrainment. In order to evaluate the self-induced floatability of the sulphide minerals in the ore, some of these tests were conducted in the presence and absence of a collector. The rate data generated from the experiments were used to calculate the selectivity index of each mineral for entrainment and true flotation. The results show: The selectivity indexes were calculated to be very similar in magnitude for entrainment of the mineral species. It means that there is no effect of the hydrodynamic conditions on the entrainment of the mineral species. The main mechanism of the gangue transfer into the froth is true flotation rather than entrainment. It is clear that these findings cannot be realistic and the estimated results for true flotation and entrainment can be misleading. In addition, the results of the size-by-size analysis of the froth products indicated that the presence of self-induced hydrophobic particles in the feed is as important as the presence of fine particles for accurate estimation of true flotation and entrainment in flotation of a complex sulphide ore. It was hoped that if all the self-induced minerals could be removed/recovered by a suitable test procedure, the detrimental effect of the self-induced floatability on the estimation of the entrainment could be overcome. Since the self-induced minerals (chalcopyrite and pyrite) in the feed were partly removed/recovered in this stage, this attempt failed. It is apparent that a new approach would be necessary to determine the contributions of true flotation and entrainment in flotation of the complex sulphide ores. The help and support of the staff at the Kure Copper Concentrator, Etibakir A.S., is gratefully acknowledged. The author would also like to acknowledge the anonymous referees for their helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper.