Results from ultimate analysis, proximate and petrographic analyses of a wide range of Kentucky coal samples were used to predict coal rank parameters (vitrinite maximum reflectance (R
                     max) and gross calorific value (GCV)) using multivariable regression and artificial neural network (ANN) methods. Volatile matter, carbon, total sulfur, hydrogen and oxygen were used to predict both R
                     max and GCV by regression and ANN. Multivariable regression equations to predict R
                     max and GCV showed R
                     2
                     =0.77 and 0.69, respectively. Results from the ANN method with a 2–5–4–2 arrangement that simultaneously predicts GCV and R
                     max showed R
                     2 values of 0.84 and 0.90, respectively, for an independent test data set. The artificial neural network method can be appropriately used to predict R
                     max and GCV when regression results do not have high accuracy.Coal quality is a function of three fundamental, independent factors: coal rank, organic composition (including, but not restricted to, macerals), and inorganic components, which include minerals and organically associated elements. Commonly used coal rank parameters such as vitrinite reflectance, calorific value, volatile matter, and carbon content are variably influenced by all three fundamental properties. Vitrinite is the most common maceral group in most US coal. Consequently, it is the properties of vitrinite and the variation of those properties with rank that define the properties of a coal ( Vitrinite reflectance values increase with rank, and measurements are typically independent of petrographic composition and mineral matter content ( Volatile matter decreases as rank increases during coalification. Consequently, vitrinite reflectance and volatile matter have an inverse relationship ( Ultimate analysis results for whole-coal samples, especially in the high volatile bituminous stage of coalification, depend heavily on both maceral composition and the extent of coalification ( Another measure of coal rank is the calorific value ( Over the last 10 In the present work, the maximum vitrinite reflectance and gross calorific value are estimated according to ultimate analysis parameters that are expressed on a dry ash free basis. To our knowledge, this is the first time that ANN analysis has been used to simultaneously predict both A robust mathematical model requires comprehensive data that include a wide variety of coal types. Such a model will be capable predicting both In this study, a multivariable equation that uses coal carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, volatile matter and total sulfur to predict By a least square mathematical method, the correlation coefficients of hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), total sulfur (S), carbon (C), and volatile matter (V) with The equation has an A multivariable equation that uses coal carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, volatile matter, and total sulfur to predict GCV was also found using the stepwise regression method. Inter-item correlation between carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, volatile matter, and total sulfur and gross calorific value was 0.94, 0.52, − The equation has an Among the existing numerous neural networks (NNs) paradigms, feed-forward artificial neural networks (FANNs) are the most popular due to their flexibility in structure, good representational capabilities, and large number of available training algorithms ( In this study, feed-forward artificial neural network (FANN) was used to estimate both According to Eqs. Neural network training can be made more efficient if certain preprocessing steps (normalizing processes) are performed on the network inputs and targets. Before training, it is often useful to scale the inputs and targets so that they always fall within a specified range. In this section of work, all inputs and outputs data were scaled so that they fall in the range [− The training process was stopped after 1000 epochs. In each epoch, the entire training set is presented to the network, case by case; and errors are calculated and used to adjust the weights in the network using sigmoid transfer function. This method is based on the BP (back propagation) error algorithm, an iterative supervised learning technique. A set of training examples is considered, and for each the desired output of the MLP (multilayer perceptron) is known. The network learns the trends contained in the data set and correlates the inputs and the outputs by finding the optimum set of weights that minimizes the differences between the predicted and actual output values. For each iteration, an error between the predicted value and the actual value is propagated backward from the output layer towards the input through the hidden layers until the error is within an acceptable limit (  Regression Eqs. Using the same experimental data, the FANN model (2–5–4–2) was able to predict both GCV and Compared to the stepwise regression method, the artificial neural network provided a more accurate estimate of The first author would like to thank Zinat alsadat Taba Tabaee.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at