Using nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide thin layer becomes more popular in recent years due to its capability to be a membrane in some engineering applications. The main purpose of this paper is to investigate the synthesis conditions at the interpore distance of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide through an experimental study, an artificial neural network (ANN), and a multiple linear regression (MLR) model. A total of 33 experimental data used to establish both models. The models have three inputs including the concentration of electrolyte, temperature, and applied voltage. The interpore distance of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide is considered as output in the models. The results of the models are compared with the results of experimental study and an empirical formula proposed by Nielsch. The results reveal that the proposed models have good prediction capability with acceptable errors. However, in this research, the proposed ANN model is accurate than the MLR analysis and both of them are better than empirical formula. The proposed models can also predict the results of experimental study successfully.Nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) had attracted intensive interest due to its potential to use as a membrane in some applications such as the gas separation The geometry of aluminum oxide layer executed important role for a separation process which could lead to maximize permeation and flux across nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide membrane. For example, as a hemodialysis membrane, a pore size was desirable which had capability to clear urea, creatinine, vancomycin and inulin as a waste product with small and middle of molecular weight while maintaining large molecular weight solutes (albumin) The geometry of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide had grown through anodization was represented schematically in Many equations were suggested for correlation between the geometry of aluminum oxide layer and conditions of anodized aluminum It was assumed that the pore diameter was a function of applied voltage. The other efforts showed that anodizing temperature and concentration of electrolyte cause changing the interpore distance Concentration of electrolyte ( Anodizing temperature ( Applied voltage ( In general, these parameters had a considerable effect on the interpore distance of nanoporous aluminum oxide, but the contribution of each parameter separately was studied a little. Nowadays, computer-based methods such as artificial neural networks (ANNs) and multiple linear regression analysis have attracted some attentions to be replaced with high-cost experimental studies. The above-mentioned techniques were used in different fields of engineering applications such as civil engineering The artificial neural networks (ANNs) are known as the important and successful simulating tools of input–output datasets. The most fundamental part of such networks is the training process. The ANN model is trained with some relevant experimental results and then can predict the output with an accepted error. This paper presents an artificial neural network (ANN) and a multiple linear regression (MLR) model accompanished with an experimental study to investigate the synthesis conditions at the interpore distance of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide. In this regard, a total of 33 experimental records are used with three factors each. The results reveal that output in the models have an agreement with experimental records. In addition, all results are compared with output of formula proposed by Nielsch A high purity aluminum foil (99.99% Alfa Aesar) was used as the primary material. At first, the aluminum substrate was degreased by Acetone, and then the native oxide layer upon the aluminum foil was removed through sinking the sample in a caustic solution (3 The geometrical characterization of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide was done by a Field Emission Electron Scanning Microscope (FE-SEM, Hitachi The objective of this research is to develop an artificial neural network (ANN) and a multiple linear regression analysis (MLR) for predicting the interpore distance of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide. The first step is data gathering for the training, validating, and testing process of the ANN model. All data are collected from the literature In total, 33 records are collected from the literature. Of these; 19, 7, and 7 records are used for training, validating, and testing of the model, respectively. The selection process is done randomly to reduce hand-selection errors. Artificial neural network modeling as a computer-based methodology is developed in an attempt to imitate the obtained knowledge and skills of the human brain. It offers considerable support in terms of organizing, classifying, and summarizing data. It also helps to distinguish among input data and gives a high degree of prediction accuracy because of requiring a few assumptions. These characteristics make neural network approach an important tool for forecasting some complex problems. Here, a brief description of ANN is presented to help readers An artificial neural network is typically composed of several layers of nodes. The first layer is an input layer where external information is received. All the input nodes are set in one input layer, and the number of input nodes corresponds to the number of independent effecting variables. The highest layer is an output layer where the problem solution is obtained. The number of output nodes is related to the problem. These two layers are separated with a number of hidden layers in which nodes are connected to each other with weighted interconnection from a lower layer to a higher layer. Also, there is a bias which is connected to the hidden and output layers with weighted interconnections The neural network training is an unconstrained nonlinear minimization problem in which weights of a model are iteratively modified to minimize the overall mean or total squared error between the target and actual output for all output nodes over all input patterns. The existence of many different optimization methods provides various choices for neural network training. There is no algorithm currently available to guarantee the global optimal solution for a general nonlinear optimization problem in a reasonable amount of time The most popularly training method used for multi-layered feed-forward networks is the back-propagation (BP) algorithm which is essentially a gradient steepest descent method. For the gradient descent algorithm, a step size, which is called the learning rate in ANN literature, must be specified. The learning rate is crucial for back-propagation learning algorithm since it determines the magnitude of weight changes. The BP algorithm contains two steps that the transfer function is propagated from the input to output layer firstly and then the weights and biases are modified to spread the difference between actual and desired outputs backward. The weighted sum of inputs is determined using following equation The activation function illustrates the relationship between inputs and outputs of a node and a network. In fact, it demonstrates a degree of nonlinearity that is applicable for the most ANN modeling approaches. A sigmoid function is selected for calculating output of The training of network is an iterative procedure through which the connection weights are determined using input and output sets. Generally, artificial neural network is trained to learn the inner relationships between the inputs and outputs by repeated exposure to examples of the input–output data patterns. A successfully trained ANN can generalize beyond the training data and produces approximately correct results for new cases or data patterns There is no general rule to determine the number of hidden layers and their neurons. It is a try and error process to identify the optimum and general network. The number of neurons should be sufficient to predict the desired parameter correctly. Most researchers have conducted many studies to determine the adequate neurons number, and have presented different algorithms. The upper bound for the number of neurons in the hidden layer is limited to twice the number of inputs plus one In this paper, the ANN toolbox in MATLAB is used to compute the predicted outputs. In this regard, a three feed-forward network trained by the Levenberg–Marquardt back-propagation (LMBP) algorithm is selected. LMBP is the fastest back-propagation algorithm and is highly recommended but requires more memory than other algorithms The proposed ANN model contains three layers including input, hidden, and output layers. Inputs are defined by input neurons where their numbers equal to the input variables (i.e., All received input data are transferred to the hidden layer without any calculation. The useful features are derived in the hidden layer and all weights of the model are generated. Totally, the predictions of the model are produced by the neuron of the output layer. The input layer weights (ILWs), input layer biases (ILBs), hidden layer weights (HLWs), and hidden layer biases (HLB) of the optimum proposed ANN model are given in the following equations: Multiple linear regression analysis (MLR) is a statistical approach which used to determine a relationship between two or more independent variables. In fact, the dependent variable is a linear function of more than one independent variable. The general MLR formula is given by: In this paper, an attempt is made to develop a relationship between Five statistical parameters are used to compare the predicted results with the desired experimental results. These norms calculate the error between the target and output in the models. In fact, these parameters show the capability of models as follows: In this study, an experimental study, an artificial neural network and a multiple linear regression analysis are carried out to investigate the synthesis conditions at the interpore distance of nanoporous aluminum oxide. Three effecting factors including the concentration, temperature, and the applied voltage are considered. As mentioned earlier, 19, 7, and 7 records are used for training, validating and testing of the proposed ANN model, respectively. The statistical values for training, validating, and testing data obtained from the ANN, MLR, and Nielsch equation A multiple linear regression analysis is carried out and the effecting factors on the interpore distance are assumed as the independent variables. The interpore distance is the dependent variable. The general MLR equation, in this model, is given by: The results of ANN and MLR models are compared with an empirical formula proposed by Nielsch et al. All results reveal that both proposed models have good prediction capacity with acceptable errors. In this study, ANN is better than MLR and also their results are more accurate than the Nielsch formula In experimental study, the synthesis conditions of oxalic acid electrolyte (0.3 The synthesis conditions at the interpore distance of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide thin layer are important problems in recent years. In this regard, some computer-based techniques such as artificial neural networks (ANNs) and multiple linear regressions are good tools for determining the results of these complicated problems. The main purpose of this study is to develop artificial neural network and multiple linear regression models for predicting the interpore distance of nanoporous anodic aluminum oxide. The models’ predictions are very close to the experimental desired results for training, validating, and testing. The mean absolute error, mean absolute percentage error, root mean square error, and the correlation coefficient are presented to show the accuracy of models. Moreover, the results of models are compared with empirical formula proposed by Nielsch et al. In addition, an experimental study is carried out and the results are verified with other models and formula proposed by Nielsch et al. In this study, it is shown that ANN model is better than another model and formula proposed by Nielsch et al.