The effect of solids (up to 30% w/w) on the viability of a mesophilic culture of acidophilic bacteria was investigated in stirred tank reactors (STRs) using the Rushton turbine (RT) and the pitched blade turbine impellers in a speed range of 2.01–3.35 m/s. The results showed that hydrodynamic shear alone as a characteristic function of impeller type and speed has a very limited effect on the bacterial cells during mixing in STRs, but mechanical damage to bacterial cells occurs, to a most significant extent, via the attrition by solid particles promoted by the intensity of agitation. Extent of the adverse effect on the bacterial cells was found to depend on impeller design/speed and solids density. The loss in the viability of bacterial population with a tendency to increase with agitation rate and solids density was more extensive with the RT than the PBT impellers under the same experimental conditions e.g. 72% loss in the viability c.f. 40% over 4 h of mixing at 20% w/w solids and 3.35 m/s impeller speed. The kinetic analysis of the experimental data suggest that the rate and extent of oxidation of a substrate in a given process would be controlled by the inoculum size and by the difference between the “normal” growth rate and the deactivation rate of bacterial cells incurred at a particular mixing condition (impeller type/speed and solids density) i.e. by the “actual” growth rate.In bioleaching/biooxidation processes mixing is an essential unit operation provided mainly to ensure the transfer of oxygen, carbon dioxide and heat to or from the medium and the suspension of solids ( In STRs turbulent (shear) conditions are generated using a suitable impeller design to achieve the desired level of homogeneity, mass transfer and solids suspension. However, the hydrodynamic shear levels produced probably depending on the impeller design and speed may adversely influence the performance of microorganisms in general used in bioprocesses ( Detrimental effect of shear conditions on the leaching activity of acidophilic bacteria in bioleaching processes has also been addressed by many investigators (  Adverse effects of mixing on bacteria may also be a function of impeller design probably as a result of different shear and functional characteristics of impeller designs. Despite these reports, which are based mainly on the observations of the limitations occurred in metal dissolution rates, mixing aspects of bioleaching processes have not been studied in detail with no conclusive, quantitative data currently available on the likely effect of shear and/or solids on acidophilic bacteria. In this study, the impact of solids on the viability of a mesophilic bacteria was investigated under different mixing conditions (impeller type and speed) and the mode of shear and/or solids effects on the bacterial cells with the likely implications for bioleaching processes was discussed. The mesophilic mixed culture designated MES1 that was routinely maintained on ferrous iron (200 mM Fe Concentrated cell suspensions for experimental use were prepared from ferrous iron grown cells. The bacteria were cultured on 200 mM Fe Flat-bottomed, jacketed glass reactor vessels with a nominal capacity of 1.2 l were used in this study. The six blade RT and the four blade, downward pumping 45° PBT impellers were the impeller designs investigated. Sizing of the impellers and baffles was based on the vessel dimensions (diameter in particular) to conform to the standard design of a STR. The design parameters and geometric relationship between them are presented in The experiments were carried out in duplicate under the constant conditions of 30 °C and pH 1.7. Enriched salt solution ((NH The viability was derived from the rate of oxygen uptake of bacteria on 100 mM Fe The experiments were carried out for a period of four hours during which samples (7 ml) were removed at 1 h intervals. The oxygen uptake measurements for each sample (a 4.5 ml aliquot of a sample (7 ml) withdrawn from a reactor plus 0.5 ml of 1 M Fe In addition the number of bacterial cells at the start and end of each experimental run was determined using a Thoma counting chamber (1/400 m  In a similar manner, increasing the impeller speed further from 2.51 to 3.35 m/s resulted in a substantial decrease in the viability particularly at high pulp densities of 20% and 30% w/w (   The relative size of the smallest eddies, Although the second mechanism proposed by Therefore, the particle–particle (quartz–quartz) collisions may well be regarded as the main mechanism responsible for the cell damage in the current study. In this context, the cell damage would probably occur when the cell was in the immediate vicinity of or at the point of collision possibly resulting in the disruption of the cell matrix (or cell death) depending on the mechanical strength of the cells relative to the severity of the collision. During the microscopic counting of the cells at the end of the mixing period, the presence of very fine quartz particles and cell debris particularly at high solids densities had been observed providing the visual evidence for the occurrence of particle–particle collisions (i.e. attrition). It may be deduced that the frequency of the particle–particle collisions at a given agitation condition would ultimately govern the extent of the cell damage (loss in the viability of bacterial population). The increase in the concentration of solids and/or the agitation speed would give rise to the probability and frequency of the collisions between the particles (  These findings for the PBT impellers revealed that the decrease in the viability was significantly less than those recorded using the RT impellers under the same conditions (impeller speed and solids concentration). The differences between these performances of both impeller designs are consistent with their respective mixing (shear) characteristics that can be correlated with the scale of turbulence (i.e. the smallest eddy size) induced. Considering that the scale of turbulence is related to the kinematic viscosity and the rate of energy dissipation (Eq. Using the experimental data collected for both impeller designs, the kinetics of the adverse effect on the viability of the bacterial population was further evaluated at a particular mixing condition (i.e. impeller type, speed and solids density). Given that no bacterial growth occurred and the decrease in the viability resulted from the deactivation (death) of the cells, the kinetics of the deactivation was determined using the first order kinetic model: Given that the oxygen uptake rate is directly proportional to the number of viable cells (Eq. The extreme thermophiles with their ability to operate at high temperatures (70–85 °C) are often considered as a potentially superior alternative to mesophiles and moderate thermophiles for the extraction of base metals, copper in particular ( For the bacteria which have a doubling time of <5 h corresponding to a specific growth rate of >0.14 h It may be inferred from these data above that the “critical” tip speed for the adverse effect tends to increase on scale up that could be interpreted as a reduced adverse impact on the oxidative activity of bacteria on large scale. This could be attributed to the increase in the circulation (mixing) time and the decrease in the power consumption (kW/m In bioleaching operations, selection of impeller design and speed would depend on the requirements for oxygen and carbon dioxide transfer and complete suspension of solids. The RT impellers are most suitable for gas transfer applications (gas–liquid mixing) while the PBT impellers are for suspension of solids (solid–liquid mixing) ( During bioleaching processes, as the pulp density increases, the agitation rate and/or air flow rate are also required to increase in order to meet the increased demand for oxygen and carbon dioxide transfer and for suspension of solids. Damage to bacterial cells would be compounded by increase in both pulp density and impeller speed ( It can be inferred from this study that it is not the magnitude of hydrodynamic shear forces alone per se that cause damage to bacterial cells leading to the loss of viability during the mixing process but, rather, to a most significant extent, the attrition of bacterial cells by solid particles promoted by the intensity of agitation (i.e. shear related impact of solids on the cells). The extent of loss in the viability of bacterial population increases as a function of time with increasing the solids density and/or the intensity of agitation. The RT impellers appear to cause more extensive loss in the viability of the bacterial population than the PBT impellers under the same experimental conditions (solids density and impeller speed). The kinetics of deactivation of bacterial cells that are consistent with the first order kinetic model can be compared with the bacterial growth at a particular condition. The findings suggest that, in bioleaching processes the actual growth rate of bacteria (and hence the rate and extent of substrate oxidation) would be determined by the difference between the growth rate of bacteria and the deactivation rate of bacterial cells incurred at a given mixing condition. The use of a strong inoculum would reduce the adverse effect on the bacterial oxidation of a substrate to some extent in a batch process. In bioleaching operations mixing intensity must be balanced against the process requirements of suspension of solids, oxygen and carbon dioxide and heat transfer in order to reduce the adverse effect on the oxidising activity of bacterial population. Selection of impeller design appears to be of prime importance in a given bioleaching system and the most efficient impellers systems should be utilised/developed to maximise the bioleaching performance. The author would like to express his sincere thanks and appreciation to the late Dr. C.V. Phillips for his support, assistance and guidance, to Dr. M.A. Jordan, Dr. S. McGinnes for their help and invaluable discussions provided and to G. Griffiths for his help during the experimental design, and to the Turkish Ministry of Education for financial support during his studies at Camborne School of Mines, University of Exeter, UK.