The ionic complexation of different chemical compositions of alginate and its sulfated derivative with tetracycline hydrochloride (TCH), as a cationic drug model, was investigated. The complexes of TCH with mannuronate-enriched alginate entrapped the highest amount of the drug. However, the ability of all un-modified alginates for ionic complexation was very weak. Interestingly, the chemical modification of alginate with sulfate groups resulted in drug-polymer complexes with remarkable entrapment efficiency of TCH. The results of this study suggested alginate sulfate as a promising biomaterial in designing delivery systems for cationic small molecule drugs.Alginate is an anionic polymer that has increasingly drawn attention in the development of advanced drug delivery systems based on electrostatic interactions. In this context, some drug carriers have been fabricated based on an ionic complex of alginate or its sulfated derivative with a cationic macromolecules such as peptides or proteins Cationic small molecules comprise a large number of pharmaceutical drugs. Therefore, the evaluation of their complexation with alginate and its sulfated derivative will likely provide valuable results in creating novel delivery systems. For this purpose, we examined the ionic complex formation of TCH in the presence of alginate and its homopolymeric fractions at several concentrations. Then, the effect of time, temperature and pH on the complex formation was evaluated at the selected working concentration. In the next, for the first time, the complex formation of this drug with alginate sulfate was investigated. Sodium alginate (Alg, 30–50 kDa) was partially hydrolyzed according to a previously published method To prepare the drug-polymer complex, the aqueous solutions of TCH and the polymer were mixed and agitated at a defined temperature for a predetermined time. The entrapment efficiency (EE) and loading efficiency (LE) of TCH in the TCH-AlgS complexes were calculated according to Equation The details of materials and experimental methods are provided in The FTIR spectrum of Alg ( In As shown in As shown in For evaluation of the effect of pH, we prepared polymer and drug solutions at acidic and neutral pH in the vicinity of their pKa values. The highest %EE was measured at neutral pH (  The highest %EE of 35.50 ± 0.70 was achieved in TCH-AlgS complex when the drug concentration of 0.90% w/v was selected. The %LE of 47.70 ± 6.43 was determined for this complex. FTIR analysis confirmed the formation of this drug-polymer complex ( In this study, we found that alginate function as a drug carrier is affected by its chemical composition and sulfated modification. The polyM-Alg showed the highest ability in the complexation with TCH. Here, we developed a novel drug carrier based on TCH-AlgS complex. According to the findings of this study, sulfated modification of mannuronate-enriched alginate may be useful for the preparation of various drug carriers.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. We acknowledge financial support from Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: