In this study, a micromechanical model has been developed to investigate the effect of the mismatch in material properties of the constituent phases on the transformation toughening mechanism in zirconia enriched multi-phase composites. The developed model predicts a very strong influence of the material properties of the constituencies and microstructure on the toughening effect. Using this model it is also possible to engineer multi-phase composites with required or predetermined fracture properties by utilizing the synergetic characteristics of their constituent phases.The phenomenon of stress transformation in zirconia-enriched composites was first reported by Garvie et al. When the particles surround a stable or a growing crack, the high stress concentration near the crack tip will trigger the transformation of zirconia particles near the crack tip. The typical transformation zone sizes found experimentally are of the order of 20 The stress-induced transformation toughening mechanism was successfully used in the past to increase the fracture toughness of brittle ceramics Continuum models of the phenomenon were developed by Lange In this paper, a micromechanical model has been developed and incorporated into the continuum model of transformation toughening by Stump and Budiansky For the sake of completeness of this paper a brief introduction into the continuum model of transformation toughening by Stump and Budiansky The mean stress due to dilatation can be calculated using the Hutchinson’s solution for two small circular spots of dilatation of area The equation for the zone boundary, The stress intensity factor at the crack tip, A similar procedure can be adapted to the growing crack case as well. Details can be found in Stump and Budiansky In The analysis for growing crack considers the stress intensity and zone shape as a function of crack extension In this section, a composite consisting of For the system under consideration, the potential energy, Eq. According to the mean-field micromechanical theory Here The internal stress for each phase The macro strain Thus, from Eqs. The effective elastic properties (bulk modulus and shear modulus) of the multi-phase composites with randomly distributed spherical particles can be derived by substituting the Eshelby’s tensor for the spherical inclusions In the above equations Now, consider the unconstrained dilatational of the composite, In the same way as the effective elastic constants were derived above, the relation between the dilatational strain component Further, in order to take into account the stress concentration effect on the stress transformation criterion, let us consider the mean stress in the particles. The mean stress in each phase, Here, the internal stress caused by the mismatch of thermal expansion of each phase is considered. Here, Similar, the following relations are derived: Here, Consider the toughening effect in a multi-phase composite enriched with partially stabilized spherical zirconia particles. The micromechanical model developed above can be directly incorporated into the continuum model by Stump and Budiansky The strength of the transformation The mismatch in the material properties results into two effects. The first changes the unconstrained dilatation of the composite, and the second influences the stress concentration around the transforming particles. Both effects lead to the appearance of the same factor, SiC/Al composites consists of high strength aluminum alloys reinforced with hard silicon carbide particles. Their low cost processing and blend of properties make them good candidates for many structural components demanding high stiffness, high strength, high resistance to wear and heat, and low weight. This translates into weight savings by producing lighter components capable of withstanding the required loads, which is of particular interest in the modern transportation industry (e.g., space frames and sheet panels). One of the major concerns regarding their widespread applications of the composites is a relatively high brittleness in comparison with traditional materials There are three basic methods used for the toughening. The first is to promote crack deflection and branching to increase the fracture energy, by introducing porosity at the interface of different phases and facilitating the generation of microcracks. Another method is to use short-cut fibers, whiskers or elongated grains of a second phase to bridge across an open crack and carry some load. However, these methods have many disadvantages and limitations; for example, for proper reinforcement using the crack bridging mechanism one has to know in advance the crack direction, while microcracks and pores are also capable of generating and propagating cracks. The stress-induced transformation toughening mechanism, which has recently received a large amount of attention in relation to toughening of brittle intermetallics, is now considered to be the best way of toughening SiC/Al composites. An application of the developed theory to ZrO In the beginning, the zone of volume fractions of constituencies of ZrO The toughening effect by adding 30 Al Several studies have been made on the effect of the ZrO Now we examine the effect of thermal stresses generated under temperature change (drop) conditions on the fracture toughness in ZrO It can be seen in Addition of small amount of Al A micromechanical model was developed to investigate the toughening effect in multi-phase composites using the stress-induced transformation mechanism of partially-stabilized ZrO The author thanks Dr. A. Kotousov and Dr. S.Y. Ho of The University of Adelaide for useful discussions and suggestions.