New 31P NMR internal reference standard – hexamethylphosphoroamide (HMPA) was applied for determination of added polyphosphates and their ionic forms in raw pork meat and meat products. Phosphate species were determined after extraction with a boric acid buffer (pH=9) and EDTA solution, using internal standard (HMPA) procedure. Hexamethylphosophoroamide was also used as the NMR reference standard. Linear correlations between phosphates and polyphosphate concentrations and 31P NMR signal areas were found in the range 81–5236mg P/dm3, presenting 95–99% recovery and variation coefficient (CV)≤5%. Studied HMPA procedure revealed shorter analysis time and the same recovery (>95%) and precision (CV=1.3–2.7%) in comparison to MDPA method. Results of phosphate determination by both 31P NMR methods were tested against the molybdenumvanadate yellow spectrophotometric method (standard PN-ISO 13730, 1999) using standard reference material (certified phosphate solution).Inorganic phosphates and polyphosphates are used as food additives in raw pork meat and in food products e.g., pork, poultry, fish and sea fruits. The additives improve moisture retention, tenderness, juiciness and protect the flavour of meat products. Besides, phosphate addition reduces the negative effect of lower salt level and improves sensory and technological properties of meat. Jiménez-Colmenero et al. Widely used as food additives are: sodium or potassium:tripolyphosphates, hexametaphosphates, dihydrogenpyrophosphates and orthophosphates Flow injection analysis (FIA) coupled with spectrophotometry was also applied for phosphate species determination in: milk, beef, brine mixtures and extracts of natural casings The review on phosphates analysis by NMR technique describes broadly the usage of the method in chemical analysis  Methylenediphosphonic acid (MDPA) was already applied as the external standard because In the presented here work hexamethylphosphoroamide (HMPA) has been used as the new NMR reference standard for determination of the added phosphates, polyphosphates and the products of their hydrolysis in meat products. As reported, HMPA was applied as spectroscopic chemical-shift standard in measurements of In this work HMPA was applied as the internal analytical standard, that should provide better accuracy and precision of analysis due to the improved lines resolution and the most important it should reduce time of analysis of all phosphate ions. Another advantage of the HMPA was the lack of physicochemical interferences with the analyzed species and its stability during analytical process. According to our observations HMPA was stable during NMR measurements due to: (a) reduced hydrolysis at pH Polyphosphates: Na  Absorption spectra for total phosphorus determination were recorded on a Helios α-UNICAM spectrophotometer in a 1-cm quartz cell against reagent blank. Absorbances were measured at analytical wavelength 430 The raw pork ham used in analyses was purchased from the local slaughter house nearby Torun and frozen (−22 Standard meat samples spiked with one of the following salts: SHP, PP, STP (81 Standardized spectrophotometric method (PN-ISO 13730, 1999), based on molybdenumvanadate yellow compound Elaborated procedure of raw meat sample preparation was applied for meat product samples purchased from the local stores (canned pork: products (1–2); mixed sea food – prawns (3–4) and squid (5)). Samples 5.0 Determination of phosphorus based on the integral intensities of The In the first stage standard water solutions of polyphosphates were analyzed by Precision and accuracy of new NMR method was tested on certified standard solution and compared to two references method. Orthophosphate water solution was used as certified reference solution (CRS), because CRS standard with polyphosphates is not commercially available. Method with HMPA standard was tested on the certified standard solutions (concentrations 163.1 For HMPA method Calculated In the next stage raw meat samples with added in laboratory polyphosphates K The recoveries obtained by procedure with HMPA were between 96.5 and 98.0%, that was in the same range as for MDPA method Comparison of HMPA method in relation to MDPA Spectra of meat samples ( Calculated The use of new NMR reference standard HMPA in phosphate analyses caused the reduction of procedure time with high analytical parameters. The application of this method for the raw meat samples and meat products confirmed the relation between intensity of signal and concentration of phosphorus. High recovery level (in range 95–99%) for NMR method and the possibility of different phosphate ions determination in one procedure suggest application of this method in analysis of meat products. Described NMR method can be used for control of the added phosphates level during production process in quality of food assessment. The authors wish to thank