The aim of this work is to study the applicability of a UV/H2O2 process intensified with persulfate (PS) as a source of SO4
                     
                        − radicals to efficiently mineralize a synthetic effluent containing aniline in a glass reactor arranged in a cascade configuration. pH conditions were studied and the concentration of PS was optimized. The synergism for aniline mineralization between the UV/H2O2 process and the combined UV/H2O2/PS process was quantified in 10.1%.
                  Aniline degradation reached 100% under the UV/H2O2/PS process after 20 min. Its mineralization is favored under acidic conditions and with the presence of persulfate (optimal conditions: 49% in 90 min; pH = 4; [PS] = 250 ppm). On the contrary, the worst conditions were found at pH = 11, since hydrogen peroxide decomposes and carbonates were formed increasing the scavenging effect.
                  The different mechanisms involved (formulated from intermediates identified by mass spectrometry) confirm these results. Aniline was found to follow a degradation pathway where phenol is the main intermediate. The presence of sulfate radicals increases phenol degradation rate leading to a higher mineralization extent. Benzoquinone was identified as the main aromatic oxidation product of phenol, whereas succinic, 4-oxo-pentanoic, fumaric and oxalic acids were detected as aliphatic oxidation products for both UV/H2O2 and UV/H2O2/PS oxidation processes.Aniline (also known as phenilamine) is a liquid organic compound (C Aniline wastewater containing highly concentrated organic nitrogenous and aromatic structure is less biodegradable and very toxic to microorganisms ( Degradation of aniline by different methods has extensively been referenced in literature: i) Electrodialysis: under the selected conditions, On the other hand, the homogeneous photo-Fenton reaction is commonly the most effective method to generate hydroxyl radicals of HO Lately, the thermally activated persulfate anions have been utilized to decompose aniline in aqueous solution, wherein the main oxidizing agent is clarified to be sulfate radicals ( In this study, the use of persulfate (PS) activated with UV-light combined with H To that end, a thin film cascade photo-reactor has been used. These reactor configuration has been used for treatment of organic compounds in wastewater using TiO Aniline (99%) and 30% hydrogen peroxide (H Deionized water used for preparing solutions was obtained from a purifying machine (ELGA PURELAB). An open glass reactor (30 mm × 110 mm) arranged in a cascade configuration ( As commented above, some intermediate refractory compounds were identified under a UV/H The removal of aniline was evaluated immediately after sampling using a Gilson 231 XL high performance liquid chromatography with UV detection (HPLC) under an isocratic mode and an Eclipse XDB-C18 column (5 μm, 4.6 × 250 mm). 60:40 (v/v) methanol/(water with 0.1% acetic acid) mixture at acidic pH was used as the mobile phase (detection wavelength, λ = 252 nm; flow rate of 0.6 ml min Total organic carbon concentration was determined using a TOC analyzer (Shimadzu TOC-5000A). H Intermediate by-products were identified by QTOF-UHPLC analysis using a MaXis HD quadrupole electrospray time-of-flight (ESI-QTOF) mass spectrometer (Bruker Daltonik GmbH, Bremen, Germany), which was coupled to an Ultimate 3000 UHPLC (Thermo Fisher Scientific, California, USA) for infusions. Analyses were performed in both ESI positive and negative-ion modes. The capillary voltage was set to 4500 V, nebulizing gas at 1 bar, drying gas at 9 L/min at 200 °C in each case. The TOF scan range was from 75 to 1000 mass-to-charge ratio ( Quantification of hydroxyl radicals was carried out using disodium salt of terephthalic acid (NaTA, 2 mM) ( The HTA fluorescence yield was measured with an RF 6000 spectro-fluorophotometer (Shimadzu). The excitation wavelength was set at 315 nm and the fluorescence spectra of the solution were collected in the range of 320 nm–500 nm. The peak intensity was quantified for each solution at the emission wavelength of 425 nm using a previous calibration. Light intensity was determined experimentally at different distances from the water irradiating a concentrated solution of H  To confirm this fact, the evolution of hydroxyl radicals formed during H The synergism between the UV/H Although the synergy is not very large (10.1%), we can conclude that addition of PS slightly improves the mineralization efficiency of aniline, so that the overall combined UV/H The experimental study was made at different pHs: pH = 4 was previously selected as optimal for UV/H Aniline was completely degraded after 20 min of reaction in all the cases ( It can be seen that aniline mineralization is favored under some acidic conditions, especially at pH = 4 (best conditions: 49.2% after 90 min at pH = 4, 42.3% at pH = 6). On the contrary, the lower mineralization degree was found at pH = 11 (20%) as will be explained below. Many organic compounds (specially aliphatic acids) undergo efficient mineralization by SO Additionally, UV radiation in the presence of PS produces supplementary hydroxyl radicals according to equations However, a high concentration of PS would produce an excess of hydroxyl radicals with the consequent known “scavenger effect” and decrease in mineralization efficiency. In addition, unproductive reactions with sulfate radicals may also occur: A concentration of PS higher than 250 ppm was found to produce this negative effect in this study. On the other hand, the analysis of the concentration of HO 0–20 min: hydroxyl radicals are being used in the complete degradation of aniline (see 20–45 min: the main intermediates are formed and the mechanism of mineralization is active. Mineralization rate increases, and the concentration of hydroxyl radicals increases, proving that they are in excess, but not efficiently used in mineralization. 45–90 min: The concentration of radicals remains nearly constant or decreases and the mineralization process is slower. It indicates that some intermediates are not degraded under these conditions or they are degraded very slowly. Recombination of radicals in unproductive reactions may also occur. The highest mineralization degree was found for [PS] = 250 ppm. For higher persulfate concentrations ([PS] = 500 ppm), the hydroxyl radicals are detected in a higher amount, but they are not effective in increasing mineralization, showing that they are in excess as previously commented. At pH = 11, the above explained trends are the same, but the amount of hydroxyl radicals found was very low. An increase in pH is expected to produce a higher mineralization degree due to the conversion of SO However, at high pHs i) hydrogen peroxide decomposes and ii) carbonates may be formed increasing the scavenging effect, so that the overall mineralization process is not improved. In fact intermediates like succinic acid are not degraded as explained below. In order to propose a clarifying mineralization mechanism, intermediate by-products were identified by QTOF-UHPLC analysis using a MaXis HD quadrupole electrospray time-of-flight (ESI-QTOF) mass spectrometer. Quantitative results for different conditions at pH = 4 and pH = 11 are shown in It can be observed that the profile of intermediates is quite different depending of pH, so that important changes in the mineralization mechanism must occur in each case. At pH = 4, the main difference is that phenol formation is faster when no PS is present, reaching its maximum concentration in 10 min. When PS is added to the system, the maximum concentration of phenol is retarded to 30 min, but in contrast benzoquinone is produced in a higher amount from the beginning. According to On the other hand, hydroxyl radicals may attack the aromatic ring of aniline to form the aniliny radical that is further oxidized to nitrobenzene (route 1) and later to more stable molecules such us oxalic acid ( Nitrobenzene can also form phenol, which in a later stage is oxidized to Reaction pathways of sulfate and hydroxyl radicals based advanced oxidation of phenol have been reported in literature, ( On the other hand, it is remarkable that formation of phenol and benzoquinone is very low at pH = 11 ( In addition to the major oxidation products being identified for hydroxyl and sulfate radical based oxidation, the occurrence of oxidative coupling reactions could also be assumed considering the observation of brownish solid residues during phenol oxidation in the present work. The appearance of brownish solid residues has already been reported to be characteristic for polyphenol polymers containing phenylene and oxyphenylene units (  The synergism between the UV/H Aniline degradation reached 100% in all the cases after 20 min. However, its mineralization is favored) under acidic conditions and with the presence of persulfate (optimal conditions: 49% in 90 min at pH = 4). At high pHs hydrogen peroxide decomposes and carbonates may be formed increasing the scavenging effect, so that the overall mineralization process is worst. The overall mineralization process can be divided in three stages: i) 0–20 min: in this stage hydroxyl radicals are being used in the complete degradation of aniline to form intermediates and mineralization is very low, ii) 20–45 min: the main intermediates are formed and mineralization rate increases and iii) 45–90 min: the concentration of radicals remains nearly constant or decreases and the mineralization process is slower, since some intermediates are not degraded and unproductive reactions occur. Aniline follows a degradation pathway where phenol is formed and ammonium released. In a later stage, phenol is oxidized to Benzoquinone was identified as the main aromatic oxidation product of phenol, whereas succinic, 4-oxo-pentanoic, fumaric and oxalic acids were detected as aliphatic oxidation products for both UV/H This work was supported by Financial The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at