Amphiphilic magnetic composites were produced based on chrysotile mineral and carbon structures by chemical vapor deposition at different temperatures (600–900 °C) and cobalt as catalyst. The materials were characterized by elemental analysis, X-ray diffraction, vibrating sample magnetometry, adsorption and desorption of N2, Raman spectroscopy, scanning electronic microscopy, and thermal analysis showed an effective growth of carbon structures in all temperatures. It was observed that at 800 and 900 °C, a large amount of carbon structures are formed with fewer defects than at 600 and 700 °C, what contributes to their stability. In addition, the materials present magnetic phases that are important for their application as catalysts and adsorbents. The materials have shown to be very active to remove the oil dispersed in a real sample of emulsified wastewater from biodiesel production and to remove methylene blue by adsorption and oxidation via heterogeneous Fenton mechanism.Natural materials such as minerals are being increasingly used in environmental applications, such as in adsorption and oxidation of different contaminants ( The literature reports the use of various natural materials such as bentonite ( Chrysotile is a low cost natural material composed of bundles of fibrils with a curly lamellar structure of phyllosilicate, rolled up to form a hollow of concentric cylinders. The crystalline structure of chrysotile is formed by the interaction between tetrahedral layers of tridymite, SiO Based on this scenario, in the lasts years, chrysotile has been used in several technological applications such as in catalysis, e.g. hydrolysis of soybean oil and hydrogenations of olefins ( Chrysotile is a highly hydrophilic material. However, its surface properties can be modified trough functionalization or coating with materials with specific characteristics. For example, the chrysotile can be hydrophobized by growing carbon on its surface. One of the most widely used methods for carbon structures synthesis is the chemical vapor deposition (CVD). This process consists on the decomposition of a volatile carbon source in the presence of a catalyst (Fe or Co, for example), which may be supported in an inorganic matrix. There are several parameters that can affect the yield and the kind of carbon structures formed during the CVD process, In this work, it was proposed a novel approach of using chrysotile. We have studied the transformation of the mining waste chrysotile in an efficient ceramic matrix for partial deposition of carbon structures by CVD process, using ethanol as a renewable carbon source. Metallic cores were used as catalysts for carbon deposition, producing low cost and safe magnetic amphiphilic materials. The resulting composites are formed by three parts with different properties: the mineral matrix, with hydrophilic characteristics, partially coating of very hydrophobic carbon structures and metal nuclei with magnetic properties. After the CVD process, the chrysotile structure is modified to another phase (forsterite), which presents no risk to human health, moreover, the carbon coating prevents the leaching of the material for the medium. Furthermore, the magnetic properties of these composites allow them to be easily removed after use by the simple approach of a magnetic field ( The magnetic amphiphilic composites were synthesized from chrysotile of waste mining (Mg Carbon structures were grown on the chrysotile surface using the catalytic chemical vapor deposition (CVD) process. In the CVD process, a volatile carbon source is decomposed in the presence of the catalyst, depositing solid carbonaceous material. Typically 500 mg of the material (chrysotile with 20%wt of Co as catalyst) was placed inside of a quartz tube and heated (10 °C min The materials were characterized by elemental analysis CHN (Perkin-Elmer – Séries II – CHNS/O Analyzer 2400, with a combustion chamber temperature near to 926 °C), thermogravimetric analysis – TG (in air flow, 100 mL min Samples of emulsified wastewater were collected in an industrial biodiesel plant of soybean oil production, located in Minas Gerais/Brazil. The sample was collected after oil/water separation process and it was maintained at temperatures lower than 4 °C before the experiments. Tests of emulsion breaking and turbidity removal were performed using 100 mg of amphiphilic carbonaceous materials. The compounds were placed in contact with 6 mL of the emulsified wastewater in a glass tube and mechanical stirring for 1 min. Then, the breaking of the emulsion was made by approaching of a magnet on the bottom of the glass tube and after that, the samples were analyzed by optical microscopy (Cole Parmer Instrument – 41500–50), UV–Vis spectrophotometry (Shimadzu UV 2550) and turbidity (HACH 2100 AN). Blank tests were performed in the same conditions without composites. The reuse of magnetic carbonaceous materials was investigated up to five times or until reached less than 20% of the wastewater turbidity removal efficiency. The removal of methylene blue (MB) (50 mg L Waste of the chrysotile mineral extraction was used as support for carbon structures synthesis by CVD process, at different temperatures (600–900 °C) using cobalt as catalyst and ethanol as carbon source, which is responsible for the reduction of cobalt species and for the formation of carbon structures ( Elemental analysis (CHN) of the materials obtained after CVD process confirmed that all temperatures were effective for growing carbon structures with yields of 23, 28, 31, and 27% of carbon for the materials Cris/Co obtained at 600, 700, 800, and 900 °C, respectively. In general, higher temperatures of CVD process increase the carbon content deposited on the material. However, it was observed a decrease of carbon content at 900 °C, probably due to the fast pyrolysis reaction of the carbon source at this temperature, promoting a fast catalyst particles encapsulation by amorphous carbon, preventing thus, the growth of organized carbon structures ( TG curves of the cobalt based materials ( DTG curves ( XRD pattern for sample obtained at 600 °C, Cris/Co600, shows typical reflections of chrysotile, Mg Raman spectra of the materials, after CVD process ( SEM images for pure chrysotile show a microfibrillar structure typical of this mineral ( Chrysotile and the materials after CVD process were characterized by N An important characteristic of these amphiphilic composites is their magnetic behavior. The presence of magnetic phases coated by carbon, such as metallic cores of Co The saturation magnetization measurements for Cris/Co600, Cris/Co700, Cris/Co800 and Cris/Co900 were 15, 17, 15 and 27 emu g The amphiphilic characteristic of the magnetic composites is very interesting to promote the turbidity removal of wastewater. These materials can be well dispersed into a polar phase, such as an aqueous medium, besides the good interaction with the organic and insoluble molecules dispersed in the water, which are responsible for the turbidity. Cloudy water is an emulsified system, where two phases are dispersed one into the other. The synthesized materials were used to removal the turbidity of the biodiesel wastewater, and for adsorption/oxidation of the methylene blue in aqueous medium. The sample Cris/Co700 showed almost 90% of efficiency for turbidity removal. Carbon structures on the materials surface have a very hydrophobic character and are fundamental to ensure good interaction between the organic contaminant and the composite. The differences observed in the materials should be related to the type of carbon nanostructure grown on the surface of the mineral. The temperature of CVD process influences the kind, e.g. graphite, nanotubes and quantity of carbon structures formed. Carbon structures with low amounts of defects present high hydrophobicity and may interact better with hydrophobic media like oil phase ( Cris/Co800 showed the best removal efficiency turbidity for all reuse tests. The material dispersed in the emulsion after the adsorption process was magnetically removed and the turbidity removal of the system is clearly observed ( The magnetic materials were also tested in the removal of organic contaminants in aqueous solutions by adsorption followed by oxidation via heterogeneous Fenton process using the cationic dye methylene blue (MB) as substrate ( The composites showed a color removal higher than 50% during the adsorption stage. Although the composites present similar specific surface areas, the MB adsorption capacities are different and increase with the carbon content of the materials. The highest color removal efficiency was obtained for Cris/Co800 (87%). According to CHN elemental analysis, this material presents the highest carbon content. For the material obtained at 900 °C, the color removal promoted by adsorption decreases, likely due to the lower carbon content and lower specific surface area ( After addition of hydrogen peroxide, H In our system, reduced Co species, such as Co Finally, hydroperoxyl radicals may also transfer one electron to Co In addition, the presence of metallic species, like Co Based on this mechanism and others seen in the literature ( According to the mechanism proposed above, the methylene blue is initially pre-concentrated on the surface of the composites from the adsorption process promoted by the carbonaceous material. Subsequently, the addition of hydrogen peroxide promotes the oxidation of the dye adsorbed on the surface of the material via the heterogeneous Fenton-Like process. New magnetic amphiphilic composites based on chrysotile mineral and carbon were successfully obtained by CVD process using ethanol as carbon source. Indeed, the temperature of the CVD process has shown to be an important parameter that influences the kind of the carbon structures grown and their yield on the chrysotile surface. The material obtained at 800 °C resulted in the highest yield of carbon structures. The composites showed great performances in the removal of the turbidity from biodiesel wastewater and in the discoloration of MB solutions via the heterogeneous Fenton-Like process. The authors are grateful to The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at