Orbitozygomatic fractures pertain to the most common injuries in craniofacial trauma surgery. Accurate fracture reduction is of high importance for a successful outcome. This pilot study was performed to assess the potential benefit of surgical navigation to aid in orbitozygomatic fracture reduction.
               
                  Methods
                  A non-comparative series of 10 consecutive patients with moderately displaced orbitozygomatic fractures was treated using the guidance of computed tomography (CT) based surgical navigation. A newly developed software platform was used for the creation of a preoperative treatment plan. On a computer workstation, the fracture was reduced virtually by three-dimensional shifting of the zygomaticomaxillary complex within the preoperative multimodal CT data set. This treatment plan was transferred to a navigation system. Fracture reduction was performed using surgical navigation according to the treatment plan.
               
                  Results
                  Virtual segmentation and positioning of the zygomaticomaxillary complex was easily performed. Intraoperative control of fracture reduction by comparing the real with the virtual preplanned bone position using surgical navigation showed up as a helpful tool.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Accurate treatment planning and immediate evaluation of craniofacial surgery outcome are the benefits of the new approach demonstrated. In addition to bone repositioning, a future application may include simulation of craniomaxillofacial osteotomiesness.With the zygomatic bone being highly susceptible to trauma because of its exposed position, orbitozygomatic fractures pertain to the most common injuries encountered in craniofacial trauma surgery. Appropriate management, avoiding zygoma malpositioning with late cosmetic deformity and malar asymmetry and, most importantly, enophthalmos as a rare but severe complication in orbitozygomatic trauma surgery, includes an adequate reduction of the displaced bone As physical examination is often limited because of soft-tissue swelling concealing malar fragment displacement or enophthalmos, and as plain radiographs do not provide adequate information for a full evaluation, there is a general recommendation for undergoing a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan Surgical approaches focus on a reduction of the orbital anatomy and the correct positioning of the orbitozygomaticomaxillary complex. A decisive factor for fracture reduction is the proper exploration and exact alignment of the three buttresses; these are the zygomaticofrontal suture, the zygomaticomaxillary buttress and the infraorbital rim. There is consent that a visualization at all three pillars is not always necessary to ensure an anatomic reduction Computer assisted surgical navigation systems furthermore provide detailed preoperative treatment planning options. Newly and not yet commercially available software platforms provide facilities to perform a mapping and virtual 3D shifting of anatomic objects within the radiologic data set including the virtual shifting of bone segments The feasibility of this new technique using computer assisted planning and intraoperative navigation for a better control of treatment was evaluated. In 10 consecutive patients with orbitozygomatic fractures, the displaced zygoma was localized and segmented within the preoperatively acquired CT data set. On the computer workstation, the displaced fracture was then reduced virtually to the individual anatomic location. Correct placement of the virtually shifted orbitozygomaticomaxillary complex was performed and controlled in all three dimensions in axial, coronal and sagittal slices. This treatment plan was then transferred and displayed on the navigation system monitor within the operating room. An optical navigation system was used to scan the surface of the orbitozygomatic bone during fracture reduction and compare it with the virtually shifted anatomy. The bony surface of the zygoma was scanned using a so called “pointer” at multiple anatomic landmarks. In this pilot study, a non-comparative series of 10 consecutive patients with moderately displaced unilateral orbitozygomatic fractures was scheduled for surgical treatment. None of the patients had a larger defect of the orbital floor or a severe medial orbital wall involvement that would have required an orbital reconstruction for prevention of enophthalmos. There was no periorbital or extraocular muscle entrapment. No severe comminution of the zygomatic arch requiring coronal incision occurred. All patients underwent routine ophthalmologic assessment prior to operation. In three patients, there was diplopia in combination with motility disturbances. No patient presented with a loss of vision, afferent pupillary defect or optic nerve injury. High resolution spiral CT scans (Somatom Sensation 16, Siemens, Erlangen, Germany) were performed of each patient's midfacial area following a routine clinical scanning protocol with 1.5 mm thickness axial slices. CT data was transferred to the navigation planning computer workstation via hospital network. The fracture lines were detected in all axial and all reconstructed coronal and sagittal series and the displaced orbitozygomatic bone was segmented by semiautomatic mapping ( We used the VectorVision™ navigation system (BrainLAB, Heimstetten, Germany) for intraoperative fracture reduction control. This optical navigation system works on a passive marker infrared light technology, that is, infrared light is emitted by diodes and reflected by marker spheres. Those marker spheres are attached to both, patient and surgical instrument. The reflected light is then detected by two infrared light high precision cameras. On the basis of this information, a computer workstation calculates the position of the patient and any surgical instrument in relation to the preoperatively acquired CT data set. Prior to navigation, a patient-to-image registration for matching of the patient's anatomy with the CT data set needs to be performed. We used a laser surface scanning technology to perform a patient-to-image registration. Following the registration procedure, both, the 3D and the axial, coronal and sagittal reconstructions of the patient and surgical instrument were displayed on the navigation screen. Registration accuracy was checked by identification of anatomic landmarks using the “pointer”. Optionally, the virtually shifted and colored orbitozygomatic bone was superimposed on the navigation screen ( The maxillary component of the malar fragment was exposed by an intraoral upper sulcus incision. A midlower eyelid incision and a lateral eyebrow incision were made to expose the infraorbital rim and the zygomaticofrontal buttress. The fracture fragment was then mobilized by a curved hook elevator that was inserted through a preauricular stab incision. The hook elevator was placed beneath the zygomatic arch and the fracture was reduced by traction that was applied towards the force vector required. The zygoma was maintained in a reduced position by the hook elevator while the three-dimensional aspects of the fracture reduction were evaluated. The reduction of the fracture was verified by scanning the surface of the orbitozygomatic bone using a pointer ( The orbitozygomatic fracture was then fixated by titanium miniplates. The number of plates was individualized to the patient's fracture. Routine postoperative standard radiographs were examined for the purpose of quality control of zygoma fracture reduction. A routine ophthalmology consultation for forensic purpose was arranged after operation. An open reduction with miniplate osteosynthesis was required in all cases. A reconstruction of the orbital floor was required in 4 out of 10 cases. In none of the procedures was any temporary or permanent facial nerve dysfunction manifest. The postoperative courses were uneventful. Intraoperative image-data-based navigation for evaluation of the adequacy of the reduction of the orbitozygomatic fracture presented as a feasible technique. In two cases minor revisions were made intraoperatively until proper reduction of the fracture was achieved. Verification of the position of the orbitozygomatic bone by scanning the bone surface using a pointer was easily performed. As the bone surface was scanned at all three buttresses in multiple anatomic sites there was no need for a postoperative radiographic control. Preoperative planning was useful to conceptualize the 3D position of the malar fragment. Virtual repositioning was easily performed in a short time. There was no need for additional computed tomography diagnostic as all patients underwent routine CT protocols. There is general consent that non-displaced zygomatic fractures may be treated without any surgical intervention. Yet, there is controversy regarding the amount of exposure and fixation required in patients with displaced zygomatic fractures. Recommendations exist for selective buttress exposure as multiple incisions and large subperiosteal exposure might be accompanied by distinct soft-tissue morbidity Diplopia, infraorbital nerve paresthesia and lower eyelid problems, such as ektropion, entropion and eyelid edema are common complications following inadequate zygomatic trauma surgery Besides, secondary restoration of the orbitozygomatic architecture is exceedingly difficult, therefore an initial proper surgical reduction is mandatory. Soft-tissue morbidity due to large exposure on the one hand and inaccurate fracture reduction due to minimal invasiveness on the other hand requires control of treatment. Accuracy of reduction can be visually checked by alignment of the fracture at the three buttresses. Furthermore, alignment can be checked clinically by palpating the lateral orbital wall through a lateral eyebrow incision using a sliding elevator. Any dislocation would impress as irregularity of the bone surface in this area. However, improper fracture reduction can occur even in very experienced investigators. To overcome inadequacies of repair of orbitozygomatic fractures, the use of intraoperative computed tomography using a mobile scanner in the operating room appears to be a solution There are attempts to use endoscopic assistance in the treatment of frontal sinus, orbital floor and orbitozygomatic complex fractures. So far, this application seems to be limited to diagnostic procedures rather than surgical treatment. Further indications depend on the development of improved instrumentation. The use of ultrasound in the diagnosis and management of midfacial fractures was assessed in several studies. Ultrasonic visualization of the zygomatic arch and the anterior wall of the frontal sinus appears to be feasible. Furthermore, ultrasound systems provide the opportunity of immediate intraoperative imaging after fracture reduction, so that additional postoperative radiation exposure can be avoided. Yet, there is restriction of ultrasound application in craniofacial anatomy as the sensitivity and reliability of ultrasound is insufficient in fractures apart from the orbital margin, zygomatic arch and the nasal bone. A 3D treatment planning system based on CT data for segmentation of the mandible has been described Our first results from this pilot study on the basis of navigational guided zygomatic fracture management suggest that, by using virtual 3D object shifting and verification of the fracture reduction by zygomatic bone surface pointer scanning, the alignment of the fracture can be verified easily. With this technique, reduction and fixation of moderately displaced zygomatic fractures without distinct orbital rim involvement may be possible using a gingivobuccal sulcus incision alone. This may eliminate the need for exposing all fracture sites in selected cases. Further controlled studies need to be done to fully evaluate the feasibility of navigational assisted trauma surgery.