Radioactive materials are treated and transformed mainly in nuclear industries. However, non-nuclear industries use raw materials containing significant levels of natural radionuclides; the processing of these materials can expose workers and people living near such sites to radiation levels well above the natural background. This radioactivity is due to nuclides belonging to the 238U and 232Th decay chains and to 40K. Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and gamma-ray spectrometry have been used together to determine uranium and thorium concentration and the conditions of secular equilibrium in their decay chains for samples from ceramic and phosphate-fertiliser plants. In fact, the knowledge of the secular equilibrium conditions is necessary in order to make correct assumptions for the dose assessment. The results indicate that the secular equilibrium is verified for the samples from ceramic plants, whereas a situation of disequilibrium between parents and daughters of the natural chains is detected in phosphate fertilisers.Over the last several decades the population in most countries has been growing in urban areas, increasingly aggravating the typical environmental problems of cities (air and soil quality, supply of drinkable water, wastewater treatment, solid waste disposal, noise, etc.). In 1900, less than 14% of the world's people lived in cities; now approximately 47% do. On the threshold of third millennium almost 3 billion people live in big cities The ubiquity of radioactivity in natural materials (e.g. air, water, minerals, fossil fuels, and wood) has been recognised for many years  To distinguish between NORM (naturally occurring radioactive materials) exposures that are strictly natural (terrestrial and cosmic radiation) and NORM exposures that result from man's industrial activity, Gesell and Prichard in 1975 Since 1975 the TENR exposure has been investigated, and there has been a growing awareness of the problem. The EC legislation regarding radiation protection devotes an entire section of one of its Directives (Dir. 96/29/Euratom, Title VII) to treat the exposure to natural radiation sources and the EC has recently issued recommendations and reference levels for the implementation of Title VII of EC Directive. For radiological protection, all the nuclides of uranium and thorium series are relevant. However, industrial processing often disturbs the secular equilibrium that characterises the original sources of radioactivity with substantial negative consequences. This indicates that a simple activity determination of a limited number of radionuclides belonging to a radioactive decay chain would not suffice. For effective assessment it is necessary to ascertain the secular-equilibrium conditions and the entire spectrum of radionuclides. High-resolution gamma-ray spectrometry is widely used to studying natural radioactivity because provides a fast, multielemental and non-destructive method of radioactivity measurement In this study, inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) has been used as a complementary technique to gamma-spectrometry to determine the conditions of secular equilibrium. The activities of The analyses were carried out on six phosphate fertiliser and six zirconium mineral samples. The selected zirconium minerals are utilised in the Italian ceramic industry for the production of ceramic colours, glazes, tiles and dinnerware. The analysed phosphate fertilisers are marketed in Italy and used for agriculture.  Samples were dried, milled and homogenised Aliquots (0.1 g) for ICP-MS analysis were transferred to polytetrafluoroethhylene vessels. A mixture of HNO The vessels were closed and placed in autoclave at 120°C for 48 h and then cooled. The solutions were transferred into a perfluoralkoxy beaker, evaporated to dryness and the residue redissolved in 10 ml 1% v/v HNO A high-purity germanium (HPGe) detector (diameter 54 mm, length 48.5 mm and volume 109 cm Nuclides An Elan 5000 (Perkin-Elmer SCIEX. Thornhill, Ontario, Canada) ICP-MS instrument, modified for installation in a glove-box as described previously The ICP-MS operating conditions are summarised in The The specific activities of It appears that the specific activities of the materials vary considerably, probably depending on their origin (particularly for zirconium minerals) and the type of processing employed (particularly for fertilisers). Among the same types of material (zirconium minerals or fertilisers) the activities of the nuclides belonging to the The The situation for the fertiliser samples is definitely different (see The results indicate that, in the monitoring of natural radioactivity due to zirconium minerals in working places of ceramic applications, the specific activity values of most intense peaks of some decay chain members ( On the other hand, for the phosphate-fertilisers, gamma-ray analysis is not able to produce values representative of all members of their chains because the industrial processing modifies the concentrations of the different radionuclides belonging to natural decay chains. In this case, it is possible to verify the the same behaviour between the re-establishment of secular equilibrium between In short, this study indicates that the ICP-MS can assume an important role in the monitoring of natural radioactivity in the working place for two reasons: this technique permits the determination of the the