Objective
                  This study evaluated the ability of lithium chloride (LiCl) to increase bone filling (BF) around threaded titanium implants inserted in estrogen-deficient rats and, thein-vitro effects of this drug on osteoblast-like cell viability, proliferation, mineralization and expression of bone-related markers.
               
                  Design
                  
                     In vivo: Rats received sham surgery plus water (Estrogen-sufficient group), ovariectomy plus water (Estrogen-deficient group) or ovariectomy plus LiCl (150 mg/kg/every other day) (LiCl/estrogen-deficient group). On the 21st day after ovariectomy/sham surgeries, a threaded titanium implant was inserted in the rat tibia. BF and the number of TRAP + cells were assessed at 10, 20 and 30 days after implant placement. In vitro: Osteosarcoma SAOS-2 cells were exposed to 0, 0.01, 0.05, and 0.1 mM of LiCl; cell proliferation, viability, mineralization (alizarin red staining) and gene expressions of RUNX-2, OCN, OPN, BSP and ALP (Real Time PCR) were estimated in the cultures.
               
                  Results
                  
                     In vivo: The estrogen-sufficient and LiCl/estrogen-deficient groups demonstrated higher percentages of BF, within the limits of implant threads, than the estrogen-deficient group at 20 and 30 days (p < 0.05). The number of TRAP + cells was lower in LiCl/estrogen-deficient than in the estrogen-deficient group at all experimental times (p < 0.05). In vitro: Cell cultures exposed to LiCl (0.01 or 0.05 mM) exhibited larger areas of mineralized matrix than the non-exposed cultures (p < 0.05) and demonstrated the highest expressions of the genes investigated.
               
                  Conclusion
                  LiCl treatment improved BF around threaded titanium implants inserted in estrogen-deficient rats and stimulated matrix mineralization and overexpression of bone-formation markers in osteoblastic cells in culture.Previous evidence shows that overall life expectancy for both sexes rose from 61.7 years in 1980 to 71.5 years in 2015. If trends continue, by 2030 women will live on average 85.3 years and men, 78.1 years ( With the increase in life expectation, demand for dental implants for the rehabilitation of partial and total edentulous patients has augmented. Data compiled from preclinical studies in animal models reproducing the osteoporotic condition have demonstrated that estrogen deficiency significantly reduces bone implant contact (BIC) ( The activation of the wingless (Wnt)/ß-cateninis pathway plays a crucial role in the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells into mature and active osteoblasts and bone mass formation, whereas the inhibition of this pathway leads to decreased bone mass ( Lithium chloride (LiCl) has been reported to be a regulator of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway that is able to increase bone formation. LiCl suppresses the activity of glycogen synthase kinase 3-β (GSK3-β), one of the members of the complex that degrades β-catenin. By inhibiting GSK3-β activity, LiCl allows β-catenin to accumulate and localize in the nucleus and subsequently induce a cellular response SAOS-2 cells were obtained from the American Type Culture Collection (ATCC, Manassas, VA) and cultured in McCoy's 5A medium (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) supplemented with 10 % (v/v) bovine fetal serum (LGC Biotechnology, São Paulo, SP, Brazil), 100 U/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin (Sigma). Upon reaching confluence, the cells were detached using a solution containing 1 mM ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (EDTA) (Gibco/Invitrogen Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY) and 2.5 mg/ml trypsin (Gibco); subsequently, the cells were cultured in 96-well polystyrene plates or 21.5 cm The cells were seeded in 96-well polystyrene plates or 21.5 cm Cell proliferation was assayed by direct cell counting. Briefly, after 24, 48, and 72 h, the cells were enzymatically detached with 1 mM EDTA (Gibco) and 0.25 % trypsin solution (Gibco). The cells were then counted using a hemocytometer (Hausser Scientific, Horsham, PA). Cell proliferation was expressed as number of cells x 10 Cell viability was evaluated by 3-[4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,5- diphenyl tetrazolium bromide (MTT; Sigma) assay after 24, 48, and 72 h. Briefly, cells were incubated with 10 % of MTT (5 mg/mL) in culture medium at 37 °C for 4 h. The MTT solution was then aspirated from the well and 200 μl of Dimethyl Sulfoxide (Sigma) was added to each well. The plates were agitated on a plate shaker for 5 min, and 150 μL of this solution were transferred to a new 96-well plate. The optical density was read at 570−650 nm on the plate reader (Epoch; Bio-Tek, Winooski, VT) and data were expressed as absorbance. Levels of mRNA for Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RUNX-2), osteocalcin (OCN), osteopontin (OPN), bone sialoprotein (BSP) and alkaline phosphatase (ALP) were evaluated by Real Time PCR. Total RNA was extracted from cell cultures using the RNeasy Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Valencia, CA); RNA was quantified by a NanoVue spectrophotometer (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Piscataway, NJ) and stored at −80 °C. Aliquots of 1 μg of total RNA from each sample were treated with DNase I (Life Technologies) and used for reverse transcription reactions with the Superscript III First Strand cDNA Synthesis kit (Life Technologies), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The primer sets are described in Mineralized matrix formation was assayed by Alizarin Red S (Sigma). At day 14, the cultures were fixed in 1.33 M formalin at room temperature for 2 h. The cultures were then dehydrated through a graded series of alcohol and stained with 0.02 g/ml Alizarin Red S (Sigma), pH 4.2, for 10 min. The percentage of the mineralized matrix area stained by Alizarin Red S was determined by analyzing the acquired digital images (Canon EOS SL1/100D) using Image Tool software (University of Texas Health Science Center; San Antonio, TX, USA). This The rats were randomly assigned to one of the following groups: Estrogen-sufficient group: animals that received sham-surgery and water (n = 24); Estrogen-deficient group: animals that received ovariectomy and water (n = 24); LiCl/estrogen-deficient group: animals that received ovariectomy and LiCl (n = 24). The animals were anesthetized by intraperitoneal administration of xylazine (0.125 mL/250 g of body weight; Anasedan, Sespo Indústria e Comércio LTDA, Paulínia, SP, Brazil) and 10 % ketamine hydrochloride (0.3 mL/250 g of body weight; Ketalex, Rhobifarma Industria Farmacêutica LTDA, Hortolândia, SP, Brazil) for ovariectomy or sham surgeries. Bilateral ovariectomies were performed in 48 rats (Estrogen-deficient and LiCl/estrogen-deficient groups) using a dorsal approach, as previously described ( On the 14 On the 21 The specimens were decalcified in ethylene-diamine tetraacetic acid (10 %) for 30 days, dehydrated in an ascending series of ethanol solutions and embedded in paraffin. After removal of the implants, three sections of 5 μm were obtained in a longitudinal direction from the most central portion of the implants. Nine sections were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) (histometric analysis) at 10, 20 and 30 days. An additional three sections were selected for TRAP staining. The percentage of BF within the limits of the threads of the implants was obtained using images of 20x magnification, employing image analysis software (Image J, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA). BF was assessed for all implant threads in the medullary bone. A standardized checkered diagram (grid) with ∼80 intersections was overlaid on the threaded area. Subsequently, the number of intersections presenting bone tissue was counted. BF was estimated using the following formula: BF = (number of intersections with bone x 100)/ total number of intersections within the limits of the implant threads, as previously described ( TRAP staining was performed to quantify bone-resorption related cells ( The same calibrated and blinded examiner (ATP) performed the histometric and TRAP analyses. Intra-examiner calibration was accomplished by examining ten non-study sections twice, with an interval of 48 h between measurements. The intra-examiner reproducibility for histometric and TRAP measurements was ≥ 90 % by intra-class correlation. Data from both experiments were examined for normality by the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. As data demonstrated normality, all analyses were then performed using parametric methods. The differences in cell proliferation and viability, mineralization and expression of RUNX-2, OCN, OPN, BSP and ALP for the different concentrations of LiCl were compared by One-Way ANOVA or Two-Way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s test. The percentage of BF and the number of TRAP + cells were compared among Estrogen-sufficient, Estrogen-deficient and LiCl/Estrogen-deficient groups and among experimental periods by One-Way ANOVA, followed by Tukey’s test. The level of significance was established at 5 %. SAOS-2 cells cultured for 24 h in the presence of all three doses of LiCl tested showed significantly lower proliferation, when compared to cells cultured in medium alone (p < 0.05). In contrast, cell proliferation rates in the presence of the three doses of LiCl did not differ from those of control cells at 48 and 72 h (p > 0.05) ( Cell cultures exposed to 0.01 mM and 0.05 mM LiCl exhibited significantly greater areas of mineralized matrix, when compared with the non-exposed cultures (p < 0.05). Cell cultures exposed to 0.05 mM LiCl demonstrated significantly higher percentages of mineralized matrix areas than those exposed to 0.1 mM LiCl (p < 0.05). Of note, the highest dose (0.1 mM) of LiCl did not present altered mineralization (    It is of clinical interest to promote better peri-implant bone formation, particularly in conditions of estrogen deficiency and, consequently, low bone mass. The Wnt/β-catenin pathway has an essential role in bone formation, stimulating the differentiation and proliferation of osteoblasts ( The first aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of LiCl on BF around implants inserted in rats under a state of estrogen deficiency. Results demonstrated a greater BF around implants placed in LiCl-treated than in untreated estrogen-deficient rats, particularly from the middle (20 days) to later (30 days) stages of peri-implant bone healing. Interestingly, estrogen-deficient animals treated with LiCl achieved similar percentages of BF within the limits of implant threads than those of estrogen-sufficient animals. These findings corroborate those of a previous study showing that LiCl improved osseointegration and bone formation around orthopedic non-threaded cylindrical implants placed in ovariectomized rats ( Complementing these Taken together, these results support previous evidence highlighting the molecular mechanism of action of lithium on bone metabolism The main strength of this study was to provide additional evidence of the benefits of LiCl around implants, since only one study has addressed this topic previously ( In conclusion, LiCl treatment improved BF around threaded titanium implants inserted in estrogen-deficient rats. Furthermore, LiCl also stimulated matrix mineralization and overexpression of bone-formation markers in osteoblastic cells. These findings may have clinical implications for enhancing the dental implant rehabilitation of edentulous patients under osteopenic/osteoporotic conditions. Study conception and design: LNT, DCP, EFM, JTC-N, PMD, MHN. Perform the experiments: ATP, JFAP, FSM, LMM, LNT, PMD. Analyze the data: ATP, JFAP, FSM, LMM, LNT, DCP, EFM, JTC-N, PMD, MHN. Draft the manuscript: ATP, LNT, JTC-N, PMD, MHN. Critical revision and final approval: ATP, JFAP, FSM, LMM, LNT, DCP, EFM, JTC-N, PMD, MHN. This work was supported by The authors explicitly state that they have no conflicts of interest in connection with this article. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: