Typical Indian iron ore slime in a steel plant contains 56% iron, 6.78% Al2O3 and 5.8% SiO2. Value addition to this reject / waste material has been investigated using chemical treatment and electrowinning. Two alternate chemical treatment routes have been explored: (i) acid extraction of iron followed by alkali treatment and (ii) alkali extraction of aluminum oxide and silica from iron ore slime. Alkali extraction improved iron content up to 65% w/w. Acid extraction could improve the same up to 63% w/w. Electrowinning of iron from oxalic acid solution using steel cathode and a lead anode, surrounded by a synthetic cloth diaphragm, produces high purity iron deposits on the cathode surface. Chemically treated iron ore slime is suitable for iron production using blast furnace whereas the elemental iron produced by electrowinning can be used directly for steelmaking. Along with the process details, a preliminary calculation of the economics of the two processes has been presented.The primary beneficiation processes of iron ore generate large quantities of superfines - relatively of lower grade that is discarded into the tailing ponds. This iron ore slime cannot be used in the blast furnace as raw material due to its low iron content. Accumulation in tailing ponds increase day by day and in India roughly 10  In the present study, iron ore slime was collected from Joda mine, Tata Steel Limited and the following beneficiation process options were investigated. Extraction of the iron content from its ore slime by leaching with acid and treating the iron concentrated solution with alkali to precipitate the iron enriched solid. Reduction of the alumina and silica components from iron ore slime by treating with sodium hydroxide solution and thus enriching the iron content. Electrowinning of iron from the solution obtained by the leaching of iron ore slime with an organic acid. Efficient extraction of iron from its ore is possible by reacting ore with hot concentrated HCl acid but not with concentrated H In the Bayer process, bauxite, the most important ore of aluminum, is digested by washing with a hot solution of sodium hydroxide. This converts the alumina (Al In electrowinning or electroextraction process, metals from their ores have been brought in solution by digesting the ore with an acid and then current is passed from an inert anode through the metal leached solution so that the metal is extracted out depositing on the cathode. For the purpose of electrowinning of iron from its ore slime in acid electrolytes, oxalic acid was chosen as solvent as it possesses high reducing ability compared to other organic acids.  The steps of extraction of iron as ferric oxide from iron ore slime is presented in Important reactions involved during digestion of iron ore slime with hot caustic solution are same as that in Bayer's process. During digestion hot sodium hydroxide (NaOH) solution reacts with aluminum minerals to form soluble sodium aluminate ( The second important reaction in digestion is desilication where silica reacts with sodium hydroxide solution to a soluble form i.e. sodium silicate ( Two steps are involved in the process. Dissolution of iron ore slime in oxalic acid solution. Reactions taking place during electrolysis involving electro-deposition of iron on cathode. Reactions involved in dissolution of iron ( Oxidation of oxalate to form carbonic acid or carbon dioxide Reduction of hematite forming Fe (II) oxalate The dissolution reaction is therefore- The reaction kinetics is dependent on the temperature, concentration of oxalate, iron oxide mineralogy and particle size. The reactions in the second step, taking place in an electrolytic cell depositing iron from a solution containing iron oxalate can be written as follows: At the cathode: At the anode: The anode reaction involving oxalate ion is in agree with Iron ore slime was mixed with different volumes of commercial grade HCl acid of concentration 32% (w/v) and was digested at 100 Experiments were performed with much less volume of acid to get high slurry density. 2 Different concentrations (5 At very high slurry density (200 Solutions of 0.11 Dissolution reactions were performed at optimum conditions for very high slurry density. 2 The dimension of the mild steel cathode was 2 A rectangular lead anode plate (2 Electrolysis must be performed using a diaphragm between the cathode and the anode compartments to minimize the effect of the oxygen gas evolution at anode which oxidizes the product at the cathode. In the present experiment a woven polymer cloth was used as the diaphragm material that enclosed the anode.  The yield for this process can be defined as the actual amount of iron content in the precipitated solid to the amount of iron present in the raw ore slime sample. When iron ore slime is heated with 150 Experiments were performed at relatively high slurry density at optimum condition which is 60  The optimum condition for this treatment method is 200 Effect of oxalic acid concentration on dissolution of iron from iron ore slime is shown in The optimum conditions for dissolution of iron ore slime in oxalic acid are 0.33 There is an effect of pH of oxalic acid solution on dissolution of iron form iron ore slime and this is shown in As oxalic acid concentration for digestion with iron ore slime increases, the deposition of iron on the cathode surface after electrowinning also increases. This is due to the fact that higher concentration oxalic acid solutions extracts more iron and during electrowinning also more iron deposits on cathode for the same current density. During the experiment the applied current was 0.75 The yield for the electrowinning study is defined as the ratio of the actual amount of pure iron deposited on the cathode surface to the amount of iron dissolved into the digested solution. The actual amount of iron content after electrowinnig can be obtained by multiplying the amount of deposited iron with the purity of the same iron. Very high purity iron (above 90%) is deposited on the cathode from electrowinning. Maximum 97% of yield can be achieved from the electrowinning study when 0.33  Where being the theoretical amount of iron deposited by the current In the concentration range of 0.11- 0.33 As the concentration of oxalic acid solution increases, the pH of the solution also decreases. After electrowinning the amount of generation of ferrous oxalate on the anode surface, which is a deep yellow precipitate, increases at lower pH. No quantification was done for this and only the results of visible inspection are being reported. However, no effect of ferrous oxalate was observed on the electrowinning process. Estimated cost for different treatment techniques in laboratory scale are given in From the economic comparison in In both the chemical treatment processes i.e. acid extraction of iron from its ore slime followed by alkali treatment and alkali extraction of aluminum oxide and silica from iron ore slime, the desired content of iron in treated slime is achievable. In alkali extraction maximum iron content in treated slime is 65% against the minimum requirement of 63% for charging in blast furnace. So it is a better feed for of steel production compared to the treated iron ore slime obtained from acid extraction where only 63% of maximum iron content is achieved. Apart from lower cost, electrowinning has the advantage of producing high purity iron directly, without involvement of blast furnace etc. The yield from this process is also attractive and as high as 97% is obtained which is almost comparable with the alkali treatment of iron ore slime. Any plant based on the above mentioned processes require an effluent neutralization facility as is commonly present in the industrial demineralized water plants based on ion exchange resin. However most steel industries have elaborate effluent treatment facilities to take care of such acidic or alkaline effluent. The electrowinning process is possibly an attractive option for value addition of iron ore slime. This however needs to be re-evaluated in a bench-scale set up. Generation of hydrogen containing gas from the electrowinning cell may be utilized as fuel to supply part of the energy required for the process. The authors express their thanks to Dr. S. Sarkar of Tata Steel Company Limited for providing the iron ore slime for the present study and for valuable technical discussions.