Adesina obtained a PhD (1986) from the University of Waterloo, Canada. He taught at the University of Port-Harcourt, Nigeria, before joining the University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia, in 1991 where he is presently a full professor leading a major research group in Catalysis and Reactor Engineering. His activities are primarily focused on energy and environmental themes. He is credited with over 350 technical papers and a book in metal carbide catalysts for Fischer-Tropsch synthesis. He is on the editorial board of Catalysis Communications and member of the International Advisory Board for Environmental Catalysis. He enjoys playing soccer. Currently heads the Thermal Processes Department and Heat Exchange Group of the Institute for Micro Process Engineering at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany. He is also a lecturer for Micro Process Engineering at the Dresden Technical University. Brandner is author or co-author of some 260 technical articles and 7 technical books. After studies in Chemistry he obtained a Diploma in Electrical Engineering and an Engineering Doctorate in Mechanical Engineering, both from KIT, as well as a habilitation degree from the Dresden Technical University. Living close to Heidelberg, Germany, he also teaches several martial arts courses as recreation. Hector is currently a Professor of Chemical Engineering at the University of Waterloo, came to Canada from Argentina via Israel. He has authored or co-authored over 150 journal publications and conference papers in the areas of process modeling and control with applications to biotechnology and reaction systems. During his career he has undertaken collaborative work in the pharmaceuticals, water treatment, mineral processing and pulp and paper industries. He holds a Mechanical Engineering doctorate from the Israel Institute of Technology (Technion). Grigori is a key engineering specialist at Matros Technologies, Inc. St. Louis, Missouri. After graduating from the Technical University of Tomsk, he obtained a Ph. D. in Chemical Engineering from and worked at the Boreskov' Institute of Catalysis (Novosibirsk, Russia). In 1993 he joined Matros Technologies Inc. where he serves as the Director of Catalyst Applications. Grigori co-authored more than 50 technical publications concerning various applications of periodic reverse-flow reactors and catalytic processes for air pollution control. Bill Epling is an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering at the University of Houston where his research focuses on Environmental Catalysis. He has authored over 80 peer-reviewed papers in archival journals and given over 100 presentations or seminars. He won the Early Researcher Award from the Province of Ontario in 2007. Bill graduated with a B.S. in Chemical Engineering from Virginia Tech and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Florida. Outside of work, Bill fosters stray dogs, pretending to find them homes although few seem to ever leave. Currently a “Director Emeritus” of the Institute of Chemical Process Fundamentals, Czech Academy of Sciences and a Professor of the Institute of Chemical Technology Prague (ICT), Jiří retired in 2012 after a 40 years carrier. However he still continue teaching, research and scholarly writing. He has written a number of technical and/or text books and co-authored several chapters in monographs as well as more than 150 technical papers. He is a graduate of ICT and holds an Engineering Doctorate and “Doctor of Sciences” degree from ICT as well. He has resided nearly his whole life in Prague where he regularly attends cultural and/or musical events. Currently a Professor Emeritus of Kyoto University, Kenji retired from the University in 1999, but he has continued teaching and research at Fukui University of Technology. He has published some 210 technical papers on chemical reaction engineering and chromatographic separation and written and /or edited 7 technical books. Kenji has served as the president of the Japanese Society of Chemical Engineering and received the highest Society award for his academic achievements. He is a graduate of Kyoto University and holds an Engineering Doctorate from that University. He now resides in Kobe, where he enjoys golfing and watercolor painting. Patricia is currently a Professor of Chemical Engineering at the Universidad Nacional of Mar del Plata in Argentina. She graduated in 1981 from that University and in 1989 obtained a PhD from the University of Waterloo, Canada, where she pioneered research on the periodic operation of trickle bed reactors. Haure continues exploring the effect of liquid flow modulation on reactor performances and has expanded her research to detoxification of waste waters. Her many publications are on those subjects. She is a pet lover involved as a volunteer in rescue actions. She also enjoys painting, gardening and outside activities. A graduate of University of Toronto and Princeton University, Bob met Pete Silveston, his co-editor of this book, at University of Waterloo where they were faculty members in its fledgling Department of Chemical Engineering. A common interest in teaching and research on reaction engineering led to a close collaboration on several topics, primary among them an examination of catalytic reactors under periodic operation lasting over three-decades. Currently, Bob is a professor emeritus, living in Kitchener-Waterloo, Canada, where he also plays piano and rings bells, helps spouse Virginia in the garden, and (too seldom) visits his Vancouver-based grandchildren. Motoaki is currently a Professor in the Department of Chemical Engineering, Kyoto University, where he supervises the Laboratory of Chemical Reaction Engineering. He graduated from that department in 1987 and later obtained an Engineering Doctorate from the University. He is an early pioneer of simulated moving bed chromatographic reactors. He has authored or co-authored about 100 technical publications or conference papers in the field of Chemical Reaction Engineering. He has lived in Kyoto since birth. Li recently retired from the Chemical Engineering Department of the Beijing University of Chemical Technology where he served as a Professor for some twenty years. He was also a member of the State Key Laboratory of Catalysis. With over 200 authored or co-authored journal publications, he is a Chinese pioneer of the study of reactor transient operation. Cheng-Yue and his wife reside in Beijing. An engineer, a scientist and an entrepreneur, Yurii originates from Odessa in the Ukraine. He is currently president of Matros Technologies Inc. located in St. Louis, Missouri, a design and engineering company he founded in 1992. He completed an engineering degree at the Technical University in Odessa. After a few years in the Russian chemical industry, he joined the Boreskov Institute of Catalysis (Novosibirsk, Russia) where he spent 28 years and won a doctorate degree. He is a pioneer of the application of periodic operation, particularly periodic flow reversal, to chemical processes. He has written and/or edited 6 technical books, and authored or co-authored more than 300 technical papers. Greg Meira is a Chemical and Petroleum Engineer (University of Buenos Aires), and holds M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in Control Engineering (University of Bradford, UK). Since 1981, he has been a Full Professor at the Universidad del Litoral (Santa Fe, Argentina); and Director of the Polymer Group at the “Institute for the Technological Development of the Chemical Industry” (INTEC, CONICET), also in Santa Fe. He is an author of over 100 scientific publications and book chapters on the mathematical modeling and control of polymerization reactors, and on the characterization of polymers by size exclusion chromatography and other analytical techniques. Currently a full professor at the Department of Chemical Engineering of the Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy at the University of Belgrade, in Belgrade, Serbia. She received her Diploma, Master and Ph.D. degrees from the same department. During her 28-years long academic career, she was a visiting researcher in France, Germany and Australia. She teaches courses in the area of process dynamics and control and process intensification. She is an author or co-author of two textbooks and about 50 scientific and technical papers. Her main areas of scientific interest are: nonlinear dynamics and non-stationary processes, adsorption and process intensification. From Montreal, Mark is a McGill University graduate and holds a Ph.D. from Virginia Polytechnic Institute (1984). After a few years at the University of Arizona, he joined the University of Waterloo where he is now a Full Professor directing research on a wide variety of electrochemical systems. Currently he works on high frequency pulse electroplating, modeling and experimental studies of PEM and SOFC fuel cells, use of electrochemical methods for nano materials fabrication and on process modeling of leaching and adsorption, and strand board manufacturing processes. Mark is the author/co-author of more than 100 technical publications. Albert obtained his academic degrees at the Technical University of Hanover, Germany. In 1977 he became Professor of Chemical Reaction Engineering at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Lausanne. He is currently an Honorary Professor at that institution. He is author of over 450 scientific publications, numerous patents and author / editor of 5 technical books. From 1992 to 2000, he was a science councilor of the Swiss National Science Foundation, and from 1996 to 2002 he served as chairman of the European Federation of Chemical Reaction Engineering Working Party. He is also member of the Swiss Academy of Engineering Sciences. Albert is widely recognized as a pioneer of the application of periodic operations to chemical processes. Currently a Full Professor at the Chemical Engineering Department of the University of Porto in Portugal, Alírio is the Director of the Laboratory of Separation and Reaction Engineering (LSRE). Over a 40+ year career, he has supervised over 50 PhD students and edited and/or written 7 technical books and authored or co-authored some 450 technical papers and 5 patents. He is a graduate of University of Porto and holds an Engineering Doctorate from the University of Nancy (France). His research focuses on cyclic adsorption/reaction processes, perfume engineering and microencapsulation, CO Hristo is a senior researcher at CanmetENERGY, the Natural Resources Canada Research Centre in Varennes, Quebec, and adjunct professor at the University of Alberta, Canada. He has authored or co-authored some 75 technical papers and he holds about 15 patents on development of environmentally friendly and energy saving technologies. He is a graduate of Sofia Technological University (Bulgaria) and holds an engineering doctorate from the Boreskov Institute of Catalysis, Novosibirsk, Russia. Hristo received the prestigious Canadian Public Service Award for Excellence in 2002 and Natural Resources Canada Departmental Merit Award in 2001. Jeno (BSc, PhD, Chemical Engineering, University of Pennsylvania) is a Professor Emeritus in the Department of Chemical Engineering, University of Waterloo, Canada. Although retired in 2004, he continues research that combines engineering , biological and biochemical concepts to the study of biological processes ranging from mammalian cell culture, to recombinant microbial fermentations for producing therapeutic agents and to diagnostic tools for the microbial oxidation of sulfide minerals or acid mine drainage. He has co-authored a large number of research papers as well as two books. For leisure, he trains championship dogs. Andreas studied Process Engineering at the Technische Hochscule Leuna, graduating in 1982; his doctorate in science is from the German Academy of Science in Berlin (1987) with a later Habilitation in 1994. Since 1995, he has been a Professor of Chemical Process Engineering at the University of Magdeburg. In addition, he heads a large research team on the physical and chemical foundations of process engineering for the Max Planck Institute in Magdeburg. Andreas is now Managing Director of the Max Planck Institute for Dynamics of Complex Systems. He is the author/coauthor of over 350 journal papers and editor/coauthor of 6 technical books. His special interests are in system dynamics, chromatography and reaction + separation. Currently a “Distinguished Professor Emeritus” of the Chemical Engineering Department of the University of Waterloo in Canada, Pete retired in 1997 after 35 years, but he has continued teaching, research and scholarly writing. Over a 50+ year career, he has written and/or edited 4 technical books and authored or co-authored some 280 technical papers. He is a graduate of M.I.T. and holds an Engineering Doctorate from the Technical University of Munich (Germany). He currently resides on the Carolina coast in the U.S. where he indulges in hiking, bicycling and water sports.