Knowledge of mass transport mechanisms in biofilm-based technologies such as biofilters is essential to improve bioreactors performance by preventing mass transport limitation. External and internal mass transport in biofilms was characterized in heterotrophic biofilms grown on a flat plate bioreactor. Mass transport resistance through the liquid-biofilm interphase and diffusion within biofilms were quantified by in situ measurements using microsensors with a high spatial resolution (<50 μm). Experimental conditions were selected using a mathematical procedure based on the Fisher Information Matrix to increase the reliability of experimental data and minimize confidence intervals of estimated mass transport coefficients. The sensitivity of external and internal mass transport resistances to flow conditions within the range of typical fluid velocities over biofilms (Reynolds numbers between 0.5 and 7) was assessed. Estimated external mass transfer coefficients at different liquid phase flow velocities showed discrepancies with studies considering laminar conditions in the diffusive boundary layer near the liquid-biofilm interphase. The correlation of effective diffusivity with flow velocities showed that the heterogeneous structure of biofilms defines the transport mechanisms inside biofilms. Internal mass transport was driven by diffusion through cell clusters and aggregates at Re below 2.8. Conversely, mass transport was driven by advection within pores, voids and water channels at Re above 5.6. Between both flow velocities, mass transport occurred by a combination of advection and diffusion. Effective diffusivities estimated at different biofilm densities showed a linear increase of mass transport resistance due to a porosity decrease up to biofilm densities of 50 g VSS·L−1. Mass transport was strongly limited at higher biofilm densities. Internal mass transport results were used to propose an empirical correlation to assess the effective diffusivity within biofilms considering the influence of hydrodynamics and biofilm density.specific mass transfer area (m interfacial area of the monitored system (m DO concentration inside the biofilm (mg L DO concentration on biofilm surface (mg L initial DO concentration on biofilm surface (mg L DO concentration inside the liquid boundary layer (mg L DO concentration in the liquid phase at the inlet of a FPB section (mg L DO concentration in the liquid phase at the inlet of the FPB (mg L DO concentration in the liquid phase at the outlet of a FPB section (mg L initial DO concentration in the liquid boundary layer (mg L effective diffusivity within biofilms (m the effective diffusivity within the boundary layer (m dimensionless effective diffusivity (−) objective function in optimization procedure for parameters estimation external mass transfer coefficient (m s boundary layer thickness (m) number of experimental measurements liquid flow rate (m Reynolds number Schmidt number Sherwood number time (s) monitoring time (s) liquid phase volume (m) sampling frequency (s biofilm density (g VSS·L simulated oxygen concentration in optimization procedure (mg L experimentally measured oxygen concentration in optimization procedure (mg L biofilm depth (m) depth of DO profile (μm) distance between monitoring points (μm) Biofilters and biotrickling filters are the most important biofilm-based reactors for air pollution control. However, the limited knowledge about biofilms performance due to large technical limitations in biofilms monitoring, mainly due to their reduced size (ranging from few microns to few millimeters), has led to often assume large model simplifications in biofiltration modeling ( Two main phenomena are considered when modeling biofilms performance ( Effective diffusivities within biofilms are highly influenced by biofilms structure and heterogeneity. Some works have considered the effect of biofilms heterogeneity in effective diffusivity correlations through the use of different structural macroscopic parameters such as biofilm density, porosity and tortuosity. Although the use of these correlations for effective diffusivity is sometimes used in biofiltration models, its reliability is under suspect. Most of these researches were based on theoretical models ( The confidence intervals of mass transport parameters are not commonly determined. However, the assessment of confidence intervals is as important as the estimation of the parameter. A mathematical method based on the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) is a proven procedure that accurately provides confidence intervals of estimated parameters. FIM method is based on the calculation of the covariance inverse matrix and is directly associated to the uncertainty of estimated parameters and the quality and quantity of experimental data. In addition, the FIM method can be adapted for optimal experiment design ( The goal of this work was to take advantage of the high resolution of microsensors measurements (10 μm) to experimentally quantify external and internal mass transport resistance. Oxygenation profiles were recorded using a dissolved oxygen (DO) microsensor specially designed for biofilms profiling ( Mass transport phenomena were studied in a heterotrophic biofilm grown in a flat plate bioreactor (FPB), shown in The reactor was sterilized as described in The glucose content in the liquid phase was periodically measured along the reactor using a refractometer (Refracto 30 GS, Mettler-Toledo, Switzerland) to check that microbial growth was not limited by the carbon source. The pH in the liquid phase was also measured and manually adjusted to pH 7 by adding either 0.1 M HCl or NaOH solutions. The density profile observed along the reactor length, was assessed by protein analysis ( Previous to effective diffusivity estimation experiments, biofilm was deactivated by recirculating a NaN External and internal mass transport were characterized in biofilms through different DO measurements using microsensors. DO measurements used in the quantification of external mass transfer resistance were performed with a commercial Clark-type microsensor (OXI-25, Unisense, Denmark). The microsensors, connected to a 4-channel amplifier (Microsensor Multimeter, Unisense, Denmark), were moved through a reactor section in 50 μm steps by means of a micromanipulator (MM33-2, Unisense, Denmark). DO profiles were recorded using a data acquisition software (Sensor Trace Basic, Unisense, Denmark). Two-point calibrations were performed prior to profiles recording. On the other hand, effective diffusivities within biofilms were experimentally quantified from DO profiles recorded using a DO microsensor based on microfabrication technology as described elsewhere ( Mass transport resistances were estimated through deactivated biofilms grown in the FPB by assessing the evolution of the DO concentration in the liquid boundary layer, the biofilm surface and inside the biofilm. Mass transport resistances were estimated through deactivated biofilms grown in the FPB by assessing the evolution of the DO concentration in the liquid boundary layer, the biofilm surface and inside the biofilm. The depth within a biofilm section of the boundary layer liquid side and of the biofilm surface were determined from a DO profile recorded from the liquid phase to the deeper part of the biofilm ( First, the bioreactor was deoxygenated by bubbling N External and internal mass transports through biofilms were modeled to quantify mass transport resistances using microsensors measurements. Biofilms surface were assumed to be separated from the bulk liquid phase by a laminar layer in which external mass transfer resistance occurred. Therefore, film theory was applied to describe the mass flux towards the interphase using an external mass transfer coefficient. Oxygen evolution in the liquid side of the boundary layer and on the biofilm surface, of a biofilm section, was modeled using an external mass transfer coefficient, as shown in Equation Where In film theory, a diffusive transport within the boundary layer is assumed. Using this assumption, and considering the boundary layer thickness uniform along the biofilm, Equation Biofilms are commonly described as a heterogeneous phase comprising a matrix of bacteria and extracellular polymeric substances and a large amount of water within matrix voids ( The external mass transfer coefficient and effective diffusivities were estimated using an optimization procedure. The differential Equations Where In the present study the confidence intervals of the estimated mass transport parameters were assessed through the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) following the procedure described in Optimal experimental design (OED) was based on selecting the optimal experimental conditions to obtain an accurate estimation of model parameters. The influence of data obtained in these experiments on estimates accuracy was assessed. According to experimental measurements available, DO at different locations along the reactor were selected as output variables. Therefore, the OED was reduced to study the effect on the estimates precision of the input variables (initial conditions) and the sampling conditions. The variables considered in the OED for external mass transfer coefficients estimation were the DO concentration in the liquid phase at the inlet of the FPB ( Equations The OED to estimate model parameters was performed evaluating the estimation accuracy under different experimental scenarios. The experimental conditions under which internal mass transport coefficients were estimated were also assessed ( Mass transport resistance in the liquid boundary layer was experimentally quantified considering boundary layer irregularities. With this aim, the oxygen flux towards the liquid-biofilm interphase was monitored by measuring oxygen profiles at both sides of the boundary layer (spatial resolution of 50 μm). The location of the sensors in the FPB was selected based on previous measurements that ensured accomplishing the OED criteria, and corresponded to the center of the open channel (reactor). Simulated and experimental oxygenation profiles located in the middle of the FPB are shown in Influence of hydrodynamic conditions on the external mass transfer coefficient was assessed by repeating the procedure at liquid velocities between 2.5 m h Despite few authors ( Where Physical properties of the fluid used in dimensionless numbers calculation describing Equation Internal mass transport was characterized within biofilms grown in the FPB by the simultaneous recording of dynamic oxygenation profiles at different depths inside biofilms using the DO-MEA microsensor. The location of the sensors in the FPB was also selected based on previous measurements (not shown) that ensured accomplishing the OED criteria Experimental DO profiles served to estimate an average effective diffusivity by curve-fitting of Equation  Since a reliable mass transport approach depends on the quality of effective diffusivities, the biofilm heterogeneity effect should be considered. Thus, the effective diffusivity was quantified considering the influence of both hydrodynamic conditions and biofilm density according to the impact of the structural heterogeneity in the assessment of internal mass transport mechanisms within biofilms previously described through biofilm density data ( Since the evaluation of hydrodynamic conditions inside biofilms, which are often described as a static phase, is complex and requires additional and sophisticated equipment ( Biofilm heterogeneity has been commonly considered as the link between biofilm structure and mass transport rates. In the current work, an increasing of biofilm density from the inlet to the outlet of the FPB was observed. The density profile between 9 g VSS·L Results in Several works have developed diffusion models considering the influence of biofilm heterogeneity, commonly addressed from a structural parameter. These models are shown in detail in section S4 of Supplementary Material. However, authors warned about reliability problems, limiting the use of these correlations in different experimental systems. In the current work, a comprehensive analysis of diffusion models was performed comparing the results found herein with the most relevant diffusion correlations ( The largest deviations were observed with respect to the The above comparison of results of experimental diffusivities and diffusivities predicted by correlations highlighted the difficulty of using correlations to describe mass transport in a different system. Therefore, extrapolation and usage of literature data should be made carefully. Results presented herein showed that development of internal mass transport correlations from a thorough experimental study performed on the modeled system is recommended. For this reason, the methodology developed herein to quantify effective diffusivity could be a powerful tool since allows an easy characterization under a wide range of conditions. Experimental data and estimated effective diffusivity obtained using the methodology based on dynamic dissolved oxygen profiles assessed under a wide range of conditions was used to propose an experimental correlation for the effective diffusivity, depicted in Where Microsensors measurements and the use of a dynamic monitoring of DO through the re-aeration method have proven to be an excellent tool for internal and external mass transport characterization. To the best of our knowledge this is the first time that both mass transport mechanisms have been completely characterized using microsensors and the re-aireation method. In addition, an OED improves the accuracy on the estimation of mass transport parameters. Results obtained within heterotrophic biofilms have confirmed that, due to surface roughness influence, the Blasius solution is not suitable for fluid-biofilm mass transfer description. Regarding to internal mass transport, results obtained suggested that this phenomenon is driven by a combination of convective and diffusive mechanisms. For this reason, it is recommended to use diffusion models considering both hydrodynamic conditions and biofilm density. On the other hand, the comparison of experimental results with mass transport correlations highlighted the need of experimental measurements to describe mass transport in biofilms rather than the available correlations. Overall, this research shows the benefit of using microsensor-based measurements to provide high-quality information for external and internal mass transport resistances characterization within biofilms, which is essential to improve the performance of biofilm-based reactors. In addition, results obtained using these methodologies provided fundamental background clarifying mass transport mechanisms involved in biofilms systems. This work has been founded by the project The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at