Gadolinium (Gd) is one of trace rare earth elements (REEs) existing in human bones; however, the underlying mechanisms of Gd element on positive cell response and bone regeneration have rarely been reported. Herein, we firstly constructed GdPO4/chitosan (CTS) scaffolds by lyophilisation method. The appropriate macropores and biocompatible chemical components improved the osteoconductivity of the GdPO4/CTS scaffolds, resulting in admired cell spreading and in vivo bone tissue in-growth. The concentrations of the as-released Gd3+ ions were kept in safety ranges, and had non-toxicity to rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (rBMSCs). Notably, the GdPO4 nanoparticles in the GdPO4/CTS scaffolds significantly promoted the osteogenic differentiation of rBMSCs via activated Smad/Runx2 signaling pathway. As compared with β-TCP/CTS scaffolds, the GdPO4/CTS scaffolds remarkably up-regulated the levels of ALP, Runx-2, OCN and Col-I expression. Moreover, rat critical calvarial defect models revealed that the newly formed bone tissues were much greater in the GdPO4/CTS group than in the β-TCP/CTS group. The exciting finding revealed the underlying mechanism of GdPO4 nanoparticles on enhanced osteogenic activity, and provided a promising GdPO4-based scaffold for bone regeneration.Bone tissue engineering (BTE) with the combination of biomaterial, cell and growth factor has been developed to reconstruct the bone defects derived from surgical excision, bone diseases and trauma Up to now, hydroxyapatite (HA) and β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP) have been employed to treat bone defects due to their good biocompatibility and bioactivity The biological effect of REEs shows the hermetic concentration–response relationship, namely low dosage stimulation and high dosage inhibition Chitosan (CTS), one of typical natural polymers, is considered as a promising and admired biomaterial for bone tissue regeneration and wound healing 3.11 g Gd(NO 4.00 g CTS powders and 4.00 g GdPO Primary rat BMSCs (rBMSCs) were obtained from the femur of the Sprague-Dawley (S-D) rats, and cultured in an incubator with 5% CO The GdPO The effects of the GdPO 2.0 × 10 1.0 × 10 The rBMSCs cultured on the scaffolds were collected at day 7 and 14 to estimate the gene expression of ALP, Runx-2, OCN and COL-I via quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR) method. TRIzol reagent (Invitrogen) was used to extract the total RNA of cells on each group, and Reverse Transcriptase M-MLV (Takara) was employed to synthesize the complementary DNA (cDNA). The osteogenic-related genes was quantified by qRT-PCR using SYBR Premix Ex Taq (Takara). The GAPDH served as internal reference, and all PCR primers were designed as follows: To investigate the protein levels, the rBMSCs were cultured in 6-well plates for 7 and 14 days. After the proteins were extracted by cell lysis buffer and proteinase inhibitor, their concentrations were quantified by a BCA Protein Assay Kit (Cell Signalling Technology). 20 ml proteins were loaded on SDS-PAGE gels. After electrophoresis (Millipore), the proteins were transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membranes, and then blocked by Quickblock™ (Beyotime). These membranes were incubated using the appropriate primary antibodies of p-Smad1/5/8, Smad1/5/8, Runx-2 and GAPDH at 4 °C, and then incubated using secondary antibodies for 2 h. All animal experiments were approved by the Animal Care and Experiment Committee of Shanghai Jiao Tong University Affiliated Sixth People’s Hospital. Twenty adult S-D rats (8 week-old; weight 250 ± 25 g) were anesthetized by the intraperitoneal injection of chloral hydrate sodium. Two full-thickness skull defects with a diameter of 5 mm were made on both sides of the skull by an electric trephine drill. Implantations of GdPO After sacrifice, all rat skulls with implanted scaffolds were scanned using an NRecon micro-CT scanner (Skyscan Company) using a 100 kV/100 μA X-ray source. According to the micro-CT images, the bone volume/total volume (BV/TV), trabecular thickness (TBT) and trabecular number (TBN) of bone defect regions were analyzed. The rat skulls were fixed in acetone for 7 days, and then dehydrated in alcohol for 3 days. The non-decalcified samples were embedded in methyl methacrylate, followed by cut into the thin slices with thicknesses of 100 μm. The treble fluorescence labeling samples were detected by a confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM, Leica), and Van Gieson’s picrofuchsin staining samples were detected by an optical microscope (Leica, Germany). Statistical analysis processes were carried out by using SPSS 20.0 software. The data were expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Differences between different groups were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA or The GdPO The phase structures and functional groups of the GdPO The GdPO As shown in the low-resolution FESEM image ( Cytocompatibility and osteogenic ability of the GdPO ALP activity, ALP staining and alizarin red staining were employed to determine the osteogenic ability of the GdPO  Critical-sized calvarial bone defect models were created for investigating the bone regeneration capacity of GdPO Newly formed bones at different weeks were characterized by fluorochrome-labeling analysis including tetracycline (yellow) at week 3, calcein (green) at week 6 and Alizarin Red (red) at week 6 ( Bone defects caused by trauma, surgical excision and diseases have been widely treated by filling calcium phosphate materials including HA and β-tricalcium phosphate (β-TCP) because of the good biocompatibility and bioactivity The GdPO Excellent biocompatibility is prerequisite for bone repair materials. The Gd Besides osteoconductivity and biocompatibility, osteoinductivity is also very important for bone scaffolds. In this work, the osteoinductivity of the GdPO In order to prove the In summary, we developed firstly the GdPO This research was supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: