The applicability of the Decision Aids for Tunneling (DAT) as an early construction cost and time predicting tool for large-scale underground cavern construction projects is investigated in this study. For this purpose, three large-scale underground cavern construction projects in Singapore are presented using the proposed framework. The data from Project A, which is already completed, are used to validate the prediction outcomes. The results show that the proposed workflow can well estimate the construction cost and time at the 95% confidence level. The DAT simulation results of the other two projects, which are in the early planning stages, are compared with Project A to assess the accuracy of the predicted cost and time. The results show that the proposed workflow with the DAT as a predictor is a valuable tool in estimating construction cost and time for large-scale underground cavern projects, particularly for feasibility studies.Underground construction is always associated with inherent risks due to limited knowledge of existing geological conditions prevailing at the site as well as because of other uncertainties. From various case studies reported around the world ( Thus, an early construction cost and time predicting tool for large-scale cavern construction is necessary to guide the decision makers during financial planning and construction budget estimation. The Decision Aids for Tunneling (DAT), developed by This paper investigates the applicability of the DAT as an early construction cost and time predicting tool in large underground cavern construction projects. Here, we define a large cavern cross section area as more than 400 m The DAT input is provided through three main modules: geology, construction, and resource management ( The states of the ground parameters relevant to the construction site, such as lithology, water inflow, faults, etc. and their associated uncertainties are represented by the transition matrix. An example of a transition matrix, which describes the likelihood of the change from one state to another, is given in The intercept of a ground parameter along the tunnel/cavern alignment is defined as a The construction module then simulates the construction process of the tunnel and cavern network along these profiles. The most important variables of this module are the advance rate and the unit cost, which are directly related to the user-defined ground class. This information is not readily available before construction, so a certain degree of estimation is required. The uncertainty of the advance rate and unit cost is also captured by a triangular distribution where the user only needs to provide the minimum, mode and maximum values of the two parameters for each ground class. At the beginning of the project, the range of input parameters (minimum to maximum) is higher due to limited knowledge about the geology conditions and construction methods, but as the project advances, the uncertainty decreases, and the range of the input parameters. The construction module also considers delays and learning curves. It is also possible to describe construction at the detailed activity level. For example, a drill and blast method involves several activities, such as probing, blasting, supporting and mucking. The advance rate and unit cost for each of these activities can be assigned, which allows the user to investigate the construction process in-depth with the simulation results. When applied to the corresponding  Cavern or large-diameter tunnel construction in weak rocks involves excavation by a partial face to account for stability. This construction process can involve the choice of different headings and benches as well as the distance between multiple partial excavation faces. Before the implementation of this project, the partial face excavation function in the DAT allowed users to model underground construction with a maximum of three partial excavation faces. This might be adequate for regular tunnel construction but created difficulties in simulating cavern/tunnel construction projects involving large cross-sectional areas in weak rocks. Thus, changes have been made in the partial face excavation function of the DAT to accommodate any number of excavation faces. Furthermore, the 2D network that enables excavation to be modeled in two directions was first introduced as presented in the application. Project A is Southeast Asia’s first commercial underground rock cavern storage facility for crude oil and petroleum products. It consists of nine distinct caverns (  Project A is located at a depth of 136 m below the ground surface in the sedimentary rock formation known as the Jurong formation ( The drill and blast method was used to excavate the caverns and the associated tunnels, galleries and connections. Considering the large cavern cross section, the partial face excavation procedure was adopted by dividing the excavation face into one heading and two benches. The height of each partial face is kept at 9 m, which produces a cross-sectional area of more than 150 m To validate the DAT and examine its capability in simulating large cavern construction with complex networks, the construction network of Project A is modeled, and the results are compared with the actual construction time ( The Decision Aids for Tunneling (DAT) have been used and proven effective for the time and cost estimation of various underground excavation projects ( Project B is the first large-scale underground space proposed for public use in Singapore. Two features distinguish this project from the rest of the underground projects in Singapore: (1) large rock caverns with complex construction networks and (2) relatively poor geologic conditions. In this study, efforts have been made to construct the DAT model to accurately represent the actual complex construction network. Project B covers an area of over 200 000 m The crown of the rock caverns is located at an average depth of 75 m below the ground surface. There are three access points, namely, one tunnel and two shafts. The access tunnel is subdivided into three tunnels as it approaches the cavern area. The one in the middle is the main concourse, and the other two, connected as a loop, are the “connecting gallery”. The shafts are connected by the secondary concourse. Two link tunnels run parallel to the main concourse tunnel. The 40 main caverns are located between these horizontal tunnels. Four geometry types corresponding to the shaft, access tunnel (main concourse, secondary concourse and connecting gallery), link tunnel and cavern are proposed and are listed in The proposed site is also located in the sedimentary bedrock belonging to the Jurong Formation. The top layer of the area consists of soil and weathered rocks. The rock formations are heterogeneous, and the rock types mainly include sandstones, conglomeratic sandstones and conglomerates, siltstones, tuffs, and carbonaceous and argillaceous limestone. Major faults were identified from surface mapping, photolineament surveys, seismic reflection surveys and cross-hole seismic tomography ( Project C has been identified as a possible location for the development of a potential underground rock cavern network accommodating warehousing/logistics and data center facilities. Project C covers an area of over 120 000 m In general, the geological conditions of Project C are similar to that of Project A. The site is in bedded sedimentary bedrock of the Jurong Formation. The rock types mainly include siltstones, sandstones, mudstones, conglomeratic sandstones and conglomerates. The main cavern area is located in sandstone, siltstone and mudstone ( For Projects B and C, key ground parameters that significantly affect the total construction cost and time and are relevant to the sites are identified, namely, lithology, bedding geometry, degree of weathering, overburden, water ingress and faulting. The lithology of the proposed projects is highly heterogeneous and irregular because of the complicated structural geology with folded bedding layers and faults. Bedding represents the major structural discontinuities in the rock mass, as the Jurong rock formation is a very complicated sedimentary rock mass with alternate weak and strong bedding layers. The geological investigation shows the presence of residual soil and completely weathered rocks down to 30 m on average below the ground surface, which will influence shaft construction but not the remainder. Water ingress to an underground excavation depends on the hydraulic conductivity of the rock mass. For a weathered rock mass and fault zones, hydraulic conductivity can be greater compared with that of fresh rocks. A few major and minor faults have been identified at the proposed underground cavern project locations. Faulting is very important since it affects the stability during cavern construction. The position and extent of faulting within the cavern area is determined from the geological cross-sections and maps ( Ground classes (GCs) in the DAT are used to relate the quality of the rock to the construction process. This is one of the most crucial steps since the final cost and time for excavating a particular rock directly depend on its associated ground class. The GC profile is established by combining a number of different ground parameters. The first step in establishing ground classes for a particular project is to identify and input the relevant ground parameters. Each ground parameter is again subdivided into various groups. For example, for Project C, weathering grade is considered as a ground parameter and is subdivided into fresh, moderately weathered (MW) and slightly weathered (SW). In the second step, the transition matrix (likelihood probabilities from each subdivision to the others) is given as an input in the DAT. These transition matrices are established with the help of expert site engineers and geologists. The intercept of these ground parameters along the tunnel/cavern alignment (zones and areas) is then defined as a triangular distribution (maximum, minimum and mode values). This gives the extent of each ground parameter in the project location. The results of these geological inputs are in the form of different combinations of the ground parameter groups known as “ground classes”. For Project B, a total number of nine ground classes are defined, where GC 1 represents the best combination of different ground parameters and GC 9 represents the worst combination of different defined ground parameters. Similarly, a total of eight ground classes are defined for Project C based on the selected ground parameters, where GC 1 represents best combination and GC 8 represents worst combination. These ground parameters are then combined to establish a particular ground class, as shown in The drill and blast method is proposed for excavation of most of the caverns and associated tunnels in both Projects B and C. The upper portion of the access/ventilation shafts in soft ground will be excavated using trenching, while the lower portion of the shaft in rock will be excavated using drilling and blasting. A partial face excavation procedure is adopted for the caverns by dividing the excavation face into a top heading and benches. The ground support for each excavation section of both proposed projects is estimated using the Q-system. The six input parameters for the Q-system were determined from borehole logs and discontinuity logs obtained from site investigations. The Q-value logs are recorded on a 1 m core run to statistically capture the variation in rock mass jointing indicated by the rock quality designation (RQD) parameter. The parameters joint set number (Jn), joint roughness (Jr) and joint alteration (Ja) have been estimated from the drill hole logs and core box photographs considering the scale of a typical cavern, with variations generally depicted over a length of 5 m, which is generally how the rock mass would be assessed during construction. The ground water and stress reduction factor (SRF) conditions are estimated for each lithological unit from the site investigation reports. According to the Q-based rock mass classification, for Project B, the rock mass condition ranged between extremely poor (<0.2) and fair (>1.8). For Project C, the rock mass condition ranged from very poor (<0.9) to very good (>40). In general, rock bolting coupled with shotcrete is found to be the most suitable rock support. For poor ground conditions, lattice girders are used along with shotcrete and rock bolts. The preliminary ground support proposed for the main caverns in Projects B and C is listed in The advance rates for both Projects B and C are estimated based on the advance rate achieved in Project A. Since the two proposed underground projects are located in sedimentary bedrock similar to Project A, the corresponding advance rates are expected to be similar. The advance rates assumed for Projects B and C for various GCs are given in Each construction activity involved in underground excavation is related to a cost-per-meter and advance rate (meter per day). These activities are defined as in Construction (activity) networks are used to model the sequence of construction of the underground structures, such as tunnels, caverns and shafts, in the DAT. Since the partial face excavation method is adopted for all tunnels and caverns, the construction networks for benches (B1-B3) follow a similar pattern as the top heading ( For Project C, the general construction sequence is as follows. The access shafts will be excavated first, followed by the construction of the passageway tunnels and the main caverns. The driveway tunnels are the last to be excavated ( A total of 10 000 simulations were carried out for each project (Project A, Project B and Project C) using the DAT. The geological simulation provides an overview of the ground class distribution of each project.   For Project C, the GCs are expressed as the average value of every five main caverns due to space limitations. The percentage of GC1 to GC3 in the main cavern areas is more than 60%. The high proportion of GC1, GC2 and GC3 reflects the relatively good ground conditions in Project C. The cumulative percentage of acceptable ground conditions (GC1 to GC5) is more than 80%. GC7, which corresponds to major faults, occupies approximately 5% of the total ground class distribution. The RQD distributions at the cavern locations for Projects A, B and C obtained from borehole investigation are shown in The time-cost scattergrams obtained with the DAT simulations for the three underground projects are shown in The larger construction costs for Projects B and C compared to that of Project A can be primarily attributed to the much larger excavation volumes of these projects. Compared to Project A, the total excavation volumes for Project B and Project C are 1.75 times and 3.3 times higher, respectively. The total excavation volume, average construction cost and time and standard deviation of the simulation results for Projects A, B and C are given in As mentioned in The statistics for construction time and cost for the three projects are summarized in The present study presents the risk assessment and evaluation of early time and cost predicting tools for large-scale underground cavern projects. These projects involve multiface excavation for large volume caverns. The results show that the outputs agree well with the actual construction time in Project A and can predict construction cost and time at the 95% confidence level. Projects B and C are presented to demonstrate the prediction of larger-scale underground construction projects in Singapore. Compared to Project A, the total excavation costs of Project B and Project C are much higher due to the large excavation volume of these projects and less favorable geological conditions. The total excavation times of Project B and Project C are approximately 1.5 times and 2 times that of Project A, respectively. The coefficient of variation suggests that the uncertainty associated with the construction time is twice or more that of the construction cost. This is because the time parameters chosen for the input have a larger uncertainty than the cost parameters. The authors would like to acknowledge Professor Herbert H. Einstein (MIT) for his valuable comments and revisions. Additionally, the authors would like to thank the Jurong Town Corporation (JTC) for the funding provided to this project and for generously allowing us to use data from the construction of the rock cavern, without which this work would not have been possible.