The desilication kinetics of synthetic Bayer liquor by use of calcium sulfate dihydrate (CaSO4·2H2O) was studied experimentally and modelled mathematically. Temperature, initial silica concentration, and the dosage of CaSO4·2H2O were found to be the main factors affecting desilication reaction. CaSO4·2H2O was proved to remove up to 95% silica from sodium aluminate solution under the optimum operation conditions. A surface integration kinetic model, assuming that the desilication process follows a pseudo-second-order kinetics, was developed and successfully model the experiment data of desilication process via CaSO4·2H2O at the range of operating conditions investigated. An activation energy of 52kJ/mol was estimated for the desilication process with CaSO4·2H2O over the temperature of 80-100°C. The desilication reaction products (DSP) were analyzed by XRD and SEM, and found to be mainly Hauyne (3Na2O·2CaSO4·3Al2O3·6SiO2) and Lazurite (3Na2O·CaSO4·0.5Na2SO4·3Al2O3·6SiO2). The final sulfate concentration in the liquor after desilication with CaSO4·2H2O was ~0.021g/L.Bauxite is currently the main resource of alumina production. The main impurities present in bauxite ores are compounds of silicon, iron, and titanium. Silica, in the forms of kaolinite (Al Up till now, the removal of silica from aluminate solution in existing alumina refineries is achieved by increasing the temperature of the solution or introducing desilication additives into the process, such as CaO and Ca(OH) The mechanism and kinetics of desilication are widely reviewed in the Bayer process literature. For example, the desilication kinetics by adding Ca(OH) In this research, the experimental parameters affecting desilication process via CaSO Chemical reagents, NaOH (98.0%, Beijing Chemical Plant), Al(OH) Clear sodium silicate solution and sodium aluminate solution were prepared first. Through dissolving Na Batch desilication experiments were conducted as follows. 500 The filtered liquor was analyzed for silica by ultraviolet–visible spectrophotometer (UNICOUV-2000, USA). The desilication reaction products were examined using XRD and SEM (JEOL-JSM-6700F). XRD (X'Pert PRO MPD, PANalytical, Netherlands) patterns were recorded on a diffractometer (using Cu Kα radiation) operating at 40 When CaSO The desilication reaction of Bayer liquor with CaSO The fundamental thermodynamic driving force for Eq. Since the complete aqueous chemistry for spent Bayer liquors is very complicated, the determination of thermodynamic driving force via Eq. If the relative supersaturation, Substituting Eq. However, Eq. Previous studies ( The desilication of seeded, spent Bayer liquor has been extensively studied by investigators ( The surface area of a single crystal of CaSO The overall surface-volume shape factor, If the desilication reaction with CaSO The boundary conditions of Eq. Integrating Eq. Supposing The experimental data of desilication reaction can be fitted by Eq. From Eq. Eq. Substituting Eq. So the practical desilication kinetics equation is given by Eq. By plotting The desilication tests were carried out under different conditions to explore the effect of the six factors, namely, desilication temperature, NaOH concentration, Al  The effect of the concentration of NaOH on the amount of the removal of silica was studied. It can be observed from Similarly, as shown in Under the conditions of temperature 90  The effect of various initial SiO The XRD analysis of DSP formed in desilication by CaSO Sulfate level should be controlled in the Bayer process as it is corrosive to the process equipments and detrimental to the product quality ( Initially, the sulfate concentration increased gradually over 120 The experimental data of desilication reaction with CaSO A good agreement of the experimental data with the regressed value is observed in The surface integration desilication rate constant ( For the estimate of the activation energy for the desilication reaction with CaSO The natural logarithmic plot of The ability of CaSO  desilication reaction products correlation coefficient surface integration desilication rate constant, cm/min gas constant, 8.314 absolute temperature, K concentration at any time and at equilibrium, g/L the volume of sodium aluminate solution in the reactor, cm the surface area of CaSO temperature, °C or desilication reaction time, min desilication rate constant, g difference in concentration at any time and at equilibrium, g/L surface area of a single crystal of CaSO volume of a single crystal of CaSO characteristic crystal size of CaSO total mass of CaSO number of crystals of CaSO the overall surface-volume shape factor the pre-exponential factor (refer to Eq. the activation energy (refer to Eq. change in chemical potential of the species i activity at any time and at equilibrium of the species i activity coefficient at any time and at equilibrium of the species the number of ions in a molecular unit the relative supersaturation surface shape factor volume shape factor density of CaSO The authors acknowledge the