The properties of PZN–PT and PMN–PT single crystals of varying compositions and orientations have been investigated. Among the various compositions studied, [001]-optimally poled PZN-(6–7)%PT and PMN-30%PT exhibit superior dielectric and piezoelectric properties, with K
                     T
                     ≈6800–8000, d
                     33
                     ≈2800pC/N, d
                     31
                     ≈−(1200–1800)pC/N for PZN-(6–7)%PT; and K
                     T
                     =7500–9000, d
                     33
                     =2200–2500pC/N and d
                     31
                     
                     =
                     −(1100–1400)pC/N for PMN-30%PT. These two compositions are also fairly resistant to over-poling. The [001]-poled electromechanical coupling factors (k
                     33, k
                     31 and k
                     
                        t
                     ) are relatively insensitive to crystal composition. [011]-optimally poled PZN-7%PT single crystal also exhibits extremely high d
                     31 values of up to −4000pC/N with k
                     31
                     ≈0.90–0.96. While [011]-poled PZN-7%PT single crystal becomes over-poled with much degraded properties when poled at and above 0.6kV/mm, PZN-6%PT crystal shows no signs of over-poling even when poled to 2.0kV/mm. The presence of a certain amount (i.e., 10–15%) of orthorhombic phase in a rhombohedral matrix has been found to be responsible for the superior transverse piezoelectric properties of [011]-optimally poled PZN-(6–7)%PT. The present work shows that flux-grown PZN–PT crystals exhibit superior and consistent properties and improved over-poling resistance to flux-grown PMN–PT crystals and that, for or a given crystal composition, flux-grown PMN–PT crystals exhibit superior over-poling resistance to their melt-grown counterparts.Relaxor-based ferroelectric single crystals of Pb(Zn PZN and PMN single crystals with a rhombohedral symmetry form solid solutions with normal ferroelectric lead titanate (PT) of tetragonal symmetry, with their morphotropic phase boundaries (MPBs) located at 9–11 and 33–35%PT, respectively. Although the growth of PZN–PT and PMN–PT single crystals and their characterization were performed more than a decade ago PZN- Earlier in situ X-ray diffraction studies have revealed that poling at high fields can induce a metastable monoclinic or orthorhombic phase other than rhombohedral and tetragonal phases We have performed X-ray diffraction (XRD) study and polarized light microscopy with poled plates of PZN–PT and PMN–PT single crystals of different compositions. Our results have revealed that for crystal compositions away from the MPBs, i.e., PZN-4.5%PT and PMN-28%PT, the poled structures are largely rhombohedral. This holds for both [0  The temperature dependence of dielectric constant of differently [0 Therefore, for [0 In summary, our results indicate the presence of small amounts of monoclinic or orthorhombic phase in a rhombohedral matrix in optimally poled samples and vice versa for the over-poled samples. The above observation agrees with the results of our polarized light microscopy, of which the details will be reported elsewhere. For PZN-4.5%PT and PMN-28%PT single crystals, which are compositionally away from the MPBs, the poled domain structure is largely rhombohedral. The poled properties of these crystals are given in columns 2 and 3 of Columns 4 and 5 of As for [0  As described above, PZN–PT and PMN–PT may become over-poled at high poling fields with significant amounts of induced monoclinic or orthorhombic phase in the material. This is especially pronounced for crystals of compositions quite near to the MPBs, e.g. PZN-8%PT and PMN-32%PT. When such occurs, sudden drops in dielectric and piezoelectric properties are also detected. The last two columns of The above-described over-poling phenomenon is most pronounced in the [0 Another observation made in this work is that, the threshold poling field, above which over-poling sets in is sample geometry dependent. For instance, The dielectric and piezoelectric properties of differently poled PZN–PT single crystals have been reported by earlier workers (see Table 1 of Ref. Even larger variations in reported property values are noted in PMN–PT single crystals (see The present work shows that the properties of PZN-(6–7)%PT and PMN-(28–30)%PT single crystal are superior and consistent compared to similar crystals but of compositions either too far or too close to the morphotropic phase boundaries. The results further show that poling can induce monoclinic and/or orthorhombic phases which, when exist in small quantity, are responsible for the superior dielectric and electromechanical properties observed. When present in sufficient quantity, such as in over-poled PZN–PT and PMN–PT single crystals, the induced metastable monoclinic and/or orthorhombic phases would lead to abrupt property degradation of the material. It is thus advantageous to stay adequately away from the MPB compositions in order to avoid over-poling induced property variation and degradation during processing and/or use of PZN–PT and PMN–PT single crystals. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial and technical support received from the National University of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*Star), NICOP/ONR and Microfine Materials Technologies Pte Ltd.