Nonferrous powder production methods are multifarious and numerous. These techniques allow the manufacture of a wide spectrum of metal powders designed to meet the requirements of a variety of applications. Various powder production processes allow precise control of the powders’ chemical composition and physical characteristics to obtain prescribed attributes for the features of different applications. The ratio of nonferrous powder to ferrous powder shipments (expressed in tonnage) is about one to four. But in market value terms, aluminum, silver, and zinc are all close to the value of iron powders Nonferrous powders are produced by mechanical, chemical, and electrochemical methods. Mechanical methods include the comminution of solids and atomization of melts. The comminution of solid metals and alloys is carried out by machining, milling (in impact mills, ball mills, vibration mills, stream mills, and edge-runner mills), and using attritors. General chemical methods include reduction methods, precipitation from solution, hydrometallurgical processing in leach autoclaves, the carbonyl process, and the hydride/dehydride process. Electrolytic methods include electrolysis of aqueous solutions, melt electrolysis, and the cementing process ( The shape and size of particles depend on the method of powder production and may vary widely. In Atomization is the most universal method used that allows powder produсtion over a wide range of compositions and in a wide variety of particle sizes, from 1 Comminution of most solid metals is significantly limited due to their ductility. Nevertheless, milling in high-energy apparatus, such as attritors, finds wide application for mechanically alloying powders. Some basic physical and chemical methods of nanopowder and ultrafine powder production are discussed in Mechanical alloying is a simple and efficacious technique for synthesizing both equilibrium and nonequilibrium phases of commercially and scientifically advantageous materials obtained from initial elemental powders. The exclusive advantages of mechanical alloying consist in the possibility of the synthesis of unique alloys that are not accessible by other technique, because mechanical alloying is a completely solid-state process and, therefore, limitations specified by state diagram do not request here. Mechanical alloying is realized by means of high-energy ball milling technique. Water-atomized powder-based aluminum alloys with nanoquasicrystalline phases display high mechanical properties and heat-resistance at both room and elevated temperatures Additive manufacturing (AM) technologies fabricate models by fusing, sintering, or polymerizing materials in predetermined layers without tools. AM enables the manufacture of complex geometries, including detailed internal parts that are essentially impossible to manufacture using machining and molding processes, because AM does not require predetermined tool paths, draft angles, under cuts. Grapheme oxide composite powders offer the perfect layer structure of two-dimensional (2D) sp2-hybridized carbon atoms; graphene has been extensively investigated in recent years due to its outstanding properties, such as high Young’s modulus, high fracture strength, and excellent thermal conductivity Powder particle size is a dominant characteristic of a metal powder designated for subsequent use in PM. The application of the powder determines the required size range. In Powder characterization and testing described in the The fundamentals of the main methods of nonferrous metal powder production, including mechanical, chemical, electrolytic, and physical–chemical methods, are described and discussed in Section B.  Production methods and techniques for aluminum and aluminum-alloy powders, magnesium and magnesium-based powders, titanium and titanium-alloy powders, copper and copper-based powders, zinc, cadmium, and their alloy powders, nickel, cobalt, and their alloy powders, refractory metal powders, rare metal powders, noble metal powders, and many other nonferrous metal powders are described and discussed in Section C. 