The aim of this project is the production of calcium hexaboride (CaB6) from colemanite and petroleum coke and the determination of the temperature-dependent phase transformation of boron carbide (B4C), which appears as an intermediate compound to CaB6. This process makes use of the advantages of the “B
                     
                        4
                     
                     C method” as a special case of the “carbothermic method” for the direct production of CaB6 from natural raw materials.
                  Colemanite (2CaO·3B2O3·5H2O), taken from Eti holding Co. in Turkey, and petroleum coke are used as raw materials. As-received crushed colemanite is processed by calcination between temperatures of 400°C and 600°C. X-ray diffraction analyses show that the obtained material contains amorphous boron oxide (B2O3) and calcium oxide (CaO) as well as calcium carbonate (CaCO3) and SrSO4 as additional crystalline components.
                  The production of CaB6 was carried out by sintering the powder mixture under argon between temperatures of 1400°C and 2000°C. The products were analysed with an X-ray diffractometer.
                  The experimental results and thermodynamic calculations show that B4C is produced as an intermediate product and remains present up to temperatures of 1700–1850°C as the boron source for the formation of CaB6. The decomposition reactions of B4C to CaB6 in this temperature range were recorded by X-ray diffraction analyses and agree with thermodynamic calculations.
                  It is concluded that the “carbothermic method” can be directly used for the production of CaB6 from the as-received unmilled raw material obtained from the calcination of colemanite at 400°C and petroleum coke.Because of its hardness, melting point and electronic properties CaB The high temperature oxidation behaviour of hot-pressed and sintered bodies of CaB Usually, B Carbothermic reduction of a mixture of the metal oxide and boron oxide with carbon at high temperature is known as the The most important methods for the preparation of borides are therefore the following: Synthesis of the compound through either melting, pressure sintering or hydrolysis. Reduction of the metal and boron oxide with carbon ( Reaction of the metal oxide with B Reduction of the metal and boron oxide with metals Al, Si, Mg ( The selection of the production method is dependent on the properties of the raw material and the desired end product of boride. In addition, the conditions of the reaction mechanisms play a very significant role. In this work, the production of CaB The starting materials in this study are washed petroleum coke and colemanite processed only by calcination. The characteristics of these materials ( The raw material colemanite is calcined at 600 CaB X-ray diffraction analyses were used in the determination of the phase formation and decomposition of B CaB The thermodynamic calculations, carried out by the program “Fact-Win”, The raw material colemanite calcined at 600 The raw material mixture of colemanite and petroleum coke used here contains numerous components (C, B In order to identify the influence of both excess carbon and boron oxide, the overall mixture was varied in the calculations by using fractions and an admixture of the experimental base material (53–95 Colemanite is a boron mineral with 5 Before calcination at 600 Upon heating, the combustion of petroleum coke lasts until 600 A detailed study was carried out by Yildiz Thermodynamic calculations of the phase composition at 600 According to thermodynamic calculations, B The phase transformation from B The formation of B According to the thermodynamic calculations the formation of CaB B According to thermodynamic calculations, B The thermodynamic calculation of CaB Eq. There are small differences between calculated and experimental formation and decomposition temperatures of B It is clearly seen that the phase transformation from B Because the water-containing raw material colemanite is a problem as a starting material for the production of the borides, It was theoretically predicted and experimentally determined that CaB B The reaction conditions (sintering temperature and time, heating rate of the furnace, formation vapour phase, partial pressure, etc.) as well as the characteristics of the raw materials (crystal water content, quantity of other components, particle size distribution, homogeneity of mixture, etc.) play an important role on the phase formation of B The advantages of the B