The growing of cobalt demand for electric vehicle batteries and various applications associated with the no cobalt ores makes the European Union consider it as a critical metal. This causes the search for new sources to meet the demand. Several studies have been explored battery recycling to promote the circular economy. On the one hand, acid leaching has been widely studied for cobalt recovery, but on the other hand, the grinding step is not well explored in the literature, which must increase metals release and further recovery. For this reason, the aim of the present work is to provide new insights on cobalt extraction from Li-ion batteries evaluating from the grinding step to the selective separation. Different grinding techniques were studied to ground the scrap: hammer, knife, and ceramic balls were evaluated on dismantling considering cobalt release. Ultrasound washing was evaluated to decrease the particle size distribution of ground material. Leaching experiments were carried out exploring different leaching agents (H2SO4, HNO3 and HCl with and without H2O2) and conditions (time, temperature and pH). Selective cobalt separation was performed using Cyanex 272 1 mol/L in kerosene. Results have shown that knife mill was the only one to ground the batteries. The best efficiency for cobalt leaching was obtained using H2SO4+H2O2 at pH 3.0 and 50 °C. Considering all hydrometallurgical processing – leaching-solvent extraction – 91 % of cobalt was recovered.The main cobalt producers are the Democratic Republic of Congo (64 %), China (5%), and Canada (5%). As UE definition, cobalt is considered as The growing demand for cobalt, mainly for electric car batteries [ Many researches have consolidated the cobalt extraction from Li-ion batteries through leaching – solvent extraction process. To illustrate it, Mantuano et al., like Ferreira et al., studied the Li-ion recycling by hydrometallurgical route [ LiCoO Different leaching agents are also explored. Cognet et al. also studied the metals recovery from LMN Li-ion battery using HCl and HNO Comparing these studies, sulfuric acid in oxidant medium has shown more efficient even in low temperatures. Moreover, further separation and purification techniques are commonly applied in mineral acids medium [ The further step is the selective separation. Precipitation technique is not appropriate due to the battery’s composition. As characterization presented by Mantuano et al., a Li-ion battery may contain cobalt, lithium, aluminum, nickel, iron, and copper as main elements. According to Jackson (1986) data, those elements cannot be separated by hydroxide, sulphide or carbonate precipitation due to the short pH range between than [ Solvent extraction is the most common technique applied due to the high selective separation. Indeed, the literature review has been shown that the cobalt separation is only possible by solvent extraction, and ion exchange resins (including chelating resins) are not suitable to obtain a high-purity product [ Despite the fact that there are a great variety of studies about Li-ion battery recycling for cobalt recovery, grinding techniques are not well explored and might be evaluated deeply. The use of the right technique must be considered which might increase the cobalt recovery and decline the acid consumption, considering a well particle size distribution and metals release. For instance, Mantuano et al. and Ferreira et al., after manual dismantled, used scissors to cut into the electrode films, which is impossible for industrial processes. Comparing with Li-ion batteries, Mantuano et al. used a ball mill to grind NiCd and NiMH batteries, and other equipments can be explored. For these reasons elucidated before, the goal of this work was to evaluate grinding methodologies for cobalt release and the leaching followed by solvent extraction for cobalt extraction. Different grinding processes were evaluated – jaw crusher, hammer mill, knife mill, and ceramic balls mill. Moreover, water washing using magnetic stirring and ultrasound were evaluated for metals release. The leaching agents H Selective cobalt separation from leach liquor was obtained through solvent extraction technique using Cyanex 272 (1 mol/L), as previous study presented in the literature. Stripping experiments were carried out using H The batteries were received from a cell phone company, which were sent back to the producer through their collection system. The manual dismantling was carried out using tools such as automatic saw, pliers, tweezers, and screwdriver [ After the manual dismantling, those batteries (4 kg) were milled by the jaw crusher for battery incision (1 cm) and washed using 3 L deionized water (solid-liquid ratio 4/3 g/L) for 1 h to promote the electrode losses. Three different grinding processes were explored to study which one better release the electrode with cobalt and separate it from all other parts for hydrometallurgical experiments. Hammer, knife and ceramic balls were tested. Subsequently, the ground material was dried at 60 °C for 24 h and the particle size distribution (PSD) was determined. Copper and aluminum were adhered to the active materials. For this reason, mechanical stirring in aqueous media and ultrasound washing. The cobalt separation efficiency was evaluated to considerer the best pre-treatment. Particles smaller than 0.300 mm were composed of cobalt-rich electrodes and they were separated from other parts of the battery, which were dried at 60 °C for 24 h for the leaching experiments. The acid leaching experiments were performed for cobalt extraction from powder obtained in the previous step (<0.300 mm). Different leaching agents were explored: H Eqs. The leaching experiments were carried out in glass-reactor 100 mL under magnetic stirring. A condenser was used to avoid gas (vapor or acid) losses during the leaching for both temperatures (25 °C and 50 °C). The pH was measured and controlled during the process. The solid-liquid ratio was 1/5. Finished the leaching experiment, the solid-liquid was separated and the leaching residues were washed using deionized water. The XRD analyses were carried after drying the material at 60 °C for 24 h. The selective cobalt separation was performed by the solvent extraction technique using Cyanex 272 (1 mol/L in Exxsol). This organic extractant is well explored in the literature for Ni-Co separation from the mining process [ Stripping experiments were carried out as well as extraction experiments. The organic phase rich in cobalt was used in the tests and H The batteries were dismantled by handwork and their main components were separated. It was observed that those residues were composed of overlapping layers involved in a steel case, as literature review has been showed [ SEM-EDS showed peaks of aluminum in steel case analyses. Indeed, all battery is composed of 27 wt% of aluminum. Analyses performed in negative electrode showed as the main element carbon, which indicates it is composed of graphite proved by XRD analysis. Analyses in positive electrode indicated the main presence of cobalt and oxygen ( After the acid digestion, positive and negative electrodes were analyzed to quantify the main elements: Cu, Fe, Mn, Co, Al, Li, and C. Results are shown in The first part of grinding was carried out in jaw crusher (4 kg of discharged batteries) followed by immersion in water as a pre-treatment for grinding study using the hammer, ceramic balls, and knife mills. The crusher was used with the purpose of just opening the plastic case and accumulators without the grinding itself. This methodology was adopted due to the fact both knife and balls mills generate dust (losses higher than 5 wt%) and heat during the process. The washing process was carried out using material from jaw crusher, as methodology previously detailed. It was expected that the hammer mill would capable to separate the activate materials of electrodes. Nevertheless, the experiments had been shown that a significant part of the material was trapped inside aluminum steel cases. As a result, grinding processing by hammer mill has been dropped. Ceramic balls were also not enough to release the materials present in the batteries. Despite different grinding times, the number of balls and water it was not possible to obtain a high-release degree, as well as hammer mill, even for a visual inspection. Finally, the knife mill was explored. Part of the material was trapped (9 wt%); it was composed of plastic (19 wt%) and steel case (81 wt%). Cathode and anode blades were cut, however active cathode and anode material remained adhered. The losses (5 wt%) were dust which was not collected by laboratory equipment. The fact that most parts of the plastic and aluminum case were not grinding benefits the process, because there is no cobalt. Despite that, SEM-EDS showed the ground material still contained part of the electrode with aluminum and copper blades, indicating them were not crumbed during the process. To sum up, hammer mill tests have shown that grinding has caused a significant part of the material to be trapped inside the metal aluminum housings. For ceramic balls grinding, even using different grinding times and varying the amount of grinding elements and using water, it was not possible to obtain a degree of release that was sufficient for a simple visual inspection. Only knife mill showed possible for metals release [ The material obtained from knife mill was composed of: 0.18 %wt% Mn, 11.2 wt% Co, 2.6 wt% Cu, 23.7 wt%Al, and 0.3 wt% Fe. Ultrasound washing was carried out for 30 min. It results in copper and aluminum particles virtually contamination-free. Then, a new PSD and chemical analyses were carried out and the results are depicted in The use of ultrasound to concentrate metals presented in Li-ion battery is not well explored in the literature. Results depict in the present study have been shown that it can benefits recycling process and extraction industries. Metals can be concentrated and increase their recovery. Materials lower than 0.25 mm (from jaw crusher-knife mill-ultrasound washing process) were used in leaching experiments, in which they were composed of: 27.5 wt% Co, 2.1 wt% Li, 34.1 wt% Al, 9.7 wt% Cu, and 11.2 wt% C. The leaching efficiency for cobalt extraction at 25 °C were 98.3 % (pH 3.0), 98.1 % (pH 4.0) and 98.15 % (pH 5.0). At 50 °C, the efficiencies were 98.4 % (pH 3.0), 98.2 % (pH 4.0) and 98.1 % (pH 5.0). For acid leaching in oxidative medium, the efficiency of cobalt extraction was 98.8 %. XRD analyses showed the peaks of LiCoO2 had decreased and the peaks of C raised, as previously literature review showed. It occurs due to the cobalt extraction. The effect of oxidant agent (H There may be other reasons for that. One of them must be the possibility of high leaching of other components in the battery that benefits the cobalt leaching, such as aluminum and copper, which occurs with PCBs recycling by hydrometallurgy route [ Comparing those results with HNO  Furthermore, the leaching kinetics was investigated to explore leaching behavious of Co in H The solution obtained from H Results are shown in In the first two extractions steps, almost 68 % of cobalt was extracted. The global efficiency was 94 %. For the stripping process, 45.5 % of cobalt was removed from organic phase in the first two steps, and the global efficiency was 98.0 %. Considering all process (leaching + extraction + stripping), the percentage of cobalt recovered was 91.0 %. The use of Li-ion batteries as cobalt source can make a positive impact towards the reduction of wastes and pollution. A whole cobalt recovery processing, from grinding to selective separation, was explored in the present study. Different grinding equipment was studied, as well as leaching agents for cobalt extraction. Solvent extraction using Cyanex 272 was used for cobalt selective separation (extraction and stripping). Results showed that the grinding on hammer, knife and ceramic balls mills must be carried out in contact with water to avoid explosions. Only knife mill makes the grinding process possible. The leaching process in the oxidative medium obtained the highest cobalt extraction (both H  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper Thanks to the University of Sao Paulo for supporting this project. To