Synthetic dyes are commonly used for graphite depression in poly-metallic flotation circuits; however, these dyes can be very expensive. The aim of this study is to evaluate performance of certain low-cost alternative depressants for a complex lead-zinc (Pb-Zn) ore rich in graphite (Gr-C) on a conventional mini pilot-scale flotation circuit. The reagents used were commercial and industrial grade starch; agro-based waste-sugarcane bagasse and charred (burnt) bagasse powder. The primary evaluation criteria were quality (grades) of lead and zinc concentrates, their recoveries (%), and graphite rejection (%) in the tails. Benchmark tests using nigrosine as graphite depressant showed 94.3% rejection of Gr-C. The results with commercial starch were found as effective with 93.8% graphite rejection. Furthermore, bagasse powder showed potential in improving product quality (36.4% and 65.6% Pb grade and recovery) with an intermediate effectiveness in graphite rejection (85.6%). The order of effectiveness in Gr-C rejection follows nigrosine≈commercial starch>bagasse>industrial starch>charred bagasse. In addition, the effect these depressants on silver (byproduct) grade and recovery was also investigated.Rampura-Agucha (RAM) is one of the world’s largest zinc mines in India. Typical RAM ores are complex multi-metallic sulfides hosted in Graphite-Mica-Schist (GMS) type rock. The ore carry low-grade lead (PbS 1–3%), high-grade zinc (ZnS 10–13%), and other critical minerals such as silver, cadmium, nickel, cobalt and molybdenum that can be found in trace amounts in combination with impurities such as, pyrite, pyrrhotite, and graphitic-carbon The GMS type ore at RAM contains significant amount of recoverable lead and zinc, but also a high percentage of graphite (up to 12% by weight). The mineral assemblage characteristics of these deposits, as shown in The separation strategy for this complex lead-zinc ore involves comminution to very fine sizes to achieve liberation, followed by differential flotation of galena and sphalerite. Hydrophobic impurities such as, graphitic-carbon (Gr-C), mica, talc, are flaky and float naturally that can get carried with froth concentrate. Flake graphite is pressumed to form when organic matter in sediments metamorphosed. Higher concentration of graphite in ore can smear other hydrophillic impurities and make them to float as well. The presence of this hydrophobic gangue can create deterioration in the quality of valuable minerals that affect the downstream mineral extraction processes. It is evident that presence of graphite in lead concentrate results in poor metallurgical yield, reduction in strength of sinters, difficulty to control temperature during roasting, and difficulty in sulfur removal In previous years, methods such as pre-graphite flotation and reverse flotation have been tested on a laboratory-scale. In former, the finely ground ore slurry is processed with flotation to remove hydrophobic graphite prior to treat in a lead-zinc flotation circuit. While in latter method, galena is first depressed with potassium dichromate followed by flotation of graphite. The studies reported that due to the excessive loss of valuable minerals and water contamination from dichromate, these methods could not be incorporated in processing plants Alternatively, graphite depressing reagents can be used during grinding and pre-conditioning steps of flotation. Synthetic dyes for graphite depression have been found somewhat effective while producing better quality product In general, the basic purpose of depressants is to improve the selectivity of valuable minerals by preventing flotation of unwanted minerals. These reagents can prevent flotation by acting on a mineral surface or by reacting with the collector (or activator) in bulk solution. In general, each depressant is specific to a mineral-collector-activator system Synthetic dyes are expensive reagent that can directly impact the operation and production cost. Therefore, it is important to find an alternative depressant that should be at least equally effective, and easily available at a lower cost. The most commonly encountered functional groups on polymeric depressants are hydroxyl carboxylate, sulfonate, and amine In many cases, organic macromolecular depressants, such as starch, dextrin, dyes, have been proven effective in mineral beneficiation for depressing hydrophobic undesirable minerals Considering that the factors involved in controlling the depressant adsorption on this complex multi-metallic are not very well understood, this communication focuses only on a qualitative evaluation. For the purpose, commercial grade and industrial grade starches were tested. Commercial grade starches are commonly used in food industry and are environmentally friendly. Industrial grade starch applications include textile and paper industry. In addition, agro-based sugarcane waste material, i.e., dried bagasse powder was also evaluated. Lastly, charred bagasse powder was evaluated as a graphite depressant. Bagasse and charred bagasse has never been investigated earlier as hydrophobic mineral depressants. Lead grade and graphite content in lead concentrates, lead recovery, and graphite rejection in the final tailings relative to the feed is used as parameters to evaluate performance of these alternative graphite depressants. The distinct nature of macromolecular poly-hydroxyls includes a long hydrocarbon chain for adsorption at hydrophobic mineral surfaces, a large number of well distributed hydroxyl groups ( Graphite composed of neutral carbon atoms that are not able to form hydrogen bond with water molecule, therefore, is naturally hydrophobic. Starches are the group of polysaccharides that comprise glucopyranose units joined together by glucosidric linkages. These linkages can be linear, unbranched, moderately or highly branched, as well as flexible or rigid. Starches have been found effective in some cases in depressing hydrophobic impurities Fine crushed ore with top size ( For the lead flotation circuit, the feed slurry was conditioned to depress sphalerite by using a combination of zinc sulfate and sodium cyanide. Furthermore, potassium ethyl xanthate (PEX) was used as a collector and methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) was used as a frother. During the conditioning, different graphite depressants were added in the feed slurry for the current investigation. Initial pH was maintained neutral in the conditioner and then slightly increased to 9 using lime solution in the lead cleaner circuit. Average flotation time in the lead circuit was reported 75 Once the lead concentrate was recovered, the tailing from the lead circuit was conditioned again to activate sphalerite by using a combination of copper sulfate and sodium cyanide. Copper ions are stronger oxidizing agent; therefore, replaces zinc ions from sphalerite surfaces making it a pseudo-copper ore Benchmark tests were conducted with Nigrosine that is used as graphite depressant in the current circuit at a dosage of 250 In general, cost of nigrosine is one of the highest among the other reagents used in the existing flotation circuit in the plant. Considering all other factors in this investigation were kept constant (including dosage), the cost of alternative Gr-C depressants relative to nigrosine on per tonne basis can be quantified in the following order: nigrosine The experiments were carried out on a conventional Dowa Holding Co. Ltd. (Japan) mini flotation circuit. Each flotation cell was Agitair type with a capacity of 1 liter and impeller rpm settings in the range of 2650–3200. The aeration throttle was kept open 100% in all the tests. Schematic of lead-zinc flotation circuit used in the investigation is described in The samples taken from feed stream, lead concentrate, zinc concentrate, and the final tails were chemically analyzed and evaluated using three-product formula as described by Wiegel Here,  Multiple tests were conducted using nigrosine (NG) at a dosage of 250 Further testing was conducted by replacing NG with commercial starch at the same dosage, i.e., 250 In later tests, commercial grade starch was replaced with industrial grade starch, which is a chemically modified starch, at the same dosage. From the results shown in Additional tests were conducted to evaluate bagasse powder (or sugarcane waste), which is extremely cheaper and abundant as compared to aforementioned depressants. Bagasse was first dried completely and crushed into fine powder. The fine bagasse powder was used at a dosage of 250 As an alternative to bagasse, charred bagasse powder was tried as a graphite depressant. To prepare the reagent, dried bagasse was burnt in the laboratory furnace at 400 Among all the graphite depressant tested, commercial starch showed potential as an alternative to Nigrosine for Gr-C depression. Therefore, multiple tests were conducted by increasing the dosage of commercial starch to 350  From these results, it can be said that using only bagasse as a depressant may not be desirable due to high graphite content in the lead concentrate. However, it would be worth in future investigations to evaluate bagasse as a mixture with either nigrosine or commercial starch to reduce operation costs.  Silver as a byproduct provides significant monetary value and sometimes pay for smelters for lead-zinc concentrate. Because silver is associated with galena, most of the silver carried with the lead concentrate in flotation. Presence of high percentage of graphite in lead flotation concentrate can severely deteorirates product quality and consequently brings challenges in the metallurgical operations. Testing was conducted on a pilot-scale mini flotation circuit to evaluate different graphite depressant for a lead-zinc complex sulfide ore from India. Following conclusion can be made from the investigation: Commercial grade starch at a dosage of 250 It was identified that increasing the dosage of commercial starch did not help and apparently degraded the performance of the flotation process. It can be said that the process is sensitive to the depressant dosage. This finding is similar to Lin and Burdick (1987), which suggest an over dosage of depressant can degrade product quality. Chemically modified industrial grade starch as graphite depressant did not show any significant improvement in lead grade and recovery, and in graphite rejection. Agro-based-residue such as sugarcane bagasse powder showed promising results to achieve comparable lead grade and high recovery; however, it was not as efficient in graphite rejection. A future investigation with combination of these depressants, such as, commercial starch and bagasse, and/or nigrosine and bagasse should be explored to achieve high minerals recovery at a high graphite rejection. Investigation with charred bagasse powder was found to be unsuccessful as the concentrate quality deteriorated. The order of performance of different graphite depressant tested for this particular ore can be described as: nigrosine The author is grateful to the management and staff of Center Research Development laboratory (HZL, Debari), India for their support with this research and permitting to publish the work.