Generally, there are different enhanced oil recovery (EOR) methods. One of the most promising EOR method is the gas injection especially carbon dioxide (CO2) injection since it introduce several unique characteristic desired for higher tertiary oil recovery. In this study, the performance and feasibility of supercritical carbon dioxide (SC-CO2) and supercritical nitrogen (SC-N2) injection to enhanced oil recovery was investigated. In this regard, swelling tests and core flooding experiments were performed to find out whether the injections of these gases are efficient to recover trapped oil in the reservoir. Based on the experimental results, the possible active mechanisms were discussed on both displacements. The results of swelling tests showed that SC-CO2 yields the swelling factor up to about 35%, while the oil swelling factor by SC-N2 is just about 8%. The core-flooding experimental results demonstrated that SC-CO2 injection could recover 15.8% of the original oil in place (OOIP), while SC-N2 injection ultimate oil recovery would be up to 8.7% of the OOIP.After more than a century of petroleum exploration, thousands of oil and gas fields have been depleted and approaching the end of their economically productive lives period Among different EOR methods, gas injection particularly carbon dioxide and nitrogen injection are considered as one of the most promising and attractive methods The point is noteworthy to be noted that N As CO This supercritical stage will allow the CO Supercritical fluid extraction has received wide attention during the past few decades for different potential application especially food processing, pharmaceutical particle engineering, and petroleum industries Pressure, temperature, composition of the crude oil, moisture content and physicochemical properties of the solid matrix affect the extraction capacity of SC-CO Generally, SC-CO CO Understanding of the CO CO Representative fluid samples can usually be obtained from producing reservoirs at either surface or subsurface locations. Surface samples are collected from either the separator or the wellhead. Recombining the associated gas and liquid would give the actual reservoir fluid. The recombination of surface separator samples is achieved by either recombining the gas and fluid to match the measured separator solution gas oil ratio (GOR) or to match a specified saturation pressure at the reservoir temperature In this regard, recombination of provided gas and oil from separator (P This test is usually conducted for the oil reservoirs, which has been producing under gas injection process. In this test, a gas with a composition similar to the proposed injected gas stream, is bring in contact in a series of slugs into a reservoir oil sample, as shown in The relation between the saturation pressure and the cumulative volume of the injected gas. The volume of the saturated fluid mixture in relation to the volume of the original saturated reservoir oil as a function of the cumulative volume of the gas injected. The Schematic of the core flooding experimental setup used in the current investigation is shown in In details, accumulators made of stainless steel for maximum pressure and temperature of 70 In brief, at the first stage, the cores with length of about 9 After that in the second stage, the live oil was injected in several pore volumes to reach irreducible water saturation (reservoir condition). The noteworthy point is that the injection of the pressure was performed above the bubble point pressure to ensure about the single phase process in the system although the separation of gas and crude oil was occurred using a glass type two ways calibrated vials. At this point, the separated gas is directed toward a manual gasometer to measure the liberated gas from the produced oil. In the third stage, the back pressure of the system was tuned on a desired pressure to mimic the natural production from the reservoir. The produced fluid at this stage is considered as the primary recovery of the reservoir which then followed by the water flooding which mimic the secondary oil recovery process. After the second stage of oil recovery it is time to perform the gas injection process to evaluate the effect of supercritical gas injection on the tertiary oil recovery. In more details, after injection of water when the produced oil was zero the tertiary oil recovery stage was started by injection of SC-CO The main objective of this investigation is comparing the efficiency of injection of SC-CO The live-crude oil was initially introduced into a visual PVT cell at bubble point pressure of 11.9 In the next experiment, the injection of SC-N Based on the above swelling experiments, it is obvious that not only SC-CO In this section, the effects of SC-CO In addition, one more core flooding test was conducted to examine the impact of SC-N Then, the tertiary oil recovery stage by injection of SC-CO This high value of oil recovery at this stage can be described as follows: after SC-CO Similarly, after the brine injection stage, the SC-N In details, a close examination in Finally, the SC-CO As can be seen from Finally, a glance at the results in In the current study, the effect of SC-CO Based on the obtained results it is obvious that injection of SC-CO