In this study, polysiloxane networks prepared by hydrosilylation or hydrolysis/condensation reactions were considered to be potential precursors for Si–C–O systems. Different precursors had different pyrolytic properties, which was essentially due to their molecular architecture. The kinetics parameters, such as the activation energy, E (kJ/mol) involved in the polymer-to-ceramic conversion, were investigated by thermogravimetry using a multiple heating rate kinetic method. The relationships between the molecular architecture and the precursor composition were compared to that of a linear poly(dimethylsiloxane) precursor. Solid-state 
                        29
                        Si
                      nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared spectroscopies, density measurements, and X-ray diffraction measurements were made on the final samples. These products were typically amorphous, with a molecular structure formed by a random distribution of different silicon sites and variable amounts of free carbon residue.Polymer pyrolysis is a relatively new and promising technique for processing advanced ceramics Several studies on the synthesis of silicon oxycarbide glasses, obtained from a polymeric precursor, have been described An alternative class of precursors of SiC The aim of the present work was to exploit the thermal decomposition process of different polysiloxane networks, during the polymer-to-ceramic conversion, to understand the influence of the molecular architecture of the precursors on their pyrolytic properties and on the structure of the final products. Three polysiloxane networks, with different molecular architecture, prepared by hydrosilylation reaction and one organic-bridge polysilsesquioxane prepared by hydrolysis/condensation of alkoxysilane, were studied. Heat treatment in inert atmosphere up to 1000 °C of these precursors resulted in silicon oxycarbide glasses with different compositions. The structural characterization of the final glasses was performed by means of different techniques such as Commercially available functional siloxane cyclic oligomers, the 1,3,5,7-tetramethyl-1,3,5,7-tetravinylcyclotetrasiloxane, [(CH In this study, homogenous neat mixtures of siloxane cyclics or polymeric materials containing –CHCH The thermogravimetric analyses, TGA, of the precursors were performed on a thermogravimetric analyzer (2950, TA Instrument) operating at various heating rates (2, 5, 10 and 20 °C/min) from 30 up to 980 °C in a controlled dry argon flow of 100 ml/min. The activation energy ( The TGA curves obtained for the preceramic polymeric networks and for silanol terminated PDMS fluid, in flowing argon, are shown in In the DTGA curves for PN1, PN2 and PN4 ( The activation energies of the global degradation process for all precursors and PDMS fluid, and also for each degradation process for the PN3 sample, were determined by using the dynamic method derived by Ozawa The activation energies obtained are shown in The calculated activation energy for the linear PDMS degradation process, described in literature, is 180 kJ/mol The lowest activation energy (139±60 kJ/mol) was obtained for the organic-bridge polysilsesquioxane, PN4, richer in organic content. This energy was less than the C–C and C–H bond energies, which are 348 and 412 kJ/mol, respectively The ceramic products derived from PNs, at 1000 °C under argon atmosphere, were amorphous oxycarbide glasses, with XRD characterized by a broad halo centered in the 22–28° (2  Preceramic polymeric networks, precursors of silicon oxycarbide glasses, were prepared from hydrosilylation or hydrolysis/condensation of siloxane units. These reactions allowed the construction of polysiloxane networks with different molecular architectures. The determination of kinetic parameters such as the activation energies, from thermogravimetric data, has received considerable attention The one-step degradation observed in TGA curve of linear PDMS sample, is due to the thermal depolymerization, which starts around 200 °C in an inert atmosphere, and involves mainly the siloxane backbone, with a participation of the Si–OH end groups Crosslinked polymers with greater fraction of crosslinks usually are more thermally resistant, because this molecular architecture makes the elimination of end groups, small molecules, or even the promotion of depolymerization, which are often responsible for low temperature weight loss, more difficult PN1 showed major thermal stability and the largest activation energy for the degradation process during its conversion to silicon oxycarbide glass. These results could be rationalized considering the molecular architecture of this polymeric precursor. In this network, there was an excess of Si–H group, in the lateral chain of the PMHS homopolymer, in relation to –CHCH For PN4 precursor the smallest activation energy was obtained, as expected, since this preceramic network had a bridge of epoxy resin between siloxane units. Based on this result we suggest that the degradation process in this polymer is also governed by kinetic considerations, probably with participation of more active groups, C–OH and N–H, present in the organic bridge. Consequently, the effect of Si–O–Si network was minimized in this system. The thermal stability and the activation energy for the degradation process were determined for a series of preceramic polymeric networks based on polysiloxane. The relationships between these results and the molecular architecture of the ceramic precursors allowed a better comprehension of the degradation process of these materials. The activation energies were related to the crosslinking density, and consequently to the molecular architecture and composition of the precursors. The crosslinking density of the polymeric network also showed an influence on the ceramic yield as well as on the final composition of the glasses. We gratefully acknowledge financial support from FAPESP (processes 95/03636-3, 98/07025-7, 99/05491-3 and 00/06882-5) and CNPq.