The mixing characteristics of cubic particles in a cylinder mixer are analyzed by the SIPHPM simulation in comparison with spherical particles. The assembly of cubic and spherical particles of uniform size is pre-divided into two parts in the axial, circumferential or radial directions respectively. Then they are mixed when the cylinder is rotated at different rotational speeds of Ω
                        d
                      = 15–60 rpm. The mixing degree is evaluated by either the Lacey mixing index or the mixing information entropy. A normalized mixing entropy is proposed here to compare the absolute degree of mixing with non-equivalent particle numbers. It is found that, for cubes, the radial mixing efficiency is higher than the circumferential, and the radial and circumferential mixing degrees are both larger than the axial. Compared with spheres, cubic shape may enhance the circumferential mixing whereas reduce the axial mixing levels at high rotating speeds. However, at low rotating speed, cubic shape always reduces the degree of mixing of all the three patterns. Moreover, the axial dispersion characteristics are also explored by the probability density functions and the axial paths. The spatial and temporal diffusion coefficients of concentration and kinetic energies are illustrated and used to explain the axial dispersion mechanism in analogy with diffusion equation. The mean diffusion coefficient of rotational energy is independent of rotating speed, which means the axial diffusion of rotational energy depends on the eccentric feature of cubic particle, i.e. rotational ability. In contrast, it is preferred to regard the axial dispersion mechanism of spheres as convection rather than diffusion.As powders and granular materials are most commonly encountered in many industries, like chemical, pharmaceutical, metallic, plastic, mineral, fertilizer, ceramic and food industries. Therefore, the mixing mechanisms have been studied over at least 60 years Regarding the particle shape, it may have strong influences on the microscopic or macroscopic behaviors of particle assembly, such as the adhesive forces For the important issue of axial mixing or dispersion of particles, the effects of Froude number, particle diameter, filling ratio and initial particle concentration on axial segregation of spherical particle were evaluated by Aissa et al. Additionally, some experiments have also been carried out to study particle mixing and the effects of particle shape. For example, X-ray CT measurement was used to study the particles of various shapes crushed by ball mill and cone crusher in mineral engineering In conclusion, although the mixing characteristics of spherical particles have been extensively explored, it is still far from well understood especially for non-spherical particles. Therefore, the mixing of cubic particles in a three-dimensional rotary cylindrical mixer is studied here by using the SIPHPM method, which is proposed by our group The soft-sphere imbedded pseudo-hard particle model (SIPHPM) For subspheres: For cubes: By solving Eqs. ( As shown in The filling process is through a freely sedimentation process of an array of 2400 cubes driven by gravity to fall down at a certain height above the cylindrical wall. After 1 s, the velocities of particles are set zero to keep stationary states of them in the cylinder. Then, the cylinder is rotated at a constant rate of acceleration (5 Moreover, In addition, the validations of the SIPHPM model, including both 2D and 3D cases, have been performed in our recent work In this section, we will show some examples of the three kinds of mixing patterns. At first, the circumferential mixing process is shown in In a similar manner, the radial mixing pattern and axial mixing pattern are shown in In comparison, the axial mixing ( In addition, compared The well-known Lacey mixing index The mixing indices of the circumferential (MI On the other hand, comparing the mixing indices of spheres and cubes, it is showed that: 1). MI Shannon information entropy Similar to mixing indices, the mixing entropies (IE) for rotating speeds of Ω Moreover, it is confirmed that: 1). the axial mixing (IE It is worth noticing that, when the rotating speed accelerates Ω For example, the normalized information entropies IE The general better agreements between the normalized information entropy IE To say conclusively, the normalized mixing entropy IE In this section, we will focus our attention on the axial dispersion characteristics of cubic particles in the cylinder. Firstly, take No. 1 particle for example, the trajectories of it under different rotation speeds are shown in To quantify the total path of dispersion in the axial direction only, we summed up the axial displacement in all time intervals together. It is named as the total length of axial dispersion path, expressed as follows It is seen from Moreover, the axial movement ranges of spherical particles are always larger than that of cubic particles ( Furthermore, we defined a probability density function (PDF) of particle's axial displacement with respect to its initial position respectively at all time for all particles, which is expressed as follows Seen from To explore the mechanism on the dominant issue of particle's axial dispersion, we suppose that the particle's axial dispersion may be related or be determined by one or some of the three most possible mechanisms, i.e. the number density, the translational velocity, and the angular rotational velocity of particles. To verify this assumption, we regard the axial dispersion behavior of particles can be governed analogously by the one-dimensional diffusion equation as follows In general, It is seen from On the contrary,  In addition, compared to cubes, the ⟨ In this work, three kinds of mixing patterns of cubic particles in comparison with spherical particles are illustrated in the cylinder mixer based on the SIPHPM simulation. The radial and circumferential mixing efficiency and degree are increasing with time. Indicated by both mixing index and information entropy, both of the radial and circumferential mixing efficiency and degree are far larger than those of axial mixing, and become even larger as the rotation speeds increase. In particular, indicated by mixing index, the efficiency and degree of radial mixing seem to be larger than the circumferential mixing, provided it is not under a low rotating speed. For mixing between two parts of non-equivalent number of particles, the mixing entropy cannot be used directly to compare the final mixing levels since they are particle-number dependent. An improved normalized version of the mixing information entropy is proposed which could overcome this problem and can be used in an equivalent way to the mixing index to compare the final mixing levels between the universal cases of non-equivalent particle numbers. Moreover, in comparison with spherical particles, cubic particles have enhanced circumferential mixing particularly at large rotating speeds. On the contrary, cubes always have lower axial, circumferential and radial mixing levels at very low rotating speeds. After analyzing the trajectories of particles, the total path length of axial dispersion and the probability density function of axial displacements indicate that the axial dispersion can be enhanced by increasing the rotating speed. The spheres always have larger mean levels of axial movements than the cubes. Moreover, by analyzing the diffusion coefficients based on the diffusion function, the mechanism of axial dispersion of cubic particle concentration is not analogous with the thermal diffusion of molecules. The diffusion coefficient of translational kinetic energy of cubes is also rotating velocity-dependent. They both mean that the axial dispersion of cubes indicated by number concentration and translational energy is not through the mechanism of diffusion. It other words, it is also dependent on the convective mechanism or motion fluctuations. However, the axial dispersion of rotating kinetic energy of cubes seems to be in analogy with the thermal diffusion mechanism. The mean diffusion coefficient The authors are grateful for the support of this research by the