Biosorption of each of the ions Cr6+, Pb2+ and Cu2+ on Bacillus sp. in a batch stirred system was investigated and optimum conditions were determined. Then, the multi-metal ions, containing different concentrations of Cr6+, Pb2+ and Cu2+ ions together were prepared and partial competitive adsorptions of these mixtures were investigated at 27°C and for the pH values of 4.0 and 7.0 that are the most frequently seen conditions in industrial waste waters. Parameters such as co-adsorption of metals to microorganism, combination, concentration and adsorption sequence affect the partial competitive adsorption. In conclusion, in the metal ions mixture, lead biosorption increases widely while chromium and copper biosorptions decrease in comparison with the biosorption of only one kind of metal ion.Heavy metal ions are used in various industries due to their technological importance. Waste waters from these industries include metal ions having permanent toxic effect Simultaneous removal of metal ions by microorganisms and immobilized microorganisms (biomass) from solutions including two or more metal ions has gained importance recently The strain used in the study was isolated from the soil. Enrichment was carried out in shaken culture in the medium with the following content: OGUB 001 was incubated at 27 Three different bacteria were obtained from soil named OGUB 001, OGUB 002, and OGUB 003. Isolate OGUB 001 was used in partial competitive adsorption of heavy metal mixtures. Tests performed for identification and other properties are in While the parameters such as binding of metals to the cells together, combinations, concentrations and binding sequence affect the partial competitive biosorption, pH affects the distribution coefficient and the adsorption capability of the functional groups on the biosorbent Optimum pH values in single adsorptions of Cr Biosorption of various metal ions onto The findings of our laboratory-scale studies are encouraging, and should be applicable to industrial waste waters biosorption. Authors acknowledge the Research Foundation of Osmangazi University for support as project numbered 1997/15.