Recovery of magnesite requires a selective separation process from its associated carbonate minerals like calcite present in the same ore deposits. As part of our previous research, potassium cetyl phosphate (PCP) was identified as a promising flotation collector for magnesite. In the current work, we report results of flotation experiments, measurements of zeta potential and contact angle with these minerals in a range of pH from about 5 to 10.5. In addition, we carried out molecular dynamics simulations to delineate further characteristics of this flotation system. The experimental results obtained have provided clear evidence for excellent separation between magnesite and calcite. These observations indicate that PCP is selectively adsorbed on magnesite, which is responsible for the development of a significant hydrophobicity level that is sufficient for its separation from calcite. The results from the molecular dynamics simulating the adsorption process indicate a large PCP concentration profile that is much closer to the magnesite surface compared to the case with calcite. It has been found that the diffusion coefficient for water, Dwater out of the hydrated interface of magnesite is larger by about 34 % than that of calcite. Furthermore, the interaction energy, -ΔE of the magnesite-PCP adsorption system is much higher than that of the calcite-PCP system, supporting the selectivity for direct flotation of magnesite.Magnesite is a magnesium carbonate mineral with a composition of MgCO As a method with high efficiency, froth flotation is usually conducive to the industrial separation of magnesite from its associated impurities [ The key to obtaining good flotation separation results is, to a very marked degree, decided by using sufficiently long chain collectors with high selectivity [ As part of our research in this area, we have identified potassium cetyl phosphate (PCP) as a potential selective collector for magnesite recovery from calcite [ High-purity crystalline magnesite blocks were acquired from Refratechnik Group, Canada. Optical-grade pure calcite blocks, obtained from Changsha, China were used in this research. Typical pieces of magnesite and calcite samples were selected for the contact angle measurements. Other hand-picked samples were crushed, dry ground and wet sieved (with deionized water) to -150 + 75 μm and −5 μm for the micro flotation tests and analytical determinations, respectively. X-ray powder diffraction analyses (see The anionic collector (potassium cetyl phosphate, PCP) used in this research was purchased from Colonial Chemical Inc. (South Pittsburg, USA). Analytically pure HCl and Na A vertical micro-flotation tube with a volume of 70 ml was used for the flotation experiments for magnesite and calcite samples [ Zeta potentials were determined to study the surface charge of each mineral and its connection with the collector action. Such measurements are known to be helpful for determining the mechanism of collector adsorption on carbonate minerals [ Contact angle measurements were carried out with both minerals in the absence and presence of PCP to examine the level of hydrophobicity with respect to pH variation. The method of measurement was based on the self-attachment of captive bubbles onto polished mineral specimens, which has been used in flotation research with some modification [ The molecular dynamics (MD) simulation, which was used to figure out the adsorption behaviour of the PCP collector on the surfaces of magnesite and calcite, was conducted using the Materials Studio 2016 software package (BIOVIA, USA). It has been reported that the (1 0 1) and (1 0 4) surfaces are the perfect cleavage planes of magnesite and calcite, respectively, and these planes were chosen as the dominant cleavage planes for the simulations [ The interaction model consists of three layers: a bottom layer, a middle layer, and a top layer. In this study, a 6 × 7 magnesite (1 0 1) supercell with a size of 3.11 nm × 3.25 nm × 1.57 nm ( Preliminary optimization of the interaction models was conducted using the geometry optimization calculation in the Forcite Plus module with a smart algorithm approach. All simulations were performed using the COMPASS Ⅱ forcefield [ The geometry optimization calculation was followed by molecular dynamic calculation of the optimized interaction model. The NVT (molecule number, volume, and temperature) canonical ensemble [ In addition, the interaction energy was calculated using the following equation [ The flotation behaviours of magnesite and calcite using PCP as the collector were investigated, and the corresponding results are reported in  The zeta potentials of magnesite and calcite in the absence and presence of the PCP collector were measured as a function of pH, and the results are shown in It can be seen from The zeta potential variation of calcite ( The results of the contact angle measurements for magnesite and calcite in the presence of 60 mg/l PCP are shown as a function of pH in As part of investigations carried out with PCP, a molecular dynamics (MD) simulation was undertaken to look into the adsorption behaviour of PCP on the magnesite and calcite surfaces. The results of the simulation are shown in  As a useful quantity in MD simulations, analysis of the relative concentration of the collector adsorbed on the mineral surface can provide a quantitative basis for determining the adsorption ability [ The distribution of atoms in the simulated PCP adsorption layer is based on the analyses of the interaction models shown in The amount of water present at a solid-solution interface is a decisive factor related to its hydrophilic/hydrophobic transition. To investigate the migration behaviour of water during the adsorption process of PCP on mineral surfaces, the displacement of water was studied by mean square displacement (MSD) analysis. Results are reported in It should be pointed out that the self-diffusion coefficient of water in pure water is of interest in many physicochemical studies. It was experimentally reported that the self-diffusion coefficient of water at 25 °C is approximately 2.2 × 10 The interaction energy between the mineral surface and the reagent system is used to characterize their interaction intensity. As an extension of theoretical analysis, the interaction energy of potassium cetyl phosphate (PCP) with the magnesite surface was computed in comparison with that of the calcite surfaces to see the relative difference corresponding to the remarkable selectivity observed in the separation of the two minerals. The results are shown in The surface chemistry of magnesite and calcite was studied using PCP as a collector in reference to the flotation behaviour of each mineral. The experimental work involved microflotation, zeta potential, and contact angle tests. These series of experiments were followed by a theoretical analysis of MD simulations. Although some aspects of this flotation system are still under investigation, the following conclusions can be made based on the results presented: PCP provides an excellent selectivity based on the fundamental surface chemistry of individual minerals, supporting the case for direct flotation of magnesite independent of pH values used. The adsorption of PCP induces strong shifts in the zeta potentials of magnesite in the negative direction. This effect on calcite is not significant. The mechanism of adsorption on magnesite is chemisorption. Unlike the case with calcite, the magnesite surface develops stable bubble contact angles in the presence of PCP, which appears to be independent of pH. MD simulations demonstrate a clear-cut case for selective adsorption of PCP on magnesite where the O atoms in the phosphate head group are the primary bonding atoms. This process is characterized by a large concentration of adsorbed species with a very much closer profile to the interface, supporting the case for chemisorption. The inclusion of large species of PCP at the initially hydrophilic magnesite surface facilitates the diffusion of water. In the case of calcite, the diffusion coefficient of water estimated for the presence of PCP is 34 % lower, which translates into a 3-fold difference in reference to the self-diffusion of water molecules in bulk water. The interaction energies of both magnesite and calcite with PCP are highly negative suggesting the spontaneous nature of the adsorption process. However, the interaction energy between PCP and calcite is remarkably small at only 7.1 % of that for the magnesite-PCP system. Experimental results obtained on the surface chemistry of the magnesite-calcite-PCP system are in agreement with microflotation results, supporting the case for separation of magnesite by direct flotation, while also representing a good correlation with results of theoretical analysis.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work is financially supported by the