Aim
                  Comparison of unfixed, CRIF, and ORIF of the posterior malleolus fragment (PMF) regarding the frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation and quality of reduction in trimalleolar (equivalent) fractures.
               
                  Material and Methods
                  Retrospective registry study. Patients with a trimalleolar (equivalent) ankle fractures were identified within the departments’ fracture database. General demographics, treatment details, and fracture specific details (CT-scans) were assessed. Patients were grouped per the PMF treatment: not addressed, CRIF, ORIF.
               
                  Results
                  236 patients (53.0 ± 18.3 (range: 18–100) years), 58.1% female were eligible. The mean size of the PMF was 21.4 ± 10.4% (range: 2.7–55.9%), 71.6% were ≤25% of the tibial plafond. PMF fixation: Untreated 48.3%, CRIF 18.6%, ORIF 33.1%. ORIF of the PMF significantly (p < 0.001) reduced the frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation (25%) compared to CRIF (61%) or untreated PMF (63%) with no significant influence of the PMF size (≤25%/>25%). ORIF resulted in a significantly (p < 0.001) better quality of reduction (1.2 ± 1.1 mm (range: 0–5 mm)) compared to CRIF (2.5 ± 2.1 mm (range: 0–8 mm)) and untreated PMF (2.5 ± 2.3 mm (range: 0–20 mm)). Neither the frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation nor the quality of reduction differed significantly between untreated PMF and CRIF.
               
                  Conclusion
                  All posterior malleolus fragments, independent of their size, should be treated by ORIF, as this restores syndesmotic stability significantly more often than untreated PMF or CRIF.With an annual incidence of 169/100,000, the treatment of ankle fractures is part of our daily routine [ The current standard treatment approach for bi- or trimalleolar fractures with a fracture to the posterior malleolus (PM) is anatomical reduction and internal fixation of the lateral and/or medial malleolus. The fracture to the PM is not routinely addressed. Per to recommendation of the AO-Foundation and several authors, fractures to the PM are only fixed if its’ size is greater than 25%–33% of the tibial plafond [ Considering the disillusioning results following complex ankle fractures, various authors have tried to identify factors associated with a poor outcome. These include severity of the fracture, insufficient reduction, and syndesmotic instability. Unsatisfactory reduction of the PM, as seen by CRIF, does not only affect the congruency of the tibio-talar, but also of the tibio-fibular joint, which possibly influences syndesmotic stability. Today, an increasing number of studies [ Therefore, the aim of this study was to investigate the frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation in patients suffering a trimalleolar or trimalleolar equivalent fracture treated without fixation of the PM (Group 1), CRIF by AP screws (Group 2), or ORIF (Group 3). It is hypothesized, that ORIF of the PM will significantly reduce the need for a trans-syndesmotic fixation. The secondary purpose was to analyse the quality of reduction between the three groups. The study was approved by the local ethics committee (#-500-15). The herein presented study is a retrospective database study investigating the frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation and the quality of reduction of the PM fragment in patients following operative treatment of a trimalleolar or trimalleolar equivalent fracture. Patient selection was based on the departments ankle fracture database. It includes all patients treated surgically for any type of ankle fracture between 01/2010 and 12/2016, comprising of 648 consecutive patients older than 18 years. The database was searched for trimalleolar (equivalent) fractures (AO 44-A2.3, A3.3, B1.3, B2.3, B3.1-3, C1.3, C2.3, C3.3), treated operatively, with either pre- or postoperative computer tomography scans (CT-scans). The phrase “trimalleolar equivalent” describes a bimalleolar fracture with a fracture of the PM and medial or lateral malleolus as well as an injury to the deltoid ligament complex / lateral ankle ligament complex. At the author’s level one trauma centre, treatment approaches for PM fractures can be categorized into three groups. Group 1 ( Next to general demographics (age, sex), the fractures were classified according the AO classification. Furthermore, the PM fractures were classified according to Haraguchi et al. [ The primary outcome was the need for trans-syndesmotic fixation per the three PM treatment groups. The secondary outcome was the degree of reduction (posterior malleolus, MCS, and TFCS) per the three different groups. Furthermore, it was tested whether these outcome parameters were influenced by any of the other parameters assessed. A sample size calculation was not conducted due to the observational nature of this retrospective registry study. Descriptive statistics included mean values, frequencies, and proportions. Group comparisons were conducted either by a paired-sample T Test, Chi-squared, or ANOVA using the Bonferroni post-hoc test. Due to multiple testing, an alpha level correction (Bonferroni) was conducted, setting the level of significance to p < 0.005. All statistics were computed using SPSS Vs. 21 (IBM Company). In the following the results are displayed as mean ± standard deviation (range). Out of 648 patients in the departments’ ankle fracture database, 236 patients were included in the final analysis. The patient selection flow chart is presented in 39.4% of the fractures were initially displaced. According to the AO Classification, 1.7% suffered a 44-A (A2: 0.4%; A3: 1.3%), 77.5% a 44-B (B1: 0.8%; B2: 0.4%; B3.1: 20.3%; B3.2: 19.5%; B3.3: 36.4%), and 11.9% a 44-C fracture (C1: 1.3%; C2: 6.8% C3: 3.8%). 8.9% could not be classified according to the AO classification with 2.5% suffering a fracture of the medial and PM and 6.4% a type Weber C and PM fracture. Per Haraguchi et al. [ In 27.1% an external fixator was applied initially. The lateral malleolus was treated using a 1/3 The posterior malleolus was not addressed in 48.3% (Group 1), by CRIF using AP screws in 18.6% (Group 2), and by ORIF using a plate or screw(s) in 33.1%. A trans-syndesmotic fixation was necessary in 50.0% of all cases, either using a trans-syndesmotic screw (56.8%), a tight rope (36.4%), or an internal brace (6.8%). According to the postoperative imaging, the above outlined treatment resulted in a displacement reduction of the posterior malleolus from 6.6 ± 6.1 mm (range: 0–30 mm) preoperatively to 2.0 ± 2.1 mm (range: 0–20 mm; p < 0.001) postoperatively overall. The postoperative medial clear space was 3.2 ± 1.0 mm (range: 2–8 mm), the tibio-fibular clear space 4.3 ± 1.5 mm (range: 2–9 mm). Outcome  Further, the choice of treatment strategy and implants did no not differ significantly between the three groups. Neither the initial application of an external fixator (p = 0.024), nor the choice of fixation of the lateral malleolus (p = 0.016), medial malleolus (p = 0.090), or reconstruction of the deltoid ligament (p = 0.918) differed significantly between the three groups. The primary outcome of this study was the frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation in regard to the method of fixation of the PM fragment. A trans-syndesmotic fixation was necessitated significant less frequent (p < 0.001) in patients undergoing ORIF for the PM (Group 3: 25%) compared to CRIF (Group 2: 61%) and untreated PM fractures (Group 1: 63%). Moreover, the size of the PM fragment (≤25%/>25%) had no significant influence on the frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation within the three Groups ( The secondary outcome was the quality of reduction of the PM fragment. Again, significant differences (p < 0.001) between the Groups were observed ( Despite the significant reduction of trans-syndesmotic fixation following ORIF of the PM fragment (Group 3), a quarter of these patients necessitated additional trans-syndesmotic fixation. Consequently, it was of interest, whether any factor could be identified predicting the need for trans-syndesmotic fixation. Overall, none of the parameters assessed differed significantly per the necessity of trans-syndesmotic fixation in Group 3 ( Syndesmotic malreduction is known to be a major factor leading to poor patient rated outcome following complex ankle fracture treatment [ To the authors’ best knowledge this is the first study demonstrating that ORIF of the PM fragment, independent of its size, significantly reduced the necessity of trans-syndesmotic fixation by 60% compared to CRIF or untreated PM fragments. Further, ORIF resulted in a significantly superior quality of reduction of the PM fragment. Interestingly, neither the necessity of trans-syndesmotic fixation nor the level of reduction differed significantly between CRIF or untreated PM fragments. ORIF of the PM has been shown to reduce the malreduction rate of the fibula in the fibula notch by a figure of 4.5 [ O’Conner et al. [ Noteworthy, a quarter of the patients necessitated trans-syndesmotic stabilization despite ORIF of the PM fracture. This could be attributed to numerous reasons, including stretching or partial tear of the PTFL as well as multi-ligamentous lesions. Although anatomical reduction of the PM fracture will restore the PTFL, it has no impact on lesions to the AITFL (anterior-inferior tibiofibular ligament), IOL (interosseous ligament), or deltoid ligament. The stress tests applied in this study for the assessment of syndesmotic stability have been proven to detect instability of the syndesmotic complex of two or more ligaments [ From our understanding, ORIF of the PM leads to increased syndesmotic stability by anatomical reduction of the bony PTFL lesion. The herein presented data revealed a significantly better quality of reduction in the ORIF, compared to the CRIF or untreated group. Several studies have assessed the degree of reduction comparing CRIF to ORIF of the PM, all of which demonstrated superior results for ORIF [ Although this study was the first to assess the effect of different treatment strategies for PM fractures in regard to syndesmotic stability, several limitations have to be mentioned. First, the registry study design was retrospective, including all patients from a level I trauma centre. Whether this has an impact on the parameters assessed remains a matter of debate. Another limiting factor could be that the indication for trans-syndesmotic fixation was made by several surgeons based on two different intraoperative tests. Nevertheless, both tests are well accepted in literature and all surgeons were board-certified trauma surgeons. Finally, no patient rated outcome measures were assessed. Therefore, the clinical impact of the different treatment strategies remains unclear. Despite these limitations, this study has two major positive aspects. First, PM fracture characteristics were all assessed based on CT imaging. Previous studies relied predominantly on plain radiographs [ Missed syndesmotic instability or malreduction are among the most determinant factors for a poor outcome following complex ankle fracture treatment. As PM fractures should be considered bony avulsions of the posterior tibio-fibular ligament, anatomical reduction of PM fragment has been hypothesized to restore syndesmotic stability. This study, for the first time, demonstrated a 60% decrease in trans-syndesmotic fixation following ORIF of the PM fragment and a significantly superior quality of reduction compared to CRIF by AP screws or untreated PM fractures. These findings were consistent for all PM fragments independent of their size (≤25%/>25%). Interestingly, CRIF and untreated PM fractures did not differ in regard to the high frequency of trans-syndesmotic fixation and the low quality of reduction. Future studies should focus on the clinical benefit of ORIF of the PM fragment including the quality of reduction of the distal tibio-fibular joint.