Conventional zooarchaeological wisdom holds that reduction of bone into small fragments, modally 2–5 cm in maximum dimension, facilitates the extraction of bone grease. However, experiments by Church and Lyman showed no statistically significant differences in amounts of grease extracted from 1 cm, 2 cm, and 4 cm bone fragments. Our research assessed whether other factors, including water and fuel inputs, could influence the degree of bone comminution for grease extraction. Experimental grease extraction from 15 cattle (Bos taurus) femora, reduced to similar maximum dimensions as in the Church and Lyman study, supports their finding that grease yield does not significantly increase in fragments <4 cm. However, our research shows that smaller fragment sizes require less water, and hence less fuel, to produce the same grease yields. These results suggest a tradeoff between the work it takes to produce very small modal bone fragment size and broader-scale fuel, water, and human energy budgets.Zooarchaeologists have long assumed that the extremely small fragment sizes typical of bone grease production facilitates the extraction of grease from the bone ( An alternative explanation, which this article explores, steps back and views bone grease extraction in a broader perspective, specifically attending to its fuel and water requirements. Reasoning from first principles, we know that a greater volume of water will require more time to heat to a boil. The equation Q = mcDT describes the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of a substance by 1 °C, where Q is the heat added, m is the mass of the substance, c is the substance's specific heat (4.168 J/g°C for water), and DT is the change in temperature. To boil this down to plain English, the smaller the fragments of bone, the less water is needed to cover them, and therefore, the smaller amount of fuel needed to bring the water to a boil. Smaller fragments also have a higher surface area to volume ratio, which facilitates quicker grease removal. We hypothesized that the volume of water, and its essential relation to the energy required to heat it to boiling temperatures, influence the size of bone fragments when extracting grease. To test this hypothesis, we monitored the volume of water (ml) required to cover bone fragments and thus to capture grease freed from bone fragments, total fuel consumption during grease extraction, the rate of temperature (°C) increase, and the total amount of grease extracted (ml/kg) from fifteen cattle femora reduced to three different fragment size classes. Mammalian bone grease is composed primarily of fatty acids, including essential fatty acids (EFA), which humans cannot physiologically synthesize and must obtain from food. Bone grease levels vary seasonally according to the condition of an animal and, especially in the case of females, through its reproductive cycles. Archaeological, ethnoarchaeological, and experimental studies from Europe and North America have shown that bone grease production usually correlates with percussion-mediated reduction of skeletal elements into very small fragments. Archaeologically, “signatures” of bone grease extraction are dense concentrations of minimally identifiable bone scraps, of 1–5 cm in maximum dimensions (   Both Our experiment focuses on how the reduction of bones to smaller fragments could conserve four critical and finite “resources:” water, fuel, processors' time, and processors' effort. For peoples residing in a fixed locale, fuel can be a major limiting factor ( Although our basic operations – bone fragmentation, simmering, fat skimming – replicate ethnographically documented cases of bone grease extraction, we stress that we in no way sought to imitate “traditional” methods in our research design. Our experimental goals were to closely calibrate bone grease yields against: (1) fragment size; (2) elapsed time to end of grease production; (3) the amount of water used; (4) amount of fuel consumed. We therefore used techniques that best suited these goals. We obtained fifteen fresh, whole young adult cattle ( Experimental femora were sawed into fragments with 4 cm, 2 cm, or 1 cm maximum dimensions using a Barranca Diamond model PF10 10" power feed rock saw. These fragment size categories coincide with those of All trials were carried out in a fume hood in the Zooarchaeology Laboratory at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Bone fragments were weighed to the nearest tenth of a gram on a digital balance, and then placed in a 12 L uncovered stainless steel pot with the measured water and brought to a low boil over a natural gas Bunsen burner attached to a gas flow meter ( We separated the sawed bone samples into three different experimental groups for boiling and grease extraction using different techniques. Each group consisted of femora sawed into different fragment sizes (1, 2, and 4 cm maximum dimensions), and each experimental trial contained fragments from a single whole femur. In the first experimental group (Lot 1: Trials 1–5, 13–15), measured volumes of water were added to cover the top of the bone fragments up to 1 cm depth. As anticipated, the volume of water added varied according to bone fragment size. The measured volume of water (ml) added and the starting temperature (°C) were recorded. The bones were simmered over an ignited natural gas Bunsen burner set to maximum (2.5 m Experimental Lot 2 trials (Trials 6, 7, and 11) were also simmered over a Bunsen burner set to maximum (2.5 m Finally, in Lot 3 trials (Trials 8–10 and 12), 4.0 L of water was added to bones with the Bunsen burner intentionally turned to half flow (1.25/m In each trial, water temperature and fuel consumption was recorded every fifteen minutes for the first two hours of the experiment. Thereafter, water temperature measurements were recorded every half hour until six hours had elapsed, or the water had completely boiled off, in which case, we ended the trial, recording the time elapsed. In each trial, we replicated two grease extraction processes described in ethnographic accounts. First, grease was skimmed from the top of the heated water with bone fragments still in the pot when a sufficient amount had accumulated during simmering, and second, grease extraction at the conclusion of each trial was facilitated by adding 1 L of cold water to the pot, which helped to bring the remaining grease to the water surface above the level of the bones, and the fat to congeal. After some trial and error with various grease recovery tools during the first two trials, we skimmed grease from the water surface with a shallow ladle. For Lot 1, grease was skimmed from the surface of the water and measured every hour. Based upon the rates of yield in the Lot 1 sampling, grease from Lots 2 and 3 was skimmed just twice: at five hours' and again at six hours' elapsed time. The volume of grease extracted was measured in a calibrated beaker and recorded (ml). In agreement with We did, however, observe striking differences among experimental trials in the amounts of grease extracted in relation to the amounts of fuel and water consumed ( Irrespective of fragment size, Lot 1 trials consistently had the lowest ratios of water to grease yield and fuel to grease yield; that is, trials in Lot 1 required the least water and the least fuel to extract a unit (ml/kg) of grease ( The proportionate grease yields for Trials 1 and 2 in Lot 1 are not available because the bone specimens were not weighed before the start of the trials. All seven trials in Lots 2 and 3 lasted the full six hours and concluded with water still remaining in the pot. It took >90 min for Lot 2 trials (4.0 L of water, at maximum fuel input) to come to a boil, while Lot 3 trials never reached a boil (4.0 L of water, at half fuel input; Irrespective of fragment size, Lot 2 trials used the greatest amount of fuel and required an intermediate amount of water per unit grease: 3.63 m Both experimental ( In sum, results of our study suggest that reducing the size of bone fragments used in grease extraction facilitates the conservation of fuel and water, as well as the human time and energetic costs involved in collecting them. Bone fragments in Lot 1, to which just enough water was added to cover the fragments to a centimeter depth, yielded the most grease in absolute terms, as well as in the most favorable ratios of fuel use and water to grease. The intern error mentioned in  The results from this experiment unequivocally indicate that bones come to a boil faster when less water is used, and that smaller bone fragments allow the amounts of water and fuel to be minimized, while shortening the boiling time and hence maximizing the amount of grease extracted per unit of the processors' time. These data strongly suggest that the goals of reducing cooking time and the costs of acquiring water and fuel, rather than a quest for non-lipid nutrients, are likely significant factors in bone fragmentation decisions. Ethnographic cases implicate women in bone grease extraction, as well as in gathering water and fuel, suggesting that bone fragmentation results from tradeoffs in overall energy and time costs by actors engaged in the entire process of this form of nutrient capture. The study further suggests the value for archaeologists of broadening their scope to include the cost-benefit tradeoffs of food processing “outside the container,” to better understand strategic decisions that structure the evidence recovered from sites. We wish to thank Anthropology Laboratories Manager Richard Baldwin for providing technical assistance at all stages of this project, and Bruce Tanner, Laboratory Specialist in the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, for guidance and assistance with sawing. We thank the butchers at Corralitos Market and Sausage Company for the cattle femora. Spencer Frasher helped with removal of soft tissue and bone sawing, and Alexis Garcia and Rachel Dailey aided in boiling experiments. We thank R. Lee Lyman for helpful comments and suggestions on a preliminary draft, and are grateful to the anonymous reviewers who offered insightful feedback. We wish to acknowledge Benjamin Broyles (Cultural Resource Specialist, California Department of Transportation, Sacramento), who suggested during his 1998 undergraduate experiments in bone grease rendering at UC Santa Cruz that thermal inertia should be considered as a factor in bone grease rendering, which was an impetus to this experimentation.