The Nineteenth Annual Summer Meeting of the American Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) was held on 27–29 July 2003 at the Westin Resort in Hilton Head, South Carolina. There were 388 registrants in attendance, including 35 individuals from 15 countries outside the United States. I. Hallux valgus: case controversies Complex hallux valgus cases were presented and discussed II. CPT coding Coding for foot and ankle care includes selection of the most appropriate CPT code and attention to other factors including billable services in the global period, billable supplies, postoperative casting, Evaluation and Management codes, and modifiers III. Diabetes: case controversies A 57-year-old insensate diabetic patient with an acute, non-displaced Charcot lateral malleolus fracture was initially managed with cast immobilization, non-weight-bearing; however, after 8 weeks, further displacement was managed with a fibular dynamic compression plate and multiple fibulotibial screws IV. Trauma: case controversies A fractured talar body that was extruded through a grade IIIA posterior open wound was treated with irrigation and debridement, medial malleolar osteotomy, and reduction and internal fixation of the talus through medial and lateral approaches; a small medial blade plate was used to buttress the soft medial talar bone, and a lag screw was used at the hard, lateral bone at the sinus tarsi V. Outcomes assessment in foot and ankle surgery The AOFAS clinical rating scores were developed to quantify clinical status including pain, function, and alignment VI. New directions for external fixation Intra-articular calcaneal fractures may be treated with indirect reduction (reduction of the tuberosity with Kirschner wire traction and reduction of the posterior facet through a small plantar incision) and external fixation with a ring fixator VII. International symposium: Achilles tendon rupture In a treatment protocol for Achilles tendon rupture, non-operative treatment is considered if there is complete tendon contact (ultrasonography) at 20° of plantarflexion and a compliant patient; a short leg cast in equinus is applied, followed by use of a walker boot in plantarflexion and physiotherapy I. Surgical management of chronic plantar fasciitis High energy shock wave therapy may be successful in relieving symptoms of chronic plantar fasciitis in approximately 80% of cases, and complications such as dysesthesia about the heel are uncommon and transient II. The role of first ray hypermobility in the etiology of hallux valgus Hypermobility of the first metatarsocuneiform joint may result in metatarsus primus varus, which may lead to hallux valgus deformity III. Surgical management of stage II posterior tibial tendon dysfunction For patients with stage II posterior tibial tendon dysfunction, a medial sliding calcaneal osteotomy may be helpful if there is mild to moderate deformity with heel valgus malalignment, moderate pronation, and mild increased forefoot abduction I. Bunions A. B. C. II. Forefoot A. B. C. D. III. Hallux A. B. C. D. E. F. G. IV. Arthritis A. B. C. V. Total ankle replacement A. B. C. D. E. F. G. VI. Ankle A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. I. VII. General A. B. C. D. E. VIII. Achilles tendon A. B. C. D. IX. Diabetes A. B. C. D. E. X. Trauma I. Ankle and calcaneus A. B. C. D. E. F. G. H. XI. Posterior tibial tendon A. B. C. D. XII. Trauma II. Lisfranc injuries A. B. C. D. An innovative wireless audience response system, arranged by Brian G. Donley, was used to broaden audience participation by enabling audience members to provide and review responses to multiple choice questions during the discussion periods after the sessions. A special session provided a forum to discuss the advantages and limitations of the diverse electronic medical records systems currently available Outgoing president E. Greer Richardson reviewed the broad participation of the AOFAS membership in the numerous successful projects during the previous year The summer meeting was a great success, thanks to the superb efforts of the AOFAS staff and generous educational grants from 35 corporate sponsors. The next meeting of the AOFAS will be on Specialty Day, March 13, 2004, at the meeting of the American Academy of Orthopaedic Surgeons in San Francisco, California. The next summer meeting of the AOFAS will be held on July 28–31, 2004 in Seattle, Washington.