Background
                  The choice between volar locking plates (VLP) and external fixation (EF) for unstable distal radius fractures have not reached a consensus. The meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials was performed to compare VLP with EF to determine the dominant strategy.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Meta-analysis was performed with a systematic search of studies conducted by using the PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials databases. The randomized controlled trials that compared VLP with EF was identified. Characteristics, functional outcomes, radiological results, and complications were manually extracted from all the selected studies.
               
                  Results
                  Six studies encompassing 445 patients met the inclusion criteria. There was significant difference between two procedures in disabilities of the arm shoulder and hand scores at 3,6, and 12 mo, visual analogue scale at 6 mo, grip strength at 3 mo, supination at 3 and 6 mo, extension at 3 mo, ulnar variance at 12 mo, and reoperation rate at 12 mo, postoperatively. However, there was no significant difference between flexion, pronation, radial deviation, and ulnar deviation at all follow-up points postoperatively and overall complications at 12 mo, postoperatively.
               
                  Conclusions
                  EF had less reoperative rate due to complications, however, VLP had advantages in functional recovery in the early period after surgery, but two methods had similar functional recovery at 12 mo, postoperatively. Clinician should make the treatment decision with great caution for the patients who sustained unstable distal radial fractures.Young and active patients with high function demands in unstable fractures of the distal radius Unstable extra-articular fracture with important metaphyseal comminution in elderly with underlying osteoporosis Dorsal fracture fragment appear uncontrolled with close reduction Type B Complex C type fracture (AO classification) Malunions and the rare nonunions Severely contaminated open injuries Compartment syndrome Open distal radial epiphysis fracture Distal radial shear fracture Medical comorbidities that disallow the safety of the manipulation or the required degree of anesthesia Unstable intra-articular fracture of the distal radius Articular depression (1 mm) after attempted closed reduction, or loss of reduction Injuries with soft tissue Grossly contaminated open fractures Unstable multitrauma patients brought to operation room for other life threatening injuries Medical comorbidities that disallow the safety of the manipulation or the required degree of anesthesia Ongoing systemic infection Local infection at the planned site of external fixator Severely osteoporotic bone The distal radius fractures, which is one of most common osteoporotic fractures Several choices can be made for managing unstable fractures of distal radius, such as closed reduction with percutaneous Kirschner-wire Recently, a meta-analysis of RCTs compared VLP with EF for the treatment of unstable distal radius fractures We conducted this comprehensive meta-analysis based on all relevant RCTs to compare the VLP with EF in the treatment of unstable distal radius fractures ( A search for PubMed, Embase, and Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials (central) databases from inception to September 2013 about the distal radius fractures was performed according to the search strategy mentioned in Cochrane Handbook 5.1.0 Studies on comparison between VLP and EF for the treatment of unstable distal radius fractures were included. The inclusion criteria are as follow: the design of study must be RCT; the original study must report at least one of the outcomes as follow: disabilities of the arm shoulder and hand (DASH) score Because there are no uniform criteria established for the definition of an unstable distal radial fractures, we made the following list according to previous literature Two co-authors independently screened all the titles of retrieved articles described previously. Duplicates were removed. The irrelevant articles through screening the titles were identified and eliminated. Subsequently, the abstracts of remaining articles were examined to confirm the sufficient information. And then potential included articles were assessed by the full-text reading. Any disagreement was resolved by the discussion between two authors, and if a consensus perspective could not be reached, a further decision was adjudicated by a third experienced trauma surgeon after the discussion. The relevant data were extracted from eligible studies by two investigators independently by using a data collection form. The data items included study type, number of patients, gender, age, dominate hands proportion, time of follow-up, interventions, controls, fractures classification, the measurement of clinical and radiological outcomes, and complications. The detailed information were obtained through contacting with the authors if the original literature did not provide the direct data. We evaluated the included studies applying the “assessing the risk of bias” table of Cochrane Handbook for Systematic Reviews of Interventions version 5.1, which included the following key domains: adequate sequence generation: allocation concealment, blinding, incomplete outcome data, free from selective reporting, and free from other bias, including baseline balance between groups, no support by funding, and valid sample size estimation. We also used the Grading of Recommendations Assessment, Development and Evaluation (GRADE) system to evaluate the quality of evidence by main outcomes in the article. In each study, the risk ratio with a 95% confidence interval (CI) was used for dichotomous outcomes and the weighted mean difference with a 95% CI was expressed for the continuous variables. Two methods were used to compute the standard deviation if the article did not provide it. When a Chi-square test was used to assess the between-study heterogeneity quantified through the I Statistical analyses were undertaken with the software program RevMan5.1 (Copenhagen: The Nordic Cochrane Centre, The Cochrane Collaboration, 2008) and the present meta-analysis was performed following the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines The strategy retrieved 221 potential eligible citations, six The result of the quality evaluation was shown in Data of DASH scores were pooled across the studies and the analysis revealed a significant difference favoring VLP over EF at 3, 6, and 12 mo, postoperatively ( Data regarding the complications, which included soft tissue infection, tendon rupture, carpel tunnel syndrome, postoperative nerve deficit, abnormal union, complex regional pain syndrome, hardware irritation, and rate of reoperation were pooled from the included studies. The overall rates of complications are 23.9% (53/222) in the VLP group and 30.9% (72/233) in the EF group, but this difference between groups was not significant ( The present meta-analysis indicated that VLP lead to significant lower DASH scores than EF 3, 6, and 12 mo after surgery, and patients with VLP had better restoration in ulnar variance at 12 mo, postoperatively significantly. Compared with EF, VLP was associated with significantly better supination range of the forearm at 3 and 6 mo postoperatively, as well the extension range and grip strength at 3 mo after surgery. Furthermore, complications were more common in the EF group, but this difference was not significant. Interestingly, there was a significant greater rate of reoperation in the VLP group. We updated the previous meta-analysis published recently, which included only three RCTs. A meta-analysis of RCTs is generally considered to provide the highest level of evidence for clinical interventions. Six RCTs were included in our meta-analysis, five of which performed the allocation concealment. Allocation concealment that plays an important role in the bias of study somewhat is more essential than blinded method in the clinical trials The significant difference in DASH scores at all follow-up points presented probable advantage superiority of VLP over the EF though the whole period after surgery. However, the minimal clinically important difference of DASH, which is smallest difference that a patient perceives as beneficial, seems to range between 10 and 15 points The difference in grip strength and the extension or supination range of the forearm postoperatively between VLP and EF suggested that the patients with VLP could acquire an advantageous recovery in early rehabilitation period, but the outcomes at 1 y are similar. This may attribute to the earlier rehabilitation and exercise in the VLP group. Egol However, the significant difference in volar tilt between the VLP and EF found in Walenkamp Moreover, significant difference in the rate of reoperation revealed that EF was better than VLP. Egol Our study revealed that the plate-fixated patients were better at 1 y in terms of the DASH scores and ulnar variance. Regarding functional, radiological outcomes, and overall complication, generally speaking, there was no absolute difference at 1 y after surgery. In terms of the reoperation, VLP failed to be superior to the EF. In addition, Day The considerable heterogeneity was found across the eligible studies and it mainly may be as a result of the different implants. The residual heterogeneity could have been induced by differences between the times of immobilization after surgeries. Other potential sources of heterogeneity are different fracture types, surgeon experience, or the definition of unstable distal radial fractures. The results of this study should be interpreted with caution because of the following limitations. First, relatively small sample sizes of the included studies led to the limitation of our study and decreased the power of the pooled estimates. Therefore, a large sample study is required. Second, publication bias was not able to be detected due to the number of the included studies. VLP could provide better results such as DASH scores, grip strength, supination motion of forearm in earlier postoperative period compared with EF. And VLP had better ulna variance at 1 y after surgery, whereas VLP had higher rate of reoperation than EF due to the complication after surgery. Large, rigorous RCTs are required to improve the evidence. Clinicians should make the treatment decision with great caution according to both the patients' requirement and the specific condition for the patients who sustained unstable distal radial fractures. The authors are grateful to all the authors of the studies included in the present study and their study participants. They thank Professor Holger Schünemann and Professor Philip Wiffen, who advised them regarding the 11th Cochrane style systematic review training in Beijing, China. There are no sources of funding involved in this article. Authors' contributions: Z.L.-H. and T.P.-F. made a contribution to designing the study and providing critical revisions to this article. W.Y.-N., M.Z., and Z.L.-C. were responsible to write the article and the others made a contribution to collecting the data. The authors reported no proprietary or commercial interest in any product mentioned or concept discussed in this article.