Background
                  No simple clinical technique with which to measure the volume of bone gaps in the treatment of open fractures or nonunions of the tibia is currently available. It is difficult to compare the three-dimensional magnitude of bone defects in research studies on bone grafting without such a tool, and clinicians have no way of determining the magnitude of defects in clinical practice. The purposes of this study were to develop and to validate a technique with which to accurately measure bone gap volumes of the tibial shaft by using only simple measurements on already available clinical radiographs and a simple equation. We hypothesized that a technique could be developed using anteroposterior- and lateral-view radiographs of the tibia to accurately determine the volume of a tibial shaft fracture.
               
                  Methods
                  We created standardized fracture gap models using 45 synthetic tibiae cut in different locations and orientations, rendering 135 gaps. We developed and validated a hydrostatic suspension technique to determine the volume of each bone, which underwent anteroposterior- and lateral-view radiography after each cut. Radiographic measurements were used to calculate defect volumes based on a simple equation. Predicted volumes were compared with measured volumes.
               
                  Results
                  The triangular prism equation matched well with the actual volumes. Linear regression analysis showed a slope of 0.92 and R
                     2 of 0.97.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The equation provides a simple technique with which to calculate three-dimensional gap volumes based on standard radiographs. The simplicity of the equation and availability of standard radiographs make this a practical research and perhaps clinical tool that might be useful in quantifying volumes of the tibial shaft defect.Substantial clinical and research interest exists in determining the ideal technique for managing bone defects in open fractures and nonunions of the tibia The cross-sectional variation of the tibial shaft and range of geometric volumes of interest in the tibia create a challenge to develop a simple technique of estimating volume based on currently available clinical information. The purposes of this study were to develop and to validate a relatively simple mathematical equation based on measurements obtained from standard clinical radiographs that can be used to estimate three-dimensional volumes across a range of different geometries and orientations along the full length of the tibial shaft. Our hypothesis was that this equation would be accurate in predicting tibial volumes of interest. A common method of measuring the volumes of irregular shapes, such as those of model tibiae, is water displacement and the Archimedes principle. Previous work conducted by Vagts et al. Our measurement technique was based on work conducted by Hughes To ensure the accuracy of the method used to determine the true defect volume, a validation study was conducted. Precision was measured by attaching a Hoffmann II MRI External Fixation system (Stryker, Selzach, Switzerland) to two model tibiae (1117-SP; Sawbones, Vashon, WA, USA), as shown in Change in weight was recorded as the volume of displaced water and volume of submerged tibia. The density of the water was assumed to be 1 Accuracy was assessed with the same tibia with the defect that was used in the precision validation except that a stainless steel mesh bowl was attached in the space left by the defect. The defect tibia and bowl were fully submerged and measured for volume. Eighteen individual 16 The accuracy of the technique was shown by plotting the measured volume versus the calculated volume (based on the size of the ball bearings added at each point) and calculating the slope and coefficient of determination. The slope of 1.0002 and We created standardized fracture gap models using 45 synthetic tibiae. We created gaps at three locations (proximal, midshaft, and distal) and in three directions (anterior-, posterior-, and lateral-facing wedge). Each gap was tested in three sequentially increasing sizes, for a total of 135 gaps of various sizes, shapes, and locations. The proximal and distal groups were cut in such a way to ensure that no defect was within a distance of either the plateau or pilon equivalent to the width of the plateau or pilon, respectively. Midshaft defects were made such that the first cut was exactly halfway down the length of the bone. The proximal, distal, and midshaft groups were further divided into anterior, posterior, and lateral based on the direction that the widest part of the defect would face, as shown in All tibiae were externally fixated and measured with the hydrostatic suspension technique described above to obtain the full tibial bone volume. External fixation was applied to maintain the tibia's length and to provide a support from which to suspend the tibia during measurement. However, other mechanisms to maintain the bone's pre-fracture length could have been used for the subsequent radiographic measurements. Each cut was made by bracing the external fixator and using an attachment (Dremel MS400 MultiSaw attachment; Robert Bosch Tool Corporation, Mount Prospect, IL, USA) to create defect patterns. The first cut was made perpendicular to the axis of the tibia, and the second was made at a 30° angle to the first cut. These cuts were defined as defect 1, which was the smallest volume defect shaped like a wedge. Defect 1 volumes were measured by using the hydrostatic suspension technique averaged in three trials and subtracting that average from the full tibial bone volume. The defected bones next underwent anteroposterior- (AP) and lateral-view radiography, and the volume was calculated by using radiographic measurements and the triangular prism equation described below. A second defect was cut into the bone, cutting perpendicular to the axis of the tibia at the point at which defect 1 was the widest, creating a cylindrical defect. The same hydrostatic suspension volume measurement and radiography-based calculation with the triangular prism equation that were used for defect 1 were used for defect 2. The third and last defect was created by making two 30° cuts on either side of the defect, rendering a defect shaped like a large wedge. The same volume measurement and radiography protocol used for defects 1 and 2 were used for defect 3. A diagram showing each cut in the anterior-facing orientation is shown in The posterior and lateral defects (not shown) were made in a similar fashion except that the widest part of the defect faced posteriorly or laterally, respectively. All three cuts were made at each location and facing each orientation. Measurements were obtained from standard two-dimensional radiographs of the fractured tibiae by using software and measuring six lengths as defined below. The measurements were the lateral and medial heights of the defect, the width proximal to the defect from the AP view of each bone, the anterior and posterior heights of the defect, and the width proximal to the defect measured from the lateral view of each bone. The maximum overall defect height ( Because the tibia is somewhat similar to a triangular prism in shape, we hypothesized that the equation for the volume of a triangular prism would provide a good estimate of the volume (Eq. An example using the values measured in The calculated values for each tibial defect were compared with the measured values obtained from the hydrostatic suspension method, and linear regression analysis was conducted to determine equivalence and correlation. The numerical error of each sample and standard deviation of the error were calculated to determine the 95% confidence intervals for the entire dataset and intervals for each subset of samples. All measurements for the hydrostatic volume of each tibia with a defect and radiographic measurements were obtained before calculating volumes to ensure integrity of the data. Linear regression analysis, shown in The purposes of this study were to develop and to validate a technique with which to accurately measure bone gap volumes of the tibial shaft using only simple measurements on already available clinical radiographs and a simple equation. Our data indicated that highly accurate estimates of three-dimensional tibial shaft volumes can be obtained through a calculation that uses only simple measurements from two-dimensional standard clinical radiographs. The simplicity of the prism equation described in this study, coupled with the accessibility of radiographs, might render this technique an effective tool for measuring tibial bone defects in either a research or perhaps a clinical setting. The hydrostatic technique used in this study can also be applied to any number of anatomic volumes for use as a standard in volumetric analysis experiments. The resolution and capacity of the volume measurement are limited only by the size of the container and the scale used, rendering the technique adaptable to any size application. Our validation results for measuring bone volume proved that the hydrostatic technique was adequate to serve as a standard for the tibial defect volumes in this study. Throughout the course of developing the technique, various sources of errors were identified and addressed. For example, each measurement removed a small volume of water (∼2 It is worth noting that the hydrostatic measurement technique used in this study can be adapted to any irregular shape (i.e., bone, solid organ, or soft tissue) as a standard by which the accuracy of other clinically available measurement tools is gauged. Kodali et al. Very little work has been done on estimating bone defects in tibial shafts. Previous work conducted by Abdollahi et al. The triangular prism equation (Eq. The research or clinical usefulness of our work is yet to be determined. It is our hope that future clinical trials on techniques for treating bone gaps in open fractures and nonunions might incorporate this technique to ensure that treatment groups have equal bone gap sizes. If future studies determine that bone gap volume is a predictor of outcome variables such as risk of complication, the equation might have clinical usefulness in predicting outcomes. This is, of course, speculation and awaits attempts at clinical validation. Further, our general approach of creating a simplified equation based on radiographic measurements can be applied to other bones and other clinical scenarios. This similar approach might be applicable to measuring bone tumours, fracture callus, volume of fracture comminution, or other volumes of interest in the body that can be observed on radiographs. Our technique is advantageous over the three-dimensional computed tomographic reconstruction because computed tomographic scans are not typically obtained of tibial gaps, would require increased cost, and are not a tool that is used in the clinic. The limitations of our study include the use of synthesized gap volumes instead of actual gaps experienced in clinical practice. However, we used a large number ( The strengths of our study include the relatively large number and variations of samples that were measured. Further, we validated our measurement technique and showed it to be accurate and precise. Additionally, our novel measuring technique is based on simple measurements from radiographs that are already obtained in clinical practice. We developed a novel equation for estimating tibial shaft bone defect volumes that can be used by clinicians and researchers with standard radiographic measurements. It is our hope that the proposed equation will become a useful and inexpensive tool with which to measure volumes of tibial shaft defects in clinical trials or perhaps in clinical practice. Additionally, we think that this general approach of creating simple equations using radiographic measurements to estimate bone gap volumes might be applied broadly to any bone for which an accurate reproducible tool for calculating bone volumes is needed. Author T.M. and his institution receive payment on an ongoing basis for providing expert testimony to various law firms and for presenting lectures for AO North America and the Maine Orthopaedic Review. They have received grant funds from the Orthopaedic Research and Education Foundation in the past. The authors have no other potential conflicts of interest to report. No outside funding was received for this work. The authors thank Senior Editor and Writer Dori Kelly, MA, University of Maryland School of Medicine, for expert assistance with the manuscript.