We present a case of a 61year-old woman who suffered a bilateral posterior fracture-dislocation of the shoulder after an isolated episode of epileptic seizure. The patient was diagnosed at our Emergency department with x-rays and CT scans after being found unconscious. An indication for bilateral shoulder hemiprosthesis implant was initially given. However, given the peculiar pattern of the fracture, the hemiprosthesis was implanted on one side only, while the other side was treated with ORIF with four cannulated screws. After the one year, the patient had resumed her previous activities and had no complaints. We performed a review of similar cases in literature and provided a rationale for our choice of treatment and the reasons for its success.Bilateral posterior glenohumeral fracture-dislocation is an extremely rare clinical entity, accounting for a small minority of shoulder dislocations. Proposed etiologic mechanisms of injury include epileptic seizure, electrocution, or extreme trauma. Diagnosis of posterior gleno-humeral dislocation and fracture-dislocation is often challenging and thus frequently missed in the emergency setting We present a case of bilateral posterior fracture-dislocation of the shoulder after an episode of epileptic seizure, after which the patients was immediately transported to our Emergency Department. Diagnostic work-up, treatment plan, outcome and a final discussion are also presented. A 61-year-old overweight female of Ukranian descent was admitted to the Emergency Department of the Umberto I hospital in Rome, Italy, after an isolated episode of tonic-clonic seizure while working as a cleaner. Past medical history was relevant for hypertension, cholecystectomy and appendectomy. No previous episodes of seizure were reported by the patient or the patient's family members. Upon arrival, the patient appears unresponsive, but is breathing spontaneously and displays biting marks on her tongue ( Once the patient is clear for surgery she is taken to the operating room, with the possibility of a bilateral one-stage hemiprosthesis implant: the decision-making criteria we used were medial hinge disruption, quality of humeral and glenoid bone stock, degree of involvement of articular surface cartilage caused by trauma and/or pre-existing conditions (i.e. osteoarthritis), fracture pattern and number of fragments. Intraoperative findings of the right humeral head showed two fracture lines, one involving the bicipital groove and the other being the reverse Hill-Sachs lesion. No significant articular cartilage or subchondral bone loss was noted. Also, although the fracture line partially involved the medial hinge, there appeared to be no significant displacement of such fracture. Conversely, the left humeral head showed medial hinge disruption, comminution of the humeral head fracture and loss of more than 50% of the articular surface. No significant bony lesions involving the glenoid cavity were noted on either side. Therefore, while a shoulder hemiprosthesis is implanted on the left side (Biomet Comprehensive Shoulder System® humeral stem and Versa-Dial humeral head), the decision is made intraoperatively to attempt an osteosynthesis on the right side: here the humeral head fracture is first reduced with the aid of Kirschner wires and the fixation is satisfactorily achieved with four cannulated screws (three 40 Bilateral posterior gleno-humeral fracture-dislocation is an extremely rare injury. The earliest report of the posterior pattern of this injury should be attributed to Mynter's description at the beginning of the 20th century Various treatments have been proposed for the management of this injury. Predictors of humeral head ischemia are the main drivers in the treatment choice and have been described by Hertel, with metaphyseal head extension, medial hinge disruption and basic fracture pattern being the most reliable factors In conclusion, we believe the case we presented shows how Hertel criteria can be successfully used in case of a rare subtype of shoulder fracture. The presence of preserved vascularity, adequate fixation technique and joint surface congruence after fixation can lead to satisfactory results. Also, the presence of such lesions appears to be uniquely due to intense muscular spasm experienced during the epileptic seizure episode. In these cases, diagnosis based on etiology is important to better plan treatment both from the orthopaedic and neurological standpoint. None.