Background
                  Malunion of the clavicle with shortening after mid shaft fractures can give rise to long-term residual complaints. The cause of these complaints is as yet unclear.
               
                  Methods
                  In this study we analysed data of an earlier experimental cadaveric study on changes of shoulder biomechanics with progressive shortening of the clavicle. The data was used in a musculoskeletal computer model to examine the effect of clavicle shortening on muscle function, expressed as maximal muscle moments for abduction and internal rotation.
               
                  Findings
                  Clavicle shortening results in changes of maximal muscle moments around the shoulder girdle. The mean values at 3.6cm of shortening of maximal muscle moment changes are 16% decreased around the sterno-clavicular joint decreased for both ab- and adduction, 37% increased around the acromion-clavicular joint for adduction and 32% decrease for internal rotation around the gleno-humeral joint in resting position.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Shortening of the clavicle affects muscle function in the shoulder in a computer model. This may explain for the residual complaints after short malunion with shortening.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Basic Science Study. Biomechanics. Cadaveric data and computer modelMidshaft clavicular fractures account for 5–10% of all fractures in humans ( Shortening of the clavicle has a profound effect on scapular orientation and on the position of the gleno-humeral joint (GH) ( Despite possible long-term adaptations of muscles to their new status after malunion, the effect of the geometrical changes on muscle potential can be visualized by the calculation of the maximal muscle moment ( In this study we used the Delft Shoulder and Elbow model, a validated musculoskeletal model ( Input data for the musculoskeletal model were derived from a cadaver study in which five shoulders from three fresh specimens (2 males aged 75 and 80, 1 female aged 79) were measured ( Motions were modelled with custom-modified versions of the Delft Shoulder and Elbow Model (DSEM). The DSEM is a finite element model that includes all bones, joints, muscles and most ligaments of the shoulder. Clavicular shortening was modelled by shortening the model's clavicle and recalculation of the shoulder geometry, following the method comparable to the method used previously for modelling of scapula neck fractures ( Input data for the model comprised clavicle orientation, scapulothoracic orientation and humerus orientation, calculated according to the ISB upper extremity proposal ( Output of the inverse-dynamic analysis for this study were the maximal muscle moments for all muscles around the SC, AC and GH, calculated for 30°–60°–90° and 120° arm elevation at 0° plane of elevation, here now coined arm abduction, and expressed around the three thorax-defined main axes. MMM (maximal muscle moments) were calculated as the cross product of moment arms and muscle lines of action, multiplied by their maximum force: Related to arm abduction, moments around the sagittal axis can be defined as abduction-adduction moments. Although MMM changes with clavicular shortening will occur in all three directions we chose to simplify interpretation of results by focusing on the main effects on potential muscle moments that were to be expected in abduction – abduction direction for arm elevation in the frontal plane. Internal and external rotation maximal muscle moments were subsequently calculated for an arm position closest to the neutral arm position (30° arm abduction) and at 90° arm abduction. For these positions the internal and external rotation maximal muscle moments were defined as the components around the longitudinal axis (30° arm abduction) and around the frontal axis (90° arm abduction). After clavicular shortening and due to the accompanying clavicular rotation relative to the thorax, the GH rotation center moved more than the actual shortening distance (3.6 ( ( This study was based on our hypothesis that that shortening of the clavicle leads to reduced strength of the arm and shoulder girdle, as earlier reported by Maximal producible muscle moments (MMM) were used to report the effect of malunion. We chose MMM because this seems the most comprehensible indicator for how malunion effects muscle function. Moment arm changes are more difficult to interpret due to the three-dimensional nature of shoulder motion in which moments cannot be simplified as the effect of a moment arm in a single plane. In fact the maximal producible moment has been used previously for the same reasons ( Our cadaveric derived data with passive scapular motion had similar findings to the data of several in vivo studies on active shoulder and scapular motion ( Although it is tempting to report the relative contribution of muscles to the abduction motion, we chose not to. It is difficult to study the change of the muscular strategy after a change in bony anatomy because the muscular strategy is dependent upon the model cost function ( Shortening is often mentioned as being the crucial factor in residual complaints after conservative treatment of clavicle fractures ( Our findings differ from the earlier computational study on the same subject by Patel et al. ( To link our findings to the clinical issue of short malunion of the clavicle we still miss out on some important data. First it is unclear to what extend a change in MMM will result in fatigue or pain in the joint or what is a significant change in maximal muscle moment for the clinical situation. Second we don't know to what extent the change in MMM can be compensated by training of the muscle. Do changes in the load of the clavicle due to altered maximal muscle moments have an effect on the AC and SC? Looking at our data it can be expected that the change will have effects on these joints in the long run leading to degenerative changes and ultimately to osteoarthritis of either one of these joints. To our knowledge there is no literature in which AC or SC arthritis is related to an earlier sustained midshaft clavicle fracture. Incidence of degenerative joint disease for the AC and SC amongst people with a clavicle malunion compared to a control group can be a subject for future studies. When should we operate on an acute displaced clavicle fracture? The current literature is not conclusive whether to favour surgical or conservative treatment ( How should we treat a symptomatic malunion? Based on the outcome of our study an improvement could be expected with training the trapezius muscle as this is the main muscle for creating the abduction moment around the SC. Also improvement can be expected the training the serratus musculature for counteracting the protraction of the scapula and compensating for the loss of maximal muscle moment for adduction. Exercising of the pectoralis musculature can compensate for the reported loss of MMM for internal rotation around the GH. There is also an option to restore the length of the clavicle when the conservative measures do not lead to significant improvement. A correction osteotomy restoring the length can be performed with good results ( Shortening of the clavicle has little effect on GH and rotator cuff and deltoid muscle function for abduction but there is a significant decrease in the maximal muscle moment for internal rotation. Relevant changes for abduction are the altered resting position of the glenoid due to altered scapula position and the changes in MMM around the SC and AC. All these findings can explain the reported loss of strength and rapid fatigability that is reported after clavicle malunion. Expenses were funded by the research institute None of the authors have any conflict of interest to declare.