Spark plasma sintering (SPS) is a type of electric discharge sintering technique used to consolidate metallic/ceramic powders. This technique could also be used to join dissimilar materials and build functionally graded materials. In this study, spark plasma sintering was used to fabricate two different stainless steel powders; 316 L austenitic (ASS) and 2205 duplex stainless steels (DSS). The parameters that influence the sintering process such as sintering temperature, heating time and pressure have been investigated. Results show that different sintering processes influenced the sintered relative density, hardness and microstructure of the sintered samples. Also, the structure of the sintered materials was well densified after the SPS process. The relative density increased with the increment of sintering temperature. Microhardness values at the interface were indifferent with no visible cracks or delamination at the interface.Spark plasma sintering (SPS) is a powder consolidation method that allows the compaction of metallic or non-metallic powders to be sintered within the shortest sintering period as compared to other sintering methods such as hot press, and also a short heating, holding and cooling time [ Despite the fact that there is available research on SPS joining of engineering materials in the literature, to the best of our knowledge, there is lack of information on SPS joining of two dissimilar stainless steel namely 316 L austenitic and 2205 duplex stainless steels. In addition, this study is required because of rapid increase in duplex stainless steels (DSSs) production due to the combination of attractive properties they possess such as good corrosion resistance, relatively low cost and high mechanical strength [ Commercially available AISI 316 L austenitic (99% pure, average particle size of 53 μm) and SAF2205 duplex (99% pure, average particle size of 22 μm) stainless steels powders supplied by Weartech (PTY) Ltd, South Africa were used as starting materials. Spark plasma sintering system model HHPD 5 manufactured by FCT Germany was used in this procedure. The density of the sintered sample was measured using the Archimedes’ method. XRD analysis was performed using the PW1710 Philips diffractometer with Cu target Kα radiation to identify the constituent phases. Diffractograms were collected over a range of 2 The sintered samples were sectioned, ground and polished to 1 μm diamond finish and followed by etching with Marble’s reagent as shown in The morphologies of 316 L austenitic and 2205 duplex stainless steel powders are shown in The densities of the sintered specimens at two different sintering temperatures are presented in  The first two peaks could be attributed to the initial rearrangement of the powder particles within each stacked layer and at the interface and this could be said to occur simultaneously. It could be explained that there are spaces created during the manual loading of the powders. These spaces or simply voids are only closed up within the first 6 min of the sintering process. That could be responsible for the two peaks observed at the low sintering temperature. The third peak represents bulk deformation of the stacked powders. Normally, the intensity of this peak could be linked to degree of densification which is influenced by temperature, pressure and holding time. In this case, both sintered compacts displayed almost same peak intensity at different sintering temperature. However, as holding time progresses, an overlap small peak intensity ( The voltage vs. sintering time and current vs. sintering time profiles during the SPS procedure of the sintered compacts at different sintering temperatures is shown in The difference between the crests and troughs for both samples during holding time is 0.05 V and 0.04 kA. Generally, it is worth mentioning that although the voltage and current intensities are different for both samples due to different sintering temperatures, there is similar trend of voltage and current changes including a constant current at holding time denoted by the dotted circle in The X-ray diffractograph of the starting powders and sintered samples presented in  For 2205 DSS at 1000 °C, a fully densified two-phase microstructure of fine islands of austenitic grains and ferrite grains typical of duplex stainless steel with no visible pores is shown in The microstructure of 2205-316 L bonded joint at temperature of 1100 °C was observed by means of SEM as shown in The results of cross sectional microhardness profile from the surface of 2205 section through the interface to 316 L section is shown in Functionally graded materials with distinct microstructural boundaries was successfully fabricated from AISI 316 L and SAF 2205 stainless steels using spark plasma sintering method. The process enhances both densification and grain growth in 2205 DSS. A relative density of 98% was achieved at a higher sintering temperature of 1100 °C suggesting that the relative density for this powder system is controlled by temperature. Visible connecting pores were observed at 1000 °C and subsequently pinched off at 1100 °C. Microhardness values were higher at punch-sample contact zone (approximately 430  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are grateful to the Institute of NanoEngineering Research (INER), Tshwane University of Technology, Pretoria for the use of sintering and characterization facilities.