Hydrogenation mechanism of magnesium-based hydrides has attracted considerable interest but many details still remained unclear or controversial. This work aimed to investigate the isothermal hydrogenation kinetics for a number of un-catalyzed and catalyzed MgH2 samples prepared by high-energy ball milling. The effects of processing parameters on the hydrogenation kinetics of magnesium hydrides were studied. X-ray diffraction and transmission electron microscopy were carried out in order to relate MgH2 crystalline size and catalytic effect to the kinetics of hydrogenation. Different kinetic models were employed to further understand the mechanism of hydrogenation. The best kinetic model to describe the hydrogenation behavior of the ball-milled Mg/MgH2 in this work was found to be the JMA (Johnson-Mehl-Arrami) model. In addition, hydrogen diffusion can be a controlling step when the kinetic rates are slow. Adding catalysts contributes to lower hydrogenation activation energy in two ways: reducing crystalline size of the as-milled MgH2 powder, as well as facilitating the hydrogen diffusion in Mg/MgH2.Hydrogenation of magnesium hydride has enormous potential for practical applications, such as hydrogen storage, thermal storage, and batteries Reducing MgH Hydrogenation of metal hydrides is considered to consist of five steps However, complementary studies on kinetic mechanisms for the magnesium hydride phases have not received sufficient attention. The major unresolved concern regarding the Mg hydrogenation kinetics is the control step of the reaction. In fact, interpretations proposed for hydrogenation of pure Mg can be controversial. Kinetic analyses showed that when different methods had been utitlized during sample preparation, the hydrogenation reaction can be explained by different models, such as second order rule Catalyst doping is a very effective method to improve the kinetics. This also led to discrepancies in the kinetics interpretation of the catalyzed system. Zhou et al. As shown above, in terms of the mechanism for hydrogenation of MgH Both ball milling and catalytic doping can facilitate one or multiple steps of the hydrogenation process, which makes the hydrogenation mechanism of nano-catalyzed Mg complicated. As a result, it's necessary to initiate further investigations regarding the relationship between hydrogenation kinetics, various catalysts, and refined nanostructure. To reveal the kinetic mechanism, comparison of different kinetic models to analyze hydrogenation reactions can be considered as a useful approach This work aims to investigate the hydrogenation mechanism of high-energy ball-milled MgH The starting material, MgH The hydrogenation process was conducted and recorded using a commercial Sieverts type apparatus (PCTPro-2000, Hy-Energy). Approximately 0.5 g of the powder mixture was loosely filled into a stainless steel sample holder. Before the actual hydrogenation data acquisition, each sample went through three hydrogenation/dehydrogenation cycles to eliminate residual stress caused during mechanical milling, with 10 bar H Phase analysis was carried out using synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) in Advanced Photon Source (APS), Argonne National Laboratory. Data processing and analysis was performed using MDI Jade 5.0. Crystalline size (D) and strain analysis were performed based on Williamson-Hall equation (more details are given in supporting materials), which is a simplified breadth method where both size-induced and strain-induced broadening are deconvoluted by considering the peak width as a function of 2 In order to properly interpret the hydrogenation kinetics of magnesium hydrides, sample temperature should be stable throughout the hydrogenation process The X-ray diffraction patterns for pure MgH  It is also worth pointing out that a small peak from iron (Fe) metal was identified in the as-milled samples, suggesting that during the milling process a small amount of iron contamination comes from the milling balls and canister. Although Fe has been shown to facilitate hydrogenation of MgH The MgH   Our previous study Hydrogenation of pure magnesium hydrides with different milling times is shown in  Adding catalyst considerably enhanced the hydrogenation kinetics, as shown in In regard to the effect of these three catalysts, TiH Mg-0.1TiH Several different kinetics models have been applied to interpret the hydrogenation kinetic Among these various models, Johnson-Mehl-Avrami (JMA) model works the best to describe hydrogenation behaviors in most scenarios, in terms of un-catalyzed and different catalyzed systems, different milling parameters, different temperatures, as shown in Figure S1, S2, S3. Comparison of JMA model of pure Mg and Mg-0.1TiH JMD model was developed by Jander Wilhelm based on diffusion-controlled reaction in a sphere In contrast to pure Mg, Mg-TiH Activation energy of hydrogenation was calculated using Arrhenius Where The activation energies for hydrogenation of Mg with various catalysts and milling times are tabulated in Table S4 (Appendix E) in Supporting Material. The activation energies of Mg-TiH Given the same milling time, each of the three catalysts drastically decreases the activation energy fitted to the hydrogenation level of Mg. According to the data shown in Table S4, when sample undergoes 4 h UHEHP milling, the activation energy for hydrogenation of Mg is reduced by at least 50% after the catalytic doping. The activation energy is 24.2 kJ/mol H Activation energy of hydrogenation was also obtained from the hydrogenation tests conducted under three different pressures, 0.5, 1, and 10 bar. As shown in The activation energies for hydrogen diffusion in magnesium metal and magnesium hydride have been reported to be 40 kJ/mol H As listed in Table S4 in Supporting material, the values of the effective hydrogenation activation energy obtained during current hydrogenation reactions are above 40 kJ/mol H The calculated activation energy and crystalline size reveals a correlation, as plotted in In this study, JMA model can be applied for most of the ball-milled MgH The Avrami exponent However, such information is not conclusive. According to Christan Table S5 in Appendix E of the Supporting Material lists the Avrami exponent Our analysis obtained very small It is interesting to find that all of the kinetics with Avrami exponent larger than 0.5 can be explained by JMD model while the rest ( Nevertheless, there could be other possible factors affecting the hydrogenation of MgH The hydrogenation kinetics of magnesium hydrides were studied under nearly isothermal conditions. The key conclusions are summarized as follows: Extended milling time helps reduce the crystalline size of magnesium hydrides, thus facilitate hydrogenation of magnesium hydrides and reduce the activation energy of hydrogenation; TiH The hydrogenation kinetics of MgH Diffusion can be the hydrogenation control step for un-catalyzed MgH This research was supported by the There are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: 