More and more slurry transport systems are used in mining operations to efficiently and cost-effectively transport ores and tailings. The materials used for slurry transport are often subjected to severe wear attack. In this study, the wear modes and wear resistance of materials commonly used for slurry transport are discussed. Slurry jet erosion, Coriolis slurry scouring erosion and slurry sliding abrasion tests are used to simulate these wear modes and to characterize the wear resistance of the materials. The wear resistance of selected materials from each material category commonly used for slurry transport, including steels, high chromium white cast irons, chrome carbide-based and tungsten carbide-based overlays, elastomers, plastics, ceramics and cermets, are reported. The relationships of the wear resistance of these materials with their mechanical properties are also briefly discussed.A growing number of short- and long-distance slurry transport systems are used for the transport of ores and tailings in various mining operations in the world. Slurry transport has a number of handling advantages including low cost, minimum maintenance and small environmental impact The equipment and components used in slurry transport are exposed to a multiplicity of wear modes. Among them, the most significant and most common wear modes are as follows Erosion caused by directional impact of particles. Examples: pipe elbows ( Erosion caused by random impact of particles. Examples: pump impeller shroud and trailing edge of pumping vanes. Abrasion caused by sliding and rolling particles. Example: straight pipes. In addition, tribocorrosion, a material degradation process due to the combined effect of corrosion and wear, plays a role in the wear damage in some operations. Tribocorrosion is not addressed in this paper so that the focuses of this paper are erosion and abrasion. Although many materials have been used for slurry transport, little systematic studies were reported on their wear resistance and wear mechanisms. This paper reviews wear-resistant materials commonly used for slurry transport, introduces the laboratory wear test methods used at the National Research Council Canada for characterizing wear-resistant materials for slurry transport applications, and presents some typical wear resistance data of commonly used materials for slurry transport. The relationships of the wear resistance of these materials with their mechanical properties are also briefly discussed. ASTM A53, ASME SA 106 Grade B, API 5L Grade B, X42 and X65 steels are used in certain areas/sections of the slurry transport system as a mediocre low cost selection. They have low carbon content (0.3% max.) and low hardness (130 HB min.) and their wear properties are generally poor. There are a variety of “wear-resistant” products and accessories that have come onto the market to replace mild steel pipe in high wear areas, including internally induction hardened steel, flame hardened dual phase steel, etc. Fedur is the product name for a wear-resistant composite steel made up of two layers inseparably bonded by a special roll bonding method. One layer has a tough, high weldability quality consisting of low carbon steel. The other consists of an alloyed carbon steel having a high hardness. Standard stainless grades are higher cost options available in piping form. They are used when wear attack is relatively low while corrosion concerns are high. They can be austenitic, ferritic, martensitic or duplex stainless steels from the AISI 200, 300 and 400 series and also in proprietary alloy compositions Typical applications of steels in slurry transport are slurry pipe spools, bends and elbows, and pump shaft sleeves. Chromium white cast irons are recognized as the cast alloy group which offers excellent resistance to abrasion, erosion and corrosion Typical applications are slurry pump impellers, casings, side plates, slurry pipe elbows and reducers. According to an ASTM definition, elastomers are any rubber-like compounds (natural or synthetic) which can be stretched repeatedly at room temperature to at least twice their length but return quickly to their approximate original dimensions when the applied stress is released. Because of their general similarity to rubbers, polyurethanes and polyureas are also classified as elastomers. The capability of polyurethanes and polyureas to be spray coated is a very significant attribute which increases the range of their application. General advantages of elastomers over other wear protection options occur in the areas of resilience, toughness, corrosion resistance, ease of fabrication, non-stick and self-lubricating qualities, noise/vibration damping capabilities and light weight. In wear situations, they rely mainly on their elastic properties to absorb the deformation induced by the abrasive or erosive medium elastically with minimal plastic deformation. However, they have clear limitations in the areas of tearing and gouging resistance, strength and ability to withstand elevated temperatures. Natural rubbers have excellent abrasion and erosion resistance when hydrocarbon and weathering resistance are not required. Neoprene rubbers are good materials where resistance to hydrocarbons and wear are needed. The properties of polyurethanes and polyureas vary depending on the base polymers. They can exhibit outstanding mechanical properties, wear resistance and chemical resistance at moderate temperatures Elastomers are widely used as the materials of hoses and hose bends, linings of pipes, pump casings and side liners. The use of plastics for wear protection is limited compared to elastomers. Polyethylenes, including high density polyethylenes (HDPEs), high molecular weight polyethylenes (HMWPEs) and ultra-high molecular weight polyethylenes (UHMWPEs) are the most used wear-resistant plastics for slurry transport. They have good chemical resistance and their properties increase with molecular weight. UHMWPE exhibits extremely low coefficient of friction thus has non-stick and self-lubricating properties The main uses of polyethylenes in slurry transport are pipe linings, pump impellers, and ball check valves. Most liners are attached mechanically. Ceramics are inorganic non-metallic compounds usually produced at high temperatures from both naturally occurring or synthetic feedstocks. Typically, they are extremely hard at low and elevated temperatures and have high wear resistance. They are chemically inert and exhibit thermal stability and insulation qualities. Their main deficiency is their brittleness. The most important and widely used wear-resistant ceramics are various grades of alumina, silicon carbide and partially stabilized zirconia. Their main uses in slurry transport are hydrocyclone linings, nozzles, orifice plates, valves, slurry launders and mechanical seals. Cermet is a term used to designate a heterogeneous combination of metals with one or more ceramic phases which can constitute more than 90% of its volume. The solubility between the metallic and ceramic phases at processing temperature is relatively limited. Cemented tungsten carbides are the main cermets used for wear applications because they have excellent combination of hardness and toughness. They usually consist of hard (1400–2500 HV) tungsten carbide grains bonded together with cobalt in a pressing operation followed by a high temperature, liquid phase sintering process. Other binder metals are used to enhance properties for certain applications, e.g. nickel, to improve corrosion resistance which is a general limitation of tungsten carbide cermets Typical applications in slurry transport include pump seals and bushings, valve components, and nozzles. The product is usually manufactured as overlaid plates which can then be fabricated into desired shapes. However, some systems deposit the overlays directly onto the internal surfaces of steel pipe. The manufacturing involves the controlled metering of a highly alloyed powder/wire onto the workpiece surface ahead of a weld deposited pool of mild steel or as the melting electrode. Dissolution of the powder/wire results in the desired high chromium and carbon alloy cladding. Open and submerged arc processes are usually used. The deposit thicknesses can exceed 11 The compositions of CCOs are essentially based on high chromium white cast irons. Typically, the grades of alloy will contain in the range of 25–32 Typical applications of CCOs include slurry piping, elbows, and shaft sleeves. In oil sands mining operations, chromium carbide overlaid piping has been used as the workhorse in high wear areas of slurry piping which includes elbows and straight piping after elbows. Chromium carbide overlaid piping is well liked by maintenance as it can be easily field repairable The WC-MMC contains a distribution of hard tungsten carbide particles suspended in a tough, ductile metal matrix alloy. Plasma transferred arc welding (PTAW) is the most common method for depositing WC-MMC overlays; however for specific components or in-field repairs gas metal arc welding techniques are employed Typical applications of WC-MMC overlays include slurry pump suction side plates, hydrotransport screens and valves. Wear testing is necessary to help in selecting the most suitable materials and to predict the wear performance of the components in slurry transport equipment. Field wear tests are performed at realistic condition but there are several disadvantages including high cost, long test time, non-controllable test parameters and non-repeatable test results The National Research Council Canada (NRC) has been working on laboratory wear testing for slurry transport applications since the 1980s and has developed and constructed several slurry wear test rigs which have been used for the selection and development of wear-resistant materials for industrial applications. These slurry wear test rigs include two slurry jet erosion testers, a Coriolis slurry scouring erosion tester, a slurry sliding abrasion tester and a slurry pot erosion–corrosion tester. The below section will present the results of selected materials from each material category tested using these wear rigs.  The NRC slurry jet erosion (SJE) test assesses material resistance to slurry attack at various impingement angles and has been shown to provide a convenient and reproducible technique  The Coriolis erosion tester was introduced in 1984 As can be seen in  A Miller tester ( The values of  The wear resistance data in In the meantime, the very soft elastomers displayed excellent wear resistance in the slurry wear tests. The laboratory test results are in agreement with field wear results. It has been reported that polyurethane lined pipes lasted 5–20 times longer than unlined steel pipes for slurry transport In the erosion testing, the UHMWPE displayed wear resistance several times better than the steels although its hardness is much lower. It is also because the UHMWPE has an The sintered alumina, which has a high hardness of 22.9 Steels, chromium white cast irons, elastomers, plastics, ceramics, cermets and overlays are commonly used materials for slurry transport. They displayed different wear resistances in the slurry wear tests. The appropriate applications of these materials should be determined by the service conditions. The most common wear modes of materials used for slurry transport are erosion caused by directional and random impact of solid particles at different impingement angles, and abrasion caused by sliding and rolling particles. The slurry jet erosion testing, Coriolis erosion testing and slurry sliding abrasion testing provide convenient techniques for assessing material performance under slurry impact erosion, scouring erosion and sliding abrasion conditions. For chromium white cast irons, cemented tungsten carbides, chromium carbide-based overlays and tungsten carbide-based metal matrix composite overlays, the extensive distributions of hard carbides in a ductile matrix result in their excellent wear resistance. Elastomers have excellent wear resistance because of their excellent resilience to absorb the deformation induced by the abrasive or erosive medium elastically with minimal plastic deformation. The authors would like to express their thanks to the members of the NRC/Industry Mining Materials Wear and Corrosion Exclusive Research Group for their support of this work.