The transformation of sodalite (SOD) to cancrinite (CAN) in Bayer digestion has been studied for a range of temperatures and time intervals relevant to high temperature bauxite refining. The transformation extent was determined by quantifying phases in digestion residues using an XRD method. It has been found that the transformation is slow in the absence of lime but dramatically promoted by three different Ca-containing sources (calcium oxide, calcite and hydrocalumite) commonly found in the Bayer process. The amount of CAN produced, however, is not proportional to the quantity of Ca charged. The transformation process can be modelled by a form of the Avrami equation. The high activation energy (~218kJ/mol) suggests that the transformation is a chemical process controlled by the nucleation and growth of CAN. The advantages of CAN formation include a reduction of soda in digestion residues and better control of silica and carbonate levels in Bayer liquor. The role of Ca, the efficiency of lime charge and the mechanism of the transformation process are discussed, especially within the context of high temperature and high silica bauxite processing.In the Bayer process, bauxite is digested in caustic liquor at a temperature mainly decided by the mineralogical forms of extractable alumina present. Gibbsitic bauxite is digested at a relatively low temperature of about 150 High digestion temperatures also increase the reactivity of impurities such as silica which is the most detrimental impurity both by its quantity and impact. In lateritic bauxites silica is usually present as both kaolinite and quartz. Kaolinite readily reacts with caustic soda at a low temperature while quartz only dissolves significantly at higher temperatures above 200 Dissolved silica precipitates as “desilication product” (commonly known as DSP) which primarily consists of Bayer sodalite (SOD) and Bayer cancrinite (CAN). Both SOD and the sodium form of CAN are of the common chemical formula Na The re-precipitation of silica not only consumes useful caustic and alumina but also leads to the slow release of soda from red mud residues in storage areas. Incomplete desilication of the liquor also causes other problems, such as silicate scaling on plant equipment and contamination of product alumina. These problems are expected to become more severe in the future when high silica bauxites are used as Bayer refinery feed ( Fundamental studies on CAN formation have often been conducted in relation to scaling problems during desilication in spent Bayer liquor – caustic aluminate solution – from which gibbsite has precipitated ( When silica re-precipitates, it does so initially as SOD, which can subsequently transform to CAN under high temperature digestion conditions. The activation energy of DSP crystallisation is related to seed type and the proportion of SOD and CAN in the mix product, the higher the proportion of CAN the higher the activation energy is. The activation energy of pure CAN growth with seeding is ~ The formation of Ca-CAN from SOD either freshly formed in-situ from kaolin and quartz or pre-prepared from kaolin was observed in an in-situ X-ray diffraction study of desilication process under simulated high temperature Bayer digestion conditions ( The sequestering capability of CAN was investigated to remove impurities from liquor at a digestion temperature of 252  In this paper, we report our recent study of the transformation of pure SOD to CAN under high temperature Bayer digestion conditions by using three different Ca-containing compounds, varying Ca charges and digestion temperatures. The kinetics of the transformation is modelled. The mechanism of the transformation and the roles of Ca are discussed. Three Ca-containing compounds (CaO (quicklime), CaCO Specific surface areas of these compounds were determined by nitrogen adsorption via the 5 point B.E.T. method (TriStar surface area and porosity analyser, Micromeritics) and are given in The amount of lime charged in each test was expressed as molar ratio (MR) of CaO to 6SiO SOD as a starting solid reactant was prepared by digestion of pure kaolinite (Eckalite A, ECC International) at 150 Liquor for transformation tests was prepared by adjusting a commercial caustic aluminate concentrate (Coogee Chemicals, WA) to the target alumina, caustic and silica concentrations (initial NaAl(OH) SOD was charged at 25 A weighed sample of the residue was suspended in weak (0.05 The transformation kinetics was measured by XRD phase quantification of reacted residues using the multi-line reference intensity ratio (RIR) method developed by The formation of CAN in Bayer liquor is a very slow process in the absence of lime. Conversion (x) of SOD to CAN is defined as where CAN  SOD to CAN transformation did not reach 100% after 60 The residues produced at 250 Tests on the effect of different Ca sources on CAN formation were conducted in two arrangements. First, the effect of CaO and CaCO The second comparison was the effect of CaO and HC at different temperatures for 10   The transformation of SOD to CAN is a multiphase process involving the dissolution of SOD and the nucleation and growth of CAN. The heterogeneous nature of the transformation of SOD to CAN suggests that an empirical kinetic model should be employed. The Avrami equation represents a well-known model for solid transformation process where the amount of a new phase depends on time, the number of nuclei and growth rate ( where x is the extent of transformation, t is the time, k is the rate constant depending on temperature and n is the Avrami exponent. Eq. A plot of ln[−ln(1 The data in where k is the rate constant, A is the frequency factor, E The kinetic parameters (k and n) were used to predict conversion of SOD to CAN at each temperature investigated. The measured conversion was in reasonable agreement with that predicted for all temperatures, lime type and charge investigated (dotted curves in Although there are a number of benefits by forming more CAN in the Bayer process, two of them are readily demonstrated by this work. First, the graph of silica/caustic ratio in digestion exit liquor against the conversion of SOD to CAN shows that this ratio declines significantly with conversion (correlation coefficient r Another important benefit of CAN formation is the reduction of soda in the residue. A regression relationship (r The results show clearly that the inclusion of calcium into the channels of the cage structure dramatically increases the rate of transformation. Even though calcium is not part of the alumino-silicate cage structure of cancrinite it is possible that its incorporation imparts a greater stability to the structure, allowing such an increase in rate. A similar thesis was put forward to explain greater formation rates for sodalite when sulphate was included ( The strong interaction between Ca In the presence of lime, the time to achieve ~ The large activation energy indicates that the transformation of SOD to CAN in the presence of lime is a chemical process, i.e. one controlled by the nucleation and growth of CAN. This measured value of activation energy is larger than activation energies obtained by The lack of dependence of transformation rates on the starting form of lime is probably related to the interdependency of the lime forms in Bayer liquor ( The experimental results suggest that using lime to reduce soda loss to Bayer residues is feasible. However, the efficiency of soda reduction is limited because of side reactions of calcium, the incomplete conversion of SOD to CAN within the characteristic industrial digestion times and the incomplete displacement of sodium ions by calcium ions in the CAN structure. Best results are therefore obtained at a lime charge as close to stoichiometric as possible.  The presence of lime and particularly calcium ions in the solution accelerates CAN formation and increases the conversion of SOD to CAN in Bayer liquor. The amount of CAN formed is not proportional to Ca charge and not all CAN formed is the calcium form of CAN. Higher temperatures increase CAN formation. The transformation process can be modelled by the Avrami equation. The high activation energy indicates that the transformation process is a chemical process controlled by the nucleation and growth of CAN. CaO, calcite and HC behave similarly, suggesting that they follow the same mechanism in promoting CAN formation. CAN formation is advantageous to the reduction of silica in liquor and soda in residues. Ca-CAN has a potential application in the processing of high silica bauxites to reduce soda in residue. The authors gratefully acknowledge the exacting work of the analytical group of CSIRO Process Science and Engineering at Waterford, WA, Australia. This project received funding from the