The current worldwide expansion of waste PCB (WPCB) deposits represents both a pressing environmental issue and an economic opportunity, fostering the development of numerous recycling processes across the world. An important input for designing such processes is the metallic content of WPCBs, which is assayed by grinding and leaching samples taken from the stack of WPCBs to be recycled. The content values come with substantial uncertainties, arising mainly from the uneven distribution of the metals within the structure of WPCBs.
                  This study aims to quantify the effects on these uncertainties of the particle size, the mass of the sample digested and the number of digestion replicates. It focused on the abundance of six metals in WPCBs: Cu, Fe, Zn, Pb and Ni, and also Co, which is a critical element for the EU. A batch of 485 kg of WPCBs was put through several shredding and splitting steps to produce three fractions: one shredded to 2 mm, and two ground to 750 μm and 200 μm. From each sample, 16 samples of 0.5 g, 2 g or 5 g were digested in hot aqua regia. Bootstrapping of the results allowed the error around the mean content to be estimated, for each metal and for all the experimental conditions. Considering the largest sample masses and three replicated digestions, the uncertainties for Zn (resp. Ni) were reduced from 35% to 10% (resp. from 70% to 10%) when the particle size was reduced from 2 mm to 200 μm.Recycling of Waste Printed Circuit Boards (WPCBs) from Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) is a major challenge in sustainable resource management. The quantities involved are significant: in 2019, the production of WPCBs amounted to 23 ktons in France and more than 170 ktons in the European Union (EU), according to the European urban mine database ( To draw a parallel with the design of a metallurgical process for ore beneficiation, the more care is taken in preparing and  One way to improve homogenization is to work with samples with finer grain sizes, but this brings in a second challenge: the very different mechanical properties of the various parts of the WPCBs, in terms of malleability and ductility, and which react differently to the grinding conditions applied. What is then often observed is stiffer and brittle parts being more easily broken into smaller fragments than ductile ones, as well as limitations on the smallest size that the whole sample can be ground down to. However, this step is often performed only to a partial extent in studies in the literature, in the sense that plastics ( The two challenges, complex composition and the different mechanical properties of constituent WPCB parts, are sometimes intertwined. Owing to some metals being at once in the form of surface layers and quite ductile, “nuggets” of very pure metal can be found in every size class in the middlings obtained after preparation by milling. Such cases then compromise the quality of homogenization, and thereby challenge the subsequent sampling procedure, in that the samples may not accurately reflect the distribution of these nuggets, resulting for example in wide variations in elements observed in various sub-samples taken from the same sample. Sampling procedures that take the above-mentioned specificities of WPCBs into account do not seem to be described in the literature. Besides the specific standards applied to solid fuels ( With regard to The scientific literature contains some data on the effects of the particle size and sub-sample mass, along with the number of digestion replicates, on the accuracy of a given chemical analysis, particularly for WPCB samples with a coarse particle size. Based on these previous studies, the significance of each of these variables (particle size, mass of the sample used for the digestion protocol, along with the number of digestion replicates) is still difficult to assess. Moreover, none of these studies evaluates the influence of the combination of all these three parameters simultaneously on the uncertainties as to the metal content, and none of them quantifies the error associated with numerous repetitions. Given these considerations, the purpose of the present study was therefore to investigate the effects of the three parameters on the data distribution and to calculate the associated margin of error for metal content found in WPCBs. The metals were chosen among those found in the highest concentrations in WPCBs: Cu, with concentrations around 14 (%) The WPCBs used for this study were taken from the Small Waste Electrical and Electronic Equipment (sWEEE) category, which comprises audio and video appliances, toys, personal care products and culinary equipment among others. Approximately 500 kg of waste was provided by “Envie 2E Midi-Pyrénées”, a waste recovery company operating in France. Materials with harmful environmental impacts, such as batteries, were disassembled, as well as aluminium heat sinks. The entire sample (485 kg) was first shredded with an industrial cutting mill without any bottom sieve (Bohmier Maschinen GmbH Material) to a particle size of less than 30 mm. The sample was subsequently quartered with a rotary divider. One quarter of the sample (122 kg) was then shredded with the industrial cutting mill with a bottom sieve with 10 mm perforations, to a particle size of less than 10 mm. The <10 mm sample was divided with a riffle splitter to obtain sub-sample masses of 4 kg. Three 4 kg samples were used for the tests: i) 2 mm sample: this 4 kg sample was shredded in a lab knife mill (Retsch SM2000 with tungsten carbide grinding tools) fitted with a bottom sieve with 2 mm perforations, ii) 750 µm sample: this 4 kg sample was shredded in the same lab knife mill fitted successively with bottom sieves of 2 mm, 1 mm and 750 µm and iii) 200 µm sample: this 4 kg sample was shredded to 750 µm in the lab knife mill and sent to the Poittemille company (Bethune, France) to be milled with a Universal grinder (FL1 Poittemille) using 200 µm ring holes. Sample preparation is detailed in In the further shredding steps, the hammer rotation and the initial feed rates were kept constant. The milling times were not fixed, but correspond to the minimum length of time needed for at least 95% of the feed to pass through the sieve aperture. The unground portion was added to the ground material to produce the same composition as the original WPCB samples. After grinding, a riffle divider was used to obtain sub-samples of 5 g, 2 g and 0.5 g from the 4 kg samples. The losses of material were less than 1% in the procedure to obtain the 2 mm and 750 mm samples. The losses associated with the size reduction from 750 μm to 200 μm are unknown. The sampling methodology, with the yields and losses associated with each step, is detailed in a previous article by To determine the particle size distribution, samples of more than 290 g were suspended in water and passed through vibrating sieves with square apertures of 4 mm, 2 mm, 1 mm, 800 µm, 400 µm, 200 µm, 100 µm, 63 µm and 20 µm. The size fractions were then dried at 40 °C. All the WPCB samples were characterised by aqua regia digestion followed by chemical analysis using Flame Atomic Absorption Spectrometry (FAAS). The samples were dissolved in hot aqua regia (HNO In order to understand the effects of sub-sample mass and particle size on the accuracy of the metal content determination, 3 samples of different particle sizes (200 µm, 750 µm and 2 mm) and 3 different sub-sample masses for digestion (0.5 g, 2 g and 5 g) were studied. Combining these two parameters produced nine different conditions. To be able to perform statistical tests, it was decided to repeat each condition at least 16 times; each metal content value represents one measurement of one digestion. The number of independent digestions was respectively: for the 200 µm sample: 5 g n = 16, 2 g n = 16, 0.5 g n = 16; for the 750 µm sample: 5 g n = 24, 2 g n = 16, 0.5 g n = 16 and for the 2 mm sample: 5 g n = 24, 2 g n = 16, 0.5 g n = 16. However, for the 0.5 g sample with a 750 µm particle size, one digestion vessel broke during the digestion, so the number of repetitions considered is 15 for this condition. For each metal, statistical analyses were performed to distinguish the gap between the experimental mean value of the metal content from the “true” mean value, which would represent the analysis of an infinite number of replicates. The 95% confidence interval was used to quantify this gap. This interval refers to the range of values in which the “true” mean value has a 95% chance of being. It thus depicts the uncertainty over the determination of the metal content. In this study, the 95% confidence interval expressed relatively to the corresponding mean value was called the margin of error (in percentage of the experimental mean value). For each metal, the normality and the homoscedasticity of the distribution of the metal concentrations for the nine associated treatments (combination of the 3 different particle sizes and the 3 different sub-sample masses) were tested using the Shapiro test (test to determine whether the distribution is normal) and the Bartlett test (test to determine whether the samples were from populations with equal variances), respectively. For some metals (Co, for instance), the measured values associated with some treatments did not follow a normal distribution, according to these tests. These results prevent the use of the classic parametric approach, based on the central limit theorem associated with the Student distribution, to calculate the population variance and draw inferences for the confidence interval. In order to overcome this limitation, an approach based on bootstrapping was used, which is not restricted to a specific type of probability distribution. In the bootstrap approach, the hypothesis is made that the measured data for each treatment and for each of the 6 metals are an empirical estimate of the probability distribution. For each treatment performed on the 6 metals, 25 metal content values were randomly selected in succession from the set of experimental data. Replacement was performed, i.e. the same experimental value could have been selected an infinite number of times. From these 25 values, a mean value was calculated. These random selections and mean value calculations were performed more than 10 000 times. From these 10 000 mean values, the 95% confidence interval around the mean value of the metal content was determined. The margin of error was then calculated, i.e. the confidence interval relatively to the experimental mean value. In order to assess the impact of the digestion replicates (n) on the estimation of statistical population properties, several bootstrap sampling sizes were tested (n = 2, n = 3, n = 4, n = 5, n = 7, n = 10, n = 15, n = 25). All the statistical tests were carried out using R-software 3.5.2 ( The particle size distributions of the different samples are shown in Despite the fact that no particles were removed during the shredding steps, the additional grinding steps for 750 µm and 200 µm compared to 2 mm were liable to generate some interference, including contamination due to the abrasion of mill material or preferential metal losses (dust dispersion for example). One way of highlighting the influence of these different sample preparations is to compare the mean values of the different conditions ( In order to verify the efficiency of the digestion process, the leaching residues from the 750 µm sample were ground again, digested with an acid mixture containing HF (total digestion) and the leachate was analysed. The analytical procedure for these residues is described in For the six metals, the Relative Standard Deviation ( These results are consistent with the results from Since it is assumed that there are no biases due to the preparation of materials and the digestion and the analysis procedures, the observed deviation depends only on the residual heterogeneity in the sample. As expected, this sensitivity to content level is less visible for the finest particles: the RSD for 200 µm sample are below 8% except for Ni, which indicates low residual heterogeneity in the 200 µm sample. The RSD for Ni does not follow the same trend because of one erratic point [200 µm; 0.5 g]. For this condition, the erratic point had a value of 0.70% while the mean value was 0.40% (  Most of these erratic points were observed in replicates from the coarse sample at 2 mm. For Co [2 mm; 2 g], the grades changed abruptly from 311 ppm (mean value) to 1153 ppm, the Ni [2 mm; 2 g] grades changed from 0.45% to 1.45% and the Fe [2 mm; 0.5 g] grades from 14% to 23%, 27% and 28%. The erratic points for Ni and Co came from the same digestion sample. The fine particles are more likely to be well disseminated in the shredded sample, and are responsible for a background grade of around 311 ppm for Co, 0.45% for Ni and 14% for Fe. In contrast, the presence or absence of coarse particles mainly made up of metal, such as Co, Ni or Fe, can have a strong impact on the analysis. The probability of having coarse particles of metal in a sub-sample is very low. The presence of these erratic points is very similar to the “gold nugget effect” found in assessments of gold deposits ( No erratic points were observed for Cu, Pb and Zn. This does not mean that none can occur but that they are likely to be less present. Based on the numerous analytical results obtained, a model was developed to calculate the margin of error, i.e. the confidence interval around the mean values. The statistical test was of the bootstrapping type, which relies on random sampling with replacements, as described in the Materials and Methods section. It can be seen in For all metals, the best preparation condition to achieve a low margin of error (<10%) was the finest particle size of 200 µm and few repetitions (3 or 4) of 2 g sample digestion. However, to avoid the difficulty of shredding WPCBs to 200 µm, the 750 µm particle size was found to be acceptable, provided that the sample mass used for digestion was larger than 2 g. Shapiro and Bartlett tests have proven that most of the elements presented do not follow a normal distribution. A non-parametric bootstrap method was therefore used to determine the margin of error for a combination of a particle size, a sample mass and a number of samples analysed. As the margin of error is calculated from an asymmetrical distribution, the mean value is not in the centre of the interval defined by the margin of error ( Overall, for the upper bound, the difference never exceeds 8% (with triplicates) between the estimate and the actual data. Regarding the lower bound, most of the preparation conditions give a deviation lower than 9% if a triplicate sample is analysed. However, at 2 mm, the lower bound presents some significant differences for all metals except Cu. The lower bound is mostly underestimated in the case of the normal distribution. With a 0.5 g sample mass, the deviation reaches 17.9% for Fe, 65.4% for Co, 18.2% for Pb 23.3% for Ni and 21.1% for Zn. With 2 and 5 g sample masses, the deviation is greater than 15.5% for Co and Ni at 2 mm. Moreover, for Ni, the deviation of the lower bound is significant even with smaller particle sizes (11.6 and 14.3% for Ni at 750 µm and 200 µm respectively). This comparison shows that reducing the particle size gives a better data fit with a normal distribution hypothesis. Thus, the margin of error calculated from bootstrap results can be used as an uncertainty around the mean value, except for the metals that present a nugget effect. Except for Ni, the error given by calculating the upper and lower limits as a normal distribution is less than 2% for 200 µm samples. Taking subsamples from a portion of WPCBs could be time-consuming and costly. It is therefore essential to assess the effects of sample preparation on the quality of the results. This assessment allows the appropriate preparation procedure to be established according to data quality objectives. A series of 9 preparation conditions for WPCB samples was analysed, producing a total of 159 data points per metal (Cu, Pb, Zn, Ni, Fe and Co), from which the effects of particle size, sample mass and digestion repetition were investigated. For some metals, Ni, Co and Fe, small amounts of concentrated nuggets of metal could inflate the total sampling variance. Shredding to fine particles (<200 µm) helped to reduce this effect for Co and Fe. For Ni, taking additional samples helped to characterize and manage this spatial heterogeneity. This study shows that the uncertainty in the quantitative determination of metals in WPCBs and the dispersion of the values is closely dependent on the preparation of the materials (particle size and sample mass used for analysis) and on their metal content. As expected, the relative standard deviation increases when a larger particle size and a smaller sampling mass are considered, in line with Gy’s sampling theory developed for ore sampling. This study quantifies these deviations when i) the particle sizes increase ii) the sample masses decrease and iii) indirectly when the content values decrease. Although this appears to be stating the obvious, our study allows the deviations to be quantified. The specific statistical processing of the data through bootstrapping allowed this quantification to be taken further and revealed that large uncertainties remain over metal concentrations if samples are not ground sufficiently finely, and if only a limited number of digestions are performed. These relatively large uncertainties, in comparison with ore, are associated with the highly heterogeneous compositions that exist in WPCBs. This study underlines the need to pay specific attention to these heterogeneities. From statistical analysis of the data, the margin of error was predicted as a function of the sample mass, the particle size and the number of digestion repetitions. Experimenters need to consider the most reasonable balance between these three parameters, according to data quality objectives. The compromise achieved will differ from one metal to another and from one experimenter to the other, depending on their own technical limitations. This article describes features of WPCB characterization data. Our main objective is now to deepen the data analysis. The application of The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This study was carried out under the French FOAMEX research project, funded by the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: