Bisphosphonates (BPs) avidly bind to calcium crystals and inhibit osteoclastic bone resorption, making them useful for treatment of skeletal disorders such as osteoporosis, Paget's disease, osteogenesis imperfecta and metastatic bone diseases. BPs therapeutically act by causing toxic effects on osteoclasts or interfering with specific intracellular pathways in those cells. BPs that possess nitrogen in their composition are called nitrogen-containing BPs (NBPs) and include alendronate, pamidronate, risedronate, ibandronate, and zoledronate. Simple BPs or non-NBPs do not have nitrogen in their composition, include etiodronate and clodronate, and were the first to be tested in animals and clinically used. Because BPs may be administered to pregnant women or children during deciduous and permanent teeth development, it is expected that they might disturb tooth eruption and development. A review of current literature on pharmacokinetics, bioavailability, mechanisms of action, and clinical applications of BPs in children, and their effects on tooth eruption and development is presented.Bisphosphonates (BPs) avidly bind to calcium crystals and inhibit osteoclastic bone resorption ( BPs are effective inhibitors of bone resorption depending on the dosage ( Because BPs are used in many bone pathologies and may be administered to pregnant women or children during deciduous and permanent teeth development ( This paper presents a review of current knowledge on BPs’ pharmacokinetics, bioavailability, mechanisms of action, clinical applications in children and effects on tooth development. BPs can be administered either orally or intravenously. They are poorly absorbed in humans (NBPs have an absorption of about 0.7%, whereas non-NBPs have a slightly higher gastrointestinal absorption of 2–2.5%) ( The overall pharmacological effects of bisphosphonates on bone appear to depend upon two key properties: affinity for bone mineral and inhibitory effects on osteoclasts ( Once adsorbed to bone mineral surfaces, BPs enter into close extracellular contact with osteoclasts, osteoblasts and osteocytes. The bone resorption process promoted by osteoclasts causes the disassociation of BPs from the bone surface followed by intracellular uptake into osteoclasts by fluid phase endocytosis ( Inside osteoclasts, non-NBPs and NBPs present different mechanisms of action. The former can be incorporated into ATP in place of the β, γ pyrophosphate, producing AppCp-type (a non-hydrolysable ATP analog). This incorporation occurs due to the similarity of the non-NBPs to PPi, which leads into the accommodation in the class II of aminoacyl-tRNA ligase active site in place of PPi. This allows a back-reaction involving the condensation of a non-NBP with AMP thus resulting in the AppCp-type, which interferes with ATP-dependent intracellular pathways leading to osteoclast apoptosis ( Recent works indicate that non-NBPs and especially NBPs prevent osteoblast and osteocyte apoptosis as part of their beneficial effects on bone ( Intravenous BPs disappear from plasma rapidly, showing a half-life of 1–2 Almost all the published studies on the effects of BPs on dental structures have inspected bisodic etidronate and/or sodium alendronate. Bisodic etidronate and sodium alendronate have different chemical structures that are associated with different antiresorptive potencies ( It is important to note that etidronate does not present expressive clinical relevance in dentistry (except for its association with osteonecrosis) because they are rarely prescribed for children and pregnant women. This is possibly the reason for few reports on human dental alterations as consequence of etidronate use ( A limited body of published data suggests that maternal use of bisphosphonates before or during pregnancy does not have serious fetal or neonatal adverse effects ( BPs have been used in children and been shown to be effective in: (1) improving the acquisition of bone mass and reducing fracture rate in some primary or secondary forms of osteoporosis; (2) treating severe hypercalcemia caused by excessive bone resorption or increased intestinal calcium absorption; (3) reducing existing calcifications and avoiding new ectopic ossifications in some disorders associated with heterotopic calcifications; and (4) reducing osteolytic lesions and bone pain in patients with fibrous dysplasia in bone, chronic recurrent multifocal osteomyelitis and osteonecrosis-related chemotherapy ( Primary forms of osteoporosis are due to an intrinsic alteration of bone structure and some of them are familial or genetically determined, like it occurs in the case of OI ( BPs are usually well tolerated and safe both orally and intravenously. Bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (BRONJ) has been detailed extensively in adults but to date there have been no similar cases in children, suggesting that pediatric patients are likely to have a different BRONJ risk profile compared with adults ( In most papers the average age of children beginning treatment of OI with BPs is about 4 years old. However, there are reports of children starting treatment as early as two weeks old ( Tooth development comprises highly regulated complex events characterized by cell–cell and cell–extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions ( Tooth eruption requires normal osteoclastic bone resorption ( Careful analysis of the literature reveals that almost all the studies associating BPs with dental defects address etidronate and/or alendronate. Some authors have reported effects of etidronate (a non-NBP) or alendronate (a NBP) on collagen fibrillogenesis, matrix synthesis, and mineralization of dentin. Some investigators have also reported the effects of etidronate or alendronate on the enamel formation. Ten years later, Previous publications indicate that disturbance in the mineralization process induced by BPs is believed to be due to physicochemical effects of the drug on crystal formation and aggregation ( We have recently analyzed secretory and mature enamels of maxillary incisors from rats treated with etidronate (8 The most widely used BPs in pediatric patients are alendronate, pamidronate and zoledronate. There is an important debate in the literature about the possible effects of BPs on tooth development and eruption. Based on the reported data relevant for dentistry, clinical use of etidronate should be systematically discarded, whereas alendronate's use in children seems to be safe. On the other hand, the effects of pamidronate and zoledronate on dental eruption and formation remain unclear and should be exhaustively studied. The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. This review is part of the Master's dissertation of the first author (Ana Prates Soares), who received a scholarship from Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado da Bahia –