In the present work the effect of the alkyl chain length and the position of the sulfophenyl substituent of the linear alkylbenzene sulfonates (LAS) on their anaerobic biodegradability have been investigated. Degradation kinetics of the linear alkyl benzene sulfonates homologues, 2ϕC10LAS, 2ϕC12LAS and 2ϕC14LAS, have been studied. It has been also investigated the effect of the isomer type on the degradation rate of the LAS molecule through the comparative study of the 2ϕC10LAS and 5ϕC10LAS isomers. Batch anaerobic biodegradation tests were performed using sludge from the anaerobic digester of a wastewater treatment plant as microorganisms source. Ultimate biodegradation was evaluated from the biogas production whereas primary biodegradation was determined by specific analysis of the surfactant. LAS homologues and isomers showed a negligible primary biodegradation under anaerobic conditions. Furthermore, analysis of sulfophenyl carboxilates (SPC) by LC–MS indicated a low and constant level of these LAS degradation metabolites over the test period. These data are consistent with a minimal transformation of the LAS parent molecule in the anaerobic digesters. On the other hand, the addition of the shortest alkyl chain length homologues, decyl and dodecylbenzene sulfonates, reduces the biogas production whereas the most hydrophobic homologue, the tetradecylbenzene sulfonate, enhances the biogas production. This LAS homologue seems to increase the availability of organic compounds sorbed on the anaerobic sludge promoting their biodegradation.Linear alkylbenzene sulphonate (LAS) is the most widely used anionic surfactant due to its excellent detersive properties and relatively low cost. LAS is a mixture of closely related isomers and homologues, each containing an aromatic ring sulphonated at the Many studies about the biodegradation of LAS have shown that the surfactant is well biodegraded under a wide variety of aerobic conditions ( Although most wastewater treatment systems are aerobic, sludge arising from such treatments is often subjected to anaerobic digestion. Due to its hydrophobic character LAS is strongly sorbed to aerobic sludge ( The purpose of the present work has been to investigate the effect of the structure of the LAS molecule on its anaerobic biodegradability. Batch anaerobic biodegradation tests with different LAS homologues were performed in order to investigate the effect of the alkyl chain length. Likewise, anaerobic degradation tests were carried out with isomers of LAS to examine the effect of the position of the sulfophenyl substituent in the alkyl chain length. Linear sodium alkylbenzenesulfonates were synthesized by Petresa (Spain). Alkyl chain distribution (C Sludge samples from the anaerobic digester of a municipal wastewater treatment plant (Manresa, Barcelona) were used as inoculum. Total and volatile solids of the anaerobic sludge samples were determined according to Standard Methods ( A batch test system based on the method proposed by The LAS extraction procedure was based on the method described by SPCs were determined as previously described by The aquatic toxicity of the LAS isomers was assessed by the The effect of the alkyl chain length on the anaerobic biodegradation of LAS was investigated performing batch degradation tests with different alkyl chain length homologues (2 When LAS was added to the anaerobic digesters, its sorption on sludge produced an increase in the surfactant concentration in the solid phase and a significant surfactant removal from the aqueous phase and, consequently, a decrease of the LAS available fraction. Concentrations of the LAS homologues in supernatant liquors and sludge are given in The surfactant concentration in the liquid phase decreased significantly as the LAS chain length increased. This finding is consistent with monitoring studies ( In all the anaerobic digesters, positive biogas production was detected and the pattern of biogas production obtained was similar for control digesters and for digesters spiked with the different LAS homologues. For digesters spiked with C Not any extent of ultimate biodegradation was obtained for C Primary biodegradation of LAS homologues in the anaerobic tests was calculated from the specific analysis of the surfactant in liquid and solid phases. LAS content was determined periodically during the degradation tests in both control digesters and digesters spiked with the different LAS homologues. The LAS concentration in supernatants and sludge remained practically constant over the period of time studied ( Specific analysis of surfactant provided evidence for the persistence of the LAS molecules under the anaerobic conditions of these biodegradation tests. However, as it has been already discussed (Section Quantitative determination of sulfophenyl carboxylic acids (SPC) in the supernatant liquors, was achieved by solid phase extraction followed by liquid chromatography/ionspray/mass spectrometry using negative ion detection (LC/ISP-MS). In order to investigate the effect of the sulfophenyl group position on the anaerobic biodegradability of the LAS molecule, batch degradation tests with two LAS isomers, 2 In all the experiments, the biogas production was lower for the digesters containing added surfactant than for the control digesters. The evolution of the net biogas pressure, i.e., the mean pressure in the digesters with added surfactant subtracting the mean endogenous biogas pressure is shown in Primary biodegradation of LAS isomers in the anaerobic tests was determined from the specific analysis of the surfactant in liquid and solid phases. The percentages of LAS removal were calculated from the overall mass balance of the surfactant. The low value of LAS removal obtained (0–5%) indicated the persistence of the decylbenzene sulfonate isomers in the anaerobic digesters. In order to compare the toxicity results on methanogenic bacteria with the aquatic toxicity data on other type of organisms, toxicity tests on The sorption of LAS homologues on anaerobic sludge determined the distribution of each one of them between aqueous and solid phases and, consequently, its availability. The surfactant concentration in the liquid phase decreased significantly as the LAS chain length increased, and a linear relationship was found between the partition coefficient and the alkyl chain length. Negligible primary biodegradation of the LAS homologues and isomers was detected in anaerobic conditions. SPC analysis by LC-MS confirmed the poor transformation of the LAS molecules. However, significant differences on the extent of the biogas production were observed depending on the LAS homologue. Thus, the shortest LAS homologues (C This research was supported by the Spanish Ministerio de Ciencia y Tecnología (MCYT) Fondo Europeo de Desarrollo Regional (FEDER), project PPQ2001-2322 and PETRESA.