ZnO thin film has been deposited on a sapphire (001) at a temperature of 400°C using a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) with oxygen pressures of 50, 200, 300 and 500 mTorr. As the oxygen pressure for the thin film deposition increases, the crystallinity of the samples degrades as measured by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In contrast, the photoluminescence (PL) intensity of ultra-violet (UV) luminescence increases as the oxygen pressure increases up to 300 mTorr. This is probably because the stoichiometry of oxygen-deficient ZnO film is improved by increasing oxygen pressure. According to the results from Hall measurements, the oxygen vacancy as a native donor defect in the ZnO decreases in concentration as the pressure increases. It is concluded that the UV luminescence intensity strongly depends on the stoichiometry in the ZnO film rather than the micro-structural quality of the crystal.Wide and direct bandgap semiconductors are of interest for blue and ultra-violet (UV) optical devices, such as light-emitting diodes and laser diodes. ZnO, a II–VI compound semiconductor with a wide direct bandgap of 3.3 eV A PLD chamber evacuated by turbomolecular pump to a base pressure of 5×10  For a ZnO film grown with the highest oxygen pressure of 500 mTorr, the FWHM of (002) peak increases the most and (101) diffraction peak is also detected. This means that the crystalline quality degrades with the increase of oxygen pressure in terms of XRD measurements. The degradation of crystalline quality is probably related to the nucleation and growth kinetics of the ZnO, even though the mechanism is not fully understood. In Photoluminescence (PL) spectra obtained from samples deposited with various oxygen pressures are shown in The PL results from the samples are found to be strongly dependent on the oxygen pressure. All samples show a typical luminescence behavior with the two emissions of a narrow UV and a broad green–yellow band. Earlier reports have indicated that ZnO exhibits a narrow peak near a band edge at 375 nm (3.3 eV) and broad deep level emission around 550 nm (2.25 eV) The stoichiometry effects are partially supported by the results of the Hall measurement as shown in Because the sample grown in an oxygen pressure of 50 mTorr has the largest number of shallow donors (oxygen vacancies) and the smallest number of deep acceptors (Zn vacancies), the electron concentration and the conductivity of the sample must be higher than those of any other sample. As the stoichiometry becomes more improved with the oxygen supply, the number of oxygen vacancies will decrease. As a result, the resistivity of the film increases as shown in the plot of We have deposited ZnO thin films on sapphire using a PLD under various oxygen pressures at a substrate temperature of 400°C. As the oxygen pressure for the thin film deposition increases, the crystallinity of the samples degrades as measured by X-ray diffractometry (XRD) and scanning electron microscopy (SEM). In contrast, the photoluminescence (PL) intensity of UV luminescence increases as the oxygen pressure increases up to 300 mTorr. This is probably because the stoichiometry of oxygen-deficient ZnO film is improved by increasing oxygen pressure. The green–yellow PL also increases in intensity with the oxygen pressure because the Zn vacancy increases with the decrease of the oxygen vacancies. According to the results from Hall measurements, the oxygen vacancy as a native donor defect in the ZnO decreases in concentration as the pressure increases. It is concluded that the UV luminescence intensity depends strongly on the stoichiometry in the ZnO film rather than the micro-structural quality of the crystal. The authors would like to thank Dr J.H. Song from the Korea Institute of Science and Technology for the backscattering spectrometry and also W.K. Choi from the Korea Institute of Science and Technology for his sincere technical support. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial support of the Korea Research Foundation made in the program year of 1998 (1998-017-E00173).