Grain soaking treatment could reduce phytates improving mineral and protein bioavailability. To evaluate the effects of soaking process with lactic acid on phytates and nutrient content (Fe, Zn, and proteins) from whole rice grain, a surface response methodology with a 32 factorial experimental design was used. The independent variables were time (24, 36 and 48 h) and temperature (35°, 45° and 55 °C) of soaking.
                  The results showed that soaking decreased total phosphorus (TP) in the range of 35–92.4 mg/100 g compared to 255 mg/100 g in whole rice. The losses of phytate in the grains were between 87 and 91%, the remnant phytic acid phosphorus in the grains being between 15.1 and 20.9 mg/100 g, and the most effective treatment was soaking at 45 °C for 48 h. The losses of the different nutrients were high in all of the different soaking treatments, reaching 50% for Fe, more than 64% for Zn, and around 45% for proteins. Although protein digestibility and mineral dialyzability were improved, acid soaking of brown rice would not be suggested as a useful process to reduce phytates from whole rice grains, if the production of a staple food is the main objective.Cereals are members of the grass family ( WG have always been recognized for their contribution of traditional nutrients, B vitamins, minerals, and dietary fiber to the diet. More recently, WG have been shown to be a good source of bioactive components (e.g. phytoestrogens and plant sterols) and antioxidants. In fact, the Food processing may produce either beneficial or deleterious effects on nutrient bioavailability. Regarding minerals, processing could increase the content of some minerals, destroy some inhibitors or form beneficial complexes between minerals and matrix components. The impact can be negative by deactivating enzymes that degrade inhibitors or by generating insoluble metal compounds (e.g. oxidation, precipitation) ( Phytates are important inhibitors of mineral absorption, whose biosynthesis occurs only in the aleurone and embryo but not in the starchy endosperm. Regarding brown rice, the content of phytates is around 1300–2700 mg kg At pH values normally occurring in foods, as well as under physiological conditions, phytic acid is negatively charged and has the potential to bind cations or other positively charged functional groups of molecules. Phytic acid forms complexes with minerals and trace elements Several processing techniques applied to seeds allow phytates hydrolysis, such as enzyme activation, improving enzyme activity present in the seed or activated during process such as soaking, germination, cooking and fermentation ( The objective of this work was to evaluate the effect of soaking process (time and temperature) with lactic acid on phytic acid and nutrient content, mineral bio-accessibility and protein digestibility from brown rice (whole grain). Whole grains of brown rice ( To evaluate the effect of time ( Approximately 25 g of brown rice was soaked with 6.6 g/L lactic acid solution (1:2 g:mL) in the different experimental conditions. The moistened seeds were dried in an oven at 80 °C and kept at 4 °C until the analysis. The soaking liquid was analyzed for free phosphorus and phytic acid phosphorus. Free phosphorus and phytic acid phosphorus from soaking water (WFP and WPPA, respectively), and phytic acid phosphorus and total phosphorus from brown rice (GPPA and TP, respectively) were determined according to AOAC Anion-Exchange Method and AOAC Phosphorus Method ( Moisture and ash were determined by gravimetric measure according to AOAC 935.29 and AOAC 923.03 ( Protein digestibility (PD%) was determined as described by A modification of the widespread Each experiment was performed at least in duplicate and each assay was performed by triplicate. Response surface and analysis of Variance was carried out using the software Statgraphics Plus 5.1. The statistical differences among samples were determined using the LSD ( The effects of soaking treatments of brown rice on soaking WFP, WPPA, GPPA, TP, DML, PL, Fe and Zn retention in the grain are presented in The ANOVA results shows that lack of fit was not significant ( It is observed (  Free phosphorus leaching can occur because it could be released by diffusion in soaking water and/or endogenous phytase could hydrolyze phytic acid during soaking releasing free phosphorous. This is in agreement with the fact that the acid conditions of the treatments (presence of lactic acid in soaking water), promotes the phytates enzymatic hydrolysis (liberating P as free P and mono, di, tri, P-inositol), because the endogenous phytases have the optimum activity at pH 4–5 and 40–50 °C ( For this response, the effect of all terms corresponding to the regression model was significant, except for In this case, none of the terms of the polynomial were significant (  ANOVA results indicate that the only significant term was DML during soaking process depended on PL followed similar tendency as that of DML. ANOVA results indicate that the terms As it is expected, Fe retention decreased with According to Retention of Zn showed similar tendency as Fe retention ( Our results suggest that minerals would dissolve in acid soaking water together with some soluble components of rice grains, as was seen by As shown in  Approximately 91% of phytic acid was removed from whole rice by soaking the grains in acidic conditions (45 °C – 48 h soaking). The reduction was caused by the activation of endogenous phytase and leaching of phytic acid in the soaking water. However, while protein digestibility and mineral dialyzability were improved, soaking process produced significant losses of minerals and proteins. Thus, acid soaking of brown rice would not be suggested as a useful process to reduce phytic acid from whole rice grains, if the production of a staple food that will not be fortified is the main objective. However, acid soaking rice could be useful to produce a low phytate starchy ingredient to be used in rice base formulated foods. This work was partially financed by Supporting Information Available: this information is available free of charge via the internet at