To ensure optimal process flowsheet selection it is valuable to conduct environmental and economic comparisons at an early stage of technology selection and process design. However, the data that is needed to perform these studies are not available at this stage of process development. This is also true for bioprocess systems. To overcome the lack of data, the CeBER (Centre for Bioprocess Engineering Research, University of Cape Town) Bioprocess Modeller was developed to provide material and energy values for industrial microbial processes.
                  This paper presents the downstream processing portion of this flowsheet. The model allows for solid–liquid separation, cell disruption, concentration and formulation units as required. The model allows section of appropriate downstream processing units include, amongst others, centrifugation, filtration, precipitation and freeze-drying. At each downstream processing stage, non-reacting and reacting chemicals can be added. The model provides both a material inventory as well as the calculation of the energy input required and waste heat generated.
                  Additionally, the model includes a database of values (including constants, operating conditions and others), drawn from various industrial norms and academic sources. Should specific information not be known, the model selects the most appropriate values based on other decisions made through the model.For microbial bioprocesses, it is accepted that the relative economic importance of the production and downstream stages is highly dependent on the product value and purity required. The relative importance of these stages with respect to environmental burden has yet to be addressed. Process flexibility decreases as the level of definition increases in the system; hence it is valuable to be able to analyse the potential for combined process sustainability as well as technical and environmental feasibility during the early stages of design. To achieve this, estimates of the material and energy inventories are required. In order to obtain easy access to accurate material and energy inventory data for the modelling of industrial bioprocesses at the early stages of process design, a Microsoft A corresponding paper described the development of the microbial growth and product formation ( The model allows for fast results at an early stage of design; even by users not familiar with modelling software such as AspenPlus or SuperPro Designer. The model also includes a database and default values based on industrial norms and academic studies. Should specific information not be known, the model selects the most feasible values and automatically uses these. All automatic values can be overwritten with more suitable data as this becomes available. More detailed calculations and equations can be obtained ( Product recoveries and waste removals are tracked throughout the flowsheet to determine overall recoveries and purities. In each separation step, the levels of liquid and solid removal are given according to the type of separation. Depending on the phase of the product (liquid or solid), the desired flow is fed to the next unit, while the waste fraction is removed. Solid liquid separation can be achieved by centrifugation, filtration, sedimentation or a nominal ‘other’ method. Five forms of centrifugation are provided in the model: tubular, disk, nozzle-discharge disk, helical conveyor decanter or “other”, each with a specific energy requirement per volume ( Unless stated otherwise, the generic flowsheet model uses energy per unit volume data, calculated mass balance data and energy efficiencies to obtain energy and volume requirements. Repeat municipal, distilled or de-ionized water washing was allowed with successive washes taking into account the reduction in initial concentrations. The material and energy balance calculations for filtration assume constant pressure membrane filtration, with no cake build-up. The mass, density and flux of the material entering the filter, as well as the cross sectional area and volume of the filtration unit, are used to calculate the linear velocity of material flowing through the filtration unit. From this, together with efficiency values, the power and energy requirements are calculated. A filter media and flocculent can be added to aid in filtration efficiencies. It is assumed that the energy requirements for filtration are provided by electricity. The model also takes into account the amount of filter material needed; based on the cross sectional area of the filter, height of filter material, density of the filter material and how often it needs to be changed. Filter media can be added as diatomaceous earth, filter paper, expanded perlite, sintered glass, wire mesh or a user specified material. It is assumed that there is no energy requirement for sedimentation. As with all solid liquid separation steps in the model, solid–liquid separation is based on default product/waste separation efficiency values, assumed from similar industrial units or a user defined value. A flocculent can also be added for a sedimentation unit operation – based on percentages of the total calculated volume in the unit. Cell disruption, to release intracellular products, can be performed chemically (using Typical disruption efficiencies (%) and energy productivities (mg/J) are assumed and used to estimate appropriate default values for the model. It is assumed that product not released on cell disruption is lost on biomass separation in further processing. The extent of cell disruption and energy efficiency (mg product released per/unit energy) on high pressure homogenization are given for Cavitation data are split into hydrodynamic and acoustic cavitation. Energy efficiency values by mass or volume (mg/J or J/ml) obtained literature ( Cell disruption (%) and energy efficiencies (mg/J) used in the model are given for a bead mill. Data are given for A maximum of six concentration and purification units can be modelled to achieve a desired product purity from solution. These include adsorption, centrifugation, chromatography, decanting, evaporation, filtration, precipitation/crystallization, solvent extraction and splitters. Material balancing for centrifugation and filtration is based on solid and liquid fractional removals. For precipitation/crystallization, it is assumed that no product is lost or waste removed since all material flows to the next unit. For adsorption, chromatography, solvent extraction and decanting, it is assumed that 99% of the product phase is retained and 95% of the waste phase is removed. All default numbers are estimations based on ideal conditions; however, can be changed. It is further assumed that all phase changes are complete. In the separation steps, additional materials may be added to facilitate separation through, for example, phase changes, ionic modification, flocculation The required energy for both adsorption and chromatography is calculated from first principles based on the pumping requirement to contact the liquid across a cross sectional area, under a given pressure. Default length to diameter ratios, pumping efficiencies and pressure changes are all assumed (and can be changed) in calculating the volumes needed to determine the cross sectional area. The material and energy balance for centrifugation uses the approach presented above under solid–liquid separation. Since the need for centrifugation during concentration or purification is more limited than in solid–liquid separation, the current model approach is simplified. No choice of type of centrifuge is allowed. Instead, the average power per unit volume across various types of centrifuges is used as default. Repeat centrifugation and wash cycles are not accommodated, but should more than one centrifuge step be needed, using an additional centrifugation in the next unit is recommended. Further developments to the model will include the same approach as in solid–liquid separation. The energy required to heat and evaporate water from the product is calculated from an energy balance calculation, using the specific heat capacity, the heat of vaporization, temperatures and efficiencies. These values should be similar to those shown in It is assumed that the energy required for heating is obtained from natural gas. If natural evaporation is required, the unit operation ‘other’ should be chosen and the energy per unit volume value set to zero. Filtration operations for concentration and purification used in the generic flowsheet model are more sophisticated than those required for solid–liquid separation. Five subcategories are considered. Each has an associated energy per unit volume requirement (diafiltration: 18-, microfiltration: 7.2-, nanofiltration: 252-, reverse osmosis: 32.4-, and ultrafiltration: 20.2 MJ/m The diafiltration option allows for the addition of a diafiltration solution (salt and water). As with filtration for solid–liquid separation, there is allowance for a flocculent and provision for the filter media used. Electrical energy requirements for precipitation or crystallization are based on the energy requirement for agitation, with a default power per unit volume value of 0.8 kW/m In modelling the precipitation or crystallization unit, precipitating chemicals are assumed to undergo a perfect phase change from liquid to solid. The solids formed can then be removed in further processing ( Modelling of solvent extraction requires the addition of a solvent and the defining of two phases: product and waste. The product phase moves on to the next unit operation, while the chemicals in the waste phase and the remaining liquid phase are removed according to the separation efficiency specified. A similar approach is taken for decanting. However, no solvent is added, but two phases and the same separation method are used. An arbitrary unit to simply divide a stream into product (for further purification) and waste is also included. The splitter is simply defined by a split ratio of product to waste, with no energy requirements included. The splitter is an addition in the model to allow for purging a stream or to manually account for losses where energy inputs are minimal or unknown. The final step in the generic flow sheet model is formulation. This can take the form of oven-, spray- or freeze-drying. Typical examples and conditions are shown in The energy required to heat material and evaporate moisture by oven drying is calculated from first principle energy balance calculation, using natural gas as the energy source. Energy calculations are similar to those for evaporation used elsewhere in the model. The energy to freeze dry the product is determined by the energy needed to cool the liquid to freezing, to freeze and subcool it, and the energy to create a vacuum in the container. It is assumed that no external energy inputs are required to sublimate the liquid from the product. The calculation includes all temperatures, the freeze drier inlet area, efficiencies, specific heats of water and ice and the latent heat of freezing. The energy required for vacuum pumping is calculated as for other pumping requirements in the model (see adsorption and chromatography). Energy data for spray drying is calculated according to an energy balance given in literature for spray drier energy requirements ( A simplified wastewater treatment scenario is included whereby wastewater collected in the discarded streams may be neutralized by the addition of up to three chemicals. A stoichiometric oxygen demand (StOD) value ( After penicillin production ( Sodium acetate, acetone and water were added to the penicillin V solution for its re-extraction into the acetone/water phase and subsequent precipitation as crystals of the sodium salt. These were washed, separated in a basket centrifuge and air-dried in a fluidized bed dryer. The wash solution from the basket centrifuge as well as the previous centrifugal extraction wastewater was neutralized with sodium hydroxide before being discharged to effluent treatment. In a more optimum system, it may be possible to recycle sodium acetate or acetone and allow for water re-use. The material and energy balance results were compared to a Penicillin V model presented in literature ( For each kilogram of penicillin produced, approximately 19 kg of process water was required. This showed good agreement with the amount of water shown to be required in literature ( Butyl acetate requirements were reduced to 43% and acetone requirements increased 3 fold because of simplifications on a recycle stream. Other inputs and outputs were within 10% of the literature values. This paper provides a generic flowsheet model (CeBER Bioprocess Modeller) for fast, first estimate material and energy balance inventories of industrial bioprocesses. Presented in an MS-Excel format, the model uses a stoichiometric approach, together with first principles and rules of thumb. The CeBER Bioprocess Modeller allows for batch or continuous production by aerobic or anaerobic and intra- or extracellular means, the details of which are presented in an accompanying paper ( The financial support of the The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at