Modem processing of tantalum and niobium metals and their compounds is related to the treatment of fluoride compounds. The processing of tantalum and niobium begins with the fluorination of the raw material, which always consists of complex oxide compounds containing tantalum and niobium. The fluorination process aims to decompose the material, and convert tantalum and niobium oxides into complex fluoride compounds to be dissolved in aqueous solutions. The next technological step is the purification and separation of tantalum and niobium in the form of complex fluoride compounds of tantalum and niobium. The process of separating the intermediate products from the purified solutions, in the form of solid complex fluoride salts or hydroxides, is related to the behavior of tantalum and niobium complexes in solutions of different compositions. Tantalum powder is produced by reduction of potassium heptafluorotantalate, K2TaF7, dissolved in a molten mixture of alkali halides. The reduction is performed at high temperatures using molten sodium. This chapter discusses the main steps in the currently applied technology of tantalum and niobium compounds from the standpoint of the chemistry of complex tantalum and niobium fluoride compounds.(1 – equilibrium curve, 2 – one-stage process) X – concentration of component (j = A or B) in aqueous phase; X X Y – concentration of j-component in organic phase; Y  The processing of tantalum and niobium begins with the fluorination of the raw material, which always consists of complex oxide compounds containing tantalum and niobium. The main types of tantalum- and niobium-containing minerals are discussed in Concentrates of columbate-tantalate are most suitable for processing and are most frequently used in the production of tantalum, niobium and their compounds. The fluorination process aims to decompose the material and convert tantalum and niobium oxides into complex fluoride compounds to be dissolved in aqueous solutions. The correct and successful performance of the decomposition process requires a clear understanding of the oxygen–fluorine substitution mechanism of the interaction itself. The next technological step is the purification and separation of tantalum and niobium in the form of complex fluoride compounds of tantalum and niobium. This process is performed using liquid–liquid extraction, using appropriate organic solvents. This technological step requires knowledge on The process of separating the intermediate products from the purified solutions, in the form of solid complex fluoride salts or hydroxides, is also related to the behavior of tantalum and niobium complexes in solutions of different compositions. The precipitation of complex fluoride compounds must be performed under conditions that prevent hydrolysis, whereas the precipitation of hydroxides is intended to be performed along with hydrolysis in order to reduce contamination of the oxide material by fluorine. Tantalum powder is produced by reduction of potassium heptafluorotantalate, K This chapter is devoted to a discussion of the main steps in the currently-applied technology of tantalum and niobium compounds from the standpoint of the chemistry of complex tantalum and niobium fluoride compounds.    Two types of digestion solutions are usually used for the chemical decomposition of the raw material hydrofluoric acid, HF, or a mixture of hydrofluoric and sulfuric acids, HF and H  The mechanism and kinetics of the dissolution of tantalum and niobium oxides both in hydrofluoric acid and in a mixture of hydrofluoric and sulfuric acids were investigated by Baram It was proposed Nevertheless, Ta Majima, Awakura, Mashima and Hirato Results of the measurements were analyzed in the form of the initial dissolution rate (R  The dependence of The addition of strong acids or neutral salts, such as NH Akimov and Chernyak It is assumed that at the second step, tantalum and niobium hydroxides are converted into oxysulfate compounds, as represented by  The decomposition process can be significantly intensified by the mechanical activation of the material prior to chemical decomposition. Based on a thermodynamic analysis of the system, Akimov and Chernyak Analysis of the volumetric effects indicates that as a result of such mechanical activation, iron and manganese are concentrated in the extended part of the crystal, while tantalum and niobium are predominantly collected in the compressed part of the distorted crystal structure. It is interesting to note that this effect is more pronounced in the case of tantalite than it is for columbite, due to the higher “rigidity” of the former. Akimov and Chernyak Welham All of the experiments described by Welham in Analysis of specific changes in surface area during milling shows the difference between wet and dry conditions. In addition, dry milling under argon and in air also provides different results. Thus, the specific surface areas at the end of the size-reduction milling process were estimated at 4.6 and 3.9 m The difference between the specific surface areas of materials treated by the wet or dry method can also be explained by the rewelding mechanism. The surface area of wet milled powders continuously increases during milling, while extended dry milling causes a decrease in surface area. Nevertheless, it was clearly shown It was found that the dissolution rate of the material depends both on its surface area and on its crystalline size, but the importance of the crystalline size seems to be greater. The empiric equation describing the above dependence of the leaching rate on these two parameters is as follows Based on a comprehensive investigation, Welham  Hydrofluoric acid, at relatively high concentrations and at elevated temperatures, dissolves columbite–tantalite concentrates at a reasonable rate. The dissolution process is based on the fluorination of tantalum, niobium and other metal oxides and their conversion into soluble complex fluoride acids yielding complex fluoride ions. Formulation of the complete formal chemical interaction between hydrofluoric acid, HF, and a columbite–tantalite concentrate with the general formula (Fe, Mn)(Ta, Nb) In the case of a mixture of hydrofluoric and sulfuric acids, the process is more complex. It can be noted that sulfuric acid most probably interacts mainly with iron and manganese, whereas hydrofluoric acid serves mostly in the dissolution of tantalum and niobium and their conversion into soluble fluoride complexes. Nevertheless, due to the high acidity of the solution, here too the formation of hexafluorotantalate and hexafluoroniobate complex ions, TaF The digestion of columbite, tantalite and other raw materials containing tantalum and niobium using both hydrofluoric acid and a mixture of hydrofluoric and sulfuric acids is widely applied in the industry. The main advantage of the method is its simplicity. The method has, nevertheless, several disadvantages that should be noted, as follows.  The method is based on the complete dissolution of the raw material. Only alkali earth metals and rare earth metals that form insoluble salts do not usually provide any significant preliminary concentration of the material during decomposition. In addition, concentration of tantalum and niobium in the final solution yielding by dissolution depends on the composition of the raw material. Another point is related to the high acidity level of the final solution, which leads to certain limitations in the subsequent technological steps. Specifically, the high acidity of the initial solution eliminates any possibility for selective extraction, i.e. sequential separation of tantalum and then of niobium. Due to the high concentration of acids, only collective extraction (of tantalum and niobium together) can be performed, at least at the first step. In addition, extraction from a highly acidic solution might cause additional contamination of the final products with antimony and other related impurities. In order to reduce the level of contaminants in the initial solution, some special additives are applied prior to the liquid–liquid extraction. For instance, some mineral acids and base metals are added to the solution at certain temperatures to cause the precipitation of antimony Another method of raw material decomposition is based on the fluorination of the raw material by the hydrofluoride method. No published data exists on hydrofluoride decomposition of columbite or tantalite concentrates. The interaction can, nevertheless, be discussed based on available information on the decomposition of lithium tantalate, LiTaO The chemical interaction of lithium tantalate with molten ammonium hydrofluoride can be represented as follows: The optimal temperature range for the fluorination process was found to be about 230-290°C. The resulting cake was leached with water. The prepared solution was separated from the precipitate by regular filtration and the separated insoluble precipitate was identified as lithium fluoride, LiF. The solution contained up to 90 g/l Ta Decomposition of lithium niobate, LiNbO The filtrated solution can be successfully used for the precipitation of potassium heptafluoroniobate, K In both cases, the fluorination of the complex oxides of tantalum and niobium leads to the formation of the water-soluble compounds (NH Since the fluorination enables to separate components of complex oxide compounds containing tantalum and niobium, it seems that it is applicable for In order to increase the efficiency of the fluorination process, the tantalum-niobium-containing raw material must be milled and well mixed with ammonium hydrofluoride. It is assumed that the process temperature can be set between 200-350°C. In general, the process flow chart of raw material decomposition by the hydrofluoride method can be represented as shown in The separated ammonia and hydrogen fluoride can be condensed and collected in the form of NH The cake is leached with water in order to dissolve tantalum and niobium (and other related compounds) in the form of fluoride salts of ammonium. Ammonium fluoroferrate and fluoromanganate are unstable in aqueous solutions of low acidity. It is assumed that iron and manganese will form precipitates of insoluble fluorides or oxyfluorides that can be separated from the solution by filtration. The main advantages of the method can be formulated as follows. First, hydrofluoric acid is not needed for the decomposition stage; the amount of fluorine required for the raw material decomposition can be calculated and adjusted as closely as possible to the stoichiometry of the interaction. Since the leaching of the fluorinated material is performed with water, a significant fraction of the impurities are precipitated in the form of insoluble compounds that can be separated from the solution, hence the filtrated solution is essentially purified. There is no doubt that solutions prepared in this way can be of consistent concentrations of tantalum and niobium, independent of the initial raw material composition. The most important property of the solution is its low acidity. Such solutions can be treated by liquid–liquid extraction using both the collective and selective methods after an appropriate acidity adjustment.  The method is very effective for the separation of dissolved components and enables the production of high-purity products, in addition to its advantages of being a low-cost and simple method. Liquid–liquid extraction is performed continuously using simple equipment, which can be completely automated and does not require constant labor and service. The liquid–liquid extraction process is based on the specific distribution of dissolved components between two immiscible fluids, for instance, between aqueous and organic liquids. The process refers to a mass exchange processes in which the mass transport of component (j) from phase (1) to phase (2) by means of convection or molecular diffusion acts to achieve the chemical potential (μ) equilibrium The rate of extraction depends on the mass transport coefficient ( The subsequent step in the liquid–liquid extraction process is the separation of the two phases. This step is also of high importance because its performance impacts the quality of the separation and, ultimately, the purity of the final product.   Based on the above, the main parameters of the extraction process can be represented as follows: The extractant selectivity with respect to the components: The process of liquid–liquid extraction, which includes the mixing of two immiscible fluids (emulsification) and separation of two immiscible fluids from the emulsion (settling), is applied in industry in one of the following three forms: One stage; Multistage cross-current; Multistage counter-current. One-stage extractions display lower efficiency compared to the other two procedures. A multistage cross-current process consists of several heavily-connected stages, as shown in  Multistage counter-current liquid–liquid extraction is characterized by a high production capacity and economic efficiency. Mixer–settler extraction cells are frequently used in the hydrometallurgical processing of tantalum and niobium compounds. The overall process usually consists of three steps. The first step aims to extract the components into the extract and leave the impurities in the raffinate. This step can be referred to as the extraction step. In the second step, the extract is washed using an appropriate aqueous solution to obtain a pure extract containing only the targeted component. This step can be referred to as the washing step. The objective of the third step is to obtain a pure aqueous solution containing the targeted component by striping the component from the extract into an appropriate aqueous phase. This step can be referred to as the re-extraction or stripping step. The organic phase that results from the stripping stage usually contains a very low concentration of the targeted component and is reused as an extractant in the first extraction step.   The number of cells required for each step of the overall extraction process - extraction, washing and stripping - is determined empirically.  The complexes can be considered to be Lewis acids, the acidity of which increases with the reduction in the metal's coordination number or when moving along the complex sequence from TaF The enhanced acidity of the solution causes the equilibriums in The difference in behavior between tantalum and niobium complexes is related to the difference in their molecular weights. Niobium complexes have lower molecular weights and are stronger Lewis acids compared to the corresponding tantalum-containing complexes. The high Lewis acidity of the niobium complexes requires that the solution acidity be respectively higher in order to be converted into NbF This particular difference in the Lewis acidity of tantalum and niobium complexes provides the possibility of an effective separation between the elements using liquid–liquid extraction. It is obvious that tantalum will extract into the organic phase at a lower acidity of the aqueous solution, whereas niobium will require a higher level of acidity in order to be extracted. The stripping of the elements from the organic phase into the aqueous phase will take place in reverse order.  Nikolaev et al. Kuterev, Stoyanov, Bagreev and Zolotov Using The spectrum of the niobium-containing extract was concluded to be related to the presence of NbF Based on recent The stripping of tantalum and niobium from the organic phase into aqueous media occurs in solutions with low acidity levels, leading to the formation of TaF Extraction and stripping (re-extraction) of tantalum and niobium complex acids are shown schematically in  The second method is based on selective extraction that consists of extraction into two different organic solutions. In the first step, tantalum is extracted into an organic phase. In the second step of the procedure, niobium is extracted into a separate portion of the extractant. In both cases, the extraction process includes washing (scrubbing) of the extract, a stage that is not shown separately. The organic phase that results from the stripping process is returned to the beginning of the extraction process for reuse as an extractant. The second process of selective extraction is more effective and leads to better separation of tantalum and niobium and to more effective purification. Its performance, however, requires the initial solution to be of relatively low acidity.  The initial solution is characterized by a high level of acidity that excludes the possibility of selective extraction. Such solutions can be treated only using the collective extraction procedure. Eckert  Another way of applying the selective extraction method directly on the initial solution is to produce a solution of low acidity. This can be achieved by using the hydrofluoride method for fluorination and decomposition of raw material. As was discussed in Paragraph 8.2.2, the raw material is fluorinated by molten ammonium hydrofluoride yielding soluble complex fluorides of ammonium and tantalum or niobium. The cake obtained following fluorination is dissolved in water, leading to a solution of low initial acidity that is related for the most part to the partial hydrolysis of complex fluoride compounds. The acidity of the solution is first adjusted to ensure selective tantalum extraction. In the second step, the acidity of the raffinate is increased to provide the necessary conditions for niobium extraction. The extraction of tantalum and niobium from solutions containing hydrofluoric and sulfuric acids can be performed using a wide variety of extractants, including organic acids and organic salts, basic dyes, amines and quaternary ammonium salts, neutral oxygen-containing solvents including ethers, ketones, derivatives of pyrazole, phosphoric acid, alcohols and so on Three extractants are currently used commercially in the production of tantalum and niobium production: methyl iso-butyl ketone – C TBP is less soluble and less dangerous but is more problematic due to its relatively high density. This can lead to poor stratification, especially during the stripping process. Hence, insufficient separation of the strip solution from the extractant can lead to additional contamination, by phosphorous, of the final products [ Alcohols with a C   First, it is important to note that complete fluorination of the elements ensures an effective separation process. Particularly, Maiorov and Nikolaev Concentration of free HF in the initial solution is of high importance and can affect the separation efficiency. Prasad, Ranganathan and Sastri It is recommended that the concentration of sulfuric acid in the initial solution be kept at 2–4 mol per liter for the extraction of tantalum, whereas for the extraction of niobium, the concentration of sulfuric acid must be increased to a minimum of 6 mol per liter [ The composition of solutions that are used for washing and stripping of extracts is also different and is adjusted for each specific case; however, some common conditions can be noted. It is recommended that the extract obtained following collective extraction, which contains both tantalum and niobium, be washed (scrubbed) using sulfuric acid solutions that contain at least 6 mol per liter of H The extraction technology is applied for scrap recycling of tantalum and niobium and for the treatment of related materials. Recovery of tantalum and niobium from secondary material, such as Sn slag, Ti slag, W slag, catalyst wastes, used cemented carbide and used tantalum capacitors was reviewed by Dai, Zhong, Li and Li Uchino and Azuma The method for the recovery of tantalum and niobium was developed for use on secondary raw materials in the form of oil-contaminated sludge. Uchino and Azuma A method for the purification or recycling of tantalum-containing salts was also proposed. According to reports by Eberts  Comprehensive comparative investigation of the main extraction parameters shows that 2-octanol is more selective than 1-octanol, with Definition and verification of the process parameters when making the transition from laboratory measurements to a laboratory extraction system and ultimately to a pilot extraction plant, are reported in An initial solution was prepared by the hydrofluoride method, i.e. melting of a mixture of ammonium hydrofluoride and tantalite, followed by the digestion of soluble components with water and separation of the solution by filtration. The prepared initial solution contained no free HF or any other acid, and had a pH ≈ 3. In order to obtain an optimal acidity level, sulfuric acid was added to the solution. Concentrations of Ta   The next step is related to the analysis of extraction and stripping isotherms intended to define the capacity of the process and verify the required number of extraction steps. A small extraction system, consisting of a total of 18 cells, was used for laboratory evaluation of the process. The volumes of the mixer and settler were 10 ml and 30 ml, respectively. Production capacity of the system was 200-300 ml per hour. The cells were divided among the functions as follows: extraction − 8 cells, washing − 3 cells, stripping − 8 cells. Several experiments were performed using the laboratory system.  Initial solution: Ta Volume ratios – V Based on the laboratory extractor experiments it was concluded that five to six cells are sufficient for successful extraction at V The chosen conditions were applied in the pilot production experiments. The pilot extraction system included a total of 18 cells divided as follows: extraction − 6 cells, washing − 5 cells and stripping − 7 cells. The various cell parameters were: Mixer volume 2 liters with 50-mm diameter stirrer, 800–1000 rpm; Settler volume 18 liters. Total production capacity was 110–170 liters per hour (50–80 liters per hour for aqueous phase). The initial solution, containing about 105–145 g of Ta  The tantalum strip solution was used for the preparation, by precipitation and thermal treatment, of tantalum oxide. The product was determined to be of high purity grade. The optimal parameters of tantalum extraction with 2–octanol are as follows: Extraction: Initial solution contains about 300 g/l sulfuric acid; number of cells − 6, V Washing: Washing solution – water; number of cells − 5-6; V Stripping: Stripping solution – water; number of cells 6-7; V The raffinate obtained following selective extraction of tantalum is used as the initial solution for niobium extraction. The acidity of the initial solution is increased by adding sulfuric acid up to a concentration of at least 6M. It was Optimal parameters for the extraction, washing and stripping of niobium were determined to be: number of stages for all three processes − 4, volumetric ratios V   Several possibilities exist for the conversion of the liquid acids into solid tantalum and niobium oxides. The most common steps performed in all such methods are: Substitution of fluoride ions by other suitable ions in the complex acid so as to separate the fluorine ions from tantalum and niobium (liquid–liquid interaction); Precipitation of niobium and tantalum compounds in forms that are suitable for separation from the aqueous media (liquid–solid interaction); Decomposition following thermal treatment of the separated material yielding solid oxides and gaseous components (solid–gas interaction). The defluorination of the complex acids is a key step in the production of tantalum and niobium oxides as it defines the quality of the products and durability of the production equipment. In some cases, the degree of fluorine contamination of tantalum and niobium oxides containing increased fluorine levels is not very critical to the later application of the oxides. Applications related to the manufacturing of optic and electronic devices, however, require significant limitations of the fluorine content of tantalum and niobium oxides. Fluorine is usually present in the oxides in the form of oxyfluorides of tantalum or niobium: MeO Preparation of tantalum and niobium oxides based on the precipitation by ammonium solution of tantalum or niobium hydroxides from strip solutions is the most frequently used method in the industry and consists of several steps. The interaction between fluorotantalic or oxyfluoroniobic acids and ammonia solution initiates the hydrolysis of complex fluoride compounds. The complete process can be represented as follows: In the case of tantalum strip solution: Agulyansky et al. [  In the case of tantalum-containing solutions, a sharp drop in Ta Two types of compounds, crystalline and amorphous, can be precipitated from tantalum or niobium solutions by an initial ammonia solution containing ammonium ions, with an interface at about pH = 10. Such solutions are used for the stripping of tantalum or niobium from TBP extracts. In the case of pure fluorotantalic or fluoroniobic acids that result from the stripping process with water, the interface occurs at a lower pH level.  The resulting product depends on the precipitation conditions, and in particular, on the over-saturation level of the solution. Formation of ammonium oxyfluorometalate crystalline compounds occurs at a relatively low pH of the solution. From the standpoint of the interactions described in It is possible to create the over-saturated conditions required for the formation of hydroxides not only by adding ammonia to the strip solutions. It was reported in Thus, in order to achieve precipitation of tantalum and niobium hydroxides with minimal levels of fluorine contamination, it is recommended to perform the process at a pH no lower than 10. Brown et al. The way in which ammonia solution is added to tantalum or niobium strip solutions is also important for the quality of the precipitated hydroxides and final oxides. The traditional method by which ammonia is poured into a container of strip solution and the mixture agitated is not optimal. According to this method, the first portion of ammonia is added to a solution of high acidity, the pH of which continues to drop gradually with each addition of ammonia, until the final addition of ammonia is made into a low-acidity solution. This procedure leads to a relatively slow increase in pH that can cause contamination of the hydroxide with crystalline oxyfluoride compounds. The opposite process, i.e. pouring the strip solution into the ammonia solution, significantly reduces the fluorine concentration in the hydroxides formed. Bludssus et al. The equipment consists of a mixing tank and stirrer that is equipped with a relatively small premixing plate. Predetermined volumes of strip and ammonia solutions are loaded onto the rotating premixing plate. The premixed pulp is unloaded into the mixing tank for continuation of interaction and homogenization of the mixture. Application of an excessive amount of ammonia solution in the precipitation of tantalum and niobium hydroxides from strip solutions usually ensures good quality of the products. Nevertheless, the method has two general problems. First, hydroxides containing low levels of fluorine contamination Some improvement in the filtration rate can be achieved by increasing the temperature and concentration of the solid component of the pulp [ Uchino and Azuma The subsequent steps in the production of tantalum and niobium are washing and thermal treatment of the precipitated hydroxides. For effective washing of precipitated hydroxides, Vaicenberg et al. Balabanov et al. Ammonia solutions are significantly more efficient than ammonium acetate as washing reagents. The process of fluorine content reduction is related to subsequent hydrolysis of fluoride and oxyfluoride contaminants by ammonia. The most effective of the proposed solutions seem to be solutions of ammonium carbonate, (NH Ammonium carbonate interacts with ammonium oxyfluoroniobates yielding niobium oxide, as shown below The most efficient washing of the hydroxide was achieved applying a three-step process using an ammonium carbonate solution as the first step, followed by an ammonia solution, and water as the final step. This washing process brings about a ten-fold reduction in the concentration of fluorine compared with laboratory and industrial experience, in which a 2–4 fold reduction in the fluorine content of tantalum or niobium hydroxides following a one-step washing process was obtained. Precipitated, washed and filtrated hydroxides consisting of wet powder contain two kinds of water. The first is moisture, i.e. water remainders that include adsorbed water. This kind of water can be successfully removed by drying at 100-200°C. The second type is molecules of water that are incorporated with tantalum or niobium to form hydroxides. Because hydroxyl groups form relatively strong bonds with tantalum or niobium, the separation of the second kind of water requires thermal treatment at higher temperatures Lapizki et al. Balabanov et al. Thus, tantalum and niobium hydroxides are converted into oxides following a two-step thermal treatment. The first step is usually performed at relatively low temperatures in the range of 100-200°C in order to dry the wet precursors. The second thermal treatment brings about the decomposition of hydroxides, removes the rest of the water and converts the material into crystalline oxides. The second thermal treatment is usually performed at temperatures as high as 900-1000°C. Uchino and Azuma The fluorine concentration in hydrofluorides of tantalum and niobium is an extremely important issue. Fluorine that separates into the gaseous phase interacts with the construction elements of the furnaces, leading to additional contamination of the final product by silicon, aluminum, etc. Thus, it is recommended to perform drying in crucibles made of Teflon or polypropylene with appropriate temperature limitations. Use of crucibles made of carbon-glass ensures high quality and a broad working temperature range, at least up to 300-350°C. Calcination is performed in crucibles made of platinum or related metals. Tantalum or niobium oxide can be successfully used in the manufacturing of such crucibles. Frolov et al. [ Fluorine appears in hydroxides in the form of ammonium oxyfluorometalates, yielding ammonium fluoride upon decomposition during thermal treatment. Ammonium fluoride is not a thermally stable compound and Different procedures for the precipitation, washing and thermal treatment of hydroxides result in different fluorine contamination levels in the final products – tantalum and niobium oxides. Laboratory and industrial experience confirms some correlation between the initial concentration of fluorine in the dried hydroxides and the fluorine content in the final oxides obtained after appropriate thermal treatment. For instance, it is reported in Temperature: 400°C – possible final fluorine content: 3.98A/(39.6–0.70A); Temperature: 1000-1200°C – final fluorine content: 1.11A/(39.6–0.76A). Agulyanskaya et al. Kobayashi et al. Other methods exist for the precipitation of tantalum and niobium hydroxides for subsequent use as oxide precursors. Application of ammonium carbonate, (NH In addition to the possibility of controlling the particle size of the hydroxides, application of ammonium carbonate affords several other advantages compared to traditional precipitation of hydroxides using ammonia solution. First, ammonium carbonate does not increase the total volume of the solution as much as does the addition of ammonia. Second, the method enables to perform the interaction so as to precipitate stoichiometric mixtures, which Another promising method for the preparation of tantalum and niobium oxide precursors involves the precipitation of peroxoniobate and peroxotantalate compounds. Niobium and tantalum peroxoacids and salts were investigated and described as early as about 100 years ago by Balke and Smith Latish, Chernyak and Serebrennikova The formation and stability of peroxoniobates and peroxotantalates can be used successfully in the technology of tantalum and niobium oxide production. Belov, Avdonina and Mikhlin The essence of the process is the precipitation of ammonium peroxotantalate or peroxoniobate by the addition of solutions of ammonia and hydrogen peroxide, H Nevertheless, the precipitation process can be specified based on data available on the complex structure of the strip solutions. In the case of tantalum strip solutions, the interaction can be written as follows: Hydrolysis in neutral or slightly basic media (pH ≥ 7) yields gaseous ammonium:  Dry peroxometalates, (NH At temperatures above 45°C, however, (NH At even higher temperatures − 80°C for (NH  To avoid explosion, the compounds can be decomposed via hydrolysis in liquid solution. Ultra-fine particles are obtained in water and water-ammonia media. Hydrolysis in HCl and HNO  Thus, by adding ammonium salts, the properties of the washing solution can be adjusted and optimal process parameters achieved. The method based on the precipitation of peroxometalate precursors enables to achieve additional purification during the process. Thus, the addition of complexonates, such as OEDP or EDTA, which form stable complexes with some polyvalent metals, prevents co-precipitation of the main impurities such as Fe, Co, Ni, Mn, Mg, etc., which in turn significantly increases the purity of the final product. Enhanced purification can also be achieved by re-crystallization of the precursor. Particularly, the precipitation of ammonium peroxofluorometalates, such as ammonium peroxofluoroniobate ((NH Ammonium peroxometalates, (NH The precipitation of ammonium peroxometalate precursors seems to be very promising for development and implementation in the production of high-purity oxides of tantalum and niobium. The main advantages of the method are as follows: Ammonium peroxometalates or peroxofluorometalates are relatively coarse crystalline powders that precipitate rapidly and can be completely and quickly separated from the solution by filtration; The precipitated precursor can be dissolved and re-crystallized from fluorine-free solutions. This provides excellent conditions for deep purification of the material and reduction of problematic impurities such as titanium, fluorine, etc.; Peroxometalates decompose at relatively low temperatures forming tantalum or niobium oxides containing small amount of absorbed water. The absorbed water separation is achieved by further thermal treatment – drying and calcination – of the product; The method emphasizes perspective directions in the development and improvement of the technology of tantalum and niobium oxides.  Plasma chemical processes have been in wide use in chemical technology for a relatively long period The first experiments on the plasma chemical decomposition of fluoride solutions containing tantalum or niobium to obtain tantalum and niobium oxides were reported about fifteen years ago  No fuel is required; Significantly higher initial temperature of heating source – up to 3000–10000K; Significantly higher temperature can be achieved during the process – up to 2500K; No additional gaseous components that coming from gaseous heating source in the case of gas-flame process; Possibility to vary the type of gas used (in other words, possibility to vary interaction atmosphere). The plasma chemical decomposition method is based on rapid heating, decomposition and hydrolysis of fluoride compounds to obtain powdered oxides following interaction with water. Rakov and Teslenko The decomposition of solutions using plasma can be conceived as occurring in two steps. In the first step, evaporation of all system components takes place. Under such conditions, tantalum and niobium appear to be in the form of gaseous TaF The presence of ammonia ions in the solution causes no significant differences in the process (strip solution obtained after stripping by ammonium The main requirements of the plasma chemical system can be formulated as follows: High-frequency plasma source having no consumable electrodes; Possibility of attaining temperatures of at least 1000K in the interaction zone; Separation of solid and gaseous decomposition products takes place at 500K; Solutions loading and unloading system, heat exchanger and all other wet parts are manufactured from materials that are suitable for use with aggressive fluoride liquids. Operation of the installation is as follows. The power supply (1) is connected to the plasma generator (4.5 kW) (2), which initiates a plasma jet by delivering plasma-forming gas (air, oxygen, nitrogen etc.). The solution is loaded onto the plasma by means of pneumatic nozzles (3) and dispersed using the same type of gas.  (7), which is equipped with a cooling system that maintains a set condensation temperature. The condensate is collected by the collector (8), whereas the rest of the gases are separated from the system through exhaust ventilation.  Niobium oxide obtained by plasma chemical decomposition is an ultra-fine powder with a specific surface area, as determined by the BET method, of about 20–30 m X–ray powder diffraction analysis of the obtained solid product indicated the presence of Nb In order to verify the nature of the increased level of fluorine in the obtained niobium oxide, the material was investigated by mass spectral methods  Analysis of some experimental results [ Chemical analysis of niobium oxide indicated that the purity of the final product depends strongly on the purity of the initial solution. Account should be taken of about 0.02–0.03% wt. cationic impurities, introduced due to interactions with metal parts of the equipment. The main added impurities are Fe, Ni, Cr, which originate mostly from the stainless steel filter. The purity of the final product can be significantly increased by using a filter made of niobium or other appropriate material. Nevertheless, the material obtained using a stainless steel filter is sufficient for use in ceramic applications or as an initial material for carbide manufacture. The unique advantage of the plasma chemical method is the ability to collect the condensate, which can be used for raw material decomposition or even liquid–liquid extraction processes. The condensate consists of a hydrofluoric acid solution, the concentration of which can be adjusted by controlling the heat exchanger temperature according to a binary diagram of the HF – H Investigations of the plasma chemical decomposition of tantalum-containing fluoride solutions indicated no significant differences in the process and product parameters compared to the corresponding decomposition of niobium-containing fluoride solution [   The main properties of potassium heptafluorotantalate in solid, molten and dissolved states were discussed in previous chapters of the monograph and are also collected and discussed in review The particle size of precipitated potassium heptafluorotantalate is one of the more important parameters. In order to achieve a certain particle size, potassium salts are added to the hot tantalum strip solution as a hot solution. The mixture is cooled down at a specific rate in order to enable the precipitation and crystallization of K–salt in the form of small, individual crystals. Potassium heptafluorotantalate, K Precipitated K–salt crystals are carefully filtrated and washed so as to separate them from the mother solution. Drying of filtrated K–salt is also a very delicate and important process that must be performed under conditions that avoid hydrolysis of the material. Potassium heptafluorotantalate is sensitive to water, basic compounds and alcohols, especially at elevated temperatures. The main product of K–salt hydrolysis is Marignac's salt. For a long time it was believed that the composition of Marignac's salt is K Based on the above composition, the hydrolysis of potassium heptafluorotantalate can be described as follows: To minimize the possibility of contaminating the material during hydrolysis, it is recommended to dry the K–salt by slowly increasing the temperature, but not exceeding 160°C. It is obvious that vacuum drying will not prevent the hydrolysis. On the contrary, evacuation of the air might stimulate and accelerate the hydrolytic process because HF saturation pressure is higher than that of water. Additional purification of the product and improvement of particle size and shape can be achieved by re-crystallization. The process consists of sequential dissolutions of potassium heptafluorotantalate in appropriate solutions at increased temperatures, filtration of the solution to separate possible insoluble parts of the product and cooling of the filtrated solution at a certain rate. The precipitated crystals are filtrated, washed and dried to obtain the final product. Re-crystallization can be performed both after filtration of the preliminary precipitated salt or after drying if the quality of the product is not sufficient. HF solutions of low concentrations are usually used for re-crystallization. In general, even water can be used as a solvent if the process is performed fast enough. Nevertheless, practical experience suggested the use of a 30–40% HF solution within the temperature interval of 80-25°C, and a cooling rate of about 8–10°C per hour. The above conditions enable to achieve an acceptable process yield and good performance of the product.  K–salt undergoes a phase transition at 202°C, which is characterized by a significant density change, and which leads in turn to the shattering of the initial crystals to form fine powder. This effect is so strong that pure potassium heptafluorotantalate can never be obtained in the form of a monolithic block. After melting and subsequent cooling, the phase transition occurs at 202°C, leading to a strong density change that shatters the block into fine separated parts. Potassium heptafluoroniobate, K   In line with the main subject of this monograph, we will discuss the reduction of complex fluoride compounds. Only two processes of tantalum metal production are of worldwide commercial significance. These are the electrolysis of fluoride–chloride melts containing potassium heptafluorotantalate, K Electrochemical reduction of tantalum in molten halide systems containing potassium heptafluorotantalate, K  After the end of the interaction, the melt is cooled down to room/ambient temperature, and the metal and salts are crushed and leached using mineral acids and water to separate the metal. The metal precipitates mostly in the form of dendrites, which are pressed and sintered into bars to be converted into wire, sheet and powder. A similar electrolyte, containing potassium heptafluoroniobate, K An ongoing debate continues among researchers regarding the mechanism of the electrochemical reduction of tantalum in fluoride melts. No unified model exists for the process. Espinola et al. In the second step, three other electrons are transfered to the tantalum ion, yielding a completely reduced tantalum metal atom: The majority of researchers, however, are inclined to believe that the tantalum reduction process takes place in a single step. Experimental results and discussions confirm that tantalum is reduced from fluoride, fluoride–chloride and oxyfluoride melts containing K Single-stage reduction of tantalum seems to be typical mostly for fluoride complexes due to the ionic nature of the bonds. Substitution of the fluoride ligands by ions that lead to higher covalence of the bonds can alter the mechanism of tantalum reduction. For instance, the investigation of pure chloride systems containing tantalum pentachloride, Niobium undergoes a two-stage electrochemical reduction from potassium heptafluoroniobate, K The electrochemical behavior of niobium in different types of molten electrolytes and the influence of ligand substitution in niobium-containing complex ions on the reduction mechanism is comprehensively reviewed by Polyakov Anode processes yield gaseous chlorine, fluorine, carbon chloride or fluoride. In the case of melts containing dissolved tantalum oxide, carbon oxides (mostly carbon dioxide) are formed on the graphite anode [ The addition of oxygen ions, in the form of tantalum oxide or niobium oxide, to the respective melts alters their complex structure and impacts the products of the electrochemical reduction The anionic composition of the cathodic product is not the only parameter that can be controlled through electrolysis conditions. Grinevitch et al. It was also announced that tantalum diboride can be successfully synthesized from chloride – fluoride melts using the electrochemical method Electrolytic refining of tantalum and niobium is of great interest to researchers dealing with electrolysis. The refinery process is based on the use of a consumable anode made of some tantalum or niobium precursor material. Elyutin et al. Another application of the electrolysis of tantalum and niobium in fluoride melts is in the preparation of intermetalic compounds as a result of the interaction between the electrochemically precipitating metal and the cathode material. Based on an investigation of the electrochemical reduction of K  Decroly, Muchtar and Winand Similar results were reported by Freidin et al. Summarizing the reported results, it is reasonable to conclude that the current efficiency and grain size depend on the complex structure of the melts containing complex tantalum or niobium fluoride ions. As was discussed in It should be noted that in addition to changes in K Catodic reduction and anodic oxidation of tantalum and niobium can also be performed in other molten media. Descriptions of processes that take place in chloride molten systems can be found in the literature Use of low-temperature molten systems for electrolytic processes related with tantalum and niobium and other rare refractory metals seems to hold a promise for future industrial use, and is currently of great concern to researchers. The electrochemical behavior of tantalum, niobium and titanium in low-temperature carbamide-hilide melts has been investigated by Tumanova et al. Berzelius reported on the results of the first reduction of tantalum from K The sodium reduction process was first implemented in Germany by Siemens and Halske A.G. and it remained a principally European method, while the American tantalum industry was founded exclusively on the electrolysis of molten fluorides [ The main reason for the tantalum industry's drive toward the sodium reduction process is an increasing demand for tantalum powder by tantalum capacitor manufacturers. The modern tendency of the electronics industry to miniaturize their components calls for the improvement of tantalum powder The process is based on the interaction between potassium heptafluorotantalate and metallic sodium: The process of sodium reduction is generally performed by one of two methods: direct reduction of K Despite the above disadvantages, some investigations show possible directions for further improvement and development of the process for the production of tantalum powder suitable for the manufacture of capacitors with no additional electron-beam melting and special crushing.  In order to improve mixing of the interacting components, a method was patented according to which loading of molten sodium or potassium is effected by means of a distributor that has, in addition to the stirring action, twenty four 0.5 mm diameter holes Further improvement of the process was achieved by the preliminary mixing of the components. A process was patented Tantalum powder with a smaller particle size compared with that obtained by the regular process was obtained by thermal treatment at 700-950°C of a mixture containing KTaF In order to produce coarse-grained tantalum or niobium powder it is recommended to perform the reduction of molten K The impact of the excess sodium on the properties of tantalum powder obtained by direct reduction of K The reduction of K Attempts to adopt the process of direct reduction of K The leaching process aims to remove the salts from the metal – salt mixture but also enables to achieve additional purification of the tantalum powder. Keller and Martin An effective leaching process that enables to reduce residual oxygen content in tantalum powder obtained from the reduction of K The separation of the excess unreacted sodium is also subject to investigation and development. Miyazaki and Kuroki  Significant improvement of tantalum powder properties was achieved by the application of molten alkali halides as solvents for potassium heptafluorotantalate, K The complete production process of capacitor-grade powder includes the reduction of K  The main metallic impurities that contaminate the primary powder, due to chemical corrosion of the retort and other metal parts of the reactor, are Fe, Ni and Cr. From this point of view, reactors that are equipped with larger retorts usually provide better purity due to a relatively low ratio between the internal surface of the wet metal parts of the reactor and the total volume of the melt. Recent investigations on the decreasing of Fe, Ni and Cr impurities during the sodium reduction process were performed by Li To achieve additional purification of tantalum obtained from sodium reduction of K  It is, therefore, required that all initial compounds be dried properly prior to performing the reduction. This procedure is not at all trivial and refers, first of all, to the diluent salts, and especially to potassium fluoride, KF, which is characterized by a strong hygroscopic property and a tendency to form stable crystal hydrates. The problem of contamination due to hydrolytic processes can usually be resolved in two manners. The first is to apply another tantalum-containing complex fluoride compound that does not undergo hydrolysis. The second involves the adjustment of the reduction process parameters and use of some additives that will “collect” the oxygen present, in the form of water, hydroxyl groups or other compounds. According to the method developed by Izumi The oxygen level in primary tantalum powder can be also increased by adjustment of the reduction process parameters The reduction process parameters and composition and physical-chemical properties of the melts define the particle size and shape of the reduced tantalum powder. Kolosov et al.  The concentration of K Yoon et al. Kim et al. Chai and Zhong Based on available results, it can be summarized that the particle size of tantalum powder increases (specific charge decreases) with the increase in temperature, K Based on the results discussed in The discussion presented in  After completion of the tantalum reduction process, the material is cooled down to a temperature that enables further operations. The cake is removed, crushed and leached with water, followed by mineral acid solutions, as discussed above. The separation of the metal powder from the solutions containing dissolved salts is performed by filtration. The wet leached product is dried and analyzed. The tantalum powder obtained cannot be applied immediately in the manufacture of tantalum capacitors due to insufficient reological properties. The primary powder has a relatively high specific charge and is usually characterized by a low bulk density and a very poor flow ability that prevents application of the powder in the industrial process of automatic pressing into pellets. In addition, the oxygen level of the primary powder is typically too high to achieve suitable electrical parameters of the anodes To impart upon the powder necessary reological properties, the material is thermally treated in high vacuum. This process is called agglomeration. Some additives intended to prevent strong sintering of the parts during the agglomeration are added to the primary powder prior to the thermal treatment. In order to reduce the oxygen content of the agglomerated powder, the material is treated using a special deoxidation process. The essence of the process is the reduction of the oxygen content in the tantalum powder by interaction with magnesium. The interaction is performed in an inert atmosphere at a temperature of about 900–1100°C Orlov et al. Rare earth metals, as well as alkali earth metals, can be used as oxygen getters in the purification of tantalum powder. Osaku and Komukai Subsequent processes related to the finishing of the capacitor-grade tantalum powder are beyond the scope of this monograph subject. Modern requirements of the capacitor industry initiate further development of tantalum powder production processes. The tendency is to produce powder of higher purity with a higher specific charge and at lower cost. Further development of the processes can be successfully achieved based on current achievements in the chemistry of tantalum and niobium fluoride compounds.