Office waste paper constitutes an excellent low cost and high quality fibre source for the papermaking industry. Limitations in the application of conventional deinking to such paper are related to negative environmental impacts chemicals can cause, hence enzymatic deinking is receiving growing attention. This study is focused on the investigation of the effect of cellulases application on the deinking of office waste paper. The methodology involved: preparation of samples, impregnation, repulping, enzymatic treatment, flotation, papermaking, and finally evaluation of optical properties. Five preparations, working under acidic and neutral conditions, were tested (Cellusoft CR, Cellusoft AP, Novozymes 342, Cellusoft L, Accelerase 1500). The added amount of each enzyme preparation corresponded to 150 FPU/100g paper. It was observed that the deinking experiments using enzymes achieved generally better results in comparison with those in which the enzymes were previously deactivated. Despite the positive effect of activated enzymes as compared to deactivated, the application of enzymes appeared disadvantageous compared with the conventional deinking in terms of specks surface of the deinked paper sheets. Apart from the type of enzyme preparation itself, another critical factor affecting the effectiveness of the enzymatic treatment was the addition of nitric acid used to achieve acidic conditions for the optimum enzyme function. To this end, further study have to be performed on enzyme preparations functioning under alkaline conditions as well as on other paper types while the effect of enzyme amount to the deinking and the subsequent impacts on mechanical strength of produced papers may be also investigated.According to the Annual Statistics of the Confederation of European Paper Industries (CEPI) the paper recycling rate in Europe was increased from 40.8% in 1991 to 71.5% in 2015 Deinking mainly encompasses two basic processes i.e. (i) the pulping process which includes the detachment of ink from fibres and the arrangement of the size and the geometrical characteristics of the ink particles so that they can be easily separated from the fibre suspension; and (ii) the separation process which involves the removal of detached ink from the pulp by washing or flotation or screening or centrifugal separation depending on ink particle size, shape and density. During pulping the toner particles form flat, two-dimensional angular flakes As a result of the above mentioned limitations, studies have been conducted in order to improve the deinking efficiency of non-impact printed papers. To this end, efforts have been concentrated on the application of chemical processes as they are generally more efficient with respect to ink removal. However, such methods may cause negative environmental impacts since they require the use of large amounts of chemical agents. Moreover, deinking under high pH may negatively affect the quality of the pulp (smeared pulp or low brightness) The present study aims at critically investigating the effect of application of cellulases on the deinking of office waste paper, through the method of flotation. For this purpose five different commercial cellulose preparations were tested in order to study the effect of their addition on the removal of ink during floatation and consequently to the properties of the paper sheets. Moreover, it was in the purpose of the present research to assess the effect of pH value of the enzymatic process to the efficiency of deinking. The methodology that was applied and the results of the research are presented below. The methodology applied in this study aimed at investigating the effect of the application of cellulose son the deinking of office wastepaper through the flotation method. To this end, the methodology initiated with the preparation of the office waste paper samples that were used for the execution of the subsequent processes i.e. the implementation of the impregnation process; the conduction of the repulping process; the application of the enzymatic treatment; the execution of flotation; the papermaking procedure; and finally the evaluation of paper optical properties. The applied methodology is illustrated in The methodology was initiated with the preparation of the sample i.e. the office waste paper. In order to enhance the quality of results, a ‘standard’ text was copied on A4 size sheet using the same copying machine (Canon NP 6220). In each sheet approximately 3726 characters were printed. In particular the word ‘deinking’ (in Times New Roman fonts, 12 pt. size, in single line spacing) was repeated. In All sheets were printed on white A4 and 80 The second step involved the impregnation of the office waste paper samples to a solution of an anionic surfactant diluted in hot tap water in order to cause swelling of fibres and as a consequence to enhance the pulping process. More precisely, the prepared waste paper was cut into small pieces (approximately 2 After completion of the impregnation process, repulping of the office waste paper slurry was implemented. Repulping process aims at the detachment and separation of ink from fibres; and was conducted in a Maelstrom laboratory pulper ( Pulp produced by the repulping process was then diluted and transferred to the enzyme treatment unit. The enzyme treatment unit, illustrated in The enzymatic treatment involved the application of commercial cellulase preparations in order to enhance the process of deinking. The tested preparations included: Cellusoft CR; Cellusoft AP; Novozymes 342 and Cellusoft L, available by Novozymes as well as Accelerase 1500 available by Danisco. The activity (Filter Paper activity) of each enzyme preparation was measured experimentally in order to determine the exact amount to be added. The added amount of each enzyme preparation corresponded to 150 FPU/100 The duration of the enzymatic treatment process was 20 After the enzyme treatment, flotation was applied. The mixture was transferred to the Induced Air Flotation (IAF) unit ( The handsheets were prepared using a Lorentzen & Wettre (Sweden) Sheet Former model SCA ( Finally, evaluation of paper quality was performed after the execution of measurements of paper optical properties (brightness and speck content), ash content as well as Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) analysis. In particular, brightness was measured with the Spectro Color LMG 183 colorimeter (Dr. Bruno Lange GmboH & Co. KG). Speck content determination was performed by a computer equipped with a scanner (hp scanjet 2400) and the appropriate software program Dot Counter 4.0 (Dekroniks NV). TAPPI methods T 211 om-93 and T 413 om-93 were used for the determination of the ash content of the office waste paper and the ash content in the rejected foam. Furthermore, by use of Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM), images of the papers before and after the enzymatic treatment were obtained. All experiments and measurements were carried out in triplicates. Six experimental sets (A–F) were accomplished in total. During the first experimental set (A) enzymatic treatment was not performed. In the rest five experimental sets (B–F) enzymatic treatment using a different enzyme preparation (Accellerase 1500, Novozymes 342, Cellusoft CR, Cellusoft AP, Cellusoft L) in each set was performed. Finally, for each of the five experimental sets blank sets were prepared. The blank experiments were prepared based on the same procedure but the enzymes added during the enzyme treatment step were deactivated previously through boiling for 10 Experimental results are presented in In In In In In As illustrated in The application of enzymes (C-1–F-1) had a positive effect in the deinking process compared to the results obtained after the application of the deactivated enzymes (C-2–F-2) with the exception of the application of Novozymes 342 enzyme preparation. In this latter case experiments with the deactivated enzymes (B-2) resulted in smaller specks surface on the final handsheets. More specifically, the average total surface of specks measured after the execution of B-2 experimental set was 457 Despite the positive effect of activated enzymes as compared to deactivated, the application of enzymes appeared disadvantageous compared with the conventional deinking in terms of specks surface of the deinked paper sheets. In particular, as shown in According to literature, the effect of pH on the enzymatic process is controversial. In particular, based on Vyas and Lachke alkaline active cellulases have been tested with positive effects on deinking Based on brightness values ( It was also observed that the size of ink particles generated during pulping constitutes an important factor of deinkability. In particular the lowest deinkability was recorded in samples where an increased number of large ink particles before flotation were measured ( The deinking experimental sets using enzymes achieved generally better results in comparison with those in which the enzymes were previously deactivated. However, in most of the experimental sets it was confirmed that the application of enzymes appeared disadvantageous compared with the conventional deinking in terms of specks surface of the deinked paper sheets. Apart from the type of enzyme preparation itself, another critical factor affecting the effectiveness of the enzymatic treatment seems to be the addition of nitric acid which was used aiming to achieve acidic pH conditions for the optimum enzyme function. Addition of nitric acid during enzyme treatment led to the reduction of inorganic fillers amount (particularly calcium carbonate) that were present in the pulp. The presence of inorganic fillers in the suspension of the fibres during the flotation appeared to facilitate ink removal. Moreover, it was also observed that the presence of inorganic fillers resulted in increased brightness of paper sheets. In all the cases studied, the brightness of deinked paper ranged from 86% to 90%, while the reflection degree of unprinted paper used as a substrate for the deinking tests is about 95%. This indicates that the majority of deinked papers demonstrate high brightness. This entails negligible existence of invisible ink particles (i.e. smaller than 50 Based on the findings of this study more research must be conducted on enzyme formulations with optimum performance under alkaline conditions and on other types of paper printed in different copiers and laser printers. Finally, the effect of the amount of enzyme formulations in the deinking process as well as in the mechanical strength of paper due to enzyme application requires further study.