Nano-morphological structure of well-crystallised kaolinite, micronised talc and micronised talc ground in a ring mill has been compared using field emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The kaolinite and ground talc dispersed in water immediately after shaking whereas the majority of the micronised talc remains at the air–water interface. AFM micrographs revealed more three-dimensional details of growth steps and attached colloid particles on basal planes of the crystallites than high resolution SEM micrographs. Two-dimensional ordered surface structure on the molecular level was measured by AFM. There are major differences in nano-morphology and surface structure between these three samples. The compact, blocky kaolinite crystals show large, relatively flat (<1.5 nm) basal planes with distinctive step growth on their surfaces. The irregular, thin, curved platelets of the micronised talc have much less complex surface structure with flat, smooth basal surfaces. Micronised talc platelets have much larger aspect ratios than either kaolinite or the ground talc. For micronised talc, the total edge contribution to the specific surface area is 13% whereas ground talc and kaolinite edges contribute 21% and 30–50%, respectively. The low edge contribution to total surface area in micronised talc contributes to its poor dispersion. Highly porous re-entrants and folds are frequently displayed at the edges and between sheets of the micronised talc. These voids, observed in both SEM and AFM micrographs, are filled by air nano-bubbles causing poor dispersion and high floatability when the talc is mixed with water. After grinding, the micronised talc particles are smaller, have reduced aspect ratios and much reduced porosity at edges and between sheets. Hence, the morphological differences in aspect ratio and air entrapment in the porous structure of talc are possible causes for the poor dispersability of micronised talc in comparison to kaolinite and ground talc samples.Talc and kaolinite minerals have found major industrial applications in the paper, ceramic, paint, plastic, rubber and cracking catalyst industries. The sheet-like morphologies of both kaolinite and talc have particular importance in paper filling and paper coating ( However, these two minerals, used in similar industrial applications generally behave differently when mixed with water. Kaolinite, with higher surface free energy, is considered essentially hydrophilic and is easily dispersed in water. Talc, with lower surface energy, is difficult to disperse in water and considered to be hydrophobic ( Structural reasons have been advanced to explain the natural hydrophobicity of talc ( Kaolinite has 1:1 structure with a single sheet of hydroxyls octahedrally coordinated to aluminium cations linked through oxygens to a single layer of silicon tetrahedra. The layered structure has a unit cell thickness of 0.713 nm ( Hence, talc has hydrophobic, siloxane-like sheets on both basal planes whereas kaolinite crystals have a siloxane-like sheet only on one basal plane with a hydrophilic gibbsite-type Al–OH sheet on the other side. This simple scheme has been advanced to explain the significant differences in wettability between talc and kaolinite. Michot et al. (1994) have cited a number of experimental facts that challenge the interpretation of talc as a truly hydrophobic material. Different varieties of hydrated talc found in nature give substantially different water uptakes. Immersion calorimetry measurements revealed that, once out gassed at medium temperatures (100–400 °C), talc exhibits a strong affinity towards water molecules. Attempts to correlate natural flotation results to the electrokinetic properties of talc have not been successful. Despite many attempts to explain the poor wettability of talc and its influence on flotation, this has not been resolved. The poor dispersability of commercially used talc necessitates the use of additional treatments to assist the rate of aqueous dispersion. One such treatment is to dry grind talc for short periods of time. The effects of extensive dry grinding on the structure of talc have been studied by A detailed, comparative study of the micro- and nano-morphological features of the two minerals, talc and kaolinite, has been conducted and the results presented in this paper. This study involved the use of scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The influences of surface structure, morphology, aspect ratio, edge contributions and porosity can largely explain the observed differences in behaviour between kaolinite and talc. We also show that changes in aspect ratio, morphology and porosity, obtained due to grinding, may be important in increasing wettability of the ground product. In particular, trapping of air nano-bubbles between detached sheets of micronised talc contributes to poor dispersion and flotability. Removal by prior evacuation or reduction after grinding can give facile dispersion of talc particles. There is a very wide variability in kaolin and talc deposits and their measured properties of their minerals relating to both chemical composition and structure. These properties are strongly dependent on weathering processes and degree of crystallinity. For this work, a well-crystallised kaolinite and a micronised standard talc product were chosen. The Kiralyhegy (Hungary) kaolinite ( The SEM studies were carried out using a CamScan CS44FE microscope with a field emission gun operating at 20 kV acceleration voltage. The kaolinite particles were coated by gold/palladium films to a thickness of 2–3 nm using a Denton Magnetron Sputter Coater system. A Nanoscope III AFM (Digital Instruments) was used with scan heads E ( For the AFM studies, kaolinite and talc particles were immobilised on a freshly cleaved atomically flat mica surface from a dilute aqueous suspension. To achieve dispersion, samples in water were ultra-sonically dispersed (1 min) and allowed to sediment in a glass cylinder for 24 h. A small amount of suspension, i.e. one or two droplets, was collected from a depth of 10 cm below the water surface, and placed on the freshly cleaved mica square. The particles were dried at room temperature in the desiccator overnight. Particles with weak contact to the mica surface were removed in a stream of dry nitrogen gas. SEM examination showed that the remaining particles were firmly attached to the mica surface in face or basal plane contact and were suitable for the AFM study. The wettability of the three samples, i.e. kaolinite, micronised talc and ground talc was examined in a simple dispersion test in which 50 g of sample was placed in a two litre jar with one litre of deionized water added and shaken by hand for a few seconds. The CM micronised talc sample was only partially dispersed in water leaving the major portion at the air–water surface. A thick foam was formed at the air–water interface. In contrast, the kaolinite and ground talc samples formed complete dispersions immediately after shaking with no remaining particles or foam observable at the air–water interface. This experiment was repeated three times with the same result. SEM micrographs of the Kiralyhegy kaolinite ( SEM micrographs of the CM talc seen in These large pore volumes between hydrophobic, siloxane-like sheets are likely to retain trapped air after this talc is added to water since it is unlikely that the sheet surfaces would be rapidly wet. The effect of the trapped air bubbles would then be observed in poor dispersion, a tendency to float or remain at the air–water interface, and colloidal stabilisation of froth ( SEM micrographs of the CM talc sample ground in the ring mill reveal significant changes in particle size and morphology. Before grinding, the platelets are generally larger than 5 μm in diameter. They form large agglomerates and the particles have very high aspect ratios with many semi-detached, bent platelets ( AFM images of the well-crystallised kaolinite from Kiralyhegy (  Low magnification AFM micrographs of CM talc show high aspect ratio, irregular platelets ∼1500 nm in lateral dimension ( The AFM imaging confirms the observations from SEM of large effective porosity due to sheet partial delamination, curved sheets and re-entrant volume. Molecular-scale resolution images of the (0 In the processed images, the hexagonal ring of basal oxygen atoms are seen as high features (white) with a repeat distance of 0.52 nm but, similarly to Results of the aspect ratio calculations from a large number of kaolinite and CM talc particles, using SEM and AFM methods described in  The specific surface areas for Kiralyhegy kaolinite, CM talc and ground talc samples, calculated from SEM–AFM aspect ratio measurements were 10.7, 5.5 and From the results presented, it can be concluded that nano- and micro-morphological features of individual kaolinite and talc platelets are very important in controlling their dispersion and floatability. As seen in both SEM and AFM micrographs, most CM talc platelets and platelet fragments show partial delamination of thin sheets, splayed and folded (i.e., puckered) at their edges producing a very porous interlamellar structure. Aggregation of platelets introduces more inter-particle void space or effective porosity. This porosity, associated with the hydrophobic siloxane-like surfaces, can be filled by entrapped air bubbles resulting in very poor wettability, slow or resistant dispersion, and very high floatability when this talc is shaken with water. It is also well established that colloidal hydrophobic particles will stabilise froth bubbles by forming close-packed arrays at the bubble–air interface ( The structure and morphology of the Kiralyhegy kaolinite platelets are considerably different from micronised talc with blocky crystals in which individual sheets are strongly bonded to each other through hydrogen bonds. These platelets subjected to bending moments are likely to fracture rather than fold like talc. As a consequence, the density of individual kaolinite crystals is close to the specific gravity of this mineral (i.e., Puckering due to partial delamination, splaying and folding was much reduced in talc samples after grinding in a ring mill. Complete detachment and flattening of the curved sheets during the grinding process reduced the effective porosity. This reduction is apparently sufficient to allow fast wetting and dispersion of the ground particles in water. It also removed any tendency to float or stabilise the froth. The porosity is not, however, the only factor likely to affect wettability and dispersion. The edge wettability of sheet silicates plays a significant role in the hydrophobic–hydrophilic behaviour of minerals which, in turn, depends strongly on the proportion of edge (including step and defect) sites. The surface area of the edges of a Cornwall kaolinite with a median aspect ratio of about 14, measured by Planimetric measurements from AFM micrographs in In addition to the porosity present in most CM talc platelets and aggregates, CM talc platelets have much larger aspect ratios than ground talc and kaolinite. There are also relatively very low concentrations of steps on the talc surfaces. Any additional step-edge contributions from CM talc platelets would not exceed 2% with the total edge area contribution for the CM talc sample estimated at only 13%. This significant difference in edge surface contribution to the total surface area between the two minerals studied must have a direct impact on differences in their wettability behaviour. Comparison of the aspect ratio distributions for the two talc samples ( Technological processes developed to disperse talc particles in water may benefit by taking the above findings into consideration. The authors are grateful to Comalco Research Centre (Thomastown, Victoria, Australia) for financial support for this work and to Dr. Ray Frost (Queensland University of Technology) for providing the Kiralyhegy kaolin samples. The award of a Senior Research Fellowship from the Australian Research Council to R. St.C. Smart is gratefully acknowledged. Many useful research discussions on this and other work with Dr. Ray Shaw, Ms. Karen Burrows, Dr. Angus Hartshorn (Comalco) and Drs. Peter Self, Gayle Morris, Hui Ming and Bill Skinner (IWRI) are also gratefully acknowledged.