This chapter lists various agencies and regulatory bodies that develop and issue specifications and codes for various fabrication, construction, maintenance, and inspection of equipment and structures. The chapter has included a list of some specifications issued by these bodies as an example.American National Standards Institute (ANSI; Specifications issued by various institutions including both ASME and ASTM are adopted as part of ANSI. Specifications are documents legally prescribing certain requirements as to composition, mode of manufacture, and physical and mechanical properties. Standards are documents representing a voluntary consensus. However, when these specifications are adopted by a regulatory authority, they become a code, such as boiler and pressure vessel code (ASME), national building codes, etc. The National Association of Corrosion Engineers (NACE; In the following paragraphs, we will try to get an introductory perspective on some of the key institutions through their historical developments. It may be noted that, however exhaustive a list one may prepare, practically it cannot cover all relevant specifications, recommended practices, or recommendations that various bodies around the world have developed over the years and continue to develop. The best way to use this wealth of resources is to refer to one directly related to the subject you are looking for; within that specification, there will be additional references to related subjects and one can follow any of those specific documents that are cross-referenced within the main specification. This general statement applies to nearly all the documents discussed in this list. Located at 3 Park Avenue, New York, NY 10016-5990 ( “The Society's history helps to reveal the outlines and consequences of a complex technological information-processing system. It is an article of faith that Americans are inventive people. But besides machines, they also created a welter of interrelated institutions to translate technical knowledge into industrial practice, and that may have been one of the country's most successful inventions.”   ASME was founded in 1880 by prominent mechanical engineers, led by Alexander Lyman Holley (1832–82), Henry Rossiter Worthington (1817–80), and John Edson Sweet (1832–1916). Holley chaired the first meeting, which was held in the New York editorial offices of the “American Machinist” on February 16, 1880, with 30 people in attendance. On April 7, a formal organizational meeting was held at Stevens Institute of Technology, Hoboken, New Jersey, with about 80 engineers—industrialists, educators, technical journalists, designers, shipbuilders, military engineers, and inventors.  The Institution of Chartered Mechanical Engineers had been successfully established in England 33 Mechanical engineers practiced in industries such as railroad transportation, machine tools, steel making, and pumping. In 1880, there were 85 engineering colleges throughout the United States, most of them offering a full mechanical engineering curriculum with a degree in mechanical engineering. The first annual meeting was held in early November 1880. Robert H. Thurston, professor of mechanical engineering at Stevens Institute and later Cornell, was the first president. Thurston is credited to have established the first model mechanical engineering curriculum and laboratory. This was an era of steel power that drove the technology of the day: locomotives, ships, factory machinery, and mine equipment. The Corliss engine and the Babcock & Wilcox water-tube boiler were in their prime. The first real US central power plant—Thomas Edison's Pearl Street Station in New York City—ushered in the era of great electric utilities in 1882. Internal combustion was not far from application. Conglomerates such as US Steel were formed. Industrial research laboratories, such as those at General Electric, du Pont, and Eastman Kodak, proliferated.  ASME formed its research activities in 1909, devoting their efforts in areas such as steam tables, the properties of gases, the properties of metals, the effect of temperature on strength of materials, fluid meters, orifice coefficients, etc. Since its inception, ASME has led in the development of technical standards, beginning with the screw thread and now numbering more than 600 specifications. The Society is best known, however, for improving the safety of equipment, especially boilers and for good reason. If we review the archives of engineering, we will note that between the periods 1870 and 1910, at least 10,000 boiler explosions in North America were recorded. By 1910, the rate jumped to 1300–1400 a year. Some were spectacular accidents that aroused public outcries for remedial action. A Boiler Code Committee was formed in 1911 that led to the Boiler Code being published in 1914–15 and later incorporated in laws of most US states and territories and Canadian provinces. By 1930, 50 The diversity of mechanical engineering can be seen in ASME's 36 Technical Divisions (plus 1 subdivision) and 3 Institutes. Today's structure of Technical Divisions was established in 1920, when eight Divisions were created. The primary divisions were Aerospace Fuels Management Materials Materials Handling Engineering Power Production Engineering Rail Transportation Two more were added next year. Internal Combustion Engine Textile Industries The most recent addition in June 1996 is the division called Information storage and processing systems division In present times, ASME is a worldwide engineering society focused on technical, educational and research issues. It has 125,000 members, conducts one of the world's largest technical publishing operations, holds some 30 technical conferences and 200 professional development courses each year, and sets many industrial and manufacturing standards. Under the sponsorship of the ASME, the Boiler and Pressure Vessel Committee established rules of safety governing the design, fabrication, and inspection during construction of boilers and pressure vessels. ASME is made up of various committees. There are several Codes, and subcommittees develop these Codes. The fabrication codes include:  Section I, Power Boilers Section III, Nuclear Codes Section IV, Heating Boilers Section VIII, Division 1 and 2, Pressure Vessels Section X, Fiberglass Reinforced Vessels. There are also reference codes issued to support the construction codes. These include: Section II, Materials     Section V, NDE Section IX, Welding Qualifications Following is a brief discussion about some key ASME specifications and their roles in design and construction of pressure vessels. The key difference in ASME Section VIII Division 1, Division 2, and Division 3 are given in The organization of Section VIII, Division 1 is as follows: ASME Code committees have developed codes for pressure piping, B31. Many sections of B31 committee include B31.1 for power piping and B31.3 for chemical piping. In addition, the B31 committee publishes a supplement on corrosion, B31G, entitled “Manual for Determining the Remaining Strength of Corroded Pipelines.” Some of the other pipeline-related design and construction specifications are given in The ASME Code Section V is the reference Code that contains requirements for nondestructive examinations that are Code requirements and are referenced and required by other Codes; it has a total of 30 Articles, and some of them are not titled as listed in This section has two subsections. Subsection A describes the methods of nondestructive examinations to be used if referenced by other Code Sections. Subsection B lists the Standards covering nondestructive examination methods that have been accepted as standards. The National Board (NB) is an organization made up of law enforcement officials in the United States and Canada. They administer and enforce boiler and pressure vessel laws in their jurisdiction. The NB also standardized inspector qualifications and issue Commissions to Authorized Inspectors who successfully pass the examinations. Authorized Inspection Agencies are the organizations that employ Authorized Inspectors. The Agency may be either the jurisdiction charged with the enforcement of the boiler or pressure vessel laws or an insurance company authorized to write boiler and pressure vessel insurance within a jurisdiction. The National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors is an organization comprised of Chief Inspectors, for the states, cities, and territories of the United States; provinces and territories of Canada; and Mexico. It is organized for the purpose of promoting greater safety to life and property by securing concerted action and maintaining uniformity in the construction, installation, inspection, repair, and alteration of pressure-retaining items. This assures acceptance and interchangeability among jurisdictional authorities responsible for the administration and enforcement of various codes and standards. The purpose of the National Board Inspection Code (NBIC; The NBIC is intended to provide guidance to jurisdictional authorities, Inspectors, users, and organizations performing repairs and alterations. This encourages the uniform administration of rules to pressure-retaining items. The American Petroleum Institute (API; The following is just a small sample of API specifications and codes that tries to reflect the variety of issues addressed by the institution. API also has several maintenance and inspection specifications that are common in use in petrochemical and oil and gas industry, some of which are described here. The API 653 “Tank Inspection, Repair, Alteration, and Reconstruction” is the inspection code for welded or riveted, nonrefrigerated, atmospheric pressure, aboveground storage tanks for the petroleum and chemical process industries. The API 510 “Pressure Vessel Inspection Code: Maintenance Inspection, Rating, Repair, and Alteration” is the pressure vessel inspection code for the petroleum and chemical process industries. The API 570 “Inspection, Repair, Alteration, and Rerating of In-Service Piping Systems” is the piping inspection code for the petroleum and chemical process industries. The API RP 579 “Fitness for Service” is a recommended practice (RP). The purpose of the RP is to provide guidance as to the methods applicable to assessments that are specific to the type of flaw or damage encountered in refinery and chemical process plant equipment. The API RP 580 “Risk-Based Inspection” is a RP. The purpose of the RP is to provide guidance as to the development of a risk-based inspection program with the methodology presented in a step-by-step manner for users in refinery and chemical process plants. ASTM specifications compliment most of the construction specifications; these specifications and codes address several material and testing procedures requirements and guidance. The specifications issued by American Society of Testing Material ( Similarly, the nonferrous material list is exhaustive, and a few of them are listed here as an example. This specification covers aluminum and aluminum-alloy formed and arc-welded round tube in diameters 9–60 The sample list of Cementations, Ceramic, Concrete, and Masonry Materials includes: A sample list of Miscellaneous Materials is listed here. A sample list of Miscellaneous Subjects is listed here. A sample list of Materials for Specific Application is given here. A sample list of Corrosion, Deterioration, and Degradation of Materials is given here. These lists are just examples of the subjects addressed by each group; in fact, the actual list is exhaustive in each group. These specifications are from time to time amended, merged, removed, or changed, so the latest updated version must be referenced. Det Norske Veritas (DNV) describes itself as a provider of services for managing risk. It is one of the several classification organizations based in Oslo, Norway. Like Lloyd's Register and American Bureau of, the DNV was originally established to inspect, evaluate, and certify the technical condition of merchant vessels. The maritime role of DNV has given this organization the edge over welding and fabrication of offshore structures and pipelines; as a result of this, DNV has developed several specifications relating to the design, welding, and testing of weldments. Although these specifications are titled differently, they have a significant effect on material and welding. The following specifications are frequently used in offshore structure design, fabrication, and testing. Offshore standard DNV-OS-C401 The standard intends to be used as technical reference document and guideline for design and procurement. This standard provides an international acceptance standard to the quality of all welding operations used in offshore fabrication. This includes the welding processes and welding qualification procedures, welders qualification, and testing thereof. The standard supports the other DNV specifications like DNV OSS-101 and DNV OSS-102 used for the installation of offshore structures. The specification also addresses the acceptable standard for coating and sacrificial anodes. DNV-OF F 101 This standard provides an international acceptance standard of safety for submarine pipeline systems by defining minimum requirements for design, materials, fabrication, and installation, testing commissioning, operations, repairs, requalification, and refurbishment. The standard is intended to serve as technical reference and guide to design and procurement. The Canadian Standards Association (CSA) is an organization that develops industrial standards spanning over 57 different industrial areas. This not-for-profit organization has representatives from industry, government, and consumer groups and publishes standards. CSA is accredited by the standards Council of Canada, which is a crown corporation to develop and issue standards to promote standardization and efficiency in industrial production process in Canada. The CSA standards are available in print and electronic form. Starting as Canadian Engineering Standards Association (CESA) in early 1900s, the body was created as a result of Sir John Kennedy's efforts to emphasize the need for such an organization. The initial approach was to address the needs of industries involved in production of aircraft parts, design and construction of bridges, construction of buildings, electrical work, etc. The first standards issued by CESA were for steel railway bridges, in 1920. CESA was renamed the Canadian Standards Association (CSA) in 1944. The certification mark was introduced in 1946. Among the 57 different areas of specialization are climate change, business management, and safety and performance standards, including those for electrical and electronic equipment, industrial equipment, boilers and pressure vessels, compressed gas handling appliances, environmental protection, and construction materials. Some of the CSA standards that relate to materials and welding are listed here. Without going much in detail of the history of how European Union had affected the common market and assimilation, which is termed as harmonization of various specification issued by different member countries into one Euro-Norm (EN), the objective being to set a common and equal ground for free flow of trade among the member countries. The concept is further extended to increase the common acceptable quality of welding works internationally through specifications issued by International Standard Organizations (ISO). Here too the EN specifications are harmonized with ISO specifications to present common acceptable grounds. The list presents some of the specifications most commonly in use that affect welding and its quality management. ISO 15607 was issued in 2003; it defines general rules for the specification and qualification of welding procedures for metallic materials. The specification also refers to several other standards as regards detailed rules for specific applications. ISO 15607 is applicable to manual, mechanized, and automatic welding. ISO 15608, issued in 2013, provides a uniform system for the grouping of materials for welding, heat-treatment, forming, and nondestructive testing. The specification covers the following groups of material. Steels Aluminum and its alloys Copper and its alloys Nickel and its alloys Titanium and its alloys Zirconium and its alloys Cast irons ISO 15610, issued in 2003, gives the necessary information to explain the requirements referenced in ISO 15607 concerning the qualification of welding procedures based on tested consumables. In addition, it gives the range of qualification. The specification applies to arc and gas welding, but other fusion welding processes may be accepted if specified. It is limited to application to parent metals that produce acceptable microstructures and properties in the heat-affected zone that do not deteriorate significantly in service. This International Standard is not applicable where requirements for hardness or impact properties, preheating, controlled heat input, interpass temperature, and postweld heat-treatment are specified for the welded joint. The use of ISO 15610 may also be restricted by an application standard or a specification. ISO 15611, issued in 2003, gives the necessary information to explain the requirements referenced in ISO 15607 concerning the qualification of welding procedures based on previous welding experience. In addition, it gives the range of qualification and the validity. The use of ISO 15611, like 15610, may be restricted by an application standard or a specification. ISO 15612, issued in 2004, gives the necessary information and explains the requirements referenced in ISO 15607 about qualification by adoption of a standard welding procedure, and establishes the conditions, limits, and ranges of qualification necessary for the use of a standard welding procedure. This International Standard gives the manufacturer the possibility of using welding procedures based on welding procedure tests performed by other organizations. The use of ISO 15612 can be restricted by an application standard or a specification. ISO 15613, issued in 2004, specifies how a preliminary welding procedure specification is qualified based on preproduction welding tests. It is applicable to arc welding, gas welding, beam welding, resistance welding, stud welding, and friction welding of metallic materials. The use of this specification may be restricted by an application standard or specification. ISO 15614-1 was issued in 2004. This specification specifies how a preliminary welding procedure specification is qualified by welding procedure tests. It defines the conditions for the execution of welding procedure tests and the range of qualification for welding procedures for all practical welding operations within a range of variables. Additional tests may be required by application standards. This ISO specification applies to the arc and gas welding of steels in all product forms and the arc welding of nickel and nickel alloys in all product forms. Arc and gas welding are covered by the following processes: Manual metal arc welding (metal-arc welding with covered electrode) Self-shielded tubular-cored arc welding Submerged arc welding Metal inert gas welding, MIG welding Metal active gas welding, MAG welding Tubular-cored metal arc welding with active gas shield Tubular-cored metal arc welding with inert gas shield Tungsten inert gas arc welding; TIG welding Plasma arc welding Oxy-acetylene welding The principles of ISO 15614-1:2004 may be applied to other fusion welding processes. Part 1; Fusion welding of Steel Materials Part 2; Fusion Welding of Aluminum and its Alloys Part 3; Fusion Welding of Copper and Copper Alloys Part 4; Fusion Welding Nickel and Nickel Alloys Part 5; Fusion Welding Titanium and Titanium Alloys, Zirconium, and Zirconium alloys       