The extraction of cerium(IV) from aqueous nitric acid medium with 18-crown-6 (18C6) dissolved in kerosene was investigated. The different parameters affecting the extraction process including nitric acid, hydrogen ion, extractant and metal concentrations as well as temperature have been separately investigated. The extraction of cerium was found to depend on nitrate ion and extractant concentrations but independent of pH or nitric acid concentrations. Based on the obtained results, the stoichiometry of the extracted species was found to be 
                        
                           
                              [
                              C
                              e
                              
                                 
                                    (
                                    N
                                    
                                       O
                                       3
                                    
                                    )
                                 
                                 4
                              
                              .
                              C
                              E
                              ]
                           
                           ¯
                        
                     , where CE refers to the crown ether used. The effect of diluents on the extraction process was also studied and correlated to their physical constants showing that the extraction of cerium(IV) increases with the diluents polarity. The separation of cerium(IV) from La(III), Nd(III) and Y(III) which could be found in the monazite ore was investigated giving 87% of extraction and 97% of stripping. The selectivity of the proposed system was successfully tested on a sample of Egyptian monazite.Much attention has been paid to the development of ion selective macrocyclic compounds for the separation of lanthanides either as a group or as elements. The macrocyclic crown ethers achieved considerable importance for separation and determination of a large number of metal ions ( The liquid–liquid extraction of some lanthanides (Pr, Gd, and Yb) with mixtures of heptanoic acid H Cerium (the second element in the lanthanide series) is the most abundant of these elements and is chemically characterized by having two stable valence states, III and IV. The mineral monazite is primarily composed of rare earth phosphates especially those of low atomic numbers (cerium group) along with numerous other minor constituents. The present work was undertaken to study the extraction of cerium and some rare earth elements from nitric acid solution using 18-crown-6. The different parameters affecting the extraction process were investigated and the effect of diluents was discussed in terms of their polarity. The separation and recovery of cerium from the Egyptian monazite were performed to test the viability of the proposed process. All chemicals and reagents used were analytical reagent grade. Ammonium ceric nitrate, benzene, cyclohexane, dichloromethane and methyl isobutylketone were Merck products. Nitric acid, sodium bromate, toluene and n-heptane were obtained from BDH. 1,2-dichloroethane, chloroform and carbon tetrachloride were supplied from Reanal, while kerosene (non-aromatic diluent) was supplied by Misr Petroleum Company Ltd. The 18-crown-6 extractant was purchased from Aldrich. A certain weight of ammonium ceric nitrate giving 0.5 The extraction procedure was performed by shaking equal volumes (10 Crown ethers with ionizable functional groups such as carboxylic acid do not require other counter anion for solvent extraction, because the ligand itself carries the negative charge ( Crown ethers 18C6, DB18C6 and DC18C6 are able to complex hydrogen ions ( The effect of diluents on the extraction of cerium(IV) from 4 The effect of 18C6 concentration on the extraction of 3.57 The effect of nitric acid concentration on the extraction of Ce(IV) was investigated between 0.5 and 6 The effect of change in hydrogen ion concentration on the extraction of 3.57 To study the effect of nitrate anions on the Ce(IV) extraction from aqueous nitrate medium, different amounts of nitrate ions were added in the concentration range 4–6 The effect of cerium ion concentration on its extraction with 0.05 The effect of contacting different volume ratios of organic to aqueous (O/A) phases was studied. The various phase ratios and their efficiencies are presented in The temperature effect on the extraction of 3.57 To verify the structure of the extracted species, the IR spectrum of 18C6 dissolved in kerosene was recorded before ( Cerium generally tends to form hexanitrato complexes in high nitric acid medium ( The equilibrium constant, K The distribution ratio, From Eqs. The average extraction constants were calculated at different [NO As shown in Some of the lanthanides which are usually found in the hydrous oxide cake resulting from the alkaline leaching of the Egyptian monazite were subjected to the extraction with 18C6 under the same experimental conditions carried out with Ce(IV). In this concern, La, Nd and Y (0.5 Based on the above obtained results, an extraction process was suggested for the separation of cerium from a rare-earth hydrous oxide cake resulting from the alkaline leaching of Egyptian monazite. The monazite ore was ground to 200 mesh size and added to 50% NaOH solution. The mixture was heated and stirred at 140 A quantitative extraction of 3.57 The authors would like to thank Prof. Dr. J.A. Daoud for her continuous help and discussion to bring the manuscript in the final form.