In leaching solutions coming from the hydrometallurgical processing of copper sulphides, it is necessary to determine the concentrations of Fetotal, Fe+2 and Fe+3. It is known that the 5-sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) forms a red-violet complex with Fe+3 in acid media and a yellow complex with Fe+2 and Fe+3 in presence of ammonia at pH=10. In this study, the results obtained by the SSA method are statistically compared with those obtained by 1,10-phenanthroline method, dichromate titration method and atomic absorption spectrometry. A statistical analysis demonstrated that the SSA method gives more exact and representative results than the other studied methods. The acid mine drainages and the leaching solutions, present an extremely complex matrix because to the high content of copper and arsenic, showing relationships that vary from 1:30 up to 1:1, depending on the stages of the hydrometallurgical process. Under these considerations, the SSA method allows the determination of Fe+3 directly in samples that have an iron content in the range 0.005gL−1–18gL−1 with a relative standard deviation (RSD) <2%.The leaching solutions from hydrometallurgical processing of copper sulphides have a high concentration of several metallic sulphates. Usually, it is necessary to determine quantitatively the iron ions concentration of both oxidation states, which could be sometimes imprecise because two techniques are required; furthermore, copper is a very usual interferent in the colorimetric determination of iron. The Fe In order to compare results, the following analytic methods were used for the direct determination of Fe For the direct determination of Fe The procedure used in the SSA method was as follows: Into a 100 A comparative study of the employed analytical methods by means of control chart was carried out ( A regression among the variable measured “concentration” ( On the other hand, the addition of standard method and calibration graph in aqueous medium were compared. The statistical treatment of comparison of this slopes allow establishing the matrix influence. A significant difference was found for the determination of Fe On the other hand, in the analysis of the method of SSA, it was found that both slopes are practically similar and as a result it can be contrasted the sample directly with the standards prepared in water. The same thing happens when the studied interference is the As(V), also studied by our group. Under these last considerations the method of the SSA is adapted statistically for the analysis of Fe Finally, it was decided to compare the SSA method and the The results shown that the The fact of having a system of analysis under statistical control, allowed to establish that the method of the SSA is which gives more exact and representative results among the studied methods. The acid mine waters and the leaching solutions, present an extremely complex matrix because the content of the interference, as copper for example, is in relationships which could vary from 1:30 up to 1:1 depending on the stages of the hydrometallurgical processing. Under these considerations, the method of the SSA allows the determination of Fe(III) directly in samples that have an iron content understood between 0.005 The authors thank Project OO-I-1050 from FONDEF for the support of this investigation. C. Paipa thanks to the German Service for Academic Exchange (DAAD) for her doctoral fellowship and to the Project PG-97-2002 of the University of Chile.