Layer by layer (LbL) deposition is a useful method for deposition of many inorganic (including metals, oxides and phosphates) and organic (including polymers and proteins) components on a large range of substrates. The LbL deposition of hydroxyapatite (HA) onto a collagen matrix involves HA synthesis on the collagen matrix starting from electrically charged precursors such as Ca2+ and PO4
                     3− at a proper pH to precipitate the desired calcium phosphate.
                  The LbL deposition process was continuously monitored in order to study the amount of HA deposited in each layer. The deposition of the first layers of HA was concluded to be highly influenced by the collagen matrix. When the collagen matrix is crosslinked with glutaraldehyde, the matrix structure is not modified during the deposition, and the porosity will decrease with the number of layers until saturation is reached. Following pore saturation, HA will be only deposited onto the mineralized collagen matrix surface. The obtained composite materials were characterized by XRD, SEM, DTA-TG and FTIR.The LbL deposition method was first reported by Iller LbL is an effective method to obtain very thin layers, starting from a thickness of a few angstroms for the monolayers and also thick layers, up to more than a micrometer for the multilayers Some of the advantages of LbL over other deposition methods include its simplicity, versatility and the possibility to control the deposited material amount The hard tissue of both animals and humans consists of an organic–inorganic hybrid phase. The ratios between organic and inorganic phases and water are influenced by the function of the tissue. The composition of the mineral phase results from the evolutionary stages of the species. For example Hydroxyapatite is the main inorganic component of bone, where, depending on species, it can range from 50% (e.g. in antlers) up to 80% (e.g. in whale bone) of the total bone mass Bone is a composite formed mainly of collagen and hydroxyapatite Citrate-enriched collagen matrices were obtained by dipping collagen matrices ( The mineralization process was performed directly on the collagen matrix starting from Ca(OH) The mineralization process is shown schematically in The mineralization process was performed as follows. In the first stage, the collagen matrices were bound on a stainless steel net and immersed into the mechanically stirred Ca(OH) After the mineralization, the matrices were air-dried and characterized by XRD, FTIR, SEM and ATD-TG. X-ray diffraction analysis was performed using a Shimadzu XRD 6000 diffractometer at room temperature. In all cases the Cu Kα radiation from a Cu X-ray tube was used. The samples were scanned in the Bragg angle, 2 SEM images were obtained with a HITACHI S2600N with an EDAX probe. All samples were covered with a silver layer prior to imaging. IR spectroscopic measurements were performed using a Shimadzu FTIR 8400 spectrophotometer. The spectra were recorded over the wavenumber range of 400–4000 cm Differential thermal analysis (DTA) coupled with thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed in an air atmosphere with a Shimadzu DTG-TA-50H at a heating rate of 10 °C. The X-ray diffraction patterns recorded for mineralized matrices revealed pure hydroxyapatite deposition without any phosphates or sodium chloride as impurities ( Scanning electron microscopy images were recorded in order to study the mineralization, the morphology and the porosity of the obtained deposition products. The recorded SEM ( The amount of deposited HA is dependent on the mineralization process, and particularly on the citrate ions present within the collagenous materials. The amount of HA is seen to be directly proportional to the number of deposited HA layers. At higher SEM resolutions, the size of HA agglomerates was determined. The typical size of the HA agglomerates increases with the number of layers from less than 100 nm for the composite obtained by LbL1 up to several micrometers in the case of composite obtained by LbL5. When the collagenous matrix is immersed for 24 h into Ca(OH) The amount of deposited HA was determined by gravimetric analysis by measuring the initial mass of collagen matrices and the mass of the dried mineralised matrices. The amount of deposited HA is quite linear with respect to the number of deposited layers. This relationship was quantified and the root-mean-square deviation was found to be 0.9857. The same results were obtained using thermogravimetric measurements. DTA-TG analysis was performed to study the effect of increasing mineral phase on the thermal behavior of the collagen/HA composite ( Infrared spectroscopy ( For visual quantification of the mineralization process, the IR spectra of collagen matrix and mineralised matrices were worked up to obtain the same intensity of the carbonyl peaks (1637 cm The layer by layer deposition method was successfully applied in order to increase the amount of mineral phase that is deposited on the collagen matrix. The root-mean-square-deviation is very close to 1, meaning highly linear layer growth was observed for even six HA layers. The classical mineralization method conducted by dipping a collagen matrix in Ca(OH) The obtained composite materials can be assumed to be hydroxyapatite matrices reinforced with mineralized collagen fibers as they have a structure very similar to the bone structure suggested by Hellmich et al. The good linearity of the quantity of deposited HA with respect to the number of layers is due to interactions occurring not only between collagen and HA, but also between deposited HA and Ca From the parameters that influence the deposition of HA, we can distinguish three main categories: support dependent, solution/suspension dependent and processing parameters. While the first two categories have been extensively studied and can be quantified, the third category is very difficult to be quantified. Under similar mineralization conditions, the amount of deposited HA is greater in the presence of citrate ions, but the LbL method applied to a pure collagen matrix can increase the amount of deposited HA even more than in the case of one layer deposition (24 This work was partially founded by the Romanian Authority for Scientific Research. We are grateful to Dr. Viorica Trandafir for providing collagen matrices.