Estimating the hydrophobicity of a solid surface is important for flotation process. Measuring the contact angle or interaction force between air bubbles and a solid surface has been widely used for evaluating the hydrophobicity of surfaces. However, the correlation between the contact angle and interaction force was not be fully explained because contact angle was measured on a macroscale surface and interaction force was measured on a microscale surface (ranging nm2 – μm2) using atomic force microscopy. In this study, we directly measured the macroscale surface – air bubble interaction force in terms of attachment force and detachment energy. We then correlated our measured attachment force and detachment energy values with the static contact angle of specimen surface. The attachment force (Fa) and detachment energy in phase 2 (E2) represented the hydrophobicity of specimen surface. And Fa and Ed in phase 2 were found to have an exponential relationship until 90° of the surface contact angle.The hydrophobicity of a substance is an important engineering parameter for many industrial processes such as flotation ( In this study, we have directly measured the attachment force and detachment energy between a bubble and a particle surface with different contact angles using a developed measurement apparatus, and the measured attachment force and detachment energy values were matched to the static contact angle of the particle surface relative to particle hydrophobicity. From this study, we expect that the relationship between interaction force of air bubble-particle and the static contact angle of particle surface will be understood in the flotation study.  The measurement apparatus used to evaluate macroscale surface–bubble interaction forces consists of a sample stage, a bubble-generating syringe, a tensiometer, and camera connected to a computer as shown in  The total interaction force ( The capillary force dominates the total interaction force between the bubble and the solid surface after the three-phase contact and can be represented as equation On the other hand, the Laplace pressure force can be expressed as equation  The blue curve; point 1-point 3 in The detachment force; red curve is recorded as the specimen moves away from the bubble, representing the retraction step; point 3-point 6 in In phase 1, the detachment force (F The detachment force (F Therefore, in this study, the starting point of phase 2 in the retraction step was decided to be the surface-bubble relative distance where detachment force (F  As shown in   Previous studies have reported that the hydrophobic force is applicable for particles with the static contact angles exceeding 40° ( As shown in Eq. On the other hands, in the bubble-sliding (detaching) phase (phase 2), the detachment energy in phase 2 (E As a result, the correlation between the static contact angle and interaction force of bubble and specimen surface was well explained in this study. In particular, understanding an exponential relationship between hydrophobicity and static contact angle is very important to flotation process. According to Han and You et al. reported that there is a linear correlation between the attachment force (F In this study, we directly measured the macroscale surface–bubble interaction force in terms of attachment force and detachment energy by using developed measurement apparatus. And the measured attachment force and detachment energy values were matched to the static contact angle of the particle surface relative to particle hydrophobicity. From the study, it was found that the attachment force (F The authors declare no competing financial interests.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was supported by the