The material and elastic properties of rocks are utilized for predicting and evaluating hard rock brittleness using artificial neural networks (ANN). Herein hard rock brittleness is defined using Yagiz' method. A predictive model is developed using a comprehensive database compiled from 30 years' worth of rock tests at the Earth Mechanics Institute (EMI), Colorado School of Mines. The model is sensitive to density, elastic properties, and P- and S-wave velocities. The results show that the model is a better predictor of rock brittleness than conventional destructive strength-test based models and multiple regression techniques. While the findings have direct implications on intact rock, the methodology can be extrapolated to rock mass problems in both tunneling and underground mining where rock brittleness is an important control.The brittleness of rock is an important consideration in mechanical excavation and underground tunneling. Recent studies have cast doubt on the effectiveness of rock strength-based techniques (such as unconfined compressive strength or tensile strength) alone for characterizing intact rock brittleness. For example, Obviously strength-based rock brittleness indices are still useful as indirect tools to assess material brittleness, given that rock strength and rock brittleness are not the same property. Indices utilizing the indirect Brazilian tensile, UCS (uniaxial compressive strength) ( It is important, however, to systematically estimate rock brittleness under varying loading conditions and anisotropies, where strength-based techniques seem to fall short. There is generally a lack of adequate systems to characterize intrinsic material brittleness under the broad scope of absolute brittleness to ductility ( This study introduces a new approach to predict and evaluate rock brittleness using P- and S-wave velocities, elastic properties and rock type. In a non-destructive (i.e. non-invasive) fashion, the approach relates rock brittleness to rock type and elastic modulus. The method utilizes 30 years' worth of test data generated from rock samples collected around the world. To build the model, the data are processed using a neural network back propagation (BP) algorithm with Bayesian regularization. The results obtained using the new approach are compared to those available from commonly referenced standard techniques, and demonstrated to provide a better generalization and accuracy. In this paper, The database utilized consists of over 20,000 rock property test results and was compiled over a span of 30 years at the Earth Mechanics Institute (EMI), Colorado School of Mines. The EMI was founded in 1974 as a center for basic and applied research in rock mechanics and mechanical excavation. Since EMI's establishment, numerous rock tests have been conducted from tunneling and mining projects around the world, resulting in an extensive, comprehensive database for a wide variety of rock types. The data include conventional American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standard rock strength test results such as point load strength, UCS, triaxial compressive strength, Brazilian tensile strength, P- and S-wave velocity tests, and specialized rock tests such as linear cutting, abrasivity, and punch penetration. After detailed assessment, suitable test parameters were selected from the global database to build the artificial neural networks (ANN) prediction model used in this study. The final model input parameters were rock type (igneous, metamorphic or sedimentary), unit weight, P-wave velocity, S-wave velocity, dynamic Poisson's ratio, dynamic Young's modulus, and Lame's constant. Representative final input parameters are shown in The output parameter used in the neural network prediction is the brittleness index, obtainable from the punch penetration test – a key laboratory test conducted at EMI originally designed to measure the normal load on disc cutters ( In this study, ANN modeling via BP was applied to developing the brittleness prediction model as discussed in Sections The ANN training occurs by minimizing an error function defined as The error function is minimized iteratively using partial derivatives applied with respect to the weights and biases. In this study, the BP algorithm was implemented in MATLAB ( The model results were obtained from the global database using the procedure as described in Section The ANN training was implemented using BP with Bayesian regularization (   Scatter plots and regression results are displayed on | 0.2 < | | All natural rock material contains defects, and the effective mechanical excavation involves strategic utilization of this characteristic. Therefore noninvasive (or non-destructive) methods, which provide some insight on intrinsic material brittleness prior to machine tool-rock face encounter, are highly desirable. In general, the higher the brittleness, the more efficient the crack initiation and propagation. The results reported herein indicate that if the rock type and rock density are known, it is possible to use acoustic velocities and elastic properties to characterize brittleness in a systematic manner useful to excavation engineers and other practitioners. Further, elastic properties and elastic energy have strong correlations with rock brittleness ( In this study, sensitivity analyses were conducted to determine the most significant ANN input parameter, based on the cosine amplitude method ( In the cosine amplitude method, the higher the value of It should be noted that the Young's modulus values including Poisson's ratios used were predominantly dynamic, as they were obtained from the P- and S-wave velocity values. Prior to practical model application, care should be taken to ensure that any computed dynamic elastic properties are consistent with the representative static elastic properties, which was undertaken in this study. Material heterogeneity, micro-fracture density, porosity, mineralogy, moisture content, grain size, and crystal interlock all have important influences on intrinsic rock brittleness and hence mechanical excavation by extrapolation ( The ANN model sensitivity analysis results also indicate that in terms of decreasing influence on prediction by rock type, the rank is igneous, metamorphic and sedimentary. This would be expected under normal conditions given that igneous rocks would be expected to be more brittle than metamorphic and sedimentary rocks. In other words, the results show that the current ANN model is more likely to better estimate the degree of brittleness for an igneous rock sample than for a sedimentary type. This would be expected given the distinct geologic histories and genesis of the two rock types in terms of homogeneity and mineralogical structure/composition. However additional rock tests and thin section analysis need to be conducted for a comprehensive assessment and systematic validation of such rock-type dependency. The properties of intact rock such as brittleness have an important influence on predicting the penetration rates and advance rates of TBM. From a project planning and cost estimate perspective, prediction of TBM penetration rates is a key component ( While this simplified ANN model version is not as comprehensive as the first, it still provides the practicing engineer a very rapid preliminary means of estimating brittleness without the need for conducting UCS or tensile strength tests. The simplified version would then be improved by expanding the training database through addition of test results relevant to the site-specific field. A new approach for the evaluation of intrinsic rock brittleness using noninvasive input parameters and ANN modeling has been introduced. The results show the ANN model is a better predictor of intrinsic rock brittleness than conventional destructive strength-test based models. Given that the ANN model is based on P- and S-wave velocities, elastic properties can be accounted for. Currently the model is limited because it can only be applied to predictive performance on intact rock, and not directly applied to rock mass conditions during live mechanical excavation. Ideally, such direct application would be desirable as rock mass brittleness information could be obtained under inelastic conditions continually during machine operation in tunneling. However, in its present form, the technique could still be applied empirically. The current approach can also be extended to the modeling of additional rock properties and response to tunneling. Similar to intrinsic rock brittleness, these extensions would have implications on rock cutting and mechanical excavation in tunneling. The authors wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication and there has been no significant financial support for this work that could have influenced its outcome. The authors wish to acknowledge and thank the students and staff at the Earth Mechanics Institute, Colorado School of Mines, too numerous to mention, whose work over the last 30 years has led to the current existing rock test database.