This paper examines the key processes and activities of customer value assessment in business-to-business (B2B) markets. Given that an increasing number of B2B firms are providing combinations of products and services, or integrated solutions, the present study examines customer value assessment from the solution supplier's perspective. Specifically, based on an exploratory field study and in-depth interviews with 18 managers in three different firms, the present study identifies five key processes (i.e., value potential identification, baseline assessment, performance evaluation, long-term value realization, and systematic data management) and 11 related activities involved in customer value assessment in B2B markets, and integrates them into a managerially grounded framework. The findings from this study contribute to the literature on customer value and solution research, and provide useful insights for managers on how to assess the value delivered by their offerings to customers.Creating and delivering superior customer value is considered one of the cornerstones in business-to-business (B2B) marketing (e.g., In the customer value literature, considerable effort has been expended to examine how suppliers create and deliver value to customers (e.g., In the solutions literature, delivering integrated combinations of products and services instead of individual components is regarded as a key to differentiation and higher margins (e.g., This study focuses on examining customer value assessment from the solution supplier's perspective. Specifically, we examine the processes and practices that suppliers undertake in their value assessment activities. To address this both academically and managerially relevant issue, we examine the following research questions: 1) Given the sparse literature on customer value assessment in B2B markets, we answer these questions through a qualitative in-depth study that applies a grounded theory approach ( The rest of the manuscript proceeds as follows. First, we review the extant literature on customer value in B2B markets and the solutions literature, and consider current approaches to customer value assessment. Second, we present our qualitative study and, based on the findings, tentatively propose an empirically grounded framework for customer value assessment in B2B markets. Finally, we present our conclusions, and suggest managerial implications and areas for future research. Customer value is one of the most central themes in marketing and it has been discussed in several different streams of research (e.g., The contemporary literature (e.g., In the solutions literature, much of the research supports the notion that integrating individual components into solutions provides more value to a customer than would be delivered by the components alone. ( Despite the high value potential involved in solutions business, research on the value solution offerings deliver to customers remains scarce ( In practice, solution suppliers often lack the capabilities to quantify the value delivered by their offerings ( Understanding how customers perceive value is considered a key competitive advantage ( In consumer markets, customer value assessment methods are usually grounded on the customer satisfaction and service quality literature, and focus on evaluating consumers' feelings of satisfaction based on comparison between expected and perceived quality ( In B2B markets, scholars have developed specific tools (e.g., However, as the value of solution offerings is not only delivered through products and services (c.f. In order to respond to the calls to 1) develop new methods for customer value assessment in B2B markets ( Consistent with prior studies (e.g., The interviews lasted between 41 and 117 The lead researcher performed the open coding, where the interview transcripts were analyzed line-by-line, and broken down into discrete parts. The data were classified based on the activities involved in the customer value assessment process. To ensure that we captured all relevant activities emerging from the data, we labeled the activities with in-vivo codes, grounding them on each manager's own language ( For the axial coding, we compared the activities according to their properties and dimensions, and then organized them into tentative categories and sub-categories ( Based on the qualitative interviews with 18 managers, we identified 11 activities involved in customer value assessment, which led to the emergence of five key processes comprising 1) value potential identification, 2) baseline assessment, 3) performance evaluation, 4) long-term value realization, and 5) systematic data management (see The findings suggest that the first key process for customer value assessment is value potential identification, which is concerned with understanding how a supplier can add value to its customer's business. Typically, customer value assessment was considered to begin by As customers are not always able to specify their ultimate problem, or the full extent of their needs, The informants reported that adding value to their customers' businesses culminates eventually in reducing customers' costs or increasing their revenues, thus The findings suggest that the second key process for customer value assessment is baseline assessment, which is concerned with assessing a customer's current situation prior to deploying the supplier's offering. This assessment is then used as the basis for comparing the customer's situation after deployment in subsequent performance evaluation and long-term value verification processes. The informants indicated that Determining the customer's current performance was usually followed by The findings suggest that the third key process for customer value assessment is performance evaluation, which is concerned with evaluating the actual value impact on a customer's business. The informants indicated that, due to differences in customers' processes, it was usually difficult to estimate in advance the exact scope and size of the impact their offerings' had on a customer's business. In particular, trial runs were considered instrumental in The interview data suggest that, depending on the size and importance of the offering, the performance evaluation process can be conducted either prior to the actual delivery, as a true “ The findings suggest that the fourth key process for customer value assessment is long-term value realization, which is concerned with ensuring that customers have actually received the promised value. The informants emphasized that The informants from the chemical company explained that they conducted semi-annual meetings with their selected key accounts to verify whether previously specified outcomes have been met. Informants from the paper and fiber technology company reported that they established joint steering groups for major customer projects, which monitored the projects' progress regularly, and possibly for several years after the initial deployment. The customer's participation in value verification was considered critical, and several informants commented that customer involvement should be more formally defined at the beginning of sales projects. Currently, however, due to time and resource pressures relating to either the supplier or the customer, long-term value verification was more often occasional than systematic. Several informants highlighted the need for remote monitoring technologies that would make regular value verification easier and less resource consuming for both parties. Overall, the need to verify realized value-in-use on a regular basis supports the argument that customer value assessment should be regarded as an ongoing process between a supplier and its customer, rather than as an assessment made only at the point of sale (c.f. The majority of informants underlined the fact that However, several informants commented that documented customer cases usually emphasized technical details, such as the content of the offering or the improved performance parameters, but rarely specified the actual monetary value (e.g., cost savings; increased profits) realized by the customer. One informant lamented: Several informants pointed out spontaneously that specifying the monetary impact on a customer's business was often a significantly difficult task. Customers' reluctance to share their operating costs, the lack of proper baseline assessment, and information sharing between the suppliers' business units were frequently mentioned as key challenges to translating delivered benefits into actual cost savings or increased profits. Consequently, the need for systematic data management was consistently emphasized over the course of the interviews. The findings suggest that the fifth key process for customer value assessment is systematic data management, which was considered essential for managing all other processes involved in customer value assessment. Consequently, Overall, effective data management was considered central to customer value assessment, due to the need to collect and coordinate systemically a large amount of information to generate a detailed analysis for the customer on all promises made and actions taken. The proposed framework that summarizes the key processes and activities involved in customer value assessment in B2B markets is illustrated in The purpose of the present study was to examine the key processes and activities involved in customer value assessment in B2B markets, and we analyzed this from the perspective of three solution suppliers. Although our findings are exploratory, they provide important contributions to the extant literature on customer value in B2B markets (e.g., For example, the value potential identification process enables a supplier to construct a shared understanding with its customer on the different ways how the supplier can add value to the customer's business. In turn, the baseline assessment process enables the supplier to evaluate its customer's current performance in selected improvement areas within the identified value potential Second, although previous research has demonstrated the high value involved in solution offerings ( Third, while the extant literature on solutions emphasizes the need for value-based pricing (e.g., Finally, while the proposed framework takes into account how complex solution offerings improve customers' business processes over time, our literature review and findings indicate that assessing the intangible value of solutions is highly challenging. Several interviewees explained that customers derived intangible benefits, such as increased skills and knowledge, ease of operations, reduced risk, or improved working conditions, and often appreciate them as add-on benefits. But unless the supplier could specify how the intangible benefits improved its customers' performance, the customers rarely acknowledged the intangible benefits in the price paid to the supplier. On one hand, this might be due to games that buyers play with suppliers, i.e. they do not deliberately want to recognize the intangible value so they would not have to pay for it For managers, the findings from this study offer four important insights. First, our study indicates that customer value assessment is not just a one-off event that can be conducted by sending a customer satisfaction survey after the solution is delivered. Instead, it is an ongoing process, which begins before and continues long after delivery, often until the end of a solution offering's life-cycle. Managers need to be aware of the long-lasting nature of customer value assessment, and coordinate the different functions and units responsible for the key processes accordingly. Specifically, we recommend that managers pay special attention to long-term value realization, which is the most critical, yet often neglected, process. Solution suppliers are often pressed by time and results, and salespeople, who are typically responsible for the “front-end” of customer value assessment, need to focus on closing the next customers. Therefore, managers must ensure that the responsibility for the long-term value realization process is clearly specified for the sales unit, or smoothly shifted to the service or project management unit. Second, the findings from this study indicate that customers' reluctance to cooperate and centralized purchasing strategies represent typical Third, if managers do not have time or resources to go through all the processes involved in customer value assessment – or quantify the monetary impact on customers' businesses - they can Finally, considering that industrial suppliers increasingly seek service-led growth, customer value assessment provides managers with a potential service business opportunity. For example, best practice firms in B2B markets conduct baseline assessments for a fee to help their customers understand how to improve their operations (e.g., In this study, we examined the complex phenomenon of customer value assessment in B2B markets from the perspectives of three solution suppliers. Our findings suggest preliminary insights on this increasingly important issue, but given the explorative nature of this study, they come with limitations which need to be considered. First, the present study is limited and context bound to three industries, namely the metallurgical, chemical, and paper and fiber technology industries. Furthermore, the adopted perspective of three solution suppliers emphasizes large scale process industries and “big ticket” items. This might affect the findings. For example, the high frequency of trial runs in our data might not be so prominent with B2B offerings of lesser value. Therefore, an important step for future research is to examine customer value assessment in a broader set of B2B firms to expand the proposed framework, and to generalize the findings towards a more general theory on customer value assessment in B2B markets (e.g., Second, the present study was conducted from the suppliers' perspective and, as such, it provides only the sellers perspective on what represents customer value. This is a major limitation, and examining customers' perceptions of value expected and derived from solutions would complement our findings. In particular, adopting the customer's perspective might shed more light on intangible value and relational benefits delivered apart from the core offering. For example, earlier research clearly demonstrates that customers' perceptions of value can change over time ( Customer value is one of the key concepts in marketing, and assessing the value delivered to customers is a major challenge for industrial firms that provide solution offerings. In this exploratory study, we empirically examined the process of customer value assessment from the perspectives of three solution suppliers. Based on the findings generated through in-depth interviews with 18 managers, this study suggests a tentative, process-based framework for customer value assessment comprising five key processes: value potential identification, baseline assessment, performance evaluation, long-term value realization, and systematic data management. We have examined these processes in detail, and propose their application in both research and practice. Given the increasing importance of customer value assessment, we hope that our exploratory study offers new insights and fuels further research on this critical area. The authors wish to thank the three anonymous reviewers for the comments and insights regarding this paper. The research was conducted in the CLEANTECH SOLUTIONS-project funded by the 