Coagulation sensors based on the magnetostrictive delay line technique are presented in this paper. They are based on magnetostrictive ribbons and are used for measuring the coagulation, curing or solidification time of different liquids. Experimental results indicate that the presented sensing elements can determine the blood coagulation with remarkable repeatability, thus allowing their use as blood coagulation sensors. Additionally, results indicate that they can also measure curing time of resins, solidification of fluids and coagulation of chemical substances, therefore allowing their implementation in chemical engineering applications.Magnetostriction is a property of considerable interest in the area of sensors and transducers Blood coagulation is a dynamic physiological process, which is deployed after a vessel injury causing bleeding, aiming to seal the bleeding vessel and eliminate haemorrhage. Blood coagulation results from the activation of a series of enzymatic reactions, known as the coagulation cascade. These reactions activate one after another inactive components that create as final result fibrin fibers which are formed as a net, entrap platelets and form the fibrin clot which seals the injured bleeding vessel. This final stage of the coagulation process is of outmost importance for the current application because it results in a viscosity change that can be measured with a magnetostrictive sensor. Thrombotic conditions affect more than 50 million Americans. This means that their blood has a tendency to coagulate itself without the normal precursor of injury. Due to this alteration in blood viscosity many adverse clinical conditions can occur and these patients have a need for coagulation monitoring. On the other hand, abnormalities in the platelets, coagulation factors and blood vessel defects can all attribute to excessive bleeding during an elective surgical procedure. In all the afore-mentioned conditions there is a need for rapid, precise measurement of blood clotting time. The currently accepted methodologies for determining blood clotting times are optical coagulometry and mechanical coagulometry The cure analysis of thermosetting resins has been mostly studied by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and to a lesser extent by other methods such as rheometry, electron spin resonance, Fourier transform, infrared spectroscopy, stress–temperature measurements, calorimetric studies, fluorescence and scanning electron microscopy Magnetostrictive coagulation sensors have been developed in the past The coagulation-sensing element is illustrated in An excitation coil, set around one end of the MDL, is used to transmit pulsed magnetic field along the length of the MDL, thus generating pulsed microstrains due to the magnetostriction effect, which are summed up to an elastic pulse, which splits up in two parts and propagates along the two directions of the MDL; after the microstrain generation, the MDL acts as an acoustic waveguide of the propagating elastic pulse. The excitation coil is practically made of a few turns to allow for easy electronic driving, which is accomplished by a MOS-FET circuit. The thickness and the frequency response of the MDL, which are of the order of several microns and of a few microseconds, respectively, suggest that the propagating elastic pulse has a wavelength of the order of several mm. In fact, it is between 15 and 50 The end of the MDL is preferably inside the excitation coil, in order to take advantage of the elastic pulse being reflected at the end of it. By applying pressure at the end of the ribbon, the reflecting pulse maintains the waveform of the initial signal. Now, if the excitation coil has a critical length significantly smaller than the wavelength of the propagating elastic pulse, the propagating elastic pulse will approximate the sum of the two propagating pulses. As the elastic pulse propagates along the MDL, it causes the magnetization in its path to change due to the inverse magnetostriction effect. Therefore, the domain magnetization changes with respect to the propagating elastic pulse. Provided that the MDL has its magnetic dipoles well oriented along a given orientation due to an external field, the infinitesimal changes in the magnetization are superimposed, thus resulting in a total, macroscopic change of magnetization. Considering that the above-mentioned MDL elements are made of amorphous FeSiB alloys, the earths field is enough to magnetize them. However, the presence of a permanent magnetic field surrounding the MDL can ensure the permanent magnetization of the MDL along a given direction, regardless of its position with respect to the geomagnetic poles. Setting a search coil around the MDL, this change of magnetization is detected as an induced voltage pulse. This voltage pulse is proportional to the first derivative of the magnetization of the MDL part being inside the search coil. As mentioned before if the search coil is at the end of the MDL and has a length considerably smaller than the propagating wavelength, the effect is maximized because the reflected signal is also superimposed to the main propagating one. The search coil ought to be sensitive enough to detect as good as possible any magnetization changes, but it also should have such a Applying a liquid on the surface of the MDL, which acts now as an acoustic waveguide, at a point between the excitation and the search coils, a part of the energy of the propagating elastic pulse is driven to the afore-mentioned liquid. The closer the density of the liquid is to the density of the MDL material, a larger portion of elastic energy is driven to the liquid. As the liquid densifies, its density tends towards the density of the MDL material and consequently a smaller amount of energy continues to propagate along the MDL. Hence, the voltage output of the MDL is expected to be inversely proportional to the coagulation procedure of the liquid, i.e. to decrease with time. Considering the peak-to-peak pulsed MDL voltage output as the output of the system, the coagulation time of the liquid, set on the MDL waveguide surface, can be determined. Therefore the described process can be used as a coagulation sensor. A drawback of the sensor is the amount of liquid set on the MDL. The volume of the liquid also determines the signal output of the MDL. Different quantities of the same liquid may result in different signal outputs, thus making the distinction between liquid quantity and coagulation time difficult. One first step towards maintaining the repeatability of the coagulation sensor is to use precise volume meters in order to control the quantity of the under test liquid. However, this still introduces uncertainties to the sensor response. The way to overcome this problem is depicted in This technique offers the following advantage: the densification process of the liquid results in additional tensile stresses applied on the surface of the MDL. Provided that the MDL is a positive magnetostrictive material, such tensile stresses result in a reduction of the above-mentioned inverse magnetostriction effect, since they help the magnetization to orient easier along the axis of the applied stresses. Therefore the signal of the MDL in such a case decreases for two reasons: one is the elastic energy driven to the liquid as it densifies and the other is the tensile stresses during liquid densification which also reduce the amount of the measured voltage output. The pulsed mode of MDL operation results in non-continuous elastic vibration throughout the volume of the MDL. This assists the densification process in non-Newtonean liquids such as blood, thus offering an additional advantage of the proposed system. This algorithm of operation theoretically suggests a more sensitive response with respect to the inductive measurements using magnetostrictive elements because of the combination of the two above-mentioned effects that are involved (in inductive measurements only the tensile stresses affect the response of the magnetostrictive element). It also offers a measurement independent of the quantity of the applied liquid, since the sensor itself utilizes only the quantity behind the sensing element. The above-described coagulation sensor has been realized for testing blood coagulation, by using a Fe The electronic circuit for the generation of the excitation pulsed current Data collection was obtained by using two Visual Basic programs that were specifically written for this purpose. The first program operates in a time sweep mode. The computer controls the palmed signal generator that creates the applied magnetic field. The resulting signal is then recorded and converted into a voltage output. The second program records the Blood setting was realized by moving the search coil, following the method described in the previous section as illustrated in The zero point of time refers to the time that blood is placed onto the surface of the sensor. Experiments performed using the same blood resulted in a repeatable determination of Testing different samples of blood resulted in the very same amplitude of Similar to the case of blood coagulation, the same sensing principle has also been used in chemical engineering applications, for the solidification of fluids or curing of resins or coagulation. This paper reports results on solidification measurements of fluid corrector (blanco) and metal glue, as well as coagulation of silicon glue and curing of epoxy resin and thixotropic polyester. Taking into account that the above-mentioned processes could easily be destructive for the search coil, the experimental set-up shown in A typical distortion of the MDL output waveforms for the above-mentioned materials is illustrated in A typical dependence of the MDL pulsed voltage output on the solidification, curing and coagulation of the above-mentioned liquids is illustrated in The solidification of the fluid corrector and the metal glue is a physical phenomenon based mainly on the evaporation of the diluent component. The curing of the epoxy resin and the thixotropic polyester is a chemical effect based on their post-polymerization. The coagulation of silicon glue is a physico-chemical effect based on solidification without evaporation. Thus, solidification, curing and coagulation time can also be determined for the case of chemical engineering applications. Repeatability measurements were also performed for the case of epoxy resin, silicon glue and thixotropic polyester, repeated for more than 10 times each. The determined values of the coefficient From the above-illustrated experimental results is evident that the time required to measure the coagulation of a liquid with this technique is of the order of several minutes. This is due to the fact that the amplitude of the voltage output is indicative of the endpoint of the coagulation process. When the output signal becomes steady within the limits of a pre-set level threshold, it can be said that coagulation has been achieved. But, since the exponential coefficient Apart from this problem, the repeatability when using the set-up of The determination of blood coagulation time is an essential part of monitoring therapeutic anticoagulants and treating life-threatening acute coagulopathies. Standard methodologies for the measurement of blood coagulation time require specialized personnel; a well-organized laboratory facility, involve blood-sampling procedures and are time consuming. It is the standard practise for a patient under anti-thrombotic treatment to visit a laboratory facility on a regular basis (every two weeks for at least six months) in order to evaluate the clotting status of his blood. The benefit in cost effectiveness if a portable simple and accurate instrument is would be available for this measurement is self-evident. Additionally, in many emergency cases, the coagulation cascade functions abnormally, altering individuals clotting ability or bleeding potential within a few minutes. It is obvious that in these cases the time of 30 Apart from the afore-mentioned measurements, we performed measurements of the delay time between the main and the reflected signal, during blood coagulation. In this experiment, the ribbon MDL sensing core was longer, allowing a large part of the MDL being out of the area between excitation and search coils, as shown in This sensing technique can be applied for the in-situ and continuous measurement for various engineering process, in order to estimate the curing time of commercial thermosetting resins. Such applications could be the curing of polyester resin alone or as matrix reinforced with glass or other fibers in various manufacturing sectors, e.g. ship-manufacturing, water-proving adhesives and molding articles. The magnetostriction effect can be used to detect the viscosity changes that occur within liquid materials. An application of this measuring principle is the time measurement of blood coagulation. It was demonstrated that the system is independent on the quantity of the blood. The next step in validating this approach will be to compare the measurements with standardized methods. Advantages of this system over current methodology include: minimal volume of blood required to perform a simple test application and can be performed by any untrained individual, laboratory facilities are not required to perform the test; the results will be available within few minutes and speed can be of critical importance in certain emergency cases.