Flotation is a difficult process to run efficiently. One way to make flotation performance better is to improve cell level control. However, controlling pulp levels in flotation cells is a complex control task because of strong interactions between the levels in flotation cells. Therefore advanced controllers are needed to give good level control. This paper deals with a model of six flotation cells in series. Simulations are performed to compare different control strategies. Four control strategies are considered: one SISO controller and three different MIMO controllers including a new multivariable controller. It is shown that level control performances of the MIMO controllers are significantly better than that of the classical SISO controller.Level control of flotation cells is a very complex task due to high interactions between the process variables. A control action implemented at any point in the flotation circuit tends to be transmitted to both upstream and downstream units, and sometimes with amplification. Large variations in the flow rate to the first cell and varying composition of the raw ore also cause problems. Flotation cells are conventionally controlled by isolated PI-controllers. PI control works well when the cell being controlled is isolated. However, in a flotation circuit where interactions are strong, PI control does not meet the requirements of high control performance. Hence a considerable amount of research has been carried out over the last few years to develop better control techniques for flotation circuits (  The aim of this research is to study and compare different control strategies from the point of view of cell level control. In addition, a new control strategy is presented and implemented. Its performance is compared to three different strategies: one traditional SISO control strategy, and two MIMO control strategies. The strategies are compared by the means of special performance indices. In the following the mathematical model of a flotation cell is first developed and a five cells in series cell configuration is constructed. The simulations are then performed in order to determine suitable control parameters for controllers of the cell levels. Simulation was performed with Matlab 5.2.0 and its Simulink library. In the flotation process the pulp is fed into the first cell and the froth is collected in the launders. The feed can be measured by a flow measurement, and the remaining pulp flows into the next cell. The magnitude of the flow depends on the pressure difference between two adjacent cells, the position of control valves, and the viscosity and density of the pulp. The magnitude of the pressure difference can be determined from the physical height difference of the cells. The pulp level in a cell is measured and controlled by adjusting the control valve. In the following a flotation cell is considered as a tank of perfectly mixed pulp. Since the pulp is perfectly mixed, the density is the same throughout the cell, i.e. there are no spatial density gradients in the cell. As the froth flow is small compared with the pulp flow, it is ignored in the outgoing flows. The impact of the air feed on the pulp level is also ignored. The cells under study do not have the properties of ideal tanks because the cross-sectional area of the cell is not constant. A mathematical model for the physical properties will be developed and discussed next. In a flotation process several single cells are connected in series as shown in For the first cell in the series: The equations for cells 2, 3, and 4 are respectively ( Mathematical models for the double cells can be derived in a similar manner ( The pulp level in the second cell is measured and compared with the set point. This signal is used as input to a PI-controller. The output signal of the controller is the desired valve position as denoted by The velocity of outflow from the first cell can be derived using Bernoull’s equation, resulting in The volume flow across the flange can be calculated as The pressure drop due to flowing resistances is assumed to be negligible and can be ignored. The change of the pulp volume in the first cell with respect to time can be written as  Calculation of the pulp volume can be divided into two sections: the pulp level below and above the level of If the pulp volume is equal or greater than A level variable, the zero point of which is equal to The third order equation has a solution in [ The effect of pulp level non-linearity can be seen in Valve sizing is based on the The flow rate (m The valves in the models are sized for a flow which has a retention time of 1.5 min in one cell. The flow rate to the first cell is also calculated using this retention time value. Characteristic curves of the control valves are produced by Larox Flowsys and were used in the Simulink models in order to cause realistic and non-linear behavior for the valves. The different control strategies are discussed and described in the following sections. These strategies are selected because they can be used with basic PI-controllers and without any additional instrumentation. Traditionally in flotation cell series there is only one flow measurement in the beginning of the series and level PI-controllers in every cell. A flow feed-forward controller monitors disturbances in the inflow to the first cell and uses proportional action to close or open the valves of the cell in order to compensate for disturbances. Compensation is linearly dependent on the difference between the current inflow and the normal inflow. The measurement signal is filtered in order to prevent the feed-forward control from reacting to random variation in the flow. However, this kind of controller does not provide any extra performance improvement in the event of disturbances occurring somewhere else in the cell series. The model of the feed-forward controller is shown in A decoupling controller is based on differential equations The mathematical criterion to be fulfilled for decoupling a tank A multivariable controller ( In this strategy each control valve can be regarded as a sluice gate of a dam. When a damned inventory is too high in upstream, the valves are opened more than usual, even when there seems to be no need to take such an action on the basis of the levels in the neighboring vessels. The control diagram is shown in When some disturbance occurs in tank, it has an effect to level in the previous tank in upstream. Previously described multivariable control does not take disturbances of this kind into account. Also strategy does not take into account disturbances arising from pulp feed. Therefore a flow feed-forward has been added to the system and the difference between set point and measured level in next tank is also added to the controller of previous tank. The control diagram is shown in In the simulations a configuration of six TC-50 cells in series was studied in accordance with the ideal tank assumption. Therefore the effects of boosters and launders were not considered. The valves were 100% oversized according to the ISA standard, and the retention time in each cell was 1.5 min. Control strategies included conventional PI-controllers with feed-forward control, decoupling controller, a multivariable controller similar to Floatstar The controllers were tuned and compared using the following indices. The IAE index (integral of the absolute value of the error) integrates the absolute value of errors, and even-handedly weights all the deviations. ISE (integral of the square error) gives more weight to big deviations from the set point. The simulations of the configurations of six TC-50 cells in series resulted in parameters for the PI-controllers. Integration times in the traditional system with a feed-forward controller were between 15 and 50 s and proportional gains between 0.8 and 1.2. Because MIMO control strategies respond better to disturbances, the PI parameters were set faster. Integration times in all the PI-controllers were set to 15 s and gain to 1. In the decoupling controller the PI-parameters were between 15–50 s and 1–1.4 s, correspondingly. The responses of the feed-forward controller to disturbances in pulp feed and to set point changes are presented in The responses of the decoupling controller are illustrated in The responses of configurations in which a controller similar to Floatstar The IAE and ISE indices, which depict the performance of controllers, are shown in All the simulated configurations were successfully tuned. It is noticeable that the classical SISO strategy with feed-forward controller cannot even approach the performances of the MIMO controllers. This is due to high interactions between the control loops, which SISO systems cannot take into account. The differences between different MIMO systems are somewhat smaller. All the controllers performed robustly to disturbances in pulp feed and to set point changes. The decoupling controller had the best IAE and IDE indices. However, the decoupling controller is sensitive to model uncertainties (