Soldering scrap, generated in large quantities by modern electronic industry, is basically lead-free but contains significant concentrations of copper and silver. This is a valuable raw material, and high purity tin can be obtained by electrolytic refining. There are a number of advantages in applying pure hydrochloric acid–tin chloride media, if the difficulties of solution stability, electrolytic efficiency and deposit morphology can be overcome. An aqueous procedure was developed on the basis of potentiodynamic studies and long-term electrorefining experiments. It can be used for an efficient purification of the valuable waste material in a single operational step. The formation of chloro-complex ionic species may offer a beneficial level of natural inhibition, therefore the inefficient and in some respects harmful organic additives should be omitted. The tendency of Sn(II) oxidation and precipitation can be overcome by properly controlling the concentration of the main components in the electrolyte solution. The virtual cathodic current efficiency can be increased close to the theoretical value by optimizing the composition of the electrolyte solution, the applied apparent current density and the technological parameters of the PCR (periodical current reversal) electric supply. The loose structure of a deposited metal may satisfy the technical requirements but it requires special cell arrangement and care during operation. Electrolyte circulation should only be applied for the control of composition. The attainable purity – of close to 99.99% – surpasses the standard technical requirements.Soldering scrap – obtained as dross from the top of tin baths – contains a high percentage of metallic tin. Due to the high market price of this metal, collection is well organized and the material is usually processed by the alloy producers by remelting in addition to primary raw metals or they are recycled to primary smelters ( The relatively hot lead-free molten tin bath is aggressive for the copper contacts, thus the copper concentration is steadily increasing during soldering. The soldering scrap may also contain significant amounts of iron, silver, bismuth and antimony. If direct purification is considered, pyrometallurgical refining is the conventional method for less reactive non-ferrous metals. Molten tin can also be purified ( Tin refining, can be efficiently carried out in a single step by hydro/electrometallurgical methods. Anodes can be cast conveniently of the collected soldering scrap. Impurities with higher electrode potential than that of tin (Bi, Sb, As, Cu, Ag, Au) practically do not dissolve from the anode, but they build a fine slime at the surface, in the elemental or oxide form ( There are different solutions which can be applied for tin refining. Alkaline baths are not favorable because of the required high temperatures (~ In view of the shortcomings of the known tin electrorefining technologies and the possible savings on the material costs, it is worth examining the application of pure HCl–SnCl Dissolved tin forms chloro-complex ions in the HCl solution. The computer program ROCC developed at our department is useful in modeling the conditions. The distribution of tin among the various species in contact with metallic tin or air in solutions of varied chloride ion concentrations can be represented by the curves of The reaction The standard potentials (Sn As a result, the surface of the electrode polarized to the dissolution of tin can be quickly covered by tin-oxide and hydroxide compounds mixed with detached metal particles. Samples of this material were analyzed by X-ray diffractometry to determine the mineralogical composition. In view of the solutions in contact with ambient air, either in operation or during pauses, the possible rate of Sn(II) oxidation under stationary conditions is of practical interest for devising the process. Oxidation with air is compared in The oxidation of dissolved Sn(II) by air is slow. It can be even relatively suppressed by the addition of pyrogallol as an anti-oxidant. The changes in the absolute concentrations ( This may protect Sn(II) from oxidation to a certain extent. If the tin chloride solution is kept open to the air and also in contact with metallic tin, the total Sn concentration increases by the combined effect of reactions ( If Sn(IV) is also present, a white-yellow stannic acid type (SnO According to The oxidized compounds may interfere with the normal electrode processes and finally cause the decomposition of the solution. Therefore, the electrolytic refining of tin in HCl solutions requires counteracting the tendency of Sn(II) oxidation and the control of Sn concentration at the same time. In order to decide the suitable conditions for the electrorefining process, primarily the anodic and the cathodic reactions were studied by the potentiodynamic technique in solutions of different compositions. Determining the main characteristics of the process, such as current efficiency, deposit morphology and purity, however, required relatively long experimental runs with a laboratory scale electrorefining cell. The electrolyte solution was prepared by dissolving the required amount of reagent grade tin powder in boiling 6 The anodes used for the electrorefining experiments were prepared by remelting and casting the lead free soldering scrap (obtained from JABIL-Hungary Electronics Co.). The amount of dross generated (10–20% of the raw material) was skimmed with aluminum tools before casting the melt into anode slabs. The copper starting cathode sheet was masked around the 9 The gross current efficiency, expressing the utilization of the total electric charge, was expressed as: Results of the potentiodynamic preliminary experiments had shown that the anodic process allows high current densities even with stationary solutions. No passivation was observed as far as approximately 1 The tin working electrode is immediately attacked by Sn(IV) species on immersion in the solution. Before the start of the cathodic reduction, the local concentration of Sn(II) around the tin plate is increased through the spontaneous dissolution reaction ( The main electrorefining experiments with 2 The virtual current efficiencies plotted in The morphology of cathodic deposition is basically roughly dendritic. Changes in the compositions of the solutions in the anode and cathode compartments were examined by analyzing samples taken periodically during the 8 The cathodic deposit has a higher purity than required for ordinary technical purposes. A good indication of the purification efficiency is given by the comparison of the compositions of samples taken from the raw anode material and the deposit produced at the cathode. Analysis of the samples was carried out by ICP OES (inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry) after complete dissolution in boiling 6 The overall process can be characterized by the analysis of the sample taken from the ingot obtained by melting the crystals – rinsed with distilled water – and cast into glass crucibles in a water bath. As Practically important impurities of relatively high standard electrode potential (Ag, Cu Bi) tend to remain un-dissolved in the anode sludge. Due to the uneven dissolution, it may also contain a great amount of tin particles. Recycling of soldering scrap collected from the electronic industry carries great economical potential. Elimination of the impurities dissolved by the lead-free tin soldering bath requires chemical metallurgical processing. The possibility of a novel aqueous technology based on the application of pure HCl solutions was proved by the experimental results. Potentiodynamic and long-term electrorefining investigations have shown that 1 Work on the subject started under the auspices of the