Direct production of ferromolybdenum from molybdenite (MoS2), in the presence of lime as a desulfurizing reagent using combustion synthesis process is investigated. Thermodynamic calculations and measurement of the adiabatic temperature of the reaction denoted that the process is in agreement with the Merzhanov criterion for self-sustaining processes. The experimental results indicated a relatively complete separation between the molten metal droplets and the co-existing slag. The slag and metal phases were characterized by X-ray diffraction, electron microscopy and wet chemical analysis techniques. It was found that sulfur is mainly distributed into the slag in the form of solid calcium sulfide (CaS). The Lack of calcium oxide in the slag indicated a complete desulfurization reaction between lime and the sulfur in molybdenum sulfide. Characterization of the molted metal revealed that only two phases namely Fe3Mo3C and Fe3Mo exist in the melt. Mass balance calculations showed an Iron-molybdenum recovery greater than 85%. Analyses of the phases indicated that a significant amount of Fe3Mo3C phase (60–70 wt%) is present in ferromolybdenum molten droplets even though the raw materials were low in carbon. Chemical analysis and microstructural studies of the raw materials and the products showed that carbon is not present in sufficient quantities to produce this amount of Fe3Mo3C; therefore the structure of this phase should contain a high concentration of carbon vacancies. The deviation of Fe3Mo3C1−x peaks in X-ray diffraction pattern compared to its standard reference peaks and a calculated 0.02% decrease in the lattice parameter of this phase are evidence of the presence of these carbon vacancies.Conventional combustion synthesis processes use molybdenum trioxide (MoO In the present study, synthesis reaction has been considered as the aluminothermic reaction of molybdenum sulfide with iron oxide in the presence of lime as desulfurization agent. Normal molybdenum weight percentage in commercial ferromolybdenum is approximately 50–70 wt% According to Hess’s law, ΔH° According to Raw materials were homogeneously mixed in a ceramic mortar for 10 min, and then the reactants blend was cold pressed in a steel die at a low pressure of 2–3 MPa (20–30 kg/cm Raw materials used in combustion synthesis process were molybdenite (Merck 11225; +98%, −25 μm), hematite iron oxide (Merck 103924; +99%, −45 μm), calcium oxide (Merck 102109; +97%, −25 μm) and fine aluminum powder (Rankem A2265; +99%, −45 μm). It must be mentioned that in addition to citing chemical analysis of laboratory raw materials produced by Merck, and Rankem companies, the EDS and XRD analysis were conducted on all used reagents and no significantly irrelevant compounds were identified. This indicates that the possible existing impurities in these materials are very minor and negligible. Due to the presence of carbon impurities in the products, a more detailed assessment was conducted on raw materials. XRD analysis results of the used raw materials only illustrate the presence of carbon in form of minor Calcite phase (CaCO In In As can be observed in TGA analysis results of the molybdenite sample, which was heated at 250 °C and washed with alcohol and distilled water, showed a very small amount of weight loss in thermo-gravimetric treatment before oxidative roasting temperature of MoS In It is noted that three random cases have been carefully evaluated among ferromolybdenum droplet samples by scanning electron microscopy. Furthermore, the maximum tolerance of EDS data result for the amount of obtained phases is estimated less than 3–4%. In In Chemical analysis of molten droplets by wet chemistry laboratory method without normalizing the results shows 51.3 wt% molybdenum and 42.5 wt% Iron. Amount of aluminum and calcium confined in form of slag phase is about 2.5% in molten droplets. LECO test results show that carbon content in the produced ferromolybdenum is about 0.4% and sulfur content is about 1%. The trapped amount of slag inside the molten droplets is the main reason for high percentage of carbon and sulfur amounts. In other words, it seems that high heat transfer rate in C.S process is the main reason for trapping the slag inside the molten droplets. Authors assume that removing the trapped slag, even in small laboratory scale, requires adding small amounts of other desulfurizing compounds such as MnO The purpose of data comparison between XRD and SEM results is to use electron microscopy’s EDS results, to prove the impossibility of presence amount of Fe LECO analysis was carried out four times on Ferromolybdenium droplets which were obtained from four separate combustion synthesis processes. The maximum and minimum values were 0.57 and 0.13 respectively. Finally, an average of 0.4 ± 0.02 wt% was calculated for LECO analysis results. However, it needs to be pointed out that with assuming acceptance of 50% as the minimum weight percentage of Fe A thorough review of XRD pattern of produced ferromolybdenum shows that there are some displacements in 2 theta angles of Fe In In The most significant reason is low carbon content of the product and reactants. Also, presence of 1.25 wt% carbon in ferromolybdenum sample (equal to at least 50% of η-carbides phase) is not feasible which has been confirmed by various tests such as XRD, FTIR, SEM/EDS and LECO analysis. Deviation in diffraction angles and significant decrease in d-spacing and lattice parameter of Fe In summing up, it could be hypothesized that there is high concentration of carbon vacancies in the non-stoichiometric structure of Fe The results of this study showed that direct ferromolybdenum production by SHS reaction from molybdenite concentrate as an alternative for molybdenum oxide reactant, in the presence of lime desulfurization, could be possible. The obtained experimental results showed a good agreement with the experimental criterion of Merzhanov. The remarkable point in this process scheme is eliminating problems such as molybdenum loss and sulfur gases emission, caused by roasting molybdenum sulfide in the process of producing MoO The presence of calcium sulfide phase and absence of calcium oxide primary reactant in XRD results of slag phase showed that a significant amount of sulfur content reacts with lime, and then solid CaS phase is crystallized. Formation of two phases namely Fe In contrast to Fe Authors are highly grateful to the