The hot compression behavior of a Co–Cr–Mo–C alloy was studied in the temperature range of 1100–1200°C and the strain rate of 0.001–1s−1. The influence of processing parameters including temperature and strain rate on the microstructure of the alloy was investigated. The flow curves of the hot compressed samples at the investigated deformation temperatures and strain rates exhibited single peak stress. The effect of the strain rate and temperature of deformation on the flow stress was studied using a hyperbolic sine-type equation. The calculated activation energy was about 744.5984kJ/mol. The evidenced microstructural characteristics combined with the shape of the flow curves indicate that there is a competition between dynamic recrystallization (DRX) and precipitation phenomena, especially at low strain rates, i.e. 0.001s−1. The formation of precipitates at the grain boundaries prevent the mobility of boundaries and also cause the partial inhibition of the dynamic recrystallization. Whereas, long time for the precipitates coarsening causes the predomination of dynamic recrystallization. Thus, the serrated boundaries in microstructure along with oscillation in the flow curves take place due to this competition.Co–Cr–Mo alloys are usually used to produce artificial joints thanks to their excellent biocompatibility, wear and mechanical properties The improvement of the mechanical properties can be obtained by applying plastic deformation combined with a subsequent recrystallization heat treatment. Whatever the procedure applied to improve the alloys mechanical properties, a clear understanding of the microstructural changes occurring during thermo-mechanical processing is mandatory In biomedical Co–Cr–Mo alloys the effect of hot compression parameters on the grain refinement with low percent of carbon (0.02%) was reported The composition of the Co–Cr–Mo–C alloy object of the present study is given in Cylindrical compression specimens (with a diameter of 7.5 The deformed specimens were sectioned in the parallel direction with respect to the compression axis, and polished using standard metallography techniques. The polished surface was then etched at room temperature by immersion in a 5:1 solution of HCl:H Typical true stress–strain curves obtained from hot compression tests of Co–Cr–Mo–C alloy at various deformation temperatures and strain rates are shown in  Some oscillations can be observed at the lowest strain rate, i.e. 0.001  As expected, the microstructures changes with the testing temperature. In fact, strong carbide formers present in the alloy composition, such as the Cr and Mo, cause the competition between precipitation and DRX. A larger amount of precipitate phase can be observed in the compressed specimens than in the as-received material, proving that the degree of deformation play a role in the competition between DRX and precipitation. The precipitation causes the pinning effect on the HAGBs In the results reported by L.E. Ramırez et al.  EDS analysis of carbides and matrix at 1100 Wimmer et al. As illustrated in The effect of the strain rate on the microstructure of the specimens deformed at 1200 It can be seen from the XRD patterns of the specimens deformed at different strain rates in The γ→ε transformation leads to greater work hardening The serrated boundaries are observed at the lowest strain rate, indicated by arrows in When the strain rate is increased, the DRX grains become finer, as a consequence of the shorter time at higher strain rate needed for growing up the grains. The material flow stress was described through constitutive equations. The base equation used in this study was proposed by Zener and Hollomon In which For obtaining the values of The graphs of ln The The ln The Zener–Hollomon parameter for the investigated Co–Cr–Mo–C alloy can be estimated by Eq. The ln The stress–strain curves of the Co–Cr–Mo–C alloy investigated in this study exhibite the typical DRX behavior with a single peak stress at different temperatures and strain rates. Cr and Mo as strong carbide formers cause precipitation during the hot deformation. Thus, there was a competition between the dynamic recrystallization and precipitation. The precipitates cause the pinning effect at the high angle grain boundaries. This phenomenon, in turn, causes the retardation or inhibition of the dynamic recrystallization. In the range of low temperatures and strain rates the deformation is accompanied to a competition between precipitation and dynamic recrystallization. This produces serrated boundaries in the microstructure and also some kind of oscillations in the stress–strain curves. In addition to precipitation, dynamic recrystallization is affected by temperature. Completed dynamic recrystallization occurs at 1150 The γ→ε transformation produced at strain rate of 0.001 The following constitutive equation expresses the hot working characteristic of the investigated alloy: