One of the most commonly used methods of determining the rock abrasivity is Cerchar Abrasiveness Index (CAI). The basic parameters affecting abrasiveness are density, cementation degree, strength properties and the number of abrasive minerals in the rock. In this study, 20 different tests were carried out on 80 different rocks, mainly Young's modulus (E), uniaxial compressive strength (UCS) and CAI. The main aim of the study is to estimate the basic mechanical rock properties which are difficult to determine and time-consuming with the help of CAI values. In addition to simple equations, multiple regression equations were developed using CAI and other test methods (11 tests). Among the obtained equations, the most reliable ones were determined with the help of a developed performance index (PIat1). The results of the study show that there are significant relationships between basic mechanical rock properties and CAI.In mining operations, either drilling-blasting or mechanized excavations methods (roadheaders, tunnel boring machines, dragline, and excavator) are performed. All the tools used in the mentioned methods interact with the rock. This interaction does not only leads to fragmentation or deformation of the rock, but also abrasion of the used tools. Increased advancement rate of the tunnel or increased production rates, especially in mining operations, require more knowledge of rock abrasivity. It is important to know or predict the interaction of rock cutting tools with changing rock types and geological formations. The unpredictability of rock abrasiveness leads to unexpected high cutting tool wear rates, which greatly affects the project budget. The resistance of tool wear when in contact with rock is the most common principle for measuring rock abrasivity. The Cerchar Abrasivity Test is a method for determining the index of abrasiveness of rock called the Cerchar Abrasivity Index (CAI) and has great popularity in academic research as well as in industry. The CAI test method is highly preferred because of its quick and simple applicability and the use of small amounts of rock samples. CAI testing has been recommended by the International Society of Rock Mechanics ISRM Suana and Peters The main purpose of this study is to estimate the basic rock properties which are carried out using samples prepared in specific sizes with the CAI test which is widely and practically used in the determination of rock abrasiveness. Based on this idea, firstly the relationships between UCS, E, BTS, Is The different originated rocks used in this study were collected from the factories, outcrops and natural stone quarries in different locations of Turkey. Tests were carried out on blocks or pieces taken from fresh parts of 80 rocks. The rocks tested are composed of volcanic (20), plutonic (13), pyroclastic (10), subvolcanic (7), sedimentary (18) and metamorphic (12) rocks. The rock samples were macroscopically inspected and samples were used that did not have any alters and discontinuities. The Brillant 250 wet abrasive cut-off machine was used for sizing and smoothing the core samples. During the sample preparation phase, standard laboratory test procedures were used ISRM. According to the classification in By the aim of the study, a total of 20 different tests were applied to 80 rocks with the CAI test. These tests; Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Young's modulus (E), Brazilian tensile strength (BTS), Point load index (Is CAI: Cerchar abrasivity index d: Diameter of wear flatness (mm) c: Unit correction factor (c = 1 mm). The UCS and E tests were performed on cylindrical rock specimens having a 42 mm diameter and a length-to-diameter ratio of 2–2.5. The ends of the cores cut off from the main rock, were cut parallel to each other, and then the surfaces of the cores were smoothed to make sure so that there were no sudden irregularities. The compression machine (ELE-3000 kN) was used for the determination of the UCS. Stress ratio was applied uniformly until the rock was completely deformed and this ratio remained between 1-1.2 MPa/s. For determining the E, strain gauges were used. The displacements were recorded using strain gauges during axial loading. The E of rock was derived from the slope of the axial stress-axial strain curves at a stress level equals to 50% of the ultimate UCS. The mean UCS and E values were calculated by taking the average of the five test values. BTS test apparatus was used to determine the tensile strength of rocks. For each rock type, at least seven core samples with a diameter of 54 mm and a thickness of about 27 mm were used and the test was carried out following the ISRM The breakage of particles by mechanical impacts such as friction and impact from the building stone surface can be described as the abrasion resistance (BSA). The problem of abrasion in rocks develops due to the load and movement between the surfaces. BSA is an effective feature for determining the resistance of stones used in engineering projects and is an important indicator of the availability of stone in higher movement areas. To determine the abrasion behavior of rocks, cubic samples with a 71 mm side (50 cm Laboratory type core drilling machine and 22 mm diameter diamond core were used to determine the rate of penetration (ROP). For the test, 54 mm core samples with a length/diameter ratio of approximately one were prepared. The rocks were cut by the weight of the drill without applying any compressive force. The ROP was calculated by dividing the progression distance via the progression time. The BPI test apparatus used in this study is a test apparatus, which is described in detail by Ulusay et al. Fracture toughness can be defined as the ability of the rock to resist the fracturing and propagation of pre-existing cracks. In this study, the semi-circular bend method proposed by Chong and Kuruppu For the SHH, an N-type Schmidt hammer was used. Before coring operations, the test was conducted on a flat rock block surfaces. The Schmidt hammer was pointed perpendicularly and touched the surface of the rock. ISRM HB is a widely used test method for metals, but it is generally not preferred for rocks because of its brittle nature. It is a measure of the rock resistance to indentation and has a direct correlation to rock strength. The ends of the cores having a thickness of 30 and a diameter of 42 mm were cut and flattened parallel to each other. The HB tests were performed by a 10 mm diameter spherical steel ball that was in contact with the rock sample. Testing loads of 50 kg–3000 kg were applied for 30 s standard time on the rocks surfaces. The diameter of the indentation area was measured and the applied load recorded. The hardness value was determined from the ratio of applied load to the surface area of the indentation and was expressed as kg/mm Drilling speed should be predicted for the drilling plan. A factor of rock in drilling is a drillability, which is quantified by CRS. The test was carried out using two aggregate pieces having a grain size of between 25.4 mm and 19.1 mm. A hammer having 2.4 kg weight was dropped from a height of 63.5 cm on the selected aggregates and this operation was repeated 5 times with new test samples and different drop numbers. The crushed aggregate pieces were sieved from 0.5 mm sieve. The smallest value obtained by calculations among the five tests was accepted as the CRS value. For the CI test, 500 g of dry aggregate was used between 10 mm and 5 mm. For the test, 500 gr dried aggregate having −10 + 5 mm grain size was used. Crushed test aggregates were fed to a laboratory type jaw crusher having 5 mm outlet opening, then the crushed aggregates were sieved from a 5 mm sieve. The ratio of the weight of the aggregate under the sieve to the 500 gr weight was defined as CI value. The ISI test used for classifying coal seams was developed by Protodyakonov for the first time. The test was then modified by several researchers. One of the non-destructive experiments used for predictability of the mechanical properties of rocks and concretes are the UPV test and designed for measuring the dynamic properties of these materials. This test is a non-destructive test and conducted by measuring the pulse velocity between the transducer of the receiver and emitter. For the test, both ends were parallel and polished cylinder rock samples were used. The samples for this test had a cylindrical shape with a 42 mm diameter and 85 mm length. The gel was used to ensure full contact between the sample and the transducers (receiver and transmitter). After this procedure, the travel time of longitudinal P-wave was recorded in microseconds. The UPV was calculated by dividing the sample length via the travel time of P-wave. Five samples from each rock were prepared. Each sample weighed between 50 to 75 gr and consisted of rock pieces greater than 15 mm in size. The sample was poured into the cylinder and a drop weight of 2.4 kg was allowed to fall 5 times from a fixed height of 640 mm. Then, the crushed aggregate was removed and the next sample was put in the cylinder, the process was repeated. After all the 5 samples were crushed, the broken material was put on a 0.5 mm (30 mesh) sieve. Fines passed through the sieve were poured into the tube of the volume meter. The height of the dust in the tube was noted after tapping it gently ten times on the table. The Protodyakonov index was calculated by: Saturation techniques were used for testing such as PG and WA tests. The water absorptions by the weight were calculated as the ratio of the weight difference of the saturated-surface-dry weight and the dry weight of the sample to the weight of the dry sample. The pore volumes were determined from the weight difference of the saturated weight (surface dry) and the dry weight, and the PG values were calculated as the ratio of pore volumes to bulk sample volume. One of the frequently used methods to obtain estimation models between rock properties is the regression analysis, in which both simple and multiple regression analyses were used. Both methods have been used in this study. SPSS v.17.0. computer package was used for all statistical analyses including Anova, F-tests, and t-tests. Firstly, simple regression analyses were performed using the linear, power, logarithmic and exponential curve fitting approximations ( For the simple regression analysis, the least-squares technique was used and the details of the obtained models were given in 95% confidence interval values were calculated for the validity of the equations. The Multiple regression analyses were performed using two, three and four independent variables with the condition that one of the independent variables was a CAI test. For multiple regression analysis, some physical and index test methods (UVP, HB, HV, SHH, SSH, CRS, CI, f, P, and WA) that can be easily applied using simple test instruments and very few samples were used as independent variables with the CAI test. For estimating the main properties, the most reliable and meaningful multiple regression equations that could be obtained by the statistical analysis were summarized in All multiple regressions revealed in this study were successful at a 95% confidence level for the F test. When the equations obtained from multiple regression analyses and their reliability analyses are examined in detail, it is seen that the most reliable results and high correlation coefficients can be obtained with UCS, BTS, E and BPI experiments. Following these, the most reliable results were obtained with the ROP test. Among the eight different tests, the least reliable results belong to K When In addition to the statistical studies in which all the data were used, some classification methods, which are detailed in     The most important finding to be mentioned in the evaluation according to the CAI classification is the rather low correlation coefficient of the equation obtained from the ROP method applied to high abrasive rocks. This is the presence of many rocks with different origin and strength characteristics with the same CAI value in the high abrasive rocks category according to the CAI classification ( When the correlation coefficients obtained from the correlation studies based on rock origin are examined, it is seen that the best results belong to the group of igneous rocks consisting of 50 rocks ( The estimation values obtained from multiple regression analyses and whether the measured values have normal distribution were examined. Five parameters are taken into consideration when deciding the normal distribution. These include the coefficients of variation, histogram graph, detrended Q-Q plots, Kurtosis-Skewness, and Kolmogorov-Smirnov normality test. As a result of evaluating a total of five parameters, one of them is the measured value, it is observed that most of the equations have a normal distribution and very few have a-normal distribution. This procedure was repeated for eight main rock properties. After the normal distribution examination, the data set was analyzed using parametric and nonparametric methods. Assuming the normal distribution of data; the homogeneity of the variations of the measured and estimated values was tested by the Anova method ( Assuming the a-normal distribution of data; the Welch Anova method was used for the nonparametric test. Tamhane's T2 test (post-hoc) was used for comparison of multiple tests to investigate the relationships between the measured and estimated values. The variations of these values were also tested using one-way analysis of variance (Welch Anova) and were seen to be homogeneous (Welch statistic significance levels change between 0.91-1.00). According to Tamhane's T2 test (post-hoc) test results, it can be said that there is no significant difference between the groups because the significance values (equal to 1 for all equations) > 0.005, ie the groups were homogeneously distributed ( Dunnett's two-sided T-test (post-hoc) was used to determine the relationships between estimation and measurement values. The measured values (J) were taken as the control group for each main rock properties used in the study ( According to the Dunnett test, each pair of data had very close average differences, equal standard error, and significance levels. One can infer from the findings that the main properties of rock materials can be reliably estimated from any equations considering the correlation and Anova analysis results. Percentage error analysis was performed after correlation and Anova analyses ( To check the capacity performance of all predictive models, some statistical performance indices (the root mean square error to observation's standard deviation ratio-RSR; weighted mean absolute percentage error-WMAPE; the variance accounted for-VAF; adjusted determination coefficient-Adj.R It is rather difficult to select a more accurate model for predicting the independent variables. Essentially, the accuracy of models can be examined separately using performance indices such as WMAPE, VAF, RMSE, RSR, and R  In this study, a series of statistical studies have been carried out to estimate the basic rock mechanics test results carried out using samples prepared in specific sizes with the CAI test which is practiced in rock wear. In addition to presenting the relationship between some commonly known parameters (UCS, E, BTS, and Is In addition to the correlation studies using 80 rocks, the data set grouped using various classification systems were evaluated in detail. The results from multiple and simple regression analysis performed with test results were summarized in the following items. In the simple regression analysis, the weakest correlation between these eight tests was obtained from the K Equations obtained from multiple regression analyzes have higher predictive power and determination coefficient than simple equations. Simple equations are reliable and sufficiently practical when used especially estimation purposes. However, if more than one independent variable is obtained, multiple equations can be used for more precise estimation. Several multiple regression equations have been developed for the estimation of main rock properties. According to the determination coefficients, all equations have high prediction performance. Only some aggregate pieces are used in a part of the tests while very small samples are needed in some of the tests used in the estimation of main properties. Equations with high correlation coefficients presented in this study can be reliably used for rocks in situations where it is not possible to determine an important mechanical parameter such as UCS. It is clear that the estimation equations with two independent variables are more reliable than the others in multiple regression studies. The author declare that they have no conflict of interest.