Blending contributes to create an opportunity to achieve the target feed material and helps optimize the run of mine (ROM) material. In addition, it allows mixing different materials and achieving a wide range of quality. Then, multiple destinations can be considered for ROM. The present study seeks to develop a Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) model for the production scheduling of an iron ore mine. Based on this model, different destinations are considered for mine products with different specifications. To this aim, ten scenarios were considered with a number of different destinations. The results indicated that the maximum NPV in the multiple product scenarios is about 15% more than that of the single product scenarios. Further, 30 realizations were used to evaluate the effect of grade and tonnage uncertainty. The reliability of the production plan was approximately 61.07% and 62.81% in the first and second period of exploitation, respectively.Mine production scheduling is involved in finding the best time to extract and determine the appropriate destination to send the material. The mine planner is faced with some constraints such as the available ore reserve, mining and processing capacities, and slope (access) constraint. In most mining operations, especially in multi-element deposits, the specified quality of the ROM is regarded as another important constraint. Thus, blocks with different characteristics should be blended to meet the required quality. All these constraints are essential for achieving the best production scheduling. However, the main question raised here is the possibility of optimizing mine products. In multi-element deposits, blending different blocks allow to produce multiple products instead of a single product. Several attempts have been made in mine production scheduling based on blending constraints. Peng used linear programming (LP) for production scheduling in coal mines in order to minimize the production costs A large number of researchers like Zuckerberg, Askari-Nasab, and Osanloo used mixed integer linear programming (MILP) in scheduling the production of open pit mines by regarding blending constraints Matamoros and Dimitrakopoulos developed a stochastic integer-programming model. The formulation could optimize fleet and mining considerations, production extraction sequence, and production constraints simultaneously Jamshidi and Osanloo presented a linear model for determining block economic value (BEV) based on the existing elements in the blocks. In this model, the existing elements were considered as profitable or penalty element. The profitable elements played a positive role while a negative effect on the BEV was observed for the penalty elements. In addition, the economic value of the blocks was calculated by using the presented model and based on the existing elements in the blocks Newmam et al. considered stockpiles as a part of the open pit mine production-scheduling problem By considering all the above-mentioned studies, the effect of having multiple products instead of a single product has been less emphasized. The present study includes two sections. In Section An MIP model is developed for production scheduling in multi-element deposits, by considering the grades related to different existing elements. Multiple destinations are possible in this model. In addition, the number of blending plans should be related to the number of destinations in order to include more than one destination for mine product. Each extracted block is controlled by the blending plans. If the quality of the block can satisfy only one of the plans, the revenue of mentioned block is calculated and accordingly the destination and time of block extraction are declared. However, the destination which maximizes the income is declared if the block can be used in several blending plans. Each extracted block can participate in the blending plan of different destinations. Based on the model, each block should be extracted in such a way that the most appropriate period and destination for the block be determined. In this model, a procedure has been defined to achieve the required blending requirements based on the production of an iron ore mine. As illustrated in The objective function of the model (Eq. The constraints related to this model include mining and destination capacity, slope constraint, and the maximum/minimum eligible grade of the elements. Each destination includes a criterion to accept the Fe in the minimum grade. If the Fe content of the mine product fails to satisfy the criterion, the customer has the right for rejection. Therefore, it should be checked whether the mine product can meet the minimum acceptable grade of the destination. This constraint is given in Eq. In addition, the maximum grade of Fe should be checked due to the limitation in the selling contract and the saving opportunity to blend high and low-grade material to obtain more valuable product. The maximum grade of product, which should not exceed the acceptable limits in the contract, is checked by Eq. The maximum acceptable grades of S and P are controlled by Eqs. Based on the Eq. The mining capacity is regarded as another constraint, which may influence the production scheduling. During mining planning, the production in each period should not exceed the maximum capacity of the mine (Eq. The destination capacity is another constraint by which the total material sent to each destination should not exceed the destination capacity (Eq. In each period, the upper blocks should be extracted before the planned blocks. Therefore, Eq. The block model of an iron ore mine which consists of different elements such as main mineral and the inter-correlated elements like S and P is regarded as the input data of the MIP model. Since the quality of mine product is important in short-term planning, the block model is divided into some push backs, and the presented model is implemented on the push back 2 including 3000 blocks with the dimension of 10 m × 10 m × 15 m. Each block involves some information about the content of P, S, and Fe. The input data of the model includes the block model of the deposit and the required blending specifications of each destination. The iron ore consumers, as the destination of the run of mine, need different qualities of iron ore in the grade of Fe, S, P, and the like and are based on the required characteristics of each destination/customer, the price of the material, and consequently the income of the mine. The block properties are evaluated based on the destination criteria. In this regard, the economic value of each block is calculated for each destination. Regarding the blocks which are possible to be used only in one blending plan, other constraints such as slope and capacity constraint are checked and accordingly the destination and extraction period is demonstrated if the block meets the constraints. However, the destination maximizing the NPV is selected as the final destination for ore block if the block characteristics allow using it in several blending plans. The block model is fed into NPV scheduler to determine the final pit limit and push backs. In this case, six push backs are determined (   Then, the production schedule of the considered push backs was performed for all the scenarios, the results of which are given in Among the single destination scenarios (1–4), the maximum NPV is related to scenario 2, in which the grade of Fe is about 58–60%. Thus, it is important to find the most appropriate destination for mine product by the production scheduling where a single destination is regarded as the target of production. Based on the results of single product scenarios, the selected push back of the deposit is a high grade part of the reserve and the destinations needing high grade material are more suitable for sending the blocks. However, all of the blocks fail to meet the specifications and some blocks will not be sent for the customer. Thus, using more blocks is possible in the production plan by adding more selling opportunities. The NPV of the project could significantly improve in most cases among the scenarios with multiple destinations and accordingly multiple blending plans. The NPV in scenario 9 is about 15% higher than the NPV in scenario 2. It is worth noting that the stockpiles in the mine are determined based on the destination criteria and each stockpile is allocated to one of the destinations. Each block identified to be sent to each destination will go to the appropriate stockpile and then the material of the stockpile will be sent to the destination. Therefore, it is important to use the opportunities to make a plan not just for a single destination and blending different blocks in order to produce multiple products. Drilling data represent initial information about a given mineral deposit and are used for modeling the ore deposit and block model. Block models are subsequently used as an input to open pit optimization tools. The actual deposit is partially known and the properties of interest such as grades and ore material types are inferred The present study aimed to compute the success probability of a given production plan by representing the inherent geological uncertainty. Reliability modeling of a system is based on the failure characteristics of the individual components of the system. In order to compute the reliability of a system based on components, a reliability block diagram In addition, it is necessary to determine the relationship between the components of the production system to evaluate the reliability of production scheduling of the studied mine. The system consists of some destinations and the mine production aims to satisfy each destination in tonnage and grades. Each destination involves a predetermined capacity, which should be met in production scheduling, as well as the limitations in acceptable grades of the main element and the impurities. Hence, Where Based on Section The distribution is generated for Fe, S and tonnage of the all realizations during the extraction periods for all the destinations. In order to calculate the highlighted area of each curve, Eq.   As illustrated in Regarding other destinations in the first period, the reliability of each series system is similarly calculated and the reliability is Therefore, the mine production can meet the requirements of the destinations during the first period with a probability of 61.07% while it is about 62.84% in the second period. Further, a sensitivity analysis was performed on the system components in order to evaluate the reasons for failures in production plan. Based on the analyses performed on the failures in the production plan, about 35% of the failures in satisfying the requirements of the destinations were created by Fe grade located under the acceptable limits. In addition, S contribution in the failures is approximately 26.11%. In fact, the sulfur content of the material sent to the destinations exceeded the accepted limits in about 26% of the plans while the tonnage of ore sent for destinations failed to meet the requirements in approximately 38.88% of the plans. The limits of Fe and S are constant because these limits are determined based on the designing criteria of the plants. However, the tonnage sent to each destination is more flexible, which may change this limit. In addition, the share of the tonnage in the failure of the production plan is more than that of other components. Thus, the failure should be evaluated when the acceptable tonnage decreases by the destinations. Therefore, a decrease of 2%, 4%, and 8% in the minimum tonnage of ore, which should be sent to the destinations. The result indicates that the failure factor of tonnage decreases to 33.33%, 26.11%, and 11.66%, respectively. In other words, the reliability of the production plan increases by 10.72% and 12.24% in the first and second period, respectively, which reaches to 71.79% and 75.08% in the first and second periods, respectively, if an 8% decrease occurs in the minimum acceptable tonnage of each product among the contracts related to selling the mine product. The present study seeks to model and optimize an iron ore blending in order to evaluate the effect of having multiple destinations instead of a single destination and determine the reliability analysis of the production scheduling under grade and tonnage uncertainty. To this aim, a mixed integer-programming model was developed for mine production scheduling when the destination number exceeds one for the mine products. Based on the proposed MIP model, constructing a plan is possible, not just with a single product, but with respect to a block which can be blended with other blocks to make one among the many alternative final products. It means that the destination of the block is not selected solely on the basis of its own quality, while blending the block with other blocks creates an opportunity for providing a wide range of quality and the block is blended in such a way that the resulting combinations can satisfy different destination criteria. Accordingly, the best destination for the block is selected in combination with others. Then, the model was performed in an iron ore mine in ten scenarios by considering different destinations for mine products. Among the four scenarios, only one destination was regarded for mine product while multiple destinations were considered in six scenarios. The maximum NPV in the multiple destination scenario is about 15% more than the maximum amount in single destination scenarios. In the next stage, the effects of grade and tonnage uncertainty were evaluated by generating 30 equal-probability realizations of the block model by using Sequential Gaussian Simulation method. The grades related to Fe, S, and P were generated during the realizations. In addition, the generated realizations were used to analyze the effect of grade uncertainty on production scheduling. To this end, the scenario of the production scheduling which can maximize the NPV of the project was considered as the main production plan and performed on the block models for the realizations. The results indicated that the production plan reliability for the first and second period is 61.07% and 62.84%, respectively. Further, the failure factor of the reliability system components for Fe, S, and tonnage is 35%, 26.11%, and 38.88%, respectively. Based on the sensitivity analysis of the failure factors, the reliability of the production plan increases by 10.72% and 12.24% in the first and second period, respectively, which reaches 71.79% and 75.08% in the first and second period, respectively, if a decrease of 8% occurs in the minimum acceptable tonnage for each product.