The paper under discussion emphasizes the importance of calculating the feed particle settling velocity distributions as a measure of evaluating the performances of water-based separators such as hydrocyclones and water-only-cyclones. The authors (Pyka and Wierzchowski) suggest that the particle size distribution and the particle density distribution in a feed may be characterized in terms of their settling velocities to sort them in a quantifiable manner. The performance of any water-based separator should then be evaluated as a function of particle settling velocity but not as a function of particle size or particle density. The authors (Pyka and Wierzchowski) believe that the particle settling velocity has not yet been used for analyzing and modeling the mineral particle separation behavior in flow processes. Once the feed particle size distribution and the size-by-size density distribution (using sink and float tests) are known, they further suggest using Stokes, Allen and Rittinger formulae to cover three different flow regimes, i.e. laminar, transitional and turbulent respectively, for the calculation of particle settling velocities. The advantages of analyzing experimental data based on settling velocity criterion over the particle size or density based criterion, as is normally done for classifiers and density separators respectively, have been demonstrated based on the data generated in a classifying cyclone as well as in a water-only-cyclone using coal particles. Unfortunately, in their analysis, the authors paid virtually no attention to the literature. It is well known that the effect of particle density distribution on the classification efficiency of a hydrocyclone cannot be ignored and similarly the effect of particle size distribution cannot be neglected on the performance of a density separator like a water-only-cyclone. Indeed, most particle separators in mineral processing involve particle motion through water, and separation between particles of differing size and density takes place as a result of the interplay of body forces (gravitation or centrifugal), drag forces and particle inertia. There are many models available in the literature where mineral particle separation in flow processes has been described as a function of not only particle settling velocity but also as a function of fluid flow conditions.  Understanding of particle separation mechanism inside water based separators has been a very popular research topic in recent times using CFD modeling approaches ( Calculating the free settling velocities of particles, at least for spherical particles, in any fluid medium is well documented in the literature related to chemical engineering, non-Newtonian fluid mechanics, hydraulics and in many other disciplines. It is true that direct solution of the equation of motion of even a single particle in a fluid medium is not possible as there are two unknown parameters — particle Reynolds number (Re) and the drag coefficient (C To establish their hypotheses that a hydrocyclone is not a classifier but it separates particles based on the differences in their settling velocities, the authors had carried out experiments in a 100 In an effort to show the particle size effect on a density separator, the authors have also presented some experimental data on a water-only-cyclone (WOC) using coal particles. WOC is basically a teetered bed separator where there is a need to artificially increase the density of the medium in the conical section of the cyclone by the relatively finer (not yet confirmed what size fractions they are) particles available in the feed to have a float-sink effect to minimize the particle size effect. The mechanism of particle separation inside a WOC may be found elsewhere ( While analyzing the experimental data it has been assumed that the density distributions of coal particles have definite relationships with their ash distributions. However, it may not be always true as two coal particles having the same ash contents may not have the same densities as their respective chemical compositions may differ. In view of the above, it appears that the authors were probably biased with the opinion that all the water-based mineral separators separate particles based on their relative settling velocity differentials. This is partially true for flowing film concentrators, classifiers and to some extent for centrifugal classifiers like hydrocyclones. But there is a strong influence of the associated flow field also, and hence, the settling velocity is not the only factor, but merely one of the factors responsible for particle separation in all those separators. In any density separator the basic design parameter is to minimize the classification effect; however, it is very difficult to have an ideal density separation in any dynamic separator like DMCs, dense medium bath and teetered bed separators. This does not mean that the particle separation behavior in any density separator can be predicted based solely on particle settling velocity.