Lead zirconate titanate (PZT)-based piezoelectric ceramic and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) organic composite thick films (∼20μm in thickness) were deposited on a 4-in. diameter Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrate and a 2-in. diameter Ag–Pd/sapphire substrate by aerosol deposition using a single 4-in. size nozzle for use as a tactile-sensor device. The PVDF content was varied from 3 to 10vol% and the films deposited on silicon and sapphire were annealed at 700 and 900°C, respectively. The annealed films showed a relatively high density, even at a 10vol% of PVDF-piezoelectric ceramic composition, as well as good adhesion to the substrate after annealing. The relative dielectric constant of the composite film decreased sharply with increasing PVDF content, while the piezoelectric d
                     33 coefficient was conserved at a relatively high value. Therefore, the g
                     33 coefficient increased and showed the highest value at 3vol% PVDF. The g
                     33 values of the as-deposited, 700°C annealed and 900°C annealed piezoelectric ceramic-PVDF composite films were 7.77, 16.3 and 41.5 (10−3
                     m2/N), respectively.Piezoelectric ceramic films have a wide range of sensor and actuator applications that are important in a variety of fields for precise sensing and controlling small forces and displacements Pb(Zr,Ti)O The aerosol deposition (AD) process is a recently developed room-temperature gas deposition method that employs fine particles mixed with a carrier gas to form a colloid aerosol flow. The aerosol flow is accelerated by the high pressure difference between two chambers and is ejected through a nozzle. The accelerated particles in the aerosol flow collide at high speed with the substrate and form a dense ceramic film In previous studies, 20∼100 The commercial PZT-based piezoelectric ceramic powder (Pb(Mg The dried ceramic powders were mixed with the carrier gas to form an aerosol flow in the aerosol chamber. The aerosol flow was transported through a tube to a nozzle, and then accelerated and ejected from a rectangular shaped nozzle through a 100 The crystalline phases of the starting powders and deposited films were identified by X-ray diffraction (XRD, D-MAX 2200, Rigaku Co., Tokyo, Japan). The microstructures of the films were observed by a scanning electron microscope (SEM, JSM-5800, JEOL Co., Tokyo, Japan). A Pt-top electrode with a diameter of either 0.5 or 5.0     A PMNZT–PVDF composite film was also deposited on a sapphire substrate with a Ag–Pd electrode to allow further increases in the post-annealing temperature to 900  PMNZT–PVDF composite thick films (∼20 This study was financially supported by Fundamental Research programme of Korean Institute of Materials Science (KIMS).