Modeling the electrical conductivity of composite materials is a complex matter, particularly if microstructural features lead to a size effect in electronic conduction or create an anisotropy. The method described in this article accounts for these circumstances by incorporation of appropriate phenomenological models. It provides a means to analyze and estimate the resistive behavior of two-phase or multi-phase micro-composites and nano-composites. A comparison with experimental data is carried out for two high-strength conductors, Ag–Cu and Cu–Nb, both of which have undergone extensive quantitative microstructure analysis to provide the required input for the model.The properties of composite materials can, in first order, be approximated by the rule of mixtures, which weighs the contribution of each composite phase by its volume fraction. This approach, however, fails to describe the behavior of composites with microstructural features that cause a size effect in or create an anisotropy of the regarded property. In situ-formed Ag–Cu and Cu–Nb composites are such composites. They are used as high-strength conductors in high-field resistive and pulse magnets, owing to their appreciable combination of high mechanical strength and high electrical conductivity. They have been reported to reach extraordinary strength as a function of the degree of deformation applied in their manufacturing Investigations on the effect of the microstructure development of such sub-micrometer and nanometer phase materials on their strengthening behavior have been subject to many studies In this publication, a model for the electrical conductivity is described that includes the established bulk scattering mechanisms in metals and introduces features to account for size effect and anisotropy, i.e., the arrangement of the phases. It can be applied to two-phase or multi-phase micro-composites and nano-composites and enables a detailed analysis of the electrical conductivity of each individual composite phase, as well as a prediction of the composite's overall electrical conductivity. From this information, the microstructural state that provides an optimal combination of strength and resistivity can be determined, cf. Following a description of the model, a comparison with experimental data is provided regarding Ag–Cu and Cu–Nb of various, well-documented microstructural states and in respect to room temperature and cryogenic temperatures. It provides new insights into the resistive mechanisms of these materials, allows conclusions regarding their optimization as high-strength conductors, and permits statements regarding the validity of the applied model. The model combines three aspects: the well-known scattering mechanisms affecting electronic conduction in metals, the basic concept describing the size effect in electronic conduction, as was established for fine wires and thin layers, and a geometrical model accounting for the alignment and arrangement of all phases and sub-phases in the composite system. A combination of the three aspects leads to one self-consistent expression that incorporates bulk properties, interface properties, and spacial parameters. Since ample information can be found in standard literature on the scattering mechanisms in bulk metals, this aspect of the model is not treated herein in further detail. To determine the overall electrical conductivity of the composite, respectively, its inverse, the electrical resistivity, the following steps are taken: each phase is treated as an individual resistor for which the resistive mechanisms in bulk phases apply. The bulk electrical resistivity of the phase is then corrected according to a size effect model. Finally, the electrical resistivity of the individual phases, under consideration of their order within the composite, will be summed up accounting for their volume fraction and their geometrical arrangement. In composites, additional scattering of conduction electrons occurs at internal interfaces. In analogy to scattering at the surface in very fine wires, the size effect can be modeled following the approaches presented in The size effect was first commented on in For application of this notion to the size effect in in situ composites, the phase dimensions can be incorporated according to The mean free path of the conduction electrons, mfpe, is defined as given in A theoretical analysis of the influence of the interface scattering factor or specularity factor, Frequently, the microstructure is quantitatively described by the dimensions of the second phase only. With respect to the electrical resistivity of composite materials, this can be insufficient due to the fineness of both the second phases and the matrix and the resulting size effects. The smallest spacing or distance between the second phase particles in a heterogeneous mixture, however, does not coincide with the average distance that a conduction electron can travel in the matrix between two scattering events. It follows from simple geometric consideration that, for example, 19.6 vol.% of round second phase particles lead to The electrical resistivity of the composite is determined by combining the electrical resistivities of its phases, accounting for their volume fractions and their geometric arrangement. The phases of the composite are seen as resistors that can be treated as either serial ( If the microstructural arrangement of the phases is neither purely serial nor purely parallel, this is accounted for by a factor, the anti-parallelism, AP, in This model can not only be applied to multiple phases, n, but also to multiple orders of phases, e.g., primary phase A consisting of two secondary phases A1 and A2. Here, for each set of sub-phases, nn, within a parent phase, n, The in situ composites Cu–Ag and Cu–Nb were chosen for several reasons: First, they provide enough similarity, e.g., deformation-processes composites and application as high-strength conductors, to allow direct comparisons. Second, their composition is different in that one combines two good conductors with significant mutual solubility, Ag–Cu, whereas the other one combines a good and a poor conductor with insignificant mutual solubility, Cu–Nb. Third, both their as-cast microstructure and their final microstructure after severe plastic deformation reveal distinctly different features. The Ag–Cu specimens were of eutectic composition (68.6 vol.% Ag, 31.4 vol.% Cu). They were manufactured by pyrometallurgy and plastically deformed to achieve a total deformation of The size effect was modeled by use of The Cu–Nb specimens were of the following composition: 79.5 vol.% Cu, 20.5 vol.% Nb. They were manufactured in situ by wire deformation, following a pyrometallurgical process. Niobium and Copper reveal practically no mutual solution, cf. The size effect was modeled by use of The influence of the phase orientation, with respect to the electrical field, on the electrical resistivity of the composite is given by the anti-parallelism, AP, in A comparison of the calculated and the experimental results of the electrical resistivity of Ag–Cu at 77 K is given in  The expected course of the electrical resistivity of Ag–Cu and Cu–Nb macro-composites as a function of their composition ( In Cu–Nb ( The same effect was shown experimentally on directionally solidified Al–Al The results presented in When depicted as a function of the lamellae thickness ( Again, the model allows for good agreement of calculated and experimental data for 295 and 77 K ( The observed decrease in the electrical resistivity between The value of AP=0.03 for higher degrees of deformation is in agreement with the very strong alignment of the Nb filaments with the wire axis In A model was described for the electrical resistivity of two-phase or multi-phase micro-composites and nano-composites. It incorporates the established bulk scattering mechanisms in metals and introduces features to account for size effect and anisotropy, i.e., the arrangement of the phases. It permits an analysis of the influence of the electrical resistivity of the individual phases on the composite resistivity and the determination of the specularity factor of the interface. The results of the model show a close match with experimental data for two high-strength conductors, Ag–Cu and Cu–Nb. For Ag–Cu interfaces, specularity factors between 0.81 and 0.86 were found, which increase with a decrease in temperature. For Cu–Nb, a strong anisotropy was found, which is due to the specular refection of electrons at the internal interfaces. From these findings, a higher importance of wire-axis alignment of the phases can be concluded for Cu–Nb, as compared with Ag–Cu, in order to optimize its applicability as a high-strength conductor. The model has shown to provide an insight into the resistive effects of selected microstructural features, which allows a further optimization of high-strength conductors. In regard to materials in which electronic conduction is influenced by other effects than those considered here, modifications and additions may have to be made to the model. Moreover, the phenomenological nature of the model does not permit the development of a more detailed understanding of the underlying physical effects that are responsible for the observed behavior. This work is based upon research conducted at the Institut für Metallkunde und Metallphysik, RWTH Aachen, Germany and the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL), Tallahassee, FL, USA. The NHMFL is supported by the National Science Foundation under Award No. DMR-9527035 and by the State of Florida.