Background
                  Anterior stabilisation of osteoporotic spine fractures is uncommon but necessary in the case of complex vertebral body comminution. The purpose of this study was to investigate the effect of additional cement-augmentation on the endplate stability.
               
                  Methods
                  Twelve human cadaveric lumbar spines were divided in two groups: (A) posterior cement-augmented pedicle screw/rod-based instrumentation of L3 to L5, posterior decompression of L4/5 and partial corpectomy of L4 and (B) same experimental setup with additional cement-augmentation of the adjacent endplates. A cyclic loading test was performed at a frequency of 3 Hz, starting with a peak of 500 N for the first 2.000 cycles, up to 950 N for 100.000 cycles under a general preload with 50 N. All specimens were evaluated with regard to a potential collapse of the adjacent endplates. Subsequently, the maximum zero-time failure load of all specimens was determined using a universal testing machine.
               
                  Findings
                  The median T-score of bone density was −4.32 (range −2.97 to −5.59), distributed equally in the two groups (average age 83 years). The specimen of the endplate-augmented group showed a significant higher failure load compared to non-endplate-augmented cadavers (group A: 2038 N, group B: 2990 N, p = 0.03). All specimens passed the full cyclic loading protocol with 100.000 cycles. No significant difference was observable regarding the adjacent endplate subsidence.
               
                  Interpretation
                  Additional cement augmentation in circumferential stabilisation resulted in a significant enhancement of the endplate stability regarding the maximum axial load, while the cyclic loading did not significantly enhance the fatigue endurance of the vertebral endplates over the 100,000 cycles tested.The general aim in the management of spinal fracture is the posterior reduction while restoring the correct spinal alignment. With respect to the fracture pattern, the combined posterior/anterior ‘360°’-fusion procedure is an established option in the treatment of young patients ( While the biomechanical advantages of pedicle screw cement-augmentation in the osteoporotic bone have been proven in several studies, high loosening and implant failure rates of the anterior implants are a well-known issue in the treatment of the elderly patient ( The aim of the present biomechanical study was to simulate the effect of cranio-caudal (axial) forces on the circumferentially stabilised osteoporotic spine. The stabilisation effect of additional endplate cement-augmentation following expandable cage implantation and posterior cement-augmented pedicle screw/rod-based instrumentation was compared to those constructs without additional endplate augmentation in a biomechanical long-term testing protocol. The hypothesis is that the additional endplate augmentation leads to a higher resistance against axial load forces. Twelve human fresh-frozen cadaveric specimens with four vertebrae each (L2–L5) have been used in this experiment. The study complies with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki (1996) and was approved by the local ethics committee (EK-070/18). To achieve reliable results, all cadavers were matched-pair randomised regarding the bone quality (T-score). Then each matched pair was split and allocated to a different testing protocol: (A) posterior cement-augmented pedicle screw/rod-based instrumentation of L3 to L5, posterior decompression of L4/5 and partial corpectomy of L4; (B) posterior cement-augmented pedicle screw/rod-based instrumentation of L3 to L5, posterior decompression of L4/5 and partial corpectomy of L4 with additional cement-augmentation of the adjacent endplates. For testing purposes, the intact cadavers of the human lumbar spine were harvested and stored in triple-sealed bags at −20 °C. Previously, a dual computed tomography (CT) and a quantitative CT of the lumbar spine was performed to detect any structural deformities and for the assessment of BMD ( The specimens were thawed at 4 °C 16 h before testing according to the protocol of One experienced surgeon performed all preparations. The pedicle screws were inserted under fluoroscopic guidance to ensure the correct position in the anterior–posterior and the lateral orientation according to the well-known in-vivo open insertion technique. In total, two fenestrated pedicle-screws (Ø 7.5 mm, length: 50 mm; CD Horizon Legacy Spinal System, Medtronic, Memphis, TN, USA) were inserted in L3 and L5 respectively. The augmentation of the fenestrated screws was implemented and 1.5 cm After that, lordotic bended rods were inserted with respect to the anatomical lordotic alignement of the cadaveric lumbar spine. The preparation for the cage embedding was performed as follows: First, the edges of the implant bed were marked under fluoroscopic control, then the adjacent discs (L3/L4 and L4/5) as well as the partial vertebra of L4 was removed with a chisel, leaving the posterior wall as well as the anterior longitudinal ligament intact. Different vertebral body replacement (VBR) guides were used to detect the appropriate size and height of the cage. Then the suitable cage (Hydrolift®, Aesculap AG, Tuttlingen, Germany) was inserted slightly anterior to the center of the adjacent bony endplates and the cage-endplates were lifted stepwise up to a maximum of 30 bar, ensuring a sufficient fixation of the cage. The Hydrolift-cage uses a saline-water based hydraulic continuous distraction procedure, instead of a mechanical distraction system usually used in expandable cage systems. To achieve a better endplate-cage-contact endplates are exchangeable (Sizes S, M, and L) and adjustable to the individual tilt of the endplate. Cement-augmentation of the adjacent endplates was performed in that way, that one horizontally oriented cannula was placed lateral at 2 mm below the endplate surface of the adjacent vertebrae under fluoroscopic guidance. The cannula was pushed on forward to the counterside of the vertebra in a horizontal orientation. Afterwards, 1.5 cm Bone cement application was performed only after the viscosity was hardened appropriately, for at least 7–8 min. For this purpose, the surface and a sticky structure of the cement was checked clinically. All biomechanical tests were carried out after the cement had completely cured at room temperature (>40 min after cement application). Cyclic loading tests were performed using a vertical servo-pneumatic actuator (DynaMess Co., Stolberg, Germany) at a frequency of 3 Hz, starting at 500 N for the first 2.000 cycles up to 950 N for 100.000 loadings. The load was applied to the anterior third of the vertebral column with respect to a horizontal orientation of the cranial and caudal pot. The punch of the actuator was placed on the screw head from above, resulting in a cranio-caudal loading direction of the applied force. In order to expose the specimen to a permanent load, a preload of 50 N was applied to the specimens. Furthermore, the processing way was adjusted automatically to ensure this preload over the testing period. Since the age-adjusted physiological load on a normal spine is estimated to be one to three million cycles over a year, 100.000 cycles were estimated to be approx. equivalent to a period of 36.5 days ( During the above-mentioned procedures, the specimens remained moist by the use of Sodium chloride (0.9%) at intervals of 30 min by the use of a vaporizer. All data was analysed using SPSS (version 23; SPSS, Chicago, IL, USA). Descriptive data was summarized as means and standard deviations (SDs). The nonparametric Mann-Whitney-Test was used due to the small group size (6 vs. 6 cadavers). The significance level is specified as 12 specimens from six female and six male donors with an average age of 83 years (range: 77–89 years, SD 3.6) met the inclusion criteria and were used for the final testing. Specific data is summarized in The average BMD of the specimens was 61.04 Ca-Ha/ml (SD 26.03). Both, the grade of osteoporosis (A: T-Score −4.15 (SD 1.2); B: T-Score −4.34 (SD 0.8), All cadavers completed the maximum of 100.000 cycles. An overview is presented in There was a significant higher load resistance against the maximum loading between the two groups (group A: 2038.17 N (SD 235.4), group B: 2990.17 (SD 809.0); Both, the amount of cement for pedicle screw augmentation and the amount for endplate augmentation was 1.5 ml per screw and endplate. Although, radiological signs of screw loosening were not detected after the completion of the testing, cement leakage into the cage/osseous endplate interface occurred in one case. The incidence of osteoporotic spine fractures in the thoracolumbar spine rises due to the demographic development. Treatment options range from conservative to surgical treatments, depending on fracture severity. Choosing the appropriate surgical treatment for osteoporotic vertebral fractures is still challenging and ranges from single-posterior stabilisation to combined anterior-posterior procedures. Current and accepted options for osteoporotic type 1 and 2 fractures according to the recent developed Osteoporotic Fracture Classification (OF) are vertebral cement-augmentation by vertebroplasty or kyphoplasty depending on the fracture pattern ( The aim of the present study was to investigate the mechanical effects following cement-augmentation of the adjacent endplates and circumferential instrumentation within the lumbar spine. As expected, this study found that additional cemented augmentation of the endplates inferior and superior to the cage leads to a higher resistance to axial forces in comparison to the non-cemented technique. The mean applied maximum axial force was 2990 N after PMMA augmentation of the endplates. Oberkircher et al. supported this finding that cement-augmented endplates provided superior implant stability regarding the cage subsidence. The reported maximum strength was 1770 N following cemented augmentation after approx. 3600 cycles ( Higher cage subsidence was observed within the non-cemented group (1.7 vs. 0.3 mm, Due to the biomechanical in-vitro setting, there are some limitations. Whereas all specimens were loaded under an axial force, a statement regarding the dynamic loading under consideration of the full range-of-motion cannot be made in this testing protocol. However, axial loading forces are thought to be one risk factor for cage subsidence. Therefore, the load was applied on the anterior part of the vertebra according to the ASTM F2267-protocol for spine implant subsidence. Another important fact is, that the use of cement leads to a minor osseous cage integration compared to non-augmented cages. Beside the very rare indication for circumferential stabilisation of osteoporotic spine fractures, the additional PMMA augmentation of the adjacent endplates leads to a significant higher endplate stability regarding the maximum axial loading force while cement-augmentation during cyclic loading offers no benefit regarding the cage subsidence. However, anterior spine surgery and endplate cement augmentation does not represent the standard surgical management due to the higher risk in the elderly population. Aside from the higher resistance against the axial loading forces, the indication for this kind of surgery should be well-chosen. CH and KQ were the major contributors in conducting this study and writing the manuscript. KQ, AP, CH and PK performed the biomechanical testing. HF, JS and FH performed the statistical analysis. The radiographs were analysed by JT, JS and FH. The collected data was discussed with CH, HF, PK and the senior author MP. JG, JS, JT and HF supported the structuring of the manuscript and helped to finalise the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. All authors declare that there is no existing conflict of interest. In particular, there was no financial or any other relationship to Aesculap AG. The authors are very thankful for the professional support provided by Dr. Andrea Weiler (Aesculap AG, Tuttlingen, Germany). The used cages were provided by Aesculap AG but there was no financial support.