Background
                  Plate and screw fixation was introduced for complex fractures of the hand. Several risk factors for a poor functional outcome have been identified, but there is a paucity of evidence regarding predictors of finger stiffness in difficult hand fractures. The purpose of this prospective cohort study was to identify independent prognostic factors of the postoperative total active motion (%TAM) in the treatment of metacarpal and phalangeal fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  Seventy-two patients (62 males, 10 females; 37±15years) with periarticular fractures involving metaphyseal comminution and displacement were evaluated at a minimum of 1 year following surgery. There were 49 phalangeal bone fractures, 30 intra-articular fractures and 20 associated soft-tissue injuries. The locations of plate placement were lateral in 42 patients and dorsal in 30. The mean duration from injury to surgery was 7.6 days (range, 0–40 days). There were eight examined variables related to patient characteristics (age, gender and hand dominance), fracture characteristics (fracture location, joint involvement and associated soft-tissue injury) and surgical variables (location of plate placement and duration from injury to surgery). Univariate and multivariate linear regression analysis were used to identify the degree to which variables affect %TAM at the final follow-up.
               
                  Results
                  Univariate analysis indicated moderate correlations of %TAM with fracture location, associated soft-tissue injury and age. Multiple linear regression modelling including fracture location, age and associated soft-tissue injury resulted in formulae that could account for 46.3% of the variability in %TAM: fracture location (β
                     =−0.388, p
                     <0.001), age (β
                     =−0.339, p
                     <0.001) and associated soft-tissue injury (β
                     =–0.296, p
                     =0.002).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Phalangeal fracture, increasing age and associated soft-tissue injury were important risk factors to identify the postoperative %TAM in the treatment of comminuted periarticular metacarpal or phalangeal fracture with a titanium plate.Fractures of the metacarpal and phalangeal bones are the most common fractures in the upper extremities. Most of these fractures can be treated by non-operative means, Restoring normal range of finger motion is the major goal of finger fractures, and there are several prognostic factors following plate and screw fixation of metacarpal and phalangeal fractures. Previous studies proposed that ‘poor prognostic factors’ such as phalangeal fracture (fracture location), The purpose of this prospective cohort study was to identify the important determinants of the postoperative range of finger motion in the treatment of comminuted periarticular metacarpal and phalangeal fractures with a titanium plate. We used multivariate linear regression analysis to determine independent predictors. A better understanding of the risk factors might help future improvement of therapeutic strategy in difficult hand fractures. This study was approved by the Human Research Committee of our institution. From February 2002 to December 2009, objective physical evaluations were gathered on patients who underwent surgical treatment for metacarpal and/or phalangeal fractures at our institution. A total of 103 consecutive patients with metacarpal and/or phalangeal fractures were treated by a single surgeon. Inclusion criteria for this study were (1) comminuted periarticular metacarpal and/or phalangeal fractures, (2) operative treatment with a titanium plate and (3) date of evaluation >1 year after surgery. Comminuted fracture was defined as multifragmentary if there were >3 fragments at the fracture site ( The operative treatment was performed with a titanium plate. Additional lag screws were used when independent intra-articular or metaphyseal comminuted fragments required fixation. We tried to employ lateral plates for phalangeal fractures to avoid interference of the implant with extensor tendon gliding as much as possible. Dorsal plates were applied for fractures with severe comminution of the dorsal cortex or the existence of multiple intra-articular fragments in a coronal plane. All patients underwent consistent postoperative physiotherapy following a standard protocol. A bulky hand bandage with a forearm-based splint was applied for 3 days to control pain and swelling, and the active motion was initiated thereafter. A buddy-tape bandage with the neighbouring finger was used for protection and assisted movement of the injured finger. A static night splint was recommended for patients who had extension lag in the injured finger. Active assisted motion was started 1 week after surgery. Passive finger motion was started 6 weeks after fracture healing. Unrestricted activities were permitted when the fracture and soft tissues were completely healed. Hand therapy was continued until rehabilitation was complete or there were no further increases in the range of finger motion and grip strength. Eight independent variables were examined: patient characteristics (age, gender and hand dominance), fracture characteristics (fracture location, joint involvement and associated soft-tissue injury) and surgical variables (duration from injury to surgery and location of plate placement). Fracture location was divided into two, metacarpal and phalangeal bone. Associated soft-tissue injury was decided to be positive when there was at least one of the following injuries including open fracture, tendon injury, neurovascular injury or significant soft-tissue defects. Location of plate placement was classified to lateral and dorsal placement. The dependent variable was % total active motion (%TAM), which was defined as a proportion of TAM of the injured finger compared with the contralateral side. Univariate analysis was performed to assess the association between independent variables and the dependent variable. The Pearson product–moment correlation coefficient ( Multivariate linear regression analysis was performed to evaluate the factors associated with the postoperative %TAM. A backward stepwise procedure was used to test all predictor variables with a There were 62 males and 10 females with an average age of 37 The average postoperative %TAM was 83.0 Additional surgeries were performed during the plate-removal procedures to improve joint movement: tenolysis in 20 cases and additional joint release in five of these cases. The acquired range of motion achieved by these surgeries averaged 20°. No adverse effects, such as infection, re-fracture or neurologic complications, were observed after plate removal. Complications included loosening of a single screw in one patient, numbness of the digital nerve in one patient and superficial infection in four patients that resolved after screw removal and oral antibiotics. In the radiograph at the final evaluation, six patients had mild osteoarthritis changes and two patients had osteonecrosis in the head of the metacarpal bone. Univariate analysis indicated moderate correlations of postoperative %TAM with fracture location ( None of the correlation coefficients between independent variables (age, gender, hand dominance, fracture location, joint involvement, associated soft-tissue injury, duration from injury to surgery and location of plate placement) was greater than 0.8, and therefore multicollinearity was not evident. With a backward stepwise procedure, the final multiple linear regression model, including fracture location, age and associated soft-tissue injury, resulted in formulae that could account for 46.3% of the variability in postoperative %TAM: fracture location ( Although several risk factors affecting postoperative outcome have been proposed, there is still lack of information regarding what factors contribute to range of finger motion following treatment with plate and screws for metacarpal and phalangeal fractures. Fracture location was the first significant predictor. The result of phalangeal fractures as a significant risk factor was comparable with results of previous studies, which demonstrated that plate fixation of phalangeal fractures can be fraught with complications and unsatisfactory results. Age was the second prognostic factor, and decreased range of finger motion was predicted by increasing age. Although age has been identified as one of the important predictors for poor functional outcome following fracture treatment, Associated soft-tissue injury was the third significant predictor. Several authors suggested that open fracture This is one of the first prospective cohort studies to identify the independent predictors for postoperative range of finger motion in the treatment of metacarpal and phalangeal fractures. A limitation of this study is the lack of control in surgical variables, and the plate location and duration from injury to surgery was not controlled in the current study design. Plate location was determined by the surgeons’ preferences, and duration to surgery was dependent on the schedule of elective surgery at the hospital. The severity of associated soft-tissue injury also influenced the duration to surgery. The biases to the surgical variables may have interfered with the consistency of the analysis results. Another limitation is related to the definition of associated soft-tissue injury in the present study. We defined associated soft-tissue injury as open fracture with or without significant soft-tissue damage, which included tendon or neurovascular laceration. Accurate severity grading for soft-tissue injury in the hand This study demonstrated that comminuted phalangeal fractures with associated soft-tissue injury in elderly patients were predictive of poorer functional outcome. These patients should be informed prior to surgery of the possibility of a higher rate of postoperative finger stiffness, and would be recommended to undergo implant removal and tenolysis as a secondary surgery. The postoperative %TAM of comminuted periarticular metacarpal and phalangeal fractures treated with a titanium plate can be predicted by fracture location, age and associated soft-tissue injury. Phalangeal fracture was the most important risk factor to explain the postoperative %TAM. Increasing age and associated soft-tissue injury were also important determinants predicting finger stiffness after the surgery. All authors disclose that there are no financial and personal relationships with other people or organizations that could inappropriately influence (bias) their work. The authors would like to thank Ryotaro Fujitani M.D. and Akio Iida M.D. for their valuable help for this study.