TEHA (tris-2-ethylhexylamine) was selected as the extractant in the current study due to high acid extraction and ease in stripping. An optimum organic system consisting of 50% TEHA, 40% octanol and 10% Shellsol A150 was determined. It was found that the acid extraction decreased with the increase in temperature. The change in enthalpy (ΔH) was −13.2kJmol−1, indicating exothermic extraction reaction. Both extraction and stripping kinetics was very fast. McCabe–Thiele extraction diagram showed that for a feed solution containing 200g/L H2SO4, three stages are required. McCabe–Thiele stripping diagram showed that three stages are required. Using slope analysis, it was found that the extracted species consisted of one acid molecule, one TEHA (A) molecule and two octanol (O) molecules with a formulae of 
                        
                           
                              
                                 
                                    
                                       H
                                       2
                                    
                                    
                                       SO
                                       4
                                    
                                 
                              
                              
                                 AO
                                 2
                              
                           
                           ¯
                        
                     .
                  The optimised TEHA system was used to extracted acid from a synthetic process solution containing a number of metals. It was found that the system only extracted acid with a small amount of metals entrained. After scrubbing the loaded organic solution in a single contact, almost all entrained metals were removed. In the case that the mining waste solution contains low concentration of acid, membrane distillation (MD) technology can be used to recover the water and concentrate the acid and metals. Solvent extraction can be then used to recover the acid and metals. A conceptual process flowsheet has been developed using a combination of MD and SX.Solvent extraction (SX) is a well established technology to separate, purify and concentrate metals. It has been also applied for acid recovery from waste solutions and bleeding streams of copper, zinc and precious metals ( Extractants including TEHA (tris-2-ethylhexylamine), Alamine 336 (tri-octyl/decyl amines), TBP (tributyl phosphate) and Cyanex 923 (hexyl/octyl phosphine oxides) have been tested and applied to recover acids using solvent extraction ( The acid concentrations in mining waste solutions are usually low and can be concentrated using membrane distillation (MD) technology in which the vapour of volatile constituents including water in the feed solution of the hot side can pass through the pores of the hydrophobic membrane to the cold side for condensation. As a result, fresh water is recovered and the other constituents are concentrated. MD offers advantages of low energy consumption, high efficiency and operating at low temperatures to recover fresh water and concentrate the acid and metals ( In the current paper, the most suitable extractant for sulphuric acid recovery in terms of extraction and stripping was selected, optimised and characterised. The composition of the extracted species was investigated using slope analysis and a process flowsheet to recover water, acid and metals proposed. Organic solvents TEHA and octanol were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Alamine 336 was supplied by BASF, Cyanex 923 by Cytec and Shellsol A150, Shellsol 2046 and Shellsol D70 by Shell Chemicals, Australia. All reagents were used without further purification. The feed solution containing only sulphuric acid was prepared by diluting AR grade concentrated sulphuric acid using deionised water. The feed solution containing sulphuric acid and metals was prepared by adding required amounts of AR grade concentrated sulphuric acid and AR grade metal sulphate salts in deionised water. All batch solvent extraction tests were carried out in 100 The extractants TEHA, Alamine 336 and Cyanex 923 in various concentrations in a temperature range of 22–60 To determine acid extraction distribution isotherms, the selected organic system was contacted with the synthetic acid feed solution using different O/A ratios at 22 To determine extraction kinetics, timing started immediately when the selected organic solution was mixed with the synthetic acid feed solution at an O/A ratio of 2 and 22 Organic solutions containing various concentrations of TEHA and Shellsol A150 with 40% octanol were used for extraction slope analysis in terms of TEHA composition. Organic solutions containing various concentrations of octanol and Shellsol A150 with 50% TEHA were used for extraction slope analysis in terms of octanol composition. Different organic solutions and a synthetic feed solution containing low concentration of sulphuric acid were mixed at an O/A ratio of 1 and 22 An automatic titration instrument (Titrando 842) was used to determine the concentration of sulphuric acid in aqueous solutions taken from extraction and stripping tests. Stock solution of 20 Three organic extractants including TEHA, Alamine 336 and Cyanex 923 were used to extract acid in the feed solution containing 200 For the systems tested in Three organic systems — (1) 50% TEHA and 50% octanol, (2) 50% Alamine 336, 30% Shellsol D70 and 20% isodecanol and (3) 100% Cyanex 923 — were loaded with the feed solution containing 200 Based on the extraction and stripping performance, the TEHA system was selected for further study due to higher acid extraction compared with the Cyanex 923 system and ease in stripping compared with the Alamine 336 system. The organic system containing 50% TEHA and 20% octanol was tested with different diluents including Shellsol A150 (100% aromatic), Shellsol 2046 (19% aromatic and 81% aliphatic) and Shellsol D70 (100% aliphatic). It was found that in terms of diluent type, the acid extractions were in the order of Shellsol A150 Another modifier, isodecanol, was also tested with the three diluents. It was found that although no third phase formation was observed with Shellsol 2046 and Shellsol D70 as the diluent, the acid extraction was slightly lower with all three organic systems compared with octanol as the modifier ( When TEHA was used as the extractant, the presence of octanol in the organic phase was necessary to prevent third phase formation. To optimise the organic solution containing 50% TEHA, the concentrations of octanol and Shellsol A150 were varied with their total volume being 50% in the organic system. The increase in concentration of octanol from 20% to 50% resulted in the increase in acid extraction from 72.34% to 84.23% ( The optimised TEHA system consisting of 50% TEHA, 40% octanol and 10% Shellsol A150 was tested under different temperatures using an O/A ratio of 2 at 22 The effect of temperature was also demonstrated thermodynamically using the Van't Hoff Equation (  If a plot of log(D) against (1000/T) forms a straight line, then A will be the slope of the line and ΔH can be calculated from the slope using Eq. A slope of 0.68 was obtained ( The optimised TEHA organic system was tested for extraction kinetics at an O/A ratio of 2 and 22 The optimised organic system was loaded at an O/A ratio of 2 and 22 The optimised TEHA organic system was subjected to successive extraction with the synthetic feed solution containing 204 The optimised TEHA organic system was used to determine acid extraction distribution isotherm with different O/A ratios at 22 The optimised TEHA organic system was loaded and the pre-loaded organic system was contacted with water at different A/O ratios and 60 ᵒC to obtain stripping distribution isotherm. From the stripping distribution isotherm, McCabe–Thiele diagram for acid stripping at an A/O ratio of 2 was constructed ( Slope analysis is a useful tool to determine the stoichiometry of the coordination complex and therefore, the mechanism of the reaction. It has been shown in previous tests ( If TEHA and octanol both take part in the acid extraction reaction, the reaction could be: K And therefore, where D is the distribution coefficient of the acid between the organic and aqueous phases. Eq. K Let To determine the role of TEHA in the acid extraction, the octanol concentration was fixed at 40% while the percentage of the diluent Shellsol A150 varied to meet the changes of the TEHA concentration ( The TEHA concentrations and the distribution coefficients with different TEHA concentrations are shown in The octanol concentrations and the distribution coefficients with different octanol concentrations are shown in Extraction test was conducted using the optimised TEHA organic system and a feed solution containing 200 To verify that the metals were entrained, the loaded organic solution was scrubbed with water at an O/A ratio of 10 and 22 A conceptual flowsheet to recover water, acid and metal values from acidic waste or process solutions is shown in Three extractants for the recovery of sulphuric acid from acidic waste solutions were tested including TEHA, Alamine 336 and Cyanex 923. Amongst the three extractants, TEHA performed best in terms of acid extraction and stripping. Therefore, the TEHA system was selected for optimisation. A number of diluents and modifiers were tested with various TEHA concentrations. An optimum organic composition consisting of 50% TEHA, 40% octanol and 10% Shellsol A150 was determined. The acid extraction increased with the increasing extractant concentration and decreased from 82% to 72% when the temperature increased from 22 to 60 The optimised TEHA organic system was further characterised. The acid extraction reached 99% after three successive extractions with fresh organic solution. Only 2 The optimised TEHA system was used to extracted acid from a synthetic process solution containing a number of metals. It was found that a small amount of metals were entrained. After scrubbing the loaded organic solution in a single stage at an O/A ratio of 10 and 22 Drs Zhaowu Zhu and Goutam Das and Mr Yoko Pranolo are thanked for assisting test work. One of the authors (U. Kesieme) would like to thank CSIRO and Victoria University for providing PhD scholarships. The support of CSIRO Process Science and Engineering and CSIRO Minerals Down Under National Research Flagship is gratefully acknowledged.