Aluminium metal matrix and hybrid composites (AMMHCs) are new materials used in recent time that have the capacity to meet the demand of advancement in processing applications. Several types of reinforcement have been used since the inception of friction stir processing (FSP). The most widely used reinforcing material is inorganic (metallic) powders such as silicon carbide, titanium alloy, graphene, iron , stainless steel, nitrides, oxides etc and fewer works have been reported on organic powders (i.e. bioprocessing using agro-wastes powders) such as fly ash, palm kernel shell ash, coconut shell ash, rice husk ash etc. Many researchers have established the roles of reinforcements in the modification of surface and texture of the reinforced metal matrix or hybrid composite material and how it enhanced the mechanical and metallurgical properties of the materials via intense, localized plastic deformation compare to the base material. FSP has advantages over other manufacturing processes in a way that it reduces defects and distortions in the material. FSP alters the physical properties of the base material without altering its physical state, this helps engineers develop attributes such as “high-state-rate superplasticity”. The grain refinement occurs on the parent material which improves the properties of the first material while mixing with the second material (reinforcement). Subsequently, allows a variety of properties to be altered and this, in turn, improves its surface modification. The survey is aimed at reviewing different combination and diversified reinforcement particulates employed in the processing of composites of aluminium metal matrix and hybrid and how it enhanced the chemical, mechanical and metallurgical efficacy of the materials. It is very much needed to have a consolidated information about the different reinforcement phases, preparation of the microchannel (groove) that accommodates the reinforcements, its dimensions and various tools geometry that have been used in the past demonstrating the optimum processing results.