The kinetics of the acidulation reaction of phosphorite in nitric acid solutions was examined in order to elucidate the operating reaction mechanism and to delineate parameters of commercial significance to the nitrophosphate process. The reaction is positively influenced by stirring speed, temperature and concentration of nitric acid solutions. The experimental data fit the diffusion kinetic model and the overall reaction rate is transport controlled with an apparent activation energy of about 14 kJ/mol.The State of Ogun in the South-Western part of Nigeria presents a number of phosphorite deposits commercially unexplored. These deposits are of sedimentary origin with carbonaceous impurities and the composition of rocks in these deposits vary widely. Reports on the winning of phosphate values from these rocks using hydrochloric acid Fertilizer manufacture methods using acidulation of phosphate ores with nitric acid are of interest since they offer an opportunity to reduce or eliminate the need for sulphur that is required in usual phosphate fertilizers The use of nitric acid as an economically viable reagent for winning of phosphate values from phosphate ores without the concomitant production of huge amounts of waste by-products has long been recognized. Nitric acid may be produced from the atomic constituents of air and water using an energy source such as natural gas, coal, naphtha, wood chips, water electrolysis, etc. The attack of nitric acid upon phosphate rock to produce soluble phosphate is represented by The kinetics of Since the production of nitric acid is dependent only upon a suitable source of energy which is readily available in Nigeria, it seems interesting to investigate the kinetic aspect of the production of fertilizer-grade phosphoric acid via nitric acid acidulation of Nigerian phosphate rock. The aim is to elucidate the reaction mechanism and to delineate parameters of commercial significance to the nitrophosphate process. Unfortunately such data are still lacking in the literature. A good knowledge of the acidulation reaction kinetics is important from a fundamental and applied point of view. The phosphorite used in this study was collected from Ayetoro, Ogun State, Nigeria. The ore was crushed and finely pulverized (100%<100 μm). The chemical and mineralogical composition of the phosphorite is presented in Acidulation of phosphate rock was carried out in a Pyrex reaction flask equipped with a heating mantle, thermometer, reflux condenser, and mechanical stirrer. Metal analyses were carried out with an atomic absorption spectrophotometer, and mineralogical analysis with a Phillips X-ray powder diffractometer. For each experiment, 200 ml of nitric acid of predetermined concentration was charged into the acidulation reactor and heated to the desired temperature (+1 °C). Thereafter, 2 g of the sample was added and the contents were well agitated. Aliquots (2 ml) of sample solution were withdrawn periodically during a run and analyzed for phosphate content by the vanado-molybdate colorimetric method  Experimental runs were also carried out at 50 °C and 400 rpm in nitric acid solutions of different concentrations, and the plots of phosphate fraction dissolved against time are shown in The dependence of phosphate dissolution upon the temperature of acidulation in 13.3 M nitric acid at 400 rpm can be derived from The X-ray diffraction patterns of some reaction residues indicated a broad peak corresponding to quartz. Also detected were other peaks though minor, based on monocalcium phosphate and dicalcium phosphate, which are formed according to The above four reactions are valid based on the fact that those diffraction peaks corresponding to fluorapatite and calcite which were originally identified in the unacidulated rock were conspicuously absent in the reaction residues examined. When viewed under a low-powdered microscope, these residues contained holes or pores which were absent in the unacidulated rock. From the above evidences, the acidulation reaction of the phosphorite in nitric acid solution The fit obtained in Compared to related studies earlier carried out on the winning of phosphate values from the Nigerian phosphorite, it is found that the acidulation reaction occurs at a relatively faster rate in nitric acid than in hydrochloric acid