In the extraction method for preparing KH2PO4, one of the key processes is the selective extraction of HCl over H3PO4. In our work, extraction kinetic studies have been carried out in a microfluidic device with a coaxial microchannel, using the extractant of 33.3% (by volume) trioctylamine (TOA) dissolved in n-octanol, with different aqueous phases: the HCl solution, the H3PO4 solution, and H3PO4 and KCl solutions of different concentrations. The changes of the extraction efficiency of HCl and H3PO4 and the selectivity for HCl along with the residence time were investigated. We found that fast extraction kinetics could be realized in microfluidic devices, and that HCl could be extracted faster than H3PO4 due to smaller mass transfer resistance and much stronger reaction between HCl and TOA. For the extraction of H3PO4 and KCl solutions, the selectivity for HCl first increased and then decreased when TOA was in excess of H3PO4 in the initial feeds, and in contrast, always increased when H3PO4 was in excess of TOA in the initial feeds. The diverse changes of selectivity for HCl along with the residence time indicate that a dynamic control of selectivity in microfluidic devices may be important and accessible for improving the KH2PO4 conversion efficiency in extraction method.KH The extraction method involves the following reaction Microfluidic technology has gained widespread attention in recent years. Liquid–liquid extraction in microfluidic devices has been studied by many researchers, for instance, aqueous two-phase (ATP) extraction In this paper, the kinetics of the selective extraction of HCl and H TOA (mass fraction Solutions were prepared using deionized water. All chemicals were used without further purification. A schematic diagram of the experimental setup is shown in The HCl solution, the H As a reference experiment, we determined the extraction kinetics of HCl in conical flasks settled in a shaking thermostat water bath. The initial aqueous and oil phase were 1.97 To acquire the kinetic data, for a certain residence time, the oil phase sample with a mass of about 0.22 The residence time in this work was referred as the time for the fluid flowing through the Teflon tube. As long as the extraction was not completed at this residence time, the acid concentration of the collected oil phase sample would be higher than the acid concentration of the oil phase at the outlet of the tube, due to the mass transfer in the collector. We found that for residence time above 5 For measurement errors, uncertainties in acid concentrations of the oil phases were evaluated using the standard deviation of repeated measurements. The relative uncertainties in total HCl concentrations and total H Using the acid concentrations of the oil phases, we can calculate the extraction efficiency ( Jetting flow occurred in the coaxial microchannel under our experimental conditions. The widening jet broke into drops ( For extraction kinetics in shaking conical flasks, the extraction efficiency of HCl was calculated using Eq. Extraction of the HCl solution and the H In this part, the extraction efficiency of both HCl and H When the initial TOA was in excess of H From When the initial H As observed from It's noteworthy that the changes of the selectivity for HCl along with the residence time were sensitive to the initial composition of the aqueous feed. It implies that we may have flexible methods to control the selectivity in microfluidic devices, by changing the residence time, as well as the initial composition of the aqueous feed. In this work, towards designing and optimizing the KH Extraction equilibrium could be achieved quickly in the microfluidic device (less than 3 For extraction of the H The diverse changes of selectivity for HCl along with the residence time indicate that a dynamic control of selectivity in microfluidic devices may be important and accessible for improving the KH In the future study, we will focus on the mechanism for the changes of selectivity, and a model for the kinetics of the selective extraction of HCl and H