The stability of mine developments is of utmost importance during the planned period of production or the life of a mine plan. Many Canadian underground mines use transverse stoping with delayed backfill to extract tabular ore deposits. These methods require access to the orebody through a number of sill drives and cross cuts which link the orezone to the haulage drift hence creating intersections on multiple levels. This paper presents the results of a study on the stability of mine development intersections at Garson Mine of Vale in Sudbury, ON, Canada. Multi-point borehole extensometers (MPBX) are used to monitor the rock deformations of an intersection as mining activities progress. The monitoring results are used to calibrate a multi-level FLAC3D numerical model, which has been developed to assess the stability of the intersection. It is shown that stope extraction causes a lateral shift to the intersection, accompanied by high shear stress in the roof. It is also shown that same-level mining has stronger influence on the stability of the intersection than lower-level mining.Cohesion of the rockmass Unit weight of the rockmass Poisson׳s ratio Modulus of of elasticity of the rockmass Friction angle of the rockmass Dilation angle of the rockmass Tensile strength of the rockmass horizontal-to-vertical stress ratio Transverse and longitudinal stoping with delayed backfill has been widely adopted by many Canadian metal mines such as Bosquet, Doyen, Laronde, and Lapa mines in Quebec and Garson, Creighton, Red lake and David bell mines in Ontario. In the transverse method, ore is accessed from upper and lower sills of the stope through cross cuts and a haulage drift; see As the mine developments, such as haulage drifts and cross cuts, are the only access where loaders and/or trucks travel through, they must remain stable during their service life. The stability of mine developments may be influenced by many factors such as the strength and quality of the rockmass, mining depth and more importantly nearby mining activity (production blasts). Mine developments such as haulage drifts and cross cuts are more likely to be influenced by stope production blasts. As mines continue to reach deeper deposits, mine developments will experience higher pre-mining and induced stress conditions, thus suffering from more instability problems. The distance between the mine developments and the stopes is another important factor affecting their stability. It is known that there exists a trade-off between the drift stability favoring long distance and mining savings favoring short distance Mining sequence is another important factor affecting the stability of haulage drifts and intersections. Different stope extraction sequences will result in different mining-induced stresses, which in turn will have varying influence on the stability of drifts and intersections. Other factors are the dip and thickness of orebody and the geometry of haulage drifts (e.g., shape and size) Mine development instability can result in production delays, loss of reserves, as well as damage to equipment, and injuries. High stress magnitudes which occur in hard rockmasses and soft or fractured rockmasses can lead to an unstable state of deformation (e.g., immense fracture of rockmass) around deep large excavations. It is important to properly use an efficient and timely ground support system to mitigate these instability issues due to stress redistribution and to provide safe access to mine openings. Also, it is imperative to implement the ground support systems in combination with conventional geomechanical instrumentations, e.g., microseismic monitoring systems, multi-point borehole extensometers (MPBX) and load cells The Garson nickel–copper (Ni–Cu sulfides) mine is located in Greater Sudbury, ON, Canada. The complex mine geometry requires a three-dimensional modeling approach. Only continuum modeling is conducted using the FLAC3D code (version 4.0) A mesh sensitivity analysis was carried out before the current model mesh had been adopted. To validate the density of the mesh and to ensure consistent results, it was necessary to perform a sensitivity analysis. This was achieved by constructing models of differing mesh densities; see FLAC3D model contains different geological units, as shown in In situ stress calibration is carried out through a trial and error analysis to satisfy the measured in situ stresses at the mine All the aforementioned rockmasses representing different geologic units are modeled. Horizontal-to-vertical stress ratios ( Multi-point borehole extensometers (MPBX) are used to monitor the rockmass deformations of the intersection as mining activities progress. The monitoring results are used to confirm the FLAC3D numerical model. The stability analysis is conducted for the #1 Shear east orebody, whereby a planned sequence of 108 stopes over four production levels (5100, 5000, 4900 and 4800) is simulated in the form of 18 mine-and-fill numerical model steps (i.e., each step represents six stopes); see longitudinal strike view in In order to assess the stability of the intersection, a performance criterion must first be selected. This may be one of numerous conditions such as maximum permissible floor heave ratio (e.g., ratio of the floor heave to the span of the drift) or roof sag ratio (e.g., ratio of the roof sag to the span of the drift), or allowable stress concentration factor (normally associated with linear elastic analyses), or a yielding condition such as Mohr–Coulomb or Hoek–Brown The strength-to-stress ratio is a built-in function in FLAC3D, defined as the strength of the rockmass divided by the mining induced stress, and it has a range from 0 to 10. It is in effect analogous to a factor of safety. The ratio is evaluated around the boundaries of the intersection (roof and walls) to provide a basis for stability assessment. To do that, it is important to rationalize an acceptable value of the strength-to-stress ratio below which the stability of the excavation would be considered unsatisfactory. As mine developments such as intersections of haulage drifts and cross cuts are considered of temporary nature compared to main level access drifts and mine infrastructure, a lower strength-to-stress ratio (or factor of safety) may deem acceptable. Once the stopes being served are mined out, access drifts can be barricaded, filled or simply abandoned. Therefore, due to the temporary nature of the case study intersection, the strength-to-stress ratio threshold is set to be 1.4. The depth-of-yield Mohr–Coulomb strength-to-stress ratio contours is actually being carried out in another study. Unsatisfactory performance is determined when the strength-to-stress ratio contours of 1.4 or less, extend beyond the anchorage limit of the rockbolt from the excavation surface. For example, for a 1.80 Numerical simulation has been performed to investigate the effect of mining steps, and same-level mining on the stability of the intersection. In the numerical modeling process, “modeling steps” are used to simulate the mining and backfilling steps.  While the stability assessment in this study is examined with the strength-to-stress ratio, it is noteworthy that the high shear stress develops in the roof of the intersection as mining activity proceeds. This is to be expected due to the large volume of rock (ore) extracted with each mining step, which in effect causes lateral translation of the haulage drift toward the orebody (e.g. see The stability of the mine development intersection deteriorates when mining progresses as discussed in the previous section. The most deterioration results when mining stopes on the same-level. For example, the stability of intersection 3181 on level 5000 highly deteriorates when mining stopes on the same-level (level 5000) compared with when mining stopes at lower-level (level 5100). The results will be introduced and discussed in terms of the strength-to-stress ratio, shear stress in the roof and occurrence of lateral displacement.   Drift excavation normally will cause convergence of the sidewalls. Thus the displacement will be in the direction of the void space. However, the excavation of the orebody in the form of mining stopes which are significantly larger than drift (i.e., stope is typically 12×15×30m) will have to effect. First, significant convergence of stope walls (inward displacement) will cause the drift to displace laterally towards the stope (lateral shift). Second, loss of the horizontal stress occurs in the pillar between the stopes and the drift. Please see Zhang [5]. Also, it is found that same-level (5000 level) of mining results more horizontal displacement that of lower-level (5100 level) as shown in This paper presents the FLAC3D analysis to evaluate mine development stability (e.g., haulage drift intersection) on 5100 level of Garson Mine, Sudbury, ON, Canada. Mohr–Coulomb strength-to-stress ratio performance criterion is used to assess the operating function of intersection at threshold of 1.4 with respect to mining activities. This threshold is chosen for temporary openings that must remain stable during their service life (production plan). The FLAC3D model typically presents Garson Mine geometry. The model is constructed for levels 4000 level to 6000 level. The model is calibrated using in situ stress measurements. Installed deformation monitoring (MPBX) is used to confirm the FLAC3D model. MPBX readings show good agreement with the FLAC3D results for the intersection understudy (intersection 3181 on 5100 level) especially the back and north wall. The model simulates the typically planned mining sequence used by Garson Mine to mine out #1 SHE (#1 Shear-East) from 5100 level upwards to 4800 level. The analysis shows that the stability of intersection deteriorates with mining advance. The north wall looks stable during all mining sequence. The back of the intersection only calls for secondary support at late mining stages (sequence 14 to 18). The same-level mining shows significant influence on the stability of the intersection compared to lower-level mining especially with near mined-stopes. The mining sequence causes lateral shift (horizontal displacement) to haulage drift intersection accompanied by high shear stress on its back. Deterministic analysis is a good starting point for stability assessment. However, due to inherent uncertainty in the model input parameters (e.g., rockmass properties), a stochastic analysis is recommended. This work is financially supported by a research grant from the