Recognising the skeletal manifestations of inflicted injury (II) in infants and young children is of crucial importance. There are specific fracture patterns which are highly suspicious of II in addition to common differential diagnoses with which radiologists should be familiar. Our objective is to provide a non-exhaustive review of the important factors relevant to the imaging and reporting of II as a platform for further learning. Part 1 encompasses important initial considerations and fracture patterns of the appendicular skeleton.Injury in non-ambulatory/totally dependent child Injury and history/mechanism given are incompatible Delay in seeking medical attention Multiple fractures (of different ages) with no family history or clinical features of bone disease Retinal haemorrhage Torn frenulum History of household fall resulting in fracture (these falls are common, fractures are not) Child abuse in all its forms (physical, emotional, sexual, neglect) is relatively common with 1 in 14 children in the UK having been physically abused. There is abundant literature on the imaging and reporting of NAI/II. This two-part article seeks to condense relevant information into an accessible format for radiology trainees during their paediatric attachment to form a solid foundation upon which further learning can be built. These articles also serve as a comprehensive refresher for general radiologists who report paediatric radiographs, aiming to stimulate teaching and further reading. Part 1 encompasses important initial considerations, initial and follow-up skeletal survey (SS), and suspicious fracture patterns of the appendicular skeleton. Suspicious fracture patterns of the axial skeleton (including rib and skull fractures), the dating of fractures and relevant differential diagnoses for II are discussed in Part 2. The composition and biomechanics of maturing bone result in distinctive patterns of fracture and healing in children when compared to adults. Paediatric bone permits a greater absorption of energy and application of strain before fracturing, secondary to the lower modulus of elasticity and bending strength, respectively. Their decreased density but increased porosity restricts fracture propagation, resulting in decreased rates of comminution. The term NAI is ubiquitous in the scientific literature; however, II may be more accurate because it does not necessarily exclude accidental harm. Consider the busy time-pressured caregiver who shoos and pushes a small ambulant child out of the way who then sustains an injury from the fall. Although the underlying action was not intended to cause injury, it was consequent upon the caregiver's actions. Similarly, the crying infant whose overtired parent forcefully abducts her legs in order to change her nappy may have done so to move the legs out of the way, not with the intent of fracturing the femur. The legal distinction between accidental injury and NAI is difficult: II is more accurate when describing the causal mechanism of injuries in abusive trauma. The term “suspected physical abuse” is also used synonymously with NAI and II. Throughout this article, the authors refer to the pre-ambulant infant or child. This implies that the child is of an age where they are not yet independently mobile and encompasses the wide variation in developmental ability and progress. The term non-ambulant may be used when referring to a child with a permanent physical disability who will never be able to walk. Imaging findings suggestive of II must be considered within the context of the child's mobility and contemporaneous developmental milestones. Reviewing images and discussing imaging findings with the child protection team and paediatricians who have examined the child are of paramount importance to determine how the radiological findings should be interpreted. Although the national guidance (discussed in detail below) states that the radiological report forms the basis of communication between radiologists and clinicians, All imaging performed for the investigation of suspected II should be assessed for diagnostic quality by the radiologists involved in the subsequent reporting, and if suboptimal should be repeated. When considering the long bones, two orthogonal radiographic views Physical abuse is insidious and may not present in a predictable fashion. There are specific risk factors for physical abuse that, once identified, should alert the reporting radiologist to the possibility of occult II ( Once a fracture has been identified, the very next questions the reporting radiologist must ask themselves are: “ Radiological findings alone do not necessarily confirm or refute the diagnosis but are considered alongside the clinical history, examination, and biochemical investigations. Hence communication with the clinical teams is vital; not only to ensure that the evidence indicates II before making the diagnosis (and the subsequent profound impact this will have on the child and their carers) but to raise an alert if abuse was not already suspected and recommend further radiological investigations as appropriate. In pre-ambulant infants, any fracture may be suspicious for physical abuse if the history is inappropriate. Due attention and consideration should be given to the The age of the patient is a key consideration. It is important to remember that in the absence of trauma, the likelihood of physical abuse is higher the younger the age of the child. There are a number of risk factors and environmental stressors that predispose infants and young children to abuse. Children with underlying chronic disease, such as osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) or a neurological disorder, such as cerebral palsy, are at increased risk of abuse. The SS is the radiological investigation of choice when II is suspected, diagnosing the majority of bony injuries. The decision to perform a complete SS is age dependent. A full SS should always be performed where physical abuse is suspected in children under the age of 2 years. Given that evidence obtained from the SS may be used as part of court proceedings, Reporting SS for suspected II is regarded as a core competence for specialist paediatric radiologists, in addition to those undertaking paediatric radiology as a special interest in a general department. The utility of certain projections, such as the spine, hands, and feet, as part of the routine SS and limiting radiographs performed for the follow-up SS are topics of debate. Follow-up imaging approximately 11–14 days after the initial SS allows identification of fractures not previously seen due to interval healing ( The (radiation) risk versus benefit ratio of initial and follow-up SS in the context of suspected physical abuse is outside the scope of this article but has been discussed in detail elsewhere, Although improving the sensitivity of the initial SS, The appendicular skeleton comprises the bones of the upper and lower limbs, and the pectoral and pelvic girdles. Also known as the classic metaphyseal lesion (CML), in the correct clinical context, the metaphyseal fracture is considered to be pathognomonic of II, being the most specific radiographic injury of suspected physical abuse The distal femur, proximal and distal tibia, and proximal humeri are the commonest locations for metaphyseal fractures. An additional theory proposes that CMLs may occur during forceful shaking, where the limbs flail around an infant being held by the trunk with a resultant shearing force to the limbs. As discussed previously, the proffered history and mechanism must be compared with the age and developmental level of the child given the wide variation in the achievement of walking-related developmental milestones (cruising, standing alone, walking unaided). In the absence of an appropriate history, e.g., of a significant high-energy impact/injury such as a road traffic accident, the presence of a lower limb long bone fracture in a pre-ambulant infant is In the older child, a “toddler's fracture” is a common accidental injury typified by an undisplaced spiral fracture of the tibia in the ambulant child/toddler (i.e., who is known to “toddle”; A humeral fracture identified in a child <18 months of age with a suspicious history is highly suggestive of an abusive aetiology, Supracondylar fractures are a common accidental injury Correlation with the age, history, and mechanism of injury is key in differentiating accidental injury from II. Should this information not be available at the time of reporting, it must be sought to ensure that the radiological report accurately reflects concerns or suspicions regarding II. Metacarpal and metatarsal fractures are uncommon and may be clinically occult (i.e., not suspected when examining the child; Suspicious fractures in unusual locations specific for physical abuse can be best remembered by the use of the helpful Scapulae fractures ( Pelvic fractures in the setting of II are rare and are more commonly encountered in the setting of polytrauma (e.g., road traffic accident); in the setting of II, the most common site of injury is the ischio/pubic ramus. The radiological diagnosis of physical abuse in infants and young children can present a diagnostic challenge. When the history and mechanism of injury are presented alongside discordant imaging findings in a pre-ambulant child, the suspicion of II must be raised and discussed with the referring clinical team contemporaneously. A multidisciplinary approach is adopted in the investigation of suspected II and the decision to undertake SS is made in concert with the clinical and child protection teams. The SS is the first-line and reference standard imaging investigation in suspected II, diagnosing both clinically suspected and occult bony injuries. The fracture patterns that are specific and highly suspicious for II are ones with which all radiologists must be familiar. The authors are grateful to Dr Sheetij Shekhar for his insights.