Novel ternary graphene oxide-hyaluronic acid-hydroxyapatite (GO-HY-HA) nanocomposite coatings were prepared on Ti substrate using anodic electrophoretic deposition (EPD). Hyaluronic acid was employed as charging additive and dispersion agent during EPD. The kinetics and mechanism of the deposition, and the microstructure of the coated samples were investigated using scanning electron microscopy, X-ray diffraction, Raman spectrum, thermo-gravimetric analysis, and microscopic Fourier transform infrared analysis. The results showed that the addition of GO sheets into the HY-HA suspensions could increase the deposition rate and inhibit cracks creation and propagation in the coatings. The corrosion resistant of the resulting samples were evaluated using potentiodynamic polarization method in simulated body fluid, and the GO-HY-HA coatings could effectively improve the anti-corrosion property of the Ti substrate.Graphene oxide (GO) sheets, as the oxygenated derivatives of graphene, are mono-layer carbon atoms with carboxylic groups at their edges and epoxy and hydroxyl groups on the GO basal planes Furthermore, GO reinforced HA [Ca Hyaluronic acid (HY) is a ubiquitous anionic extracellular glycosaminoglycan with high concentrations in skin, joints and cornea Given the combination of the aforementioned advantages of materials (GO, HA and HY) and fabrication technique (EPD), we employ EPD to prepare GO-HY-HA nanocomposite coatings on commercial pure Ti (cp Ti) to further improve the mechanical and bioactive properties of HA. To our knowledge, there is still no report on the production of these novel ternary coatings. The aim of this research is to verify the feasibility of preparing GO-HY-HA nanocomposite coatings on Ti substrate using EPD method. The kinetics and mechanism of the deposition, and the microstructure and electrochemical properties of the coated samples were also investigated. Nano graphene oxide platelets were provided by Angstron Material LLC, USA (product ID: N002-PD; Lot #: D2110810-1). Sodium hyaluronate (extracted from cockscomb) was purchased from Aladdin Industrial Inc., China. Hydroxyapatite nanoparticles were obtained from Nanjing Emperor Nano Material Co., Ltd, China. Commercial pure Ti (grade TA2) sheet with 1 The EPD cell consisted of a 200 The zeta-potential of the suspensions with different GO contents were evaluated by Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern Instruments, UK) using dynamic light scattering. The surface morphology was observed after Au coatings by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, AMRY 1-1910FE). The microstructural characteristics of the nanocomposite coatings were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) using a Rigaku DMAX 2400 diffractometer with a step size of 4°/min and Raman spectra using a Raman Imaging Microscope System (Renishaw 1000). The HA content in the coatings was evaluated by thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA, TA instrument, Q50), at a heating rate of 10 The corrosion resistant property of the GO-HY-HA was evaluated by electrochemical experiment with a computer-controlled Auto lab CHI 650C in simulated body fluid (SBF) EPD is one of the colloidal processes in coating technique where charged micro/nanoparticles in a suspension are deposited onto conductive substrates under an electrical field As it can be seen from The EPD process was conducted in a glass beaker with GO-HY-HA suspensions under 30 It was suggested that the dissociation of HYNa could produce anionic HY In our study, HY The deposition yield The surface morphology of the uncoated and coated samples after air drying was shown in The as-received HA nanoparticles, pristine GO platelets and HYNa powders, as well as the prepared GO-HY-HA nanocomposite coatings were subjected to TGA analysis to verify the SEM observation results ( The phases of the resulting coatings were investigated by XRD as shown in The results of FTIR investigations are shown in The corrosion behaviors of the uncoated Ti and GO-HY-HA coated samples with different GO contents were evaluated by potentiodynamic polarization tests in SBF as presented in In this paper, novel ternary GO-HY-HA nanocomposite coatings were successfully prepared on Ti substrate by anodic electrophoretic deposition. The suspension with higher GO contents could result in higher deposition yield. And the addition of GO sheets would inhibit cracks creation and propagation in the coatings. Compared with HY-HA coatings, the GO incorporated nanocomposite coatings showed enhanced corrosion protection of Ti substrate in SBF. Our preliminary study suggests that EPD could be a promising technique to fabricate GO-HY-HA coatings for potential biomedical applications. Therefore, further research should be conducted on the mechanical property analysis and in vitro cytotoxicity evaluation of the coatings. This work was supported by