Mineral solids are usually processed, produced or handled in the form of two-phase slurries. Accurate and reliable measurements of the rheological properties of settling slurries using conventional viscometric instruments can be difficult, if not impossible, since the solid particles settle rapidly under the influence of gravity. In this paper we report on the development of an on-line flow rheometer specially designed and constructed for characterising the rheological behaviour of settling slurries. The instrument design is based on the principles of helical flow, which is the combination of tangential Couette and axial Poiseuille flows. The data reduction procedure developed is firmly based on the theory of helical flow and has been extensively tested and validated with fluids of different rheological behaviour. Good results have been obtained using the rheometer for various Newtonian liquids, pseudoplastic polymeric solutions and mineral slurries.pre-exponential parameter, Pa constant of integration gravitational acceleration, m/s pressure, Pa torque per unit length, Nm/m exponential parameter flowrate, m radius of inner cylinder, m radial length, m axial fluid velocity, m/s velocity vector, m/s axial distance, m ratio between cylinder radii shear rate, 1/s angular velocity of inner cylinder, rad/s angular fluid velocity, rad/s shear stress, Pa cylindrical co-ordinates radial direction cylindrical co-ordinates axial direction cylindrical co-ordinates angular direction The control of the rheology of settling suspension is of great importance to the mineral industry as it is a critical factor in optimising plant life cycle costs. Many processes involve handling particles of diverse sizes, usually in the form of rapid settling (unstable) slurries and it is the slurry viscosity not the solids concentration that effects the energy consumption and many of the design factors of mineral processing units One option to prevent particles from settling is to use an impeller to maintain homogenous conditions. Calderbank and Moo-Young To avoid the complexities of mixing impellers other techniques must be used to maintain particle suspensions in less complex geometries. Concentric cylinder viscometers used in their standard form will obviously not maintain homogenous conditions. However in cases where the particle settling rate is known, it is possible to design a concentric cylinder viscometer where the shearing surface is only in the hindered settling zone, where the solids concentration is constant. Such a device has been designed and tested by Partridge and co-workers In order to overcome the inherent deficiency of the coaxial cylinder arrangement to handle settling slurries it has been proposed to add an additional annular flow component to the standard Couette flow. The additional flow transforms the flow regime from Couette to helical flow. Albert et al. Various researchers, e.g. Ferrini et al. Nguyen et al. In this paper we report on modifications made both to the rheometer and to the data reduction procedure presented in Consider the helical flow between two concentric cylinders as shown diagrammatically in From the theory of helical flow by Coleman and Noll For a typical experiment with the flow rheometer, the independent variables are the rotational speed of the inner cylinder, A computer program written in Pascal, utilising the Levenberg–Marquardt technique However before the shear stress and shear rate values can be calculated the value of The experimental setup for the flow rheometer is shown in In order to test the accuracy of the flow rheometer and verify its applicability as a scientific instrument, the results obtained with the various fluids tested were compared with data obtained using another standard commercial instrument. A Bohlin controlled stress rheometer (Model CVO-50) fitted with various measuring geometries was used for this purpose. For liquids, the cone and plate geometry was used because it provides a constant shear rate across the measurement gap. For slurry systems, the parallel plate geometry was selected to prevent particles becoming lodged in the small gap between the cone and the plate. The experimental fluids used in this study included a Newtonian liquid (100% Glycerol solution), two shear thinning, pseudoplastic liquids (0.7 and 1.0 wt.% aqueous solutions of carboxy methyl cellulose (CMC), C600 grade) and a mineral slurry (70 wt.% alumina hydrate-water slurry). The properties of these fluids were measured on the Bohlin rheometer and are summarised in For a typical experiment with the flow rheometer, the test fluid was first circulated through the rheometer with the bob (inner cylinder) stationary. The pump speed was adjusted until the required pressure difference measured across the bob was reached. The bob was then set to rotate at a constant speed and the torque acting on the bob, measured as a function of time until a steady value was observed. If the additional shear due to the rotating cylinder caused the differential pressure across the instrument to change, the flow rate was adjusted accordingly to maintain a constant value of differential pressure. Between 8 and 10 different rotational speeds were selected at a particular value of differential pressure. A new value of differential pressure was then chosen and the procedure repeated. The raw data were analysed in an Excel spreadsheet, which performed the data reduction procedure described earlier.  The results obtained for the 70 wt.% alumina hydrate slurry are shown in A novel feature associated with the development of the flow rheometer is the data reduction procedure based on the principles of helical flow. To illustrate the effect that ignoring the axial flowrate can have on the results, data from the helical flow rheometer have been analysed with the axial flow component ignored. The torque acting on the inner cylinder and the rotational speed of the inner cylinder from helical flow tests have been used to calculate shear stress and shear rate using only Couette flow theory. Results of this analysis for the 1 wt.% CMC solution are presented in A new rheometer based on the principles of helical flow has been developed to measure the properties of settling slurries. An accurate method for determining the rheological properties of fluids including mineral slurries, from helical flow tests has been developed. The measurement and data reduction procedures for the instrument have been validated for a variety of fluids, which include Newtonian liquids, pseudoplastic polymeric solutions and mineral slurries. Work is continuing to determine the limits of the stability of the helical flow within the geometry, so that reliable results for as wide a range of shear rates as possible can be obtained. The data analysis procedure is also being further refined to include the possible effect that a yield stress material may have on the calculations. The modifications will involve incorporating certain viscoplastic fluid models such as the Hershel–Bulkley model, instead of the simpler power-law model into the data analysis procedure. This work is supported by a grant from the Australian Research Council under the Strategic Partnership with Industry––Research and Training Scheme, in conjunction with Rio Tinto Technical Services. The authors wish to acknowledge and thank the workshop staff especially J. Peak for their assistance in the construction and maintenance of the equipment used.