We report the fabrication of monolithic bulk amorphous Ni59Zr20Ti16Si2Sn3 alloy and amorphous Ni59Zr20Ti16Si2Sn3 alloy reinforced Cu matrix composite using a combination of RCRF (Repeated Cold Rolling and Folding) and warm rolling processes. Based on the TTT curve established for the amorphous Ni59Zr20Ti16Si2Sn3 alloy, the crystallization of the amorphous ribbon is prevented during warm rolling process. The micro-hardness of the amorphous alloy (600±30 Hv) is comparable with those for other Ni-based amorphous alloys.A manufacturing of bulk amorphous material via consolidation process has often showed enlarged structural options, since the unique properties of bulk amorphous phase can be achieved for the fabrication of large sized monolithic amorphous materials and composite systems as well. Several alternative processes have been carried out in order to produce bulk amorphous alloys by consolidation of amorphous powders or ribbons 30 g alloy ingots with a composition of Ni The rolling process was performed by electric motor-controlled twin roll with 20 cm in diameter at a constant speed of 1.8 radians/s. For fabrication of amorphous ribbon reinforced composite, the pre-formed mixture of ribbon and Cu thin foils was fabricated by RCRF up to 40 times to distribute the amorphous ribbon homogeneously in the Cu matrix. The RCRF processed pre-form was vacuum-sealed in a Cu tube. For the synthesis of monolithic bulk amorphous alloy, a stack of the amorphous ribbon was vacuum-sealed in a Cu tube. Then, the sealed Cu tubes were warm-rolled with a reduction ratio of about 50% following a heat treatment at 850 K for 100 s based upon the predetermined Time-Temperature-Transformation (TTT) curve. Finally, the warm-rolled samples were polished up to 0.3 μm Al The microstructures of Cu matrix composite and the monolithic amorphous alloy have been examined through OM (Optical Microscope) and the thermal history of the warm-rolled specimens was investigated by DSC [Differential Scanning Calorimetry (Perkin Elmers DSC-7)]. XRD [X-ray Diffraction (Rigaku RINT 2200)] was used for phase identifications and the hardness of the specimen was measured by Digital micro-hardness tester [MXTα (Matzawa)].  In order to optimize thermal processing conditions for the warm rolling process, the TTT diagram of the amorphous ribbon was established from isothermal heat treatments. The amorphous structure of the as melt-spun and as warm-rolled monolithic amorphous specimens was confirmed by XRD (not shown).  The monolithic bulk amorphous Ni This work is supported by Creative Research initiatives of the Korean Ministry of Science and Technology.