Rhodococcus erythropolis as a flotation collector for hematite was evaluated in the study. The surface morphology and cell wall composition of R. erythropolis was analyzed. Zeta potentials for four pure minerals from hematite ores were measured before and after adsorption by R. erythropolis. Pure mineral flotation tests and mixed mineral separation tests were performed to describe adsorption characteristics and mechanisms. A rod-shaped bacterium was detected with CH2, CH3 and COO groups on its cell wall that imparted hydrophobicity and negative charges. The ability of R. erythropolis to collect hematite was stronger than its ability to collect quartz, kaolinite and apatite. For a pulp pH of 6 and a cell concentration of 75mg/L, recovery rate of hematite was 89.67%. The recovery differences between hematite and quartz, kaolinite and apatite were 66.43%, 60.36% and 54.30%, respectively. These data indicated that electrical properties of hematite surface were more suitable for adsorption of R. erythropolis than other three minerals. The adsorbed hematite particles appeared as large agglomerates after interaction with R. erythropolis. The quartz, kaolinite and apatite particles, however, were in the form of dispersed particles or small agglomerates. The chemical adsorption of hematite on bacterial cell wall resulted in agglomeration. The effects of flocculation and flotation of R. erythropolis on micro-fine hematite particles were characterized for the first time. The results showed that R. erythropolis can act as a flotation collector for hematite from hematite ores.Research on the use of efficient, minimally polluting flotation reagents for mineral processing is being carried out around the world. Microbial flotation reagents are currently one of the most important directions for this research (  Handpicked highly pure mineral samples of hematite and gangues (quartz, kaolinite and apatite) in hematite ores were obtained from the Geological Museum of China. The purities of mineral samples were ascertained to be hematite 97.6%, quartz 99.9%, kaolinite 99.0% and apatite 99.0%, respectively. The samples were ground in a porcelain ball mill and sieved. The <30  Flotation tests were carried out in a 30 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to observe Zeta potential measurements for Infrared absorption spectra were recorded on a Nicolet 6700 Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrophotometer using A SEM micrograph of FTIR spectra for The band at 3398.52 Zeta potentials for The surface of Microbe-mineral interactions resulted in significant surface charge changes on mineral surfaces. Zeta potentials for hematite, quartz, apatite and kaolin after interaction with After interaction, the IEP of hematite increased from pH 5.2 to pH 5.6. The IEP of quartz, kaolin and apatite did not appear again. This indicated that adsorption of The effects of pulp pH on flotation recovery of hematite, quartz, kaolin and apatite are shown in Hematite recovery increased rapidly with the increasing of pulp pH from 3 to 6, and then decreased rapidly at above pH 6. The recoveries of other three minerals varied slightly as pulp pH increased from 3 to 11. The order of recovery was as follows: hematite The effects of The hematite recovery increased rapidly as concentration of The above results showed that collecting ability of It can be concluded that it is possible to efficiently separate hematite from hematite–gangue mixtures through flotation using Micrographs of hematite, quartz, kaolinite and apatite are shown in The hematite particles were in the form of large agglomerates after adsorption by The adsorption of Obviously, adsorption of FTIR spectra for hematite before and after interaction with After interaction with     The hematite particles formed large agglomerates after adsorption by The hematite surface was characterized by six groups after interaction with Hydrophobic aggregation and collection of hematite by We gratefully acknowledge financial support from the