Due to the limitation of secondary pollution and high equipment investment, the industrial-scale recycling technology for electrode materials from spent lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) needs urgent breakthrough. In this paper, a physical recycling method, grinding flotation, is creatively proposed for the separation and recovery of LiCoO2 and graphite from spent LIBs. According to the exploratory experiments, if the mixed electrode materials is ground in the hardgrove machine for 5min before reverse flotation, the concentrate grade of LiCoO2 sinks and graphite floats can reach 97.13% and 73.56%, respectively. Moreover, with the help of advanced analytical technologies, the surface morphology, elemental chemical states and element distribution on the very surface of electrode particles before and after grinding were systematically analyzed to reveal the mechanism of dry surface modification. Results indicate that the mechanical grinding destroys the lamellar structure of graphite, exposing massive newborn hydrophobic surfaces. Meanwhile, the abrasion of organic film coating the LiCoO2 particles causes its original hydrophilic surface partially regained. Hence, the great wettability difference between LiCoO2 and graphite contributes to an excellent flotation separation. This grinding flotation method is a promising separation method without any toxic emissions or introducing other impurities in industrial application.The attractive electrochemical characteristics (e.g. high energy density, high battery voltage, low self-discharge and no memory effect) help lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) substitute nickel-metal hydride batteries as power source in portable electronic equipment and even electric vehicle The recycling techniques of electrode materials (LiCoO In recent decades, considerable researchers have focused on grinding flotation based on mechanical attrition In this paper, a promising modified flotation for recovery of electrode materials from spent LIBs with high purity is reported. It is the first time that grinding flotation is utilized to separate and recover the mixed electrode powder. Through laboratory experiments, the grinding time is investigated and the optimized results of grinding flotation are obtained. Furthermore, the surface properties of the particles, including surface morphology, elemental composition and element distribution, are systematically discussed before and after grinding with the help of advanced analytical techniques. Eventually, the mechanism of dry surface modification of electrode materials is revealed to establish theoretical and experimental basis for grinding flotation. Without environmental pollution or any impurity, grinding flotation technology has broad prospects for the industrialization. In order to avoid short-circuit and self-ignition, 100 pieces of spent LIBs with the same type were discharged completely in 5 Grinding flotation experiments were carried out in standard Hardgrove apparatus and lab-scale flotation machine. First, 40 The flotation flowsheet for obtaining high-grade LiCoO The elemental composition and chemical states of carbon in the very surface of the mixed electrode powder before and after grinding were determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB 250Xi, USA). Microcrystalline structure of LiCoO The concentrate grade and recovery rate are two important evaluation indexes of flotation effect in this investigation. The flotation results of LiCoO Pictures in During the flotation process, the vast majority of graphite are mixed with a few LiCoO The LiCoO The separation of LiCoO In order to directly observe the peeling behavior of graphite layered structure and the morphology of the adhesion between LiCoO In the backscattering mode of SEM, the black particles are graphite and the bright white particles are LiCoO In order to understand the occurrence state of organic films on the surface of LiCoO With the help of FE-EPMA, the adhesion portion between the LiCoO Since the fluorine element is a characteristic element in PVDF, which is the main component in organic film, and there is no fluorine on the initial surface of electrode material, then the F element distribution can be used to characterize the occurrence of organic film. The micro-probe distribution of cobalt and fluorine elements on the particles are shown in Based on the above analyses, the dry modification mechanism is revealed and shown in However, it should be noted that due to the smaller particle size and more quantity of LiCoO Grinding flotation is a physical sorting method proposed for the special structural characteristics of LiCoO The financial support for this work was from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 