Deep litter manure contains considerable amounts of plant nutrients and is therefore used as a fertiliser in crop production. However, the manurial value of deep litter manure is reduced by ammonia volatilisation and uneven land spreading. Although storage before spreading may improve the spreading evenness of deep litter manure, it may also influence the potential for ammonia losses. A study was therefore designed to investigate how storage of deep litter manure influences spreading evenness and ammonia volatilisation following land spreading. The ammonia volatilisation following land spreading was found to be reduced by 44% following storage, as the ammonium content of the deep litter manure had declined considerably during the storage period. The spreading evenness of both mass and nutrient content of deep litter manure was found to be improved by storage. During spreading, deep litter manure was found to be separated into bands of mainly straw or heavier material. However, this separation did not significantly influence the evenness in distribution of the nutrient content of either stored or unstored deep litter manure.In most European countries, livestock manure is used as a fertiliser in crop production in order to decrease the environmental impact of livestock production and reduce the need for chemical fertilisers ( Although most of the livestock manure produced in Europe is handled as slurry ( Deep litter manure is a specific type of solid manure, which builds up over months in mats on solid floors in housing systems. As the mat is normally littered daily with straw deep litter manure contains a high content of straw. Deep litter manure is either stored before being used in crop production or is spread directly on the field without intermediate storage. Farmers therefore have to decide whether they should store the deep litter manure before it is used in plant cultivation. While it is well known that the content of ammonium is considerably higher in unstored deep litter ( Deep litter is very often stored in heaps before being used in crop production. Owing to the aerobic conditions in the heap, a composting process takes place during storage ( However, storage may also influence the spreading pattern of deep litter manure. In Denmark and UK, most solid manure is spread using rear-discharge spreaders ( In order to increase spreading capacity, solid manure spreaders with a very large spreading width have been developed ( The objective of this study was therefore to determine the effects of storage on uniformity of mass and nutrient distribution and subsequent ammonia volatilisation during the spreading of deep litter manure, and in addition to determine if separation of deep litter takes place during the spreading event and how this influences the uniformity of distribution of nutrient content in stored and unstored deep litter manure. The deep litter manure used in the ammonium-loss experiment was a deep litter mat produced by an outdoor pig production system. Stored manure was manure stored for 2 months in an outdoor uncovered heap (height 2 The ammonia emission experiment was conducted in February 2001 at Research Centre Bygholm, Horsens, Denmark (55°90′ N, 10°10′ E). The study site consisted of bare harrowed sandy loam soil (10·3% clay, 87·7% sand and 2·0% organic matter in 2000) ( Hourly data for wind speed, temperature, atmospheric humidity and precipitation were recorded by the meteorological station at Research Centre Bygholm, situated less than 1 Ten manure samples per load were taken for analysis of the deep litter manure composition ( One load of either stored or unstored deep litter manure was applied by means of a rear-discharge solid manure spreader to each experimental plot. Manure landing inside the plots was left untreated until the end of the study, whereas manure landing outside the experimental plots was harrowed down immediately to stop ammonia volatilisation. Care was taken that application to the different plots took place simultaneously, as far as possible, in order to minimise changes due to climatic conditions. The amount of manure applied was determined by weighing the spreader before and after application, thus showing that the actual application rate was within the range of 9·3–9·6 Prior to the application of the deep litter manure, 14 spreading plates (0·5 The rate of NH The statistical analysis of the manure composition of pig manure was performed using paired For the spreading test, cattle deep litter was prepared in three different ways previous to the study: the first manure sample was taken directly from an indoor deep litter mat (unstored) to give a bulk density of 296 In order to decrease the effects of wind disturbance, all spreading tests were performed on a concrete test area, surrounded by big bales at a height of 3.60 The manure was loaded into the spreader by means of a loader tractor. Care was taken to ensure that unbiased loads and similarity between loads were obtained. After loading, the manure was spread over a line of 54 containers (each measuring 0·5 For each distribution test the coefficient of variation (CV) was calculated by In order to determine the separation of deep litter manure during spreading and its influence on the distribution of nutrients, a line of 10 adjoining measuring plates (1 A relatively low ammonia emission loss was observed after the deep litter manure had been applied, due both the low application rate and the wet and cold climatic conditions prevailing during and after the application ( In general, storage of deep litter manure before spreading improved both the spreading evenness and the working width of solid manure spreaders ( Distributing deep litter manure with manure spreaders that have very large spreading widths resulted in a separation of the material into straw and heavier particles ( The reduced content of ammonium found in stored deep litter manure ( When deep litter manure was left on the soil surface, the ammonium concentration of the manure was found to decrease exponentially with time ( When deep litter is stored, organic matter is decomposed. This makes the manure more homogeneous and decreases the strength of the straw content of the manure, thus making the comminution of the manure easier. Therefore, stored deep litter manure can be more easily separated into smaller and more even clump sizes when handled by the spreading device of the solid manure spreaders. This explains why, storage in general, improves both the spreading evenness and the working width ( The long throwing width of modern solid manure spreaders increases the likelihood that inhomogeneous manure types will be separated into light and heavy particles during spreading. In the present study, it was observed that when unstored manure is spread, the manure that lands close to the spreader may consist almost exclusively of straw, whereas heavier fractions such as faeces is transported longer distances away from the spreader ( The study has demonstrated that storage previous to spreading improves spreading evenness of deep litter manure and its nutrients and decreases the ammonia loss following land spreading. Improved spreading evenness of nutrients has shown to increase crop yield in some studies, while no significant effects were observed in others ( Reduced ammonium content in deep litter manure stored for 2 months decreased the ammonia volatilisation following land spreading from 2.7 to 1.5 The author thanks Henrik Mortensen, Karsten Sørensen and Merete Maahn for valuable technical assistance. This study was part of the project ‘Increased nitrogen use efficiency of litter-rich cattle and poultry manure by adjusting the application strategy’, within the research programme ‘Sustainable handling and utilisation of animal manure’, funded by the Danish Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries.