Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) are a natural byproduct of oxygen metabolism. At physiological levels, ROS regulate multiple cellular processes like proliferation, migration, and differentiation. Increased levels of ROS are associated with pathological conditions, such as inflammation and vascular calcification, where they elicit cytotoxic effects. These contrasting outcomes of ROS have also been reported in osteogenic precursor cells. However, the role of ROS in committed osteogenic cells has not been investigated. Cytotoxic and physiologic effects have also been demonstrated for extracellular phosphate (Pi). Specifically, in committed osteogenic cells Pi stimulates their major function (mineralization), however in osteogenic precursors and endothelial cells Pi cytotoxicity has been reported. Interestingly, Pi cytotoxic effects have been associated with ROS production in the pathological vascular mineralization. In this study, we investigated a molecular mechanistic link between elevated Pi and ROS production in the context of the mineralization function of committed osteogenic cells. Using committed osteogenic cells, 17IIA11 odontoblast-like cell and MLO-A5 osteoblast cell lines, we have unveil that Pi enhances intracellular ROS production. Furthermore, using a combination of mineralization assays and gene expression analyses, we determined that Pi-induced intracellular ROS supports the physiological mineralization process. In contrast, the exogenous ROS, provided in a form of H2O2, was detrimental for osteogenic cells. By comparing molecular signaling cascades induced by extracellular ROS and Pi, we identified differences in signaling routes that determine physiologic versus toxic effect of ROS on osteogenic cells. Specifically, while both extracellular and Pi-induced intracellular ROS utilize Erk1/2 signaling mediator, only extracellular ROS induces stress-activated mitogen-activated protein kinases P38 and JNK that are associated with cell death. In summary, our results uncovered a physiological role of ROS in the Pi-induced mineralization through the molecular pathway that is distinct from ROS-induced cytotoxic effects.Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) production is a physiological consequence of incomplete reduction of molecular oxygen, which results in generation of superoxide anions (O Several extracellular stimuli, such as hormones, pro-inflammatory cytokines, glucocorticoids, and inorganic ions, influence ROS levels in osteogenic cells [ In this study, we use an We used mouse 17IIA11 odontoblast-like [ ROS were assayed as described before [ RNA was extracted using GenElute Mammalian Total RNA Miniprep Kit (Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). Total RNA (1 μg), after DNase I treatment (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA), was converted to cDNA with SuperScript III Reverse Transcriptase kit (Life Technologies, Grand Island, NY, USA). Gene expression analyses were performed using AB Biosystems 7500 Fast RealTime PCR System and Fast SYBR Green reaction mix (Roche, Indianapolis, IN, USA). Primer sequences are: Gapdh F: GCAAGAGAGGCCCTATCCCAA R: CTCCCTAGGCCCCTCCTGTTATT; Opn F: ATGAGGCTGCAGTTCTCCTGG R: AAAGCTTCTTCTCCTCTGAGCTGCC; Dmp1 F: TCTTTGCTGTCGCTGGGGGTATCTTG R: AACATCTCTGTGCAAGCGA. Whole protein extracts from cells were prepared using RIPA lysis buffer (50 mM Tris Cl pH = 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 0.1% SDS) supplemented with phosphatase and protease inhibitors (1 mM NaF, 2 mM Na The confluent cells on 6-well plate were cultivated in either growth medium or osteogenic medium (50 μg/ml ascorbic acid and 5 mM P 17IIA11 and MLO-A5 cells were cultured in osteogenic or growth media for 9 days. Then cells were washed with saline, collected and lyophilized overnight. Five mg of each lyophilized cell culture sample were ground and mixed with 135 mg of dry potassium bromide (KBr) powder and pressed into a pellet. FTIR spectra from three biological replicates per experimental group were collected at room temperature in the transmission mode with 64 scans per spectrum and the resolution of 4 cm Statistically significant differences were determined using the Student's To study molecular mechanisms regulating the initiation of the mineralization process we selected 17IIA11 pre-odontoblast and MLO-A5 osteoblast cell lines that have characteristics of committed osteogenic cells, determined by high expression of key osteogenic transcription factors and enzymes required for mineralization. This molecular makeup allows for rapid deposition of mineral in ECM under osteogenic conditions (in the presence of ascorbic acid and elevated P Previous studies have shown that P In cell culture system, mineralization is typically induced by supplementing growth medium with ascorbic acid and phosphate (osteogenic medium). Commonly, β-glycerophosphate (βGP) is used as a source of phosphate, which requires alkaline phosphatase production by the cells in order to utilize phosphate provided in this form [ After validating our experimental approach, we addressed the biological significance of P In an Next, to evaluate whether reduced mineralization observed in osteogenic cells treated with ROS scavenger NAC ( In summary, these results demonstrate that NAC-mediated inhibition of P Although little is known about P After determining that either H To understand the role of P In the majority of cell types, elevated extracellular P Bone is a mineralized connective tissue that is continuously remodeled through the specialized actions of bone-forming osteoblasts and bone-resorbing osteoclasts. Many systemic and local factors contribute to bone homeostasis by regulating bone cells function, survival, and death. ROS have been implicated in bone homeostasis by regulating fundamental processes including proliferation, differentiation, and cell death [ ROS have long been considered as a potential detrimental byproduct of the aerobic metabolism that has a negative effect on cell functions and survival (oxidative stress). It is now recognized that ROS generated at sub-toxic levels by different intracellular systems act as signaling molecules and mediate important physiological functions (redox biology). This dual constructive/destructive effect has also been suggested for P The effects evoked by ROS differ not only depending on the cell type, but also on the site of ROS production (intracellular versus extracellular). This means that the same cell type may respond to the extracellular ROS differently than to the ROS produced intracellularly in response to extracellular stimuli. However, this has not been well-studied in osteogenic cells [ Contrasting outcomes of extracellular and P Erk1/2 is one of three members of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK). The other two, c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and the P38 kinase, also called stress activated kinases, can induce pathological cell death [ In this study, we implicated ROS in P A clear understanding of the role of ROS in various signaling pathways regulating cell differentiation and function, as well as in pathological processes will allow us to develop therapeutic strategies enhancing positive effects of ROS and minimizing the negative ones. Recent clinical trials targeting redox status of cancer cells demonstrate a significant benefit of redox-based therapies [ We would like to thank Drs. Odile Kellermann and Anne Poliard for providing the 17IIA11 cell line. Research reported in this publication was supported by The following are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at