The alloy Ti–24Al–11Nb was hot rolled in the β phase field at 1523K by 80% and water quenched. The material was then aged at 773K, 873K and 1173K for various lengths of time leading to the formation of the O phase and the α2 phase, either directly from the β or via β to O phase transformation. The O phase shows a “tweed” microstructure while the transformed α2 phase displays the typical plate like features. The texture of the α2 phase whether formed directly or indirectly from the β phase, due to a final ageing treatment at 1173K, is rather strong and non-basal type. By contrast, the α2 texture of the 873K aged material is weak and again non-basal type, but it differs significantly from the texture of the 1173K aged material.The two-phase (α The alloy with a nominal composition Ti–24Al–11Nb was provided by Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Hyderabad (India) in form of a cast pancake. The wet chemical analysis of the as-received material revealed the composition as given in The pancake was cut into rectangular pieces of size 30 As cast As cast As cast All the as-processed samples were subjected to microstructural and structural characterisation. XRD profiles using the normal Bragg Scan, were recorded from polished mid-thickness surfaces of the specimens. Microstructural examination was carried out using a JEOL 2000 FX transmission electron microscope (TEM) operated at 160 Texture examination of the materials was carried out using a X-ray texture goniometer with Cu Kα radiation. The orientation distribution function (ODF) from the bcc β phase were plotted from the data of (2 The X-ray diffraction pattern obtained from the (β) hot rolled specimen is shown in The XRD patterns obtained from the specimens heat treated through routes A–C are shown in Ageing at a temperature 873 At 1173 The existence of an ordered orthorhombic (O) phase (oC16, Cmcm) in Ti–22Al–12.5Nb (at.%) ordered alloy system was first reported by Banerjee et al. It has been shown that a periodic {1 The XRD studies of Hsuing and Wadley As stated earlier, texture study has been carried out for both the starting bcc material as well as the transformed hcp material. Texture of the material heat treated through route A could be measured only for the last step because of non availability of software for orientation distribution function (ODF) calculation for an orthorhombic crystal structure. This heat treatment route involving ageing at 773 The ODF of the sample obtained after ageing at 873 The ODF of the material directly aged at 1173 These results indicate that texture of material subjected to ageing at 1173 The orientation (1 In the case when 773 The Ti–24Al–11Nb alloy in the β quenched condition reveals a structure consisting mostly of β(B2) phase. Isothermal ageing of this material gives rise to the formation of orthorhombic ‘O’ phase, ‘O’ phase followed by α Texture of the as β rolled material is weak. However, the texture of transformed α The authors are grateful to Dr. D. Banerjee, Director, DMRL, Hyderabad for his encouragement during the course of present investigation. We sincerely acknowledge Prof. Dr. G. Gottstein, Director, Institut für Metalkunde und Metalphysik, RWTH, Aachen for providing texture measurement facility and Ms. G. Brückner for her help during texture measurement.