Experiments with laser Doppler velocimetry show that, for flat bottom hydrocyclones, the axial velocity field is a function of the radius and a linear function of the axial co-ordinate, while the tangential velocity is a function of the radial co-ordinate only. Based on these results, a physical model is presented, where the flow field is divided in two zones. Zone I corresponds to the feed inlet, which occurs through a ring in the upper portion of the cylinder, the length of which depends on the length of the vortex finder tube. Zone II includes the rest of the cylinder. The axial symmetric solution of Reynolds equations for the isotropic turbulent flow leads to two sets of field equations, one for each zone in the hydrocyclone. In zone II, where experimental data were determined, simulation compares favourably with the flow pattern determined experimentally for water in a 100-mm flat bottom hydrocyclone.It is interesting to notice that while, conical hydrocyclones are the most widely used classification equipment in the mineral industries, cylindrical hydrocyclones, more often called flat bottom hydrocyclones, were the first to be mathematically modelled. The reason for this is that the cylindrical geometry is more amenable to mathematical treatment than the cylindro-conical combination. Rietema and co-workers The early work on cylindrical hydrocyclones was fragmentary and restricted, in the sense that only the tangential velocity component was studied, assuming that it was a function of the radial co-ordinate only and that the functional form of the radial velocity could be derived from experimental evidence. The consequence of this assumption was not investigated further. As examples, take the cases analysed by Rietema and Krajenbrink The problem with the models developed by Rietema and co-workers is that they do not consider explicitly the axial velocity, which was experimentally known, and assumed arbitrarily a radial velocity. Furthermore, their solutions serve only to calculate the centrifugal force, but give no clue as to how the particles are separated and how the particles and fluid are evacuated from the equipment. The conclusion is that, to solve the dynamic process for cylindrical hydrocyclones, it is first necessary to measure the axial and tangential velocity distributions in these hydrocyclones, and then, it is essential to solve all three components of Reynolds equations, together with the continuity equation. That is the objective of this work. A flat bottom hydrocyclone 102 mm in diameter and 310.5 mm total in height was built in Perspex. The flow enters the hydrocyclone tangentially through a rectangular tube with 16×43-mm cross section. The hydrocyclone body is a cylinder, 301 mm in length, ending in a short conical section, 9.5 mm in height, forming an angle of 154°. The overflow occurs through a vortex finder tube 82 mm in length and 32 mm in diameter, while the underflow discharge is through an apex of 19 mm in diameter. Water at room temperature (20±0.5°C) was fed to the hydrocyclone under controlled flow conditions by a set of valves. The fluid was pumped from a 0.665 m Velocity and turbulence were measured inside the flat bottom hydrocyclone with a 300 mW two-component fibre optic Dantec LDV. The instrument is controlled by the burst spectrum analysers (BSA) connected to a PC. The equipment is completed by an automatic, computer-controlled, three-direction traverse system. To minimise the optical refraction of the laser beams at curved walls, the flat bottom hydrocyclone was immersed in a water jacket. Coherent light from an argon-ion laser, with a wavelength in the range of 457–514.5 nm, was directed to a transmitter box for frequency shifting to remove the velocities direction ambiguity and perform colour separation In order to extract the Doppler frequencies, the Doppler signals are processed in two BSAs, the BSA master for measuring the main component of the velocity and the BSA slave for the other component, which were set to run in a continuous data collection mode. The experimental data were transferred to a computer for processing via an IEEE-488 interface. To measure the velocity and turbulence in the hydrocyclone, the probe was moved and positioned using a highly accurate computer-controlled three components ( Velocity data were thus measured on four symmetrical vertical positions chosen on the curved walls (azimuths co-ordinates  The complete Reynolds equations, in cylindrical co-ordinates, for the steady axial symmetric flow, with an isotropic turbulence represented by an eddy viscosity, Integrating the continuity equation ( From the experimental results, it can be safely assumed that for a cylindrical hydrocyclone, the tangential velocity is independent of the axial co-ordinate. With this assumption and from Continuity equation: Eliminating the pressure from To satisfy the continuity equation, a stream function Defining the dimensionless variable To obtain this equation, that defines the radial and axial velocity, the viscous terms of equation Consider the hydrocyclone divided into two zones. Zone I corresponds to the upper part of the cylinder with a height Assuming that the feed enters through the entire mantel of zone I, the total volume feed rate The fluid is evacuated from the hydrocyclone through the overflow at the top and through the underflow at the bottom of the equipment at volume rates of Consider that the fluid entering the hydrocyclone has a known circulation A solution that approximates the set of equations ( Using the boundary conditions (   In both the zones In both the zones the pressure distribution can be calculated from, The error of the approximate solution ( In Heights of the zones I and II are arbitrary. We selected The external tangential velocity at the wall  The variation of the tangential velocity with the Reynolds number is given in  Finally, From the exact solutions of the Reynolds equations, as given in this work, and from the results of other research workers that have modelled the cylindrical hydrocyclones For the axial velocity to be a consequence of the radial velocity, it must be a function of The authors acknowledge the partial financial support of this work by the following institutions, DAAD through project 429-511-010-7/334-400-031; Fundación Andes through project C-13131; FONDEF through project D97-I2042; National University Pedro Ruiz Gallo, Perú, where the first author is Staff member and United Engineering Foundation through a fellowship to participate in the Conference on solid–liquid separation, Hawaii, 18–23 April, 1999. The present work is part of the D.Sc. thesis in Mathematical Engineering of the first author at the University of Concepción, Chile.