Ferric chloride and Fe-sulphates are commonly Fe-salts used in water treatment, and the iron ionizes to form Fe3+ or Fe2+ when reduction occurs. A volume of 200mL acid mine drainage (AMD) sample was poured into five 500mL glass beakers or Erlenmeyer flasks and dosed with salts such as FeCl3, Fe2(SO4)3 and FeSO4 respectively. The samples were treated in a jar test and shaken respectively, then settled for 1h, after which the pH, conductivity and turbidity were then measured. Another similar set of experiments was conducted in a jar test where the jars were rotated at 100, 150, 200, 250 and 300rpm for 2min, after which the samples settled for 1h and the same measurements were conducted. A third, similar set of experiments was conducted at a rotating speed of 250rpm for 30, 60 and 90s, and then settled for 1h and the same measurements were conducted. Although the Fe-salts are both divalent and trivalent, the turbidity removal values of the treated AMD samples do not differ significantly. The turbidity in the AMD samples with 90s rapid mixing is slightly higher than in the samples with 30 and 60 rapid mixing. The SEM image of the sample with 90s rapid mixing showed scattered agglomerates which indicates that rupturing occurred. Although there was no pH adjustment done on AMD sample before treatment, the pH and conductivity showed a direct relationship with the turbidity.The effectiveness of the destabilization of a colloidal suspension is the most essential reaction during wastewater treatment. Chemical precipitation is widely known to be an effective and most used process in industrial wastewater treatment because it is relatively simple and inexpensive to operate ( A lot of research has been conducted on the treatment of AMD which includes, lime-, dolomite-neutralization, iron oxidation and gypsum crystallization. Other researchers such as The species distribution is controlled by equilibrium equations (Eqs. The hydrolysis species shown in Fe Ferrous hydroxide precipitates between the pH of 7.0 and 9.0 as shown by Eq. The valence of 2 and 3 between Fe This property of iron cations is exploited for the fractional precipitation of the two hydroxides in chemical analysis. Both hydrolysis species are effective in the adsorption of the sulphides. The sulphides in the solution react with hydrogen to form hydrogen sulphide (H According to It is thus suggested that the inconsistence in the pH changing pattern is influenced by the interfference of water molecules during the destabilization-hydrolysis process. There is some controversy as to whether iron dissolves as Fe Notwithstanding all the technologies employed in wastewater treatment, the physico-chemical reaction is a common factor to both the colloidal suspension (AMD) and the metal salt (Fe The colloidal suspension (AMD) consists of colloids which are charged (mostly negative ions) and surrounded by dipolar water molecules (solvation). The bipolarity of water molecules creates an ionic charge density around the colloids with two ionic layers, a positively charged layer around a negatively charged central colloid and a mixed charged (counter ionic) layer surrounding the positively charged layer, namely diffuse layer. Both layers form an electrostatic double layer (EDL) which was discovered by The EDL is formed by a layer of positive ions which surround the central negative ions and the mixture of positive and negative ions bound together by coulomb forces in a diffuse layer ( The efficiency of the metal salt is determined by the stoichiometry of the metal ion-colloid, valence of metal salt (electronegativity), electron configuration (energy levels), atomic radius of the metal ion and the favourable pH range of precipitates ( The quality of treated water is determined during a coagulation and flocculation, where the latter is divided into perikinetic and orthokinetic flocculation. The former is influenced by thermal conditions during the chemical reactions and the latter is caused by movement of particles close together by gentle water motion ( N Mechanical agitation of the colloidal suspension after the addition of the metal salts has been recommended by researchers ( P The novelty of this study is to determine the turbidity removal efficiency of the Fe salts in a highly acidic AMD sample without pH adjustment using varying mixing rates. Another rationale was to determine the impact of flocs rupture at varying time-frames as well as the minimum time within which optimal flocs are formed. In this study, the coagulation-flocculation treatment has been applied to a AMD solution using 0.043 A second similar set of experiments was conducted and rapid mixing was replaced with shaking done at 250 A third similar set of experiments was conducted with AMD samples dosed with 20 A forth similar set of experiments was conducted with AMD sample dosed with 20 The samples were collected from the Western Decant in the Krugerdorp area in 25 Inorganic coagulants of 0.043 The calculation of the mass of metal salt to obtain 0.043 Monoprotic metal salts (MCl Diprotic metal salts ( In The equipment used for the jar tests was a BIBBY Stuart Scientific Flocculator (SW1 model), which has six adjustable paddles with rotating speeds between 0 and 250 The pH was used as a determinant to assess the rate of hydrolysis and hydrolytic potential of the coagulants at different mixing duration whereas turbidity was to determine the removal of colloidal particles from the samples. A MetterToledo Seven Multimeter (made in Germany) pH metre with an electrode filled with silver chloride solution and the outer glass casing with a small membrane covering at the tip was used. The equipment was calibrated with standard solutions with the pH of 4.0 and 7.0 before use. A EDT instrument FE 280 conductivity-metre (made in Japan) was used and calibrated with a 0.1 KCl standard solution. A Merck Turbiquant 3000  Apart from the pH consideration in wastewater treatment, destabilization-hydrolysis occurs when there is a counter-ionic reaction between electronegative metal salt reacts with ionic charged colloidal suspension to produce hydrolysis products as stated by   It also indicates that 20–60 According to the residual turbidity in the AMD samples with FeCl  There is a decreasing turbidity removal efficiency of FeCl On the other hand, the pH drop in the solution indicates that the rate of hydrolysis increased with dosage, with the likelihood of restabilization due to overdosage. The graph of the turbidity removal efficiency of the FeCl3 in AMD sample (  The left hand side of Experimental results of the pH and residual turbidity indicated that the correlation between the two parameters is not based on the pH range as stated by Fe shows a high hydrolysing potential because of charge density which is equal and greater than 0.1. The lower the negative logarithm of equilibrium constant (pk   The concept behind optimal turbid materials removal is based on the rate of adsorption-desorption (adorption isotherm). It indicates that the destabilization-adsorption occurred under multi-stages dynamics, i.e. neutralization and particle bridging (destabilization), and the maximum internal energy which induces adsorption capacity. Although the characteristics of the polymer are unknown, the turbidity removal results resemble those governed by the hydrophobic interaction as regarded to play a predominant role for the association behaviour in aqueous solutions as stated by We used Pearson correlation coefficient (r) to calculate the relation between pH and residual turbidity using Eq. According to correlation coefficient, 0.70 or higher is very strong relationship, 0.40–0.69 is strong relationship and 0.30–0.39 is moderate relationship. The results from the following data: x Σx Σx Using the results obtained with AMD sample with FeCl Although the Fe-salts are both divalent and trivalent, the turbidity removal values of the AMD samples do not differ significantly. Maximum turbidity removal occurs within 60 This work is based on the research financially supported by the