We report here, the first observation of silicon nanowire growth via the VLS route at 400°C using the HWCVD technique with gold (Au) as catalyst. The supersaturation of the alloy droplet, due to a large flux of atomic silicon generated due to efficient dissociation of the silane over the hot wire, leads to the precipitation of Si nanowires. The hot wire process plays a dual role in the entire nanowire growth. Firstly, the atomic hydrogen generated from the hot wire leads to the formation of the metal nanoclusters. Secondly, it offers a continuous supply of silicon atoms enabling efficient diffusion of Si into the Si–Au eutectic alloy leading to the growth of dense silicon nanowires as observed in the SEM. The Raman and TEM data show that the Si nanowires are amorphous in nature. Precise tuning of the hot wire CVD process parameters gives rise to a high density of silicon nanowires having diameters as small as 50nm and lengths of about a few microns.The driving force for semiconductor nanowire synthesis is the drastically modified electrical conduction and optoelectronic properties of the wires having nanoscale dimensions Presently nanowires have been grown with diameters in the range between 5 and 300 Methods have been developed to form the metal nanoparticles such as dispersion of metal particles, using colloidal metal solutions, annealing of deposited metal films In this work, we report the growth of SiNWs at low silane pressures. We have employed the HWCVD technique in the metal nano-template as well as nanowire formation. This includes the study of the morphology and size of gold nanoparticles formed using the hot wire generated atomic hydrogen and the subsequent nanowire growth. SiNWs are synthesized on glass substrates using Au catalyst using the hot wire chemical vapor deposition method. Corning # 1737 glass substrates are cleaned sequentially in a bath containing deionised water and methanol with ultrasonic agitation for 10 To prepare the Au-catalyst particles, the Au-coated substrates are exposed to atomic hydrogen generated by passing 50 The surface morphology of the Au nano-template and the nanowires thus obtained is studied using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (HITACHI-S3400). Furthermore, the structural characteristics of the synthesized SiNWs are studied using Raman spectroscopy (JOBIN-YVON HORIBA HR-800 micro Raman) and TEM (CM200 Philips). To analyze the as-grown SiNWs by TEM, the SiNWs are removed from the substrate by mechanically scrapping and placing them on the TEM copper grid. The dual role of HWCVD process in the nanowire formation is explained in the following sections.  In the present case, various factors such as the thermal stress in the film and the effect of hot wire generated atomic hydrogen seem to be responsible for the metallic clustering. The mismatch of thermal expansion coefficient causes stress in the film, tending to break it apart to minimise the stress. The difference between the thermal expansion coefficient of corning glass #1737 and Au is ~ SiNWs are grown on the Au nano-template by passing the Si source gas SiH  The Raman spectrum of the silicon nanowires is shown in As mentioned earlier the SEM image ( The amorphous nature of the nanowire may be due to the low temperature growth of the SiNWs. The precipitated Si atoms stack up randomly and form amorphous structures of nanowire. On the other hand, at temperature in the excess of 500 SiNWs have been synthesized on glass using Au-catalyst by the HWCVD. The hot wire process plays a dual role in the formation of the nanowires. Initially it helps in forming the metal nano-template and subsequently assisting in the nanowire growth. The unique feature of the metal nano-template formation via the high temperature treatment of the metallic film with hot wire induced atomic hydrogen, is that regular spherical metal nanoclusters are formed. The temperature at which the atomic hydrogen treatment takes place decides the size of the nanowires. Secondly the hot wire CVD process also assists in the nanowire growth by producing a large amount of Si containing species. The diameters of the synthesized SiNWs are temperature dependent. A structural analysis of the as synthesized nanowires by SAED measurements and Raman scattering studies suggest a higher growth temperature, in order to form crystalline SiNWs. One of the authors (AK) acknowledges the financial support of