Drying of low-rank coals affects: coal cleaning, combustion, comminution, gasification, liquefaction, and in-seam fluid-flow (water, coalbed methane, and carbon dioxide for sequestration/enhanced coalbed methane). To evaluate the extent of drying-induced transitions, 3 lump-sized (approximately 6×2×2cm) Powder River Basin subbituminous coal samples were thermally dried in an air-drying coal oven at 50°C over two weeks. A high-resolution industrial X-ray computed tomography scanner was utilized to generate (non-destructively) three-dimensional regional volumetric renderings, as-received and over 3-stages of drying. The lumps had cleats, both open and mineral filled, with a degree of fracture diversity along the longitudinal plane. Comparison of the virtual slice surfaces, at identifiable locations, allowed the induced cracking and shrinkage accompanying the transitions during 19% moisture loss to almost dry to be observed. Under these drying conditions, the heat transfer, and thus extent of drying, proceeded radially inward. With increased drying time the fractures extend and become larger in aperture as the coal shrinks. The major fractures mostly followed the existing cleat system. With additional drying, these cleats widened and the aperture increase propagated deeper into the coal extended into the butt cleats. New fractures were located mostly perpendicular to the cleat fracture surface. The external volume of the coal lumps had limited shrinkage. The axial extent of the shrinkage length (lump edge to lump edge) was on the order of 4–6%, the bulk of the shrinkage being accommodated by the internal shrinkage between cleats.There is an increased interest in the drying of low-rank coals prior to combustion to reduce water use and CO While coal's bulk properties are more easily studied, it is the microstructure of the coal and the transitions that occur with drying that often determine the behavior of the coal with regard to optimizing: comminution, coal beneficiation, or dynamic fluid-flow predictions. Determining coal's interior microstructure typically requires destruction of the sample using petrographic approaches that slice into the coal (after resin impregnation) and examine the polished surface(s) Computerized tomography reconstructs a volume representation from which cross-sectional views of selected transverse planes can be obtained. CT imaging creates a quantitative map of the X-ray attenuation coefficient in any transverse plane. The distribution of the X-ray attenuation coefficients allows localization of specific features in the material and has been used to study coal. X-ray visualization of coal dates back to the formative years of X-ray shadowgraphs A subbituminous coal sample was obtained from the Pennsylvania State University Coal Sample Bank and Database X-ray imaging was performed using the Universal HD-600 industrial scanner. The coal sample has a significant amount of water, thus the density changes and shrinkage/cracking accompanying moisture loss results in an X-ray attenuation change that can be mapped in three dimensions. The resolution of the image is dependent on the X-ray spot size, sample size, and location within the beam. To better capture the transitions occurring, only a portion of the coal volume was scanned to increase resolution (obvious smooth curved “surfaces” indicate termination of the imaging front). Resolution obtained under these conditions was 70 Coal lumps within the packing assembly were dried in a Fisher Model 496 Isotemp Controlled Atmosphere Moisture Oven in air at 50 The volume reconstruction generated from the X-ray CT consists of grey-scale voxels (3D pixels) mapped to the X-ray attenuation. Typical results for as-received samples are shown in The mass loss upon heating at 50  Radial drying was expected and is evident. It is possible, due to the open-cut mining, that some moisture loss occurred prior to obtaining the samples. Handling/mining also may have also induced fractures, although care was taken to avoid rough handling during transport from Montana to Pennsylvania. Weathering also impacts moisture loss and retention The rate of drying influences the pore structure With extended drying, comminution and coal cleaning will be easier. The images presented here show the benefits of coal drying with coal particles size reduction as a strategy to free mineral particles. This may also have benefits for trace element mitigation as they are often associated with the mineral portion of coal The thermal drying of lump-sized subbituminous coal from the Powder River Basin was followed, non-destructively, with high-resolution X-ray tomography. The lumps had cleats, both open and mineral filled, with a degree of fracture diversity along the longitudinal plane. X-ray CT scanning occurred with as-received samples and over 3-stages of thermal drying (in a coal-drying oven operating at 50