The Ni sheets were treated by single ball impacts in the vibration mill. The microstructural evolution and formation of the nanocrystalline grains were investigated as a function of the processing time and the ball size. The smaller balls were more effective for grain refinement. After 15-min treatment, the grain size was around 300nm for 20-mm ball and 70nm for 15-mm balls. 20-nm grain size may be attained after 30-min treatment by 20-mm ball. The difference in microstructural evolution was attributed to the impact frequency that appeared to be higher for the smaller balls at a present experimental condition. Ball collisions destroyed the initial rolling texture and could lead to the formation of the fiber texture. After 30-min treatment by 20-mm ball, microhardness increased more than five times.Grain refinement induced by ball collisions has recently received much consideration because it can improve a range of mechanical properties In this study, the microstructural evolution of the Ni sheets was investigated as a function of the processing time and the ball size. In the present experiment, we used single ball impacts to simplify our analysis of the material behavior. Moreover, as we known it was the largest ball size that was used for surface severe plastic deformation. The results from the single impact events may be further used to predict the material behavior during multiple ball collisions for different devices.  The microstructural evolution of the sheets was investigated as a function of the processing time and the ball size. The structure of the as-fabricated samples was studied by X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis using a Rigaku diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation. The (2 The pole figures in  However, the grain structure of the Ni sheet treated by the 15-mm ball differed considerably from that fabricated by the 20-mm ball ( The contrast in grain size at different ball size can be understood in terms of the impact frequency. The frequency of the 15-mm ball's oscillations was reasonably assumed to match the frequency of the chamber. Therefore, the milling intensity was maximized and, consequently, the strain rate reached higher value than in the case of low impact frequency. When the ball size was increased to 20 We also increased the treatment time for 20-mm ball to observed further structural development of the ultrafine grains. Increase treatment time decreased grain size. After 30 The microhardness as a function of the ball size and treatment time is shown in Single ball impacts may be effectively used for grain refinement. The process was affected by the ball size. The smaller balls were more effective for grain refinement. When the larger 20-mm ball was used, grain refinement occurred via formation of dislocation cells and evolution of the dislocation cells to a granular structure that was appropriate for the low strain rate. When the 15-mm ball was used, nanocrystalline grains developed from the lamellae that were appropriate to higher strain rate. The difference in microstructural evolution was attributed to the impact frequency that seems to have been higher for the smaller balls at present experimental condition. The ball collisions may be used in the effective, short-term, solid-state processing to destroy the texture of the thin sheets. Ball collisions destroyed the initial rolling texture of the Ni sheets with thickness of 0.5 This research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by