The extent and rate of dissolution of two natural pyrrhotite samples, one monoclinic (Fe0.88S) and the other hexagonal (Fe0.90S), were studied in alkaline cyanide solutions (pH 10). The effects of dissolved oxygen, particle size, and temperature were investigated. The extent of dissolution was followed by monitoring the dissolved sulfur levels in solution. The initial rates of dissolution were determined by fitting the conversion data to a second-order polynomial regression equation. The rate of dissolution of the monoclinic pyrrhotite under the variety of conditions was found to be greater than that of the hexagonal pyrrhotite. The activation energies for the oxidative dissolution of monoclinic and hexagonal pyrrhotites were found to be 65.3 and 71.9 kJ/mol, respectively, which indicated that the initial dissolution of pyrrhotite is under chemical control. The reduced reactivity of the hexagonal form was attributed to its greater iron content, which, during oxidation, was proposed to form a more compact iron-oxyhydroxide coating, which passivated the sulfide and made it less susceptible to cyanide ion attack. No passivation effect was evident in the case of the monoclinic pyrrhotite.Gold recovery relies on the hydrometallurgical process of cyanidation. This process is essentially the dissolution of gold ore in the presence of oxygen according to The low dissolution of gold in oxygenated cyanide solutions containing pyrrhotite has often been attributed to the high reactivity of pyrrhotite. It has been reported in early studies Although sulfate ions were detected as the end product The possible loss of cyanide ion through the formation of such stable complexes as those indicated above increases the costs associated with reagent consumption, and is a major variable in the financial viability of a gold operation The mineralogical assays of ores presented for cyanidation are often focussed on the gold content and give only a relatively poor characterization of the material. Hence, although pyrrhotite may be identified by optical microscopy as being present in a sample, it is not usual to specify its concentration, crystal structure or stoichiometry, all of which may be expected to influence the rate of its dissolution. It has been previously reported that the rate of dissolution of synthesised samples of hexagonal pyrrhotite in cyanide solution depends strongly on the stoichiometry of the pyrrhotite This previous study has been broadened to investigate the relationship between the crystal morphology of natural upgraded samples of hexagonal and monoclinic pyrrhotite, and their rate of dissolution in cyanide solution. Massive samples of hexagonal and monoclinic pyrrhotite were respectively obtained from Renison Tin Mine in Zeeman, Tasmania and Three-Mile Hill in Kalgoorlie, Western Australia. The beneficiated samples were analysed for iron and sulfur by wet chemical analysis. The Renison Tin sample consisted of 56.4% Fe and 36.0% S, giving a stoichiometry of Fe Examination by SEM (Philips XL30) coupled with Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy indicated that the impurities in both pyrrhotite samples consisted of iron/magnesium oxides and silicates, quartz, and aluminium silicates. No other sulfides were detected. A liquid bromine and aqua regia digest was employed to quantitatively determine that the hexagonal and monoclinic samples were respectively composed of 3.5% and 2.2% w/w by silicates and quartz. The bulk samples were crushed further and dry-sieved through a set of Endecott precision sieves producing particle size fractions of 63–90, 45–63 and 20–45 μm. The fractions were then wet-sieved using acetone to remove any fines. The samples were stored in a desiccator under a nitrogen atmosphere when not in use. The surface areas of the various particle size fractions of the natural pyrrhotites examined in this study were determined by the Brunauer, Emmett and Teller (BET) method, using a Quantachrome Autosorb-1 surface area analyser. Approximately 5.0 g of the sample was accurately weighed into a clean glass Autosorb sample tube, which was then outgassed at 100°C in a vacuum for 60 min. The tube was attached to the automatic analyser and the extent of nitrogen adsorption at five pressures, ranging from 0.1 to 0.3 of the saturated nitrogen vapour pressure was measured. The results of the surface area analysis are listed in Dissolution studies were conducted using a leaching apparatus which was comprised of a five port Metrohm 350 ml titration reaction vessel fitted with a plastic impeller aligned down the center axis, and baffles to inhibit the formation of vortex during rotation. The impeller was rotated using a Heidolph RZR 2021 electronic stirrer. An impeller rotation speed of 450±5 rpm was used in all the dissolution studies carried out in this study. The reaction vessel was suspended in a water bath and maintained at a set temperature using a Julabo F26 refrigeration/heating unit. The pH of the solution was measured continuously using an Ionode intermediate junction hydrogen ion selective electrode (ISE) with internal reference. All leach solutions were maintained at a pH of 10.50±0.20 by the addition of sodium hydroxide solution (1 M). The dissolved oxygen concentration was measured using a precalibrated Activon Model 401 platinum/silver polarographic electrode with oxygen-permeable membrane. Both the pH and dissolved oxygen concentrations were logged at regular intervals throughout the leaching experiments using an application written in LABTECH NOTEBOOK pro for Windows ver. 8.1. The free cyanide ion concentration in leach solutions was measured by recording the voltage between a calibrated Ionode Model SI 12 cyanide ISE and a Philips R11 saturated Calomel reference electrode. Unless stated otherwise, the cyanide concentration was maintained at 10 mM by the addition of a cyanide solution (1 M at a pH of 10.50) where necessary. Bottled BOC industrial grade air, and high purity oxygen and nitrogen were used as gas sources in the dissolution studies. Carbon dioxide and other acidic gases were scrubbed prior to entering the reaction vessel by passing the gas through a Mallcosorb indicating carbon dioxide adsorbent filter tube, followed by a 500-ml Dreschel flask of granulated sodium hydroxide pellets. The gas feed was then passed through several Dreschel flasks containing concentrated and dilute sodium hydroxide solutions, and finally deionised and Milli-Q water, respectively before introduction into the reaction vessel. Dissolution studies were carried out by initially filling the reaction vessel with 310±0.5 ml of sodium cyanide solution (pH of 10.50), stirred at 450 rpm, while sparging it with oxygen, air or nitrogen introduced at a flow rate of 50±5 ml min Data analysis for kinetic purposes were carried out with Kaleidagraph, version 3.08, produced by Synergy in 1996. The dissolution of the mineral during the leaching experiments was followed by monitoring the concentration of dissolved sulfur present in the solution as a function of time. This is an effective way to measure dissolution, as the many oxidative and non-oxidative reaction mechanisms proposed for pyrrhotite dissolution all yield soluble sulfur species in some form, or yield sulfur products which readily react with cyanide ions to form soluble thiocyanate ions. Control experiments were conducted in the absence of pyrrhotite to ascertain the level of changes of the various parameters over a 24-h period. The values of pH and cyanide remained constant over 24 h at 10.50±0.10 pH units and 1.00±0.02×10 Data is plotted as a function of particle size, as the ratio of the surface areas of the monoclinic:hexagonal pyrrhotites were effectively constant as indicated in  When nitrogen was sparged in the solution both types of mineral dissolved to some extent. Although the dissolution could be accounted for by When the lixivant was aerated with air and oxygen gas the dissolution profile for the hexagonal pyrrhotite was markedly different to that for the monoclinic pyrrhotite. The hexagonal pyrrhotite showed a parabolic dissolution with respect to time for both air and oxygen, while the monoclinic dissolution appeared to show a linear profile over the time period in each case. Additionally, after 24 h the extent of dissolution of the monoclinic pyrrhotite was 1.78 and 2.40 wt.% when air and oxygen gas were respectively used as the oxidants, while the hexagonal only dissolved by 0.76 and 0.98 wt.% for each of the sparged gases. In gold processing, this magnitude of dissolution could be considered significant, especially when the content of pyrrhotite in some sulfide ores may exceed 10 wt.%. The differences in the profile of dissolution and the extent of dissolution could not be merely accounted for by the relative surface areas, and suggests that the crystal structure of the pyrrhotite significantly affects the mechanism by which each type dissolves. The dissolution data were fitted to a range of kinetic models listed in In general kinetic studies, where the rate law has the form: Ciminelli and Osseo-Asare The initial rate of hexagonal pyrrhotite dissolution showed a linear dependence on dissolved oxygen, which was not reproduced for the case of monoclinic pyrrhotite. In nitrogen the initial rates of dissolution of the two pyrrhotites were almost equal, which correlates well to the suggestion of surface area dictating extent of dissolution. Under oxidative conditions, the ratio of the initial rates for the monoclinic to the hexagonal pyrrhotite increased as a function of dissolved oxygen, and indicated that the dissolution mechanism between the two types of pyrrhotite changed dramatically. The differences in the dissolution mechanisms might be thought to depend on the stoichiometry of the pyrrhotite. This is in accord with a previous study which showed for synthesized pyrrhotites the extent of dissolution in alkaline cyanide solutions decreased with increasing iron content Since the morphology of the reacted particles might reveal which leaching model is active during dissolution, micrographs of the unreacted and reacted pyrrhotite samples (45–63 μm) were obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The samples had been leached for a period of 7 days in an aqueous solution of sodium cyanide (10 mM, pH 10) sparged with air. Surprisingly, little difference was observed between the unreacted samples and the leached samples, and there was no evidence of a discernible coating on the particles (see Furthermore, quantitative elemental analysis by EDS of regions at the edges of the leached particles showed no differentiation of elemental composition as compared to the inner unreacted core of the mineral particles. It was estimated from SEM analysis at high magnification that if a coating did exist, it must be less than 0.1 μm in thickness. Studies using XPS and XRD The fact that even after long leaches no coatings were observed in the SEM analyses, is attributable to the low conversions that were achieved during oxidative dissolution of pyrrhotite in cyanide solutions (i.e., <3%). For comparison, coatings formed on pyrite particles The only difference apparent in the micrographs of the reacted minerals is that the reacted monoclinic particles surfaces appear to be slightly more fractured and fragmented than those of the unreacted monoclinic and reacted hexagonal pyrrhotite. This may be a result of the polishing step employed in sample preparation, but may also indicate that cyanide leaching imposes a reduction in the mechanical strength of the surface of the monoclinic pyrrhotite mineral.  For both pyrrhotite types, the extent of dissolution decreased with increasing particle size. The amount of hexagonal pyrrhotite dissolved over a 24-h period was found to be 0.76, 0.44, and 0.39 wt.% for the respective particle size fractions of 20–45, 45–63 and 63–90 μm, compared with 1.78, 0.64 and 0.45 wt.% for the same particle sizes of the monoclinic sample. These results show that a halving of the particle size results in a two-fold increase in the extent of dissolution of hexagonal pyrrhotite, but a four-fold increase for the monoclinic pyrrhotite. These comparisons suggest that although the hexagonal pyrrhotite dissolution profiles are parabolic, the long-term dissolution is controlled by linear rather than parabolic processes The most distinguishing feature in comparing the two plots is the large drop in the dissolved oxygen levels associated with the dissolution of the 20–45 μm monoclinic pyrrhotite, which contrasts with a smaller drop observed for the equivalent size fraction of the hexagonal. The decay in the dissolved oxygen level for the monoclinic pyrrhotite approaches a limiting value, which does not recover during the time of the experiment. This dramatic drop in dissolved oxygen levels is not a consequence of the initial surface areas of the minerals. At this time, we have no proven explanation for this behaviour. The effect has been verified experimentally, with two separate workers preparing their own samples reproducing the results. It is possible that this large increase in oxygen consumption of the 20–45 μm monoclinic pyrrhotite is associated with an increase in the reacting surface area undergoing oxidative dissolution. Such an increase could be attributed to the primary particles breaking up into smaller fractions, and would support the previously mentioned fracturing observed in the SEM analysis of the monoclinic particles. This surface area effect and the resulting mechanical strength of these particles would be expected to be dependent on size, and so larger particle fractions would be less susceptible to such behaviour. The first 2 h of the reaction could be regarded as an induction period. If a coating is formed, which then sloughs off once it reaches a certain mass, and some of the pyrrhotite surface is taken with it, then the available surface area may increase rapidly and begin a new phase of the reaction. There may be a limiting particle size above which this does not occur. If small fractured particles are formed they would be difficult to detect as they dissolve rapidly. This occurs in monoclinic pyrrhotite and not hexagonal pyrrhotite because in part, as pointed out earlier, hexagonal pyrrhotite contains more iron than monoclinic pyrrhorite and so affords a more consistent and adhering iron oxy/hydroxy coating which prevents the break-up of the surface.  The plot indicates that a linear relationship exists between the particle size and the initial rate for both forms of pyrrhotite, although the initial rate of the monoclinic form has a significantly greater dependence on particle size than does the hexagonal. A parabolic dissolution mechanism such as in the Shrinking Core model would have instead resulted in linearity in a plot of the initial rate vs. 1/  The extent of dissolution for both forms of pyrrhotite is observed to increase with increasing temperature. The monoclinic pyrrhotite underwent 1.77, 2.04, and 2.66 wt.% conversion at the respective temperatures of 25°C, 35°C and 45°C The dissolution profiles for the hexagonal pyrrhotite retained a parabolic dependence at the three temperatures studied. The monoclinic pyrrhotite dissolution profiles changed from showing a linear dependence at 25°C to one showing a parabolic dependence at 45°C. From the effect of temperature on the initial rates, the activation energy for the dissolution reaction can be determined from the Arrhenius equation: The magnitude of the energies indicated that the initial dissolution reactions of both forms of pyrrhotite were under chemical control. It also implies that in the initial stages of reaction, the coatings that are afforded by the dissolution reaction do not apply significant diffusional resistance to hinder the reaction. This may not be true for the monoclinic form at higher temperatures. The linear dissolution observed at lower temperatures may indicate that the rate of dissolution is slower than the diffusional rate through a porous coating. As the temperature increases, the rate of dissolution may increase to a level that is greater than diffusion through any oxide coating, and thus convert from linear to parabolic behaviour. This might also explain the changing ratio of dissolved monoclinic to hexagonal pyrrhotite as the temperature increased, with the ratios being 2.3 at 25°C, 2.0 at 35°C, and 1.5 at 45°C. The two natural pyrrhotites, one with hexagonal and the other with monoclinic structure, showed appreciable oxidative dissolution when leached in cyanide solution over a 24-h period. The rate of dissolution of the minerals increased with an increase in oxygen partial pressure, decrease in particle size, and increase in temperature. Under all sets of experimental conditions, the monoclinic form exhibited greater reactivity than the hexagonal form. In particular, a fraction of monoclinic pyrrhotite of particle size 25–45 μm caused severe depletion of dissolved oxygen in the solution, an effect that was not observed with the hexagonal form. The difference in reactivity is most likely due to the nature of the iron-oxyhydroxide product layers that are formed during oxidation, one of which offers some protection to dissolution under all conditions used in this study, while the other offers protection only at elevated temperatures. This work indicates that reporting data on mineral reactivity makes it essential to characterize the minerals in terms of a variety of properties, which includes their crystal structure. Classifying minerals in generic terms i.e., “pyrrhotite”, is insufficient to predict their reactivity. Furthermore, the results have industrial implications. In some gold processing plants, which have pyrrhotite as a component of the feedstock to the cyanide leaching plant, the feedstock is subjected to an aeration pre-conditioning step designed to produce an oxide coating, which is expected to reduce the solubility of the pyrrhotite in cyanide solution. While this might have an effect on any hexagonal pyrrhotite present, it appears that this approach will have no effect on the reactivity of the monoclinic component. This work was carried out with the financial support of the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centers Program through the AJ Parker CRC for Hydrometallurgy.