From the perspective of high temperature structural applications, it is important to evaluate temperature dependent mechanical properties of titanium diboride (TiB2) ceramics. The present study reports the effect of TiSi2 content (up to 10wt.%) and temperature on hardness and strength of TiB2. The hardness properties were measured from room temperature (RT)—900°C in vacuum; the four-point flexural strength properties were evaluated at selected temperatures in air up to 1000°C. An attempt has been made to discuss the difference in hardness and strength properties with sinter-aid amount and microstructure. Our experimental results clearly indicated that the addition of 2.5wt.% TiSi2 to TiB2 resulted almost full densification at a lower hot pressing temperature of 1650°C without compromising on the high temperature strength and hardness properties. The hot pressed TiB2–2.5wt.% TiSi2 ceramic could retain moderate strength of more than 400MPa and hardness of 9GPa at 1000°C and 900°C, respectively.In the last few decades, ceramics have emerged as a new generation of high temperature materials for aerospace and other structural applications. Transition metal diborides (TiB In particular, TiB It has to be mentioned here that although TiB In the present investigation, TiB The densification data of the hot pressed samples is presented in The microstructural analysis shows that hot pressed TiB From the etched microstructures of different TiB The samples (5 The specimens for strength measurements were cut from the hot pressed disks and machined into bar shapes with dimensions of 3 The measured hardness values of TiB In The crystalline phases of TiB The high temperature strength and hardness properties of the TiB It is known that the brittle materials can be plastically deformed even at temperatures below 0.5 It can be further mentioned here that Munro  Up to 500 At 1000 A summary of research results illustrating the effect of temperature on flexural strength of some of the important high temperature structural ceramics is presented in Finally, the present experimental results clearly confirm the advantage of using TiSi The hardness measurements of TiB Both at RT and 500 At 1000 The authors thank Mr. K. Yoon for the help in carrying out the high temperature flexural strength tests at the Korea Research Institute of Standards and Science (KRISS), Korea. G.B. Raju wishes to express sincere gratitude to Dr. M.C. Chu and Dr. B. Phanigrahi for the cooperation in the hot pressing experiments during his brief stay at KRISS.