Interpolation of solute concentration measurements often yields disappointing results, especially when it fails to incorporate some knowledge relative to the underlying physics of groundwater flow and solute transport. Concentration maps, however, are required in several applications such as plume monitoring, evaluation of total dissolved mass, design of hydraulic containment and pump-and-treat systems, source identification and natural attenuation assessment. Kriged concentration maps can be improved by a coordinate transformation based on natural flow coordinates, as this allows to consider variations in the local anisotropy direction produced by heterogeneous groundwater flow. On the other hand, this does not consider nonstationarity induced by local dispersion. This paper presents a flexible kriging approach that combines a coordinate transformation based on groundwater flow and a class of nonstationary (NS) covariance functions that can be parameterized to account for the evolution of concentration correlation and variance with travel time/distance. We also propose an alternative flow coordinate transformation that does not rely on the stream function, enabling the computation of approximate 3-D flow coordinates. Nonstationary covariance parameters are estimated using maximum likelihood, and candidate parametrizations are compared by the likelihood ratio test and Akaike Information Criterion. The approach is tested on simple 2-D and 3-D synthetic plumes shaped by heterogeneous flow and local dispersion. Results show that: (1) NS covariance parameterizations improve significantly the likelihood compared to the stationary models, (2) the combined coordinate transformation and NS covariance approach enhances kriging of solute concentrations. Although the flow fields are considered known in the case studies, the approach can be modified to incorporate flow uncertainty and lends itself to various useful extensions, such as mass flux estimation.Interpolation of concentration measurements is generally required in environmental studies involving groundwater contamination; yet, several factors complicate this task. In most cases, the number of measurements is limited by economical considerations, leading to a sparse sampling network. Further, concentration data feature a heterogeneous, anisotropic and nonstationary distribution ( Comparison of conventional interpolation approaches to solute concentration estimation is done by In geostatistics, coordinate transformations have been widely used to cope with spatially-varying anisotropy ( Although stochastic studies based on first-order perturbation theory differ in underlying assumptions and purpose with the present work, they provide valuable insight for the concentration covariance function. For example, As it was mentioned previously, coordinate transformations may be used in some cases to model a nonstationary variable by mapping it in a new Euclidean space where the stationarity assumption is reasonable or, at least, where anisotropy is simplified. When the location of points in the new space is not obtained directly from a geographical or geological model ( The objective of this study is to develop a kriging approach that incorporates available physical model information to enhance solute concentration estimation. As in This paper focuses on the methodological aspects of the approach. Computation of the proposed alternative flow coordinates (AFC) is explained in Section In Section In order to extend the kriging approach presented in To illustrate the method, consider a 3-D flow domain, For the box-shaped model in For general model geometry, curvilinear inflow boundary may require numerical mapping procedure to compute the The coordinates We emphasize that the computation of flow coordinates can be performed on multiple flow fields corresponding, for example, to competing conceptual models or to realizations from geostatistical simulations. In such cases, computation of the flow coordinates must be repeated for each of the flow fields.  Nonstationarity in Eqs. The variance In order to produce a nonstationary covariance model, the model presented above requires parameterization of the spatial variation of the kernel covariance matrix As the AFC and NFC transformations straighten the streamlines, the kernel covariance matrices can be simplified. Indeed, the main continuity direction become parallel to the coordinate axes, allowing the use of diagonal kernel covariance matrices (no rotations, the kernels are aligned with the coordinate axes) as in In order to generate a correlation increase with travel time/distance, nonstationary range parameters are chosen to increase linearly as a function of hydraulic head decrease, Δ For the variance, we neglect the small-distance increase usually observed in stochastic studies, and model As the proposed models are a simplification of the real (unknown) underlying model, we consider testing several candidate combinations of the range and variance parameterizations: S1: Stationary model with constant range parameters, NS1: Nonstationary model with range parameters of the form given in Eq. NS2: Nonstationary model with constant range parameters, NS3: Nonstationary model with range parameters and variance of the form given in Eqs.    For each model presented in the previous section, covariance parameters are estimated using maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). In practice, we minimize the negative log-likelihood In Eq. Modeling nonstationary covariance comes with the risk of overfitting, as more parameters are required compared with a stationary function ( Let As mentioned above, stationary models are in fact simpler versions of the proposed nonstationary models in which some parameters are set to 0. Models NS1 and NS2 are not nested as none of them can be expressed as a simpler version of the other (however NS1 and NS2 are nested with S1). Similarly, LRT is not used to test among the different coordinate transformations. In 3-D, NSX The small sample Akaike Information Criterion, AIC In addition to the ML statistic, LRT and AIC Furthermore, we also use statistics that depend on the use of a contamination threshold value to delineate the plume. Among those is the relative error between the estimated and the reference contaminated volumes the concentration is correctly estimated as under the threshold (true negative), the concentration is incorrectly estimated as above the threshold (false positive), the concentration is incorrectly estimated as under the threshold (false negative), the concentration is correctly estimated as above the threshold (true positive). The maximum attainable value for In this first example, we use a simple 2-D model, similar to that presented in A finite element solver (COMSOL Multiphysics) is used to produce a flow field and contaminant plume, from the synthetic model shown in   Kriged concentration maps obtained are compared to the reference plume ( The previous example has shown that the proposed AFC approach, although approximate, produces similar results as the NFC. In the present example, a 3-D flow field is computed from the hydraulic conductivity model shown in  Another interesting aspect of the proposed approach is the combined effect of the coordinate transformation and nonstationary covariance function on the estimation variance (or kriging variance). As for the covariance functions presented in Section  In the case of a continuous source, where the highest concentrations are necessarily found upstream in the domain, the nonstationary parameterizations NS2 and NS3 have the effect of relating higher estimation variance to higher concentrations values, and lower estimation variance to lower concentrations values. The estimation variance (conditional variance) inherits the nonstationarity from the spatial transformation and the nonstationary parameterization of the covariance model; thus, it does not depend only on the location of data and the covariance model (gaussian, exponential, etc.). Note that the estimation variances, contrary to the concentration estimates, are highly model dependant. In the proposed kriging approach, we combined the use a coordinate transformation with the nonstationary covariance class proposed by The candidate covariance parametrizations were tested on the basis of their maximum likelihood values using the likelihood ratio test (LRT). For both the 2-D and 3-D examples, nonstationary parameterizations of the covariance function yields larger ML values and were deemed significant by LRT compared to stationary models. In 3-D, fully anisotropic models were not significantly better than the anisotropic models with transverse range parameters set equal. This is consistent with the reference model, which uses equal The other purpose of this article was to test a substitute coordinate transformation. Previous work ( The approach heavily relies on MLE for parameter selection, as it cannot be done with variography in this case. Unfortunately, one drawback of the MLE is that it requires a multi-Gaussian distribution of the data (possibly after transformation of the studied variable). As this is not the case for concentration data, the ML values should be seen as approximate. Note, however, that LRT is considered to be robust to slight departure from normality ( For the examples presented above, the visual aspect of the kriged plumes is improved by the proposed approach. Nonstationary covariance eliminates the excessive longitudinal spreading observed with the stationary model on the transformed grid. Although the comparison of the kriged maps with the reference indicates better plume delineation with the combined AFC-NS covariance models, comparative statistics are often only slightly better than Cartesian or stationary models. Cross-validation RMSE only showed small improvement by the proposed hybrid kriging approach. However, none of the statistics used describes the improvement by itself and the approach clearly increased the overall plausibility of the kriged maps in both examples. The coordinate transformation and the proposed nonstationary models has notable effects on the kriging variance. The coordinate transformation, along with a strong anisotropy, allows low kriging variance associated with data to stretch in the direction of groundwater flow. In addition, the combined effect of the range increase and variance decrease in the flow direction yields kriging variances that are higher upstream and lower downstream. This is consistent with a decrease of the concentration variance due to dispersion, reported from first-order perturbation theory. Having the spatial continuity increase and variance decrease with groundwater flow allows the estimation variance to display some relationship with the magnitude of concentration values; thus, it no longer depends only on the data configuration in the Cartesian system. This is interesting as the potential for large errors is greater near the continuous source than away from it, especially as its position is considered uncertain. Although the constant mean assumption is not supported by physics, this model performed better than one with a linear drift decreasing away from the inflow boundary. In work not presented here, this universal kriging model yielded higher ML values, but failed to produce visual or statistical improvement on kriged maps compared to ordinary kriging. Serious bias was observed as concentrations were overestimated in the upstream part of the domain where concentrations should have been zero. Note that this may also happen with a constant mean, but to a lesser extent. Moreover, a linear drift would possibly lead to negative concentration values in the downstream part of the domain. A physically plausible mean that would consider the plume transverse profile could possibly enhance the kriging; however, it would likely require information or assumptions about the source position. A power-transformation such as that is used by Many studies show that the solute concentrations pdf can be modeled as a scaled beta distribution ( Reference flow fields were used for illustration in the examples, however, perfect knowledge of the flow field is not required for the approach. In practical situations, the model used should be a conceptual model of the problem, which hopefully will include the determinant flow features, depending on the available knowledge. This has been illustrated in a previous paper ( In a 2-D example, No assumptions relative to the contaminant source position or release history, and to the transport parameters are made, as opposed to inverse modeling approaches which provide a framework for plume interpolation. Although it is more computationally intensive than conventional interpolation methods, the nonstationary kriging approach enables kriging to account for groundwater flow, through the coordinate transformation, and for dispersion and dilution, through the nonstationary covariance model. Enhanced concentration maps can be used for computation of contaminant mass, as an initial solution for numerical fate-and-transport modeling or as validation target for such numerical models. Combined with groundwater velocities from the flow model used for the AFC, the interpolated maps could be used for computing mass fluxes as well; thus providing a tool for natural attenuation assessment. Since the alternative flow coordinates no longer require the computation of the stream function solution, wells and sources may be readily included to the flow models. In its actual form, which uses the streamlines start points on the inflow boundaries for coordinate identification, the approach could only accommodate pumping wells. For injection wells, streamlines used for the computation of the flow coordinates should be identified with their endpoints on the outflow boundaries. Complex cases with both sources and wells, would be more challenging as splitting the domain into subdomains using dividing streamlines similarly to The alternative flow coordinates (AFC) provided similar results to the natural flow coordinates (NFC) in 2-D. They also provided better mapping than kriging on Cartesian coordinates for a 3-D problem, especially when combined with nonstationary covariances. Simple parameterizations of the covariance range parameter and variance were sufficient to improve significantly the likelihood function and to generate sizeable improvements on various performance statistics. Moreover, results obtained with the combined approach appear physically more realistic, both for the concentration estimates and for the estimation variance. The approach is flexible and lends itself to useful extensions, such as mass fluxes estimation. Financial support for this research was provided by a scholarship from the