The aim of this study was to investigate the possible influence of surface topographical features on the spatial variability of glyphosate degradation and some microbial characteristics in sandy loam soil. Soil samples were taken from the ploughed layer across an agricultural field after seedbed preparation for grain (Grue site), and down to 1m depth under a ridge tilled field (Målselv site), both sites having similar soil textural characteristics (sandy loam soil). Laboratory experiments were performed looking at glyphosate mineralization and soil microbial activity at the Grue site, as well as microbial biomass, activity and substrate utilization patterns at the Målselv site. Microbial biomass and activity decreased, and substrate utilization patterns changed with increasing soil depth, reflecting naturally occurring changes in quantity and quality of soil organic carbon. Further, our results show that considerable spatial heterogeneity in the degradation rate of glyphosate and general carbon utilization exists even across small areas within a single agricultural field. This horizontal variability was observed over several spatial scales, and could not be clearly explained. It evidently arose from differences in environmental factors affecting microbial activity and growth, and topographical features controlling redistribution of water and matter flow patterns were correlated to the investigated soil microbial variables.Soil is a heterogeneous medium due to the variability in its physical, chemical and biological constituents. The physico-chemical and structural characteristics of soil provide many microhabitats in which complex bacterial populations can evolve, and the variability in soil microbial factors is found to be higher than the variability in physical and chemical parameters ( The topic of different scales of spatial variation and the factors driving the variability has been reviewed by Soil was sampled from agricultural fields in Grue (South-East Norway) at N60°28′ E12°02′, and Målselv (North Norway) at N69°15′ E18°33′. Both locations had alluvial sandy loam soils, with potatoes as a main crop in rotation with barley. Some previously measured general chemical and physical characteristics of the soils are given in Two sites were used with two different sampling strategies to catch the spatial variability at two different scales. The site at Grue was used for assessing the variability at a metre scale and to observe horizontal variations. The site at Målselv was used for a decimetre scale study to evaluate horizontal and vertical variations in a soil profile. At the Grue field site samples were taken with a core borer (5 Soil sampling was done once in mid May 2003 at the Grue field site, on a flat field after seedbed preparation for grain. Previous field experiments at this site revealed a large-scale depression running through the field from south to north, with ponding of water during rainfall and spring thaw. In Målselv sampling was done once in late August 2003, on a ridge-tilled potato field that had been sprayed with a colour tracer (Brilliant Blue) for pesticide fate studies app. 2 months earlier. Ridge-tillage is observed to affect the redistribution of water during rainfall, with interrow ponding of water. All soil samples were stored moist at 4 The water holding capacity (WHC) was estimated on one average mixed soil sample of sieved soil gently packed in plastic columns. After wetting with MilliQ-water overnight, excess water was allowed to drain for 1 Glyphosate ( Aqueous solutions of glyphosate were prepared from Roundup Eco Fresh moist soil (10 During incubations, total activity of microbial biomass was followed by respirometric measurements ( Glyphosate mineralization during the incubation period was monitored by measuring the Amount of extractable The resulting soil samples containing non-extractable All the LSC and oxidizer measurements were performed by the Environmental Chemistry Laboratory at the Norwegian University of Life Sciences. Fresh moist soil (5 Total soil microbial biomass was measured by chloroform-fumigation of moist soil samples (10 Microbial diversity expressed as substrate utilization pattern, was measured by use of Biolog EcoPlate™ (Biolog, Inc., Hayward, CA, USA), indicator plates for microbial community characterization in environmental samples ( The statistical processing of the results included analysis of variance (ANOVA), principal component analysis (PCA), linear regression analysis and Tukey's test for comparison of means. A significance level of 5% was used for hypothesis testing. Coefficients of variation (CV) were calculated as the standard deviation in relation to the mean value, and are given as %. CVs below 10% are considered to indicate low variability, between 10 and 30% moderate variability, and above 30% high variability. Both organic carbon and glyphosate mineralization in the Grue soil mineralization experiment were described using zero- and first-order kinetics. The rate constants were estimated by linear regression, from the equation Geostatistical analysis of the data from the analysis of the Grue soil samples was done using geoR 1.4-4 and R 1.8.1 software ( To adjust for the effect of inoculum cell density when interpreting the Biolog results, a standardized reference point, the Average Well Colour Development (AWCD), was calculated for each replicate on the BiologEco Plate, according to Information on the main physico-chemical properties of the soils sampled was taken from a previous investigation (  Descriptive statistics of the soil microbial properties investigated in soil samples from the Målselv field site are given in  The variability in soil moisture between the individual samples on sampling at the Grue field site was quite low ( Meteorological data from the Målselv field site showed dry conditions from spraying of brilliant blue in late June until the second half of July (data not shown). Through regression analysis we found a statistically significant positive correlation between the non-extractable glyphosate pool in samples from the Grue field site, and eastward location ( We observed a large horizontal variability for the soil microbial biomass size and activity levels measured in samples from the Målselv field site ( An overall principal component analysis (PCA) was done for the observed substrate utilization patterns of all the soil samples from the Målselv site. Carbon sources with high correlation coefficients for principal components 1, 2 and 3 are listed in Our results show that considerable spatial heterogeneity in the degradation rate of glyphosate exists even across small areas within a single field ( General activity levels in surface soils measured here ( As in earlier studies (M. Stenrød, loc. cit.), the potential substrate utilization patterns were shown to perform better in describing differences in the soil microbial community due to environmental conditions, compared to biomass and activity that show a much larger variability. The degree of correlation between microbial biomass and respiration activity has been found to be variable in the investigated soils (M. Stenrød, loc. cit.), as the amount of active biomass varies more than the actual biomass size. This larger variability in microbial activity compared to biomass size is a well-known feature, and some recent reports illustrate the rapid and reversible transition between active and dormant microbial states occurring in soil ( Surface topography is closely linked to patterns of matter flow, including redistribution of water, nutrients and gases ( Variability in soil microbial properties have also been linked to topography ( Results from the Grue field site require more detailed information on surface topography before the analysis can be considered complete. Our results only give indications on a connection with the large-scale depression running though the field. Non-extractable glyphosate might be higher in the more elevated parts of the field ( Effects of surface topography have been found to be more evident above a minimum moisture content ( The large variability observed for glyphosate mineralization must be accounted for in predictions of its fate in soil. Pesticide fate models are frequently found to be sensitive to parameters controlling transformations (i.e. degradation, mineralization); see To conclude, our results show a considerable spatial variability in both glyphosate mineralization and general soil microbial characteristics, within short distances in two Norwegian sandy loam soils. The spatial variability was evident at two different scales, and our results indicate that the variability was linked to the variability in soil physico-chemical parameters that are controlled by surface topographical features. These results justify further studies into patterns of variability and the main controls of this variability, as only soil moisture was investigated here. Further knowledge on the patterns of glyphosate and matter transport will be important for prediction of the fate of glyphosate in soil. More extensive sampling procedures than we were able to perform, together with more detailed information on topographical features and water flow patterns, are vital to get reliable and interpretable results from geostatistical data analysis. On a field scale we see the link to efforts done on precision agriculture with emerging techniques on variable pesticide application through a field, and on a regional scale there are possibilities linked to soil type and climate studies. Further studies should focus on mapping spatial variability in environmental controls capable of supporting predictions of pesticide mineralization rates across broader spatial scales. This work was funded by the Research Council of Norway. We thank Maud Retif, INA-PG for assistance in the lab with the mineralization experiment with Grue soil.