Flotation modelling has advanced from deterministic single particle-bubble models into using such models to solve flotation systems by using modern computational techniques. The step from a single particle- single bubble event to multiple events taking place in the large computational volume like a flotation cell poises the challenge of handling bubble and particle distributions in all computational cells.
                  The estimation of bubble size has either been omitted (constant size) or has been lately estimated by a population balance approach. The physical performance of flotation is excessively determined by the bubble size distribution (BSD). Therefore, the bubble size distribution estimate is crucial for modelling. Although the BSD can be measured, the underlying effects of different variables causing changes in break-up and coalescence rates producing changes in the measured BSD’s are not well understood. This paper discusses the profound effects frothers have on both the coalescence and break-up of gas bubbles.
                  Depending on the bubble surface stiffness caused by frother adsorption, the drainage rate of fluid between two approaching bubbles is very different. Frothers like DF200 and Pentanol have a higher coalescence rate than frothers like DF250 and NF240.
                  Break-up is shown to be a function of the dynamic surface tension, not the static surface tension. Fast adsorbing frothers (DF200) have at very short time scales a higher rate of break-up.
                  The paper suggests a division of frothers into two distinct classes for modelling purposes. Those with fast adsorption and desorption, which leave the gas-air interface mobile and those frothers that by slower adsorption and desorption create stiff interfaces. The effects in real systems may be more varied. The modelling of subtler frother effects will not substantially improve modelling quality.Flotation modelling has the challenge to combine several physicochemical phenomena into a concise model framework. The main body of modelling has been related to the well-known first order reaction model. During the years this approach with its additions and improvements has proven to be a good simple engineering model to be fitted with batch flotation data results The rate constant k can be obtained experimentally for any given steady-state condition. However, to formulate the dependence of the rate constant from process variables has turned out to be difficult. There have been attempts to relate the rate constant to both local and global parameters ( The flotation rate k is then modelled as a product of the “total probability of flotation” and the frequency that bubbles and particles interact (come so close to each other for the above mentioned sub-processes to take place There are several deterministic models for the particle-bubble collision ( A challenge has been how to expand the single bubble-particle pair models to handle large interacting bubble and particle populations. Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) has become a versatile and indispensable tool to model any fluid flows containing devices and equipment, flotation devices among them. The challenges for meaningful flotation CFD are several, as the aim is to model two discrete poly-disperse phases interacting in a continuous fluid phase. Without discussing and detailing them, an important question to be asked is “ A hypothesis to estimate bubble size has been to define a critical concentration from where added frother has no further effect on bubble coalescence (coalescence is prevented) and a minimum bubble size is reached ( Population balance models (PBM) can be used in conjunction with CFD to estimate the local poly-disperse phase distributions, here the bubble number density functions (NDF) ( Bubble breakage kernels m(b Population balance models can be solved either by the method of classes, where the NDF is discretized into a number of classes. Each class leads to an equation considering all the processes that will affect the units of the said class. The issue rising is mainly the bubble breakage and bubble coalescence. Each class would need its own kernel functions. The benefit is the natural reconstruct of the NDF. It is, however, computationally very expensive and time consuming to be used in flotation simulation. The other method to solve the bubble PBM is the method of quadrature of moments (QMOM) ( Bubble break-up and coalescence kernels have been studied extensively for bubble columns ( The If surfactants are added to the solution in dilute concentrations their adsorption on the gas-water interphase will change the surface tension in a linear way This will change the critical bubble size of Eq. As The critical Weber number is given as 2.2 for this model (   In pure water gas bubbles have a tendency to coalesce as has been observed in flotation systems by The simple equation for coalescence success rate It relates the time the bubbles spend at a distance where the drainage of the film takes place (t The drainage is governed by the following equations ( If the bubble surface is immobile then u(z,r) For a fully mobile surface u(z,r) The real situation is more complex due to surfactant concentration gradients and resulting Marangoni stresses. However, such details are not rate determining in flotation CFD modeling ( If Eqs.  As surfactants are adsorbed onto the surface the increased rigidity of the surfaces decreases the velocity difference between the fluid and the bubble substantially. There are three different mechanisms for bubbles to collide. The first is due to turbulent fluctuations. The second is due to buoyancy induced velocity differences. The third mechanism is by viscous shear close to the impeller. Summing up these will give the total collision probability. The first mechanism is only related to bubble sizes and the turbulent energy dissipation. Eq. We can write the coalescence kernel (Eq. Computational modelling of flotation has drawn much of its methods and algorithms from the works dealing with bubbly flows ( The film drainage model used in computational modelling determines the coalescence efficiency (and therefore the bubble size distribution) from the characteristic time scales of surface contact and drainage. The former is strongly determined by fluid dynamic while the latter is by bubble surface rigidity ( The direct use of kernel equations derived from pure systems or from studies performed with electrolytes (notably NaCl) lead to wrong estimates of the bubble size at any spatial volume modelled. The characteristics of frothers have not been taken into consideration in the modelling of bubble behaviour. For bubble break –up it is proposed to take the frother effects into account by a correction factor dependent on the dynamic surface tension (Eqs. It has been shown that frothers can be divided into two major categories (for modelling purposes) based on their effects on viscoelasticity. Frothers like DF200 will have a coalescence drainage behaviour best described by a plug flow of liquid, while frothers like DF250 produce a parabolic Poiseuille flow. This difference in behaviour can be simplified to be taken into account in the coalescence kernel only by a constant factor of four (Eq. As a simplified outcome for flotation CFD modelling, we propose two modelling regimes depending on the properties of the used frother for the time being. For future improvements of flotation modelling more frother behaviour derived data is needed to “fill” the framework presented as