Particles of crushed ferrotitanium (FeTi) were mixed with three iron-base powders of different carbon and alloy content as well as some graphite to obtain a metal matrix composite (MMC) by hot isostatic pressing (HIP) or hot uniaxial pressing (HUP) and an in situ transformation of the FeTi particles to TiC. In situ means “at the same site or position”, i.e. a phase change within the particles by an inward diffusion of carbon. The HUP specimens were not fully dense but useful to study the microstructural transformation in time. Already after 4min at 1000°C, a hard TiC case had formed around the FeTi particles, the thickness of which increased up to 300min. Iron and other impurities were enriched in the particle core, which did not transform to TiC. Pin-on-disc test with fully dense HIP specimens against flint, Al2O3 and SiC of 80 and 220 mesh size at room temperature revealed that the abrasive wear resistance of the new MMC with 10vol.% in situ TiC particles, 63–100μm in size and dispersed in a hardened steel matrix, was superior to a reference MMC with CrB2 and close to one with WC/W2C. A commercial MMC with 50vol.% TiC particles of 1–4μm in size showed a considerably lower wear resistance than the in situ MMC. Measuring the microhardness and specific scratch energy up to 600 and 700°C, respectively, indicate a potential of in situ TiC for elevated temperature service. The design of in situ MMC for wear protection is discussed, which is based on the larger size of in situ TiC particles compared to conventional ones and on the cost reduction.White cast irons and hardfacing weld deposits are the workhorses of wear protection in the mining and mineral processing industries, they contain hard carbides and even borides which are embedded in a hardened metal matrix (MM). The size of these hard phases (HP) decreases as the thickness of the solidifying cross-section is reduced. If the size of the HP falls below the groove width caused by sliding abrasive particles (AP), they become less effective in preventing wear. Another drawback of these hypo- to hyper-eutectic iron alloys is the linkage of HP which results in a brittle skeleton and promotes crack extension Therefore, wear resistant metal matrix composites (MMC) have been developed, which are produced by powder metallurgy (PM) Cr In Therefore, the present study is aimed at the PM development of wear resistant MMC starting from FeTi particles dispersed in an iron base matrix powder enriched with carbon and transforming them Three different powders were used to form the MM ( If the impurities are not considered, the binary Ti–Fe system In a first series, 10 Three MMC, hiped under similar conditions and investigated earlier TiC is known to exist in a wide range of carbon deficit from TiC The macrostructure was assessed by light microscopy (LIMI), SEM with EDX, wave length dispersive (WDX) microprobe analysis including line scans as well as by X-ray diffraction analysis. The FeTi and TiC fraction, respectively was derived by computer aided image analysis. Differential thermal analysis (DTA) was employed to indicate partial melting. The microhardness of individual phases and abrasives was measured in a computer controlled tester up to 600°C under vacuum with electric resistance heating of specimen and diamond indenter by tantalum strips. The values given represent an average of 10 measurements. Microscratching of phases was carried out in another tester with similar features under a normal load The micrographs in During the FeTi to HP transformation, the particle shape apparently remained unchanged in the LAS and WCI matrices, while in HAS, it was deformed by MM powder grains under the compacting pressure. The HP consist of a case surrounding a core. Some particles even reveal concentric shells within the core which occurred independently of the MM composition. The case is harder than the core ( Independently of these fluctuations, the microstructure of the HP core hints to a eutectic ( To study the rate of TiC formation in the HP case, the microhardness was measured after different graphite additions and HUP times ( In the following, the transformed FeTi particles are called The high microhardness of The specific scratch energy The wear resistance If the pin-on-disc test is stopped after a few centimetres of wear path, individual scratches are detected on the previously polished contact area of the pin. In contrast to the scratch tester equipped with a diamond indenter, these accidental scratches reveal the interaction of individual phases with abrasive particles. Two examples are given in In the very beginning of a HIP cycle, there is some graphite in contact with FeTi particles embedded in LAS. However, the major part of carbon has to reach the FeTi particles by solid state diffusion via the still porous austenitic matrix. As the compaction proceeds little difference is expected between the carbon transport in LAS plus dissolved graphite and HAS, respectively WCI, which contain carbon from the start because in both cases it is based on bulk diffusion. The Finite element calculations revealed that — compared to globular HP — the angular or elongated shape of HP in MMC gives rise to local stress concentrations upon mechanical or thermal loading. As a result, decohesion and cracking of HP occurred and microcracks extended into the matrix Once a TiC case is formed, it acts as a diffusional barrier for Ti, Fe and C The chemical stability of hard particles is an important property of wear resistant MMC. During manufacturing, the HP need to be stable with respect to the surrounding MM. Previous work showed for HIP temperatures between 1070 and 1100°C that HP of Cr Carbon leaves the Cr During service, the chemical stability of The wear properties of Let us assume that an abrasive particle grooving the matrix of a “coarse” MMC hits a hard particle, which it cannot scratch. The AP may fracture the edge of the HP or itself or may be lifted from the groove to the protruding HP level. Work of As to the wear resistance of Previously an increase of wear resistance was measured up to 50 For two reasons it seems to be appropriate to add graphite or soot to the powder mixture. Firstly, the demand for carbon may exceed the available content in the matrix powder as the fraction of FeTi powder is raised. Secondly, remainders of carbides in the metal matrix tend to embrittle the MMC. The phase diagram of LAS derived by the ThermoCalc program If it comes to a superposition of wear and corrosion, the MM has to be adapted accordingly. In high temperature, wear optimal results were obtained at 750°C by using a NiCrAlSi matrix precipitation hardened by γ′-Ni Last but not the least, the cost of powders has to be considered in relation to their volume content. To give an example, the material density increases in the order of FeTi, Cr The development of a new type of wear resistant MMC is described, which consists of The support of this work by the German Research Foundation (DFG) is gratefully acknowledged.