Purpose
                  To retrospectively compare the clinical outcomes of displaced tibial-side posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) avulsion fractures treated with open reduction and screw fixation versus arthroscopic suture fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  From 2005 to 2013, all displaced PCL tibial-side avulsion fractures treated surgically—initially by an open posterior approach and later by arthroscopic-assisted suture fixation—were retrospectively reviewed. The cases with radiographic evidence of greater than 3 mm of displacement and/or grade II or III laxity on the posterior drawer test were included in the study group. The associated injuries were duly treated. A conservative rehabilitation protocol was followed until radiologic fracture union occurred. The patients' clinicoradiologic assessment data at 1 year of follow-up were used for comparison between the open and arthroscopic groups.
               
                  Results
                  Forty-seven patients were available with 1 year of follow-up: 27 in the open group and 20 in the arthroscopic group. More than 90% of patients in both groups rated their knee function as normal or nearly normal. At 1 year of follow-up, knee function in terms of the Lysholm score (mean of 95.3 with 95% confidence interval [CI] 92.85 to 97.75 in open group and mean of 94.8 with 95% CI 91.38 to 98.22 in arthroscopic group; P = .812), Tegner activity level (mean of 6.8 with 95% CI 6.16 to 7.44 in open group and mean of 7.0 with 95% CI 6.44 to 7.66 in arthroscopic group, P = .677), International Knee Documentation Committee evaluation, and 1-leg hop test was comparable in both groups. The postoperative arthrometric laxity measurements with a KT-2000 arthrometer (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA) were better in the arthroscopic group, with 0 to 3 mm of laxity in 85% of cases in the arthroscopic group versus 74% in the open group. Avulsed fracture fragments were usually united by 3 months after surgery. No significant complication was noted.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Both arthroscopic and open methods of treatment for PCL tibial-side avulsion injuries resulted in comparably good clinical outcomes, radiologic healing, and stable knees at short-term follow-up.
               
                  Level of Evidence
                  Level III, retrospective comparative study.Tibial-side avulsion injuries of the posterior cruciate ligament (PCL) are usually considered rare injuries. The purpose of this study was to retrospectively compare the clinical outcomes of displaced tibial-side PCL avulsion fractures treated with open reduction and screw fixation versus arthroscopic suture fixation. The hypothesis was that the clinical and radiologic outcomes and results of laxity measurement would be comparable in both groups without statistical significance at short-term follow-up. From 2005 to 2013, all displaced PCL tibial-side avulsion fractures treated surgically at our tertiary care hospital and trauma center were retrospectively reviewed. In the initial 5 years, all the cases were operated on by an open posterior approach, and the arthroscopic method was used thereafter. The inclusion criteria for this retrospective study were as follows: PCL tibial-side avulsion fracture with radiographic evidence of greater than 3 mm of upward displacement and/or with grade II (5 to 10 mm of translation) or III (>10 mm of translation) findings on the posterior drawer test at 90° of knee flexion on clinical evaluation or examination under anesthesia. Associated meniscal, chondral, anterior cruciate ligament (ACL), or collateral ligament injuries were not grounds for exclusion. Cases with fractures of the proximal tibia or distal femur, open injury, or associated neurovascular injury were excluded from the study. All avulsion injuries were confirmed with radiography ( Clinically, each patient was assessed preoperatively and under anesthesia using the Lachman and anterior and posterior drawer tests to evaluate for cruciate injury, as well as varus and valgus stress tests both in extension and at 30° of flexion to assess the competence of the collateral ligaments. The dial and external rotation recurvatum tests were also performed to evaluate posterolateral corner injuries. In the operating room, the injured knee was examined with the patient under anesthesia and laxity elicited was documented. Both the open and arthroscopic methods used were modified from the description in the literature and verified on cadaveric dissection to be safe. We used the modified small-incision posterior approach, modified from the description of Nicandri et al. The patient was positioned supine on the operating table with the affected knee mounted on a knee holder (Arthrex, Naples, FL) at 90° of flexion. No pump was used to avoid fluid extravasation to the calf. High parapatellar anterolateral and anteromedial (AM) portals were created. Diagnostic arthroscopy was performed, and the status of the menisci, cartilage, and ligaments was noted. Once both the ACL and PCL were identified, the knee was placed in 70° of flexion and a shaver was used to resect the synovium just above the ACL to enter into the posterior compartment of the knee. Care was taken to keep both cruciate ligament fibers undamaged. Then, the posterior knee septum was removed, and a single posteromedial (PM) portal was created after localization of the portal site by a spinal needle with the knee at 90° of flexion. While the surgeon was viewing from the anterolateral portal, a PCL elevator (Smith & Nephew, Andover, MA) was inserted through the AM portal and the posterior knee capsule was elevated, carefully working behind the PCL and the avulsed fragment. A PCL tibial angled drill guide (Smith & Nephew) was placed through the AM portal with its tip placed 2 to 4 mm distal to the level of the fracture bed. A guidewire was drilled, and the PCL tibial angled drill guide was removed. The tip of the guidewire was protected with the PCL elevator passed through the AM portal. A 4.5-mm tunnel was drilled over the guidewire, and a 26-gauge stainless steel wire loop was passed through the tunnel, which was pulled into the PM portal with a crochet hook. Next, a No. 2 Orthocord (DePuy Mitek, Raynham, MA) was used; one end was passed through the AM portal medial to the PCL using a suture grasper, and it was taken out through the PM portal using a crochet hook. The other end of the suture was passed through the AM portal lateral to the PCL using a suture grasper (i.e., between the ACL and PCL), and it was also taken out through the PM portal using a crochet hook. Thus the suture was placed around the PCL base with both ends in the PM portal ( The rehabilitation protocol was identical in both groups and in the presence of associated collateral ligament injuries. A knee immobilizer brace (Tynor Orthotics, Mohali, India) was used for immobilization in full extension in the immediate postoperative period. A 2-inch-thick cotton pad was used behind the calf to protect the PCL. Patients were encouraged to start partial weight bearing with axillary crutches and quadriceps strengthening and isometric exercises. From the third week onward, assisted range of motion was started in the prone position with a hinged knee brace (Tynor Orthotics), with 0° to 30° initially and then gradually increasing to allow up to 120° by the end of 6 weeks. Stationary bicycling was allowed thereafter. Use of the brace was discontinued and full activity was allowed after radiologic healing. All the patients were followed up and evaluated by clinical and radiographic assessment at monthly intervals until fracture union occurred and then at the end of 1 year of follow-up. Bony union was defined as the absence of a visible fracture line on plain radiographs. At the end of 1 year, apart from clinical evaluation, a KT-2000 arthrometer (MEDmetric, San Diego, CA) was used to assess knee stability and the side-to-side difference was noted. The Lysholm scoring system, Tegner activity score, International Knee Documentation Committee (IKDC) knee ligament examination form, and single-leg hop test were used for follow-up assessment to document symptoms. Knee radiographs in the standing anteroposterior and lateral views were examined for alignment, joint space narrowing, and degenerative changes. The severity of degenerative changes was graded according to the Ahlbäck classification. The outcome at 1 year of follow-up was used for comparative evaluation between the 2 groups. The evaluation data at 1 year of follow-up were gathered and statistically analyzed with SPSS software (version 13.0; SPSS, Chicago, IL). The results were compared between the 2 groups using the unpaired Student A total of 54 cases of displaced PCL tibial-side avulsion injuries were operated on during the study period, of which 47 were included in this study per the inclusion criteria and availability at a minimum of 1 year of follow-up. The initial 27 cases were operated on by an open posterior approach, whereas the next 20 cases were operated on by arthroscopic single-tunnel suture fixation (D.S., 13 open and 11 arthroscopic; A.J., 6 open and 5 arthroscopic; and V.K., 8 open and 4 arthroscopic). We excluded 7 cases (13%) because of inadequate follow-up. The patients comprised 43 men and 4 women, and the mean age at surgery was 34.2 years (range, 18 to 54 years) ( Before surgery, all patients had a 15° or greater difference in flexion deficit between the 2 sides. In addition, 30% of patients in the open group (8 of 27) and 20% of patients in the arthroscopic group (5 of 20) had an extension deficit of 10° or more. At 1 year of follow-up, patients whose normal and reconstructed limbs had a 3° or smaller difference in full extension or 5° or smaller difference in full flexion were given a normal rating. Only 3 patients, 2 (7.4%) in the open group and 1 (5%) in the arthroscopic group, had deficits in flexion that were abnormal. There was no extension limitation. No patient had a severely abnormal rating (extension deficit >10° or flexion deficit >25°). The postoperative KT-2000 arthrometric data at 90 N were available for all patients. At the final follow-up, the mean side-to-side difference was 1.8 mm (range, 0 to 4 mm) in the open group and 1.25 mm (range, 0 to 4 mm) in the arthroscopic group ( At 1 year of follow-up, there was significant improvement in mean Lysholm scores in both the open and arthroscopic groups ( Regarding pain, 96% of patients in the open group (26 of 27) and 95% of patients in the arthroscopic group (19 of 20) reported no pain during moderate or strenuous activity. One patient in each group reported inconsistent and slight pain with moderate or strenuous activity. Radiologic union of the avulsion fragment was visible within 3 months of surgery in all cases. At 1 year of follow-up, there was no malalignment or progression of joint space narrowing. However, 2 patients in the open group (7.4%) showed Ahlbäck stage I degeneration at 1 year of follow-up. Partial medial collateral ligament injuries were managed nonoperatively ( There were no neurovascular injuries, cases of compartment syndrome, or infections associated with surgery. No implant failure was noted. One patient in the open group required revision open surgery because initial reduction was inadequate and unstable clinically because of comminution on screw insertion. Three patients in the open group and 2 patients in the arthroscopic group, all of whom had comminuted fractures preoperatively, had incomplete reduction on postoperative radiography. All these patients had acceptable stability on clinical evaluation and thus were managed conservatively with less aggressive rehabilitation. The outcome at 1 year was not affected by these radiologically incomplete but stable reductions. In the arthroscopic group, 2 patients complained about prominence of the suture disk, which required implant removal after healing of the bony fragment. Both arthroscopic and open methods of treatment for PCL tibial-side avulsion injuries resulted in good clinical outcomes, radiographic healing, and low complication rates. All the patients showed good functional strength when the operative extremity was compared with the uninjured contralateral lower extremity. We used to perform open fixation of PCL avulsion injuries for quite a long time and later changed to arthroscopic surgery after we gained adequate expertise in arthroscopy of the posterior compartment of the knee and after evidence in support of arthroscopic techniques in managing such injuries became available in the literature. Although a learning curve was associated with mastering the arthroscopic technique, it did not affect selection bias because we performed arthroscopic surgery for more comminuted cases as well. For us, the arthroscopic method has now largely replaced the open method except in rare complex situations with associated fractures of the distal femur or proximal tibia. All published case series on open fixation methods have suggested a reasonable outcome (good or fair) in most patients (>90%). Inoue et al. Regarding open techniques, a posterior approach, Possible advantages of arthroscopic treatment include diagnosis and treatment of associated ACL, meniscal, and chondral injuries. Moreover, with larger patient numbers, a lower complication rate and less danger to the popliteal neurovascular structures could be expected. However, there is possible risk of fluid extravasation due to arthroscopy. By avoiding use of pump, this risk can be minimized. A number of arthroscopic techniques for PCL bony avulsion fixation have been described that differ in the number of posterior portals used, the implant used for fixation, and the number of tibial tunnels. For the posterior portals, surgeons can use 1 or 2 PM portals Our arthroscopic technique is similar to techniques reported before but was modified to make it simple. We used a single PM portal, a single 4.5-mm tibial tunnel, and no metal implant on the back of the PCL. We agree to Gui et al. Many previous reports suggested cast immobilization for 6 weeks after fixation of displaced PCL avulsion fractures, This study is obviously limited because of the retrospective nature, the apparent small sample size, the inclusion of associated ligament injuries, and the short duration of follow-up. Because of the small sample size, there is a possibility of a β error for the functional outcomes. However, the rarity of PCL avulsions makes it extremely difficult to design an appropriate prospective comparative study. In addition, there is a potential learning-curve issue with the arthroscopic technique, thus leading to bias favoring the open technique. The involvement of 3 surgeons depicts the reproducibility of the technique; on the other hand, it can also have a negative effect because the number of patients included is still small and minute differences in surgical technique or assessment cannot be excluded. There is also possible selection bias because the groups were not randomized and because the arthroscopic technique was preferentially selected in some cases because of comminuted fractures. The 12-month follow-up period is short. However, in our experience, improvements in patients' results do not occur after 1 year of treatment, so 1-year average follow-up is probably adequate. Lack of preoperative arthrometer examination may decrease the convincing strength of the study. Lack of MRI evaluation in all cases is also a limitation because intrasubstance injuries to the PCL were not documented. Moreover, meniscal, chondral, and ACL injuries were likely to be missed in the open group because arthroscopic examination was not performed, thus not being documented among the associated injuries. A posteroanterior weight-bearing radiograph obtained with the knee in 45° of flexion (Rosenberg radiograph) may have higher interobserver reliability to detect osteoarthritis when compared with the anteroposterior radiographs used in this study. Both arthroscopic and open methods of treatment for PCL tibial-side avulsion injuries resulted in comparably good clinical outcomes, radiologic healing, and stable knees at short-term follow-up.