Introduction
                  Obesity continues to be a problem in the United States with greater than 35% of the adult population affected. Obesity influences fracture care as it affects impact forces, alters cellular pathways of healing, and is often associated with higher complication rates. Distal radius fractures are among the most common fracture patterns in the adult population. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of BMI on the degree of intra-articular fracture comminution, operative time, and return to the OR in obese patients who underwent operation for distal radius fractures.
               
                  Methods
                  A retrospective analysis of the American College of Surgeons National Surgical Improvement Program's (ACS-NSQIP) database was performed and logistic regressions were used to assess the relationship between BMI and open treatment of distal radius fractures. Three separate CPT codes were used to distinguish between extra-articular fractures, intra-articular split fracture, and intra-articular fracture with comminution. Percutaneous or closed treatment of distal radius fractures were excluded.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 11,228 patients (mean age 65.1 years) with open reduction and internal fixation of distal radius fractures were identified. For every increase in BMI point, there was an increased risk of intra-articular split fracture by 1.7% (OR 1.017, 95% CI 1.010–1.023, p < 0.01) and increased risk of intra-articular comminution by 3.1% (OR 3.1, 95% CI 1.025–1.037, p < 0.01). Additionally, for every increase in BMI point, the risk of a surgical complication increased by 2.3%
               
                  Discussion
                  This nationally representative, population-based study demonstrates that elevated BMI is associated with increased risk for intra-articular involvement and higher risk for post-operative complications. Our results can be useful to patients and orthopedic surgeons as prognostic information for counseling patients on expectations following open reduction and surgical fixation of distal radius fractures.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Case-control study. Level IIIThe obesity epidemic continues to be a major health problem in the United States. In 2015–2016, the prevalence of obesity, as defined by body mass index greater than or equal to 30 Fractures of the distal radius are among the most common orthopedic injury seen in the emergency department each year, accounting for 18% of all fractures in patients over 65 years of age The purpose of this study was to evaluate the effect of BMI on the degree of intra-articular fracture comminution, operative time, and return to the OR in obese patients who underwent operation for distal radius fractures. We hypothesized that an elevated BMI would be associated with increased intra-articular comminution in operative distal radius fractures, as well as longer operative times, and higher surgical complications. The American College of Surgeon's National Surgical Quality Improvement Program (ACS-NSQIP) database was used to evaluate our hypothesis. This database is nationally validated and peer-controlled with the purpose of improving surgical outcomes. More than 600 hospitals nationwide contribute perioperative data, which is deidentified prior to delivery to participating institutions. This perioperative data includes patient demographics and comorbidities, surgical details, and any postoperative complications within 30 days from the date of surgery. The data is abstracted by designated and trained Surgical Clinical Reviewers and regular internal audits ensure a high quality of standardized reporting. Given the deidentified nature of the data, this study was granted IRB exemption as a non-human subject study by our institutional review board. Patients aged 50 years and older undergoing isolated distal radius fracture fixation between the years 2014 – 2017 were included in this study. Patients were identified by Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes: 25,607 (open treatment of an extra-articular distal radius fracture), 25,608 (open treatment of a distal radius fracture with 2 fragments), and 25,609 (open treatment of a distal radius fracture with 3 or more fragments). Patients undergoing other procedures of the distal radius such as percutaneous skeletal fixation or external fixation, those undergoing multiple procedures for polytraumatic injuries, any patient with a reported wound class other than clean (wound class 1), and those who did not meet criteria for this study were excluded from further analyses. Patient-specific data was collected including age, sex, height, weight, race, American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class, and smoking status. From the height and weight data, body mass index (BMI) was calculated ([weight in kilograms]/[height in meters Patients were stratified by fracture pattern according to the appropriate CPT codes. Frequencies of baseline characteristics and demographics were calculated and compared between groups using the chi-square test or student “ACS-NSQIP and the hospitals participating in the ACS-NSQIP are the source of the data used herein; they have not verified and are not responsible for the statistical validity of the data analysis or the conclusions derived by the authors.” 11,228 patients were identified for inclusion in this study. The mean patient age was 65.1 years. Most patients were female, white, and non-smokers ( Multivariate logistic regression models were constructed to evaluate risk factors for intra-articular comminution ( BMI was predictive of operative time when using linear regression models ( Total surgical complications assessed included the risk of a superficial or deep surgical site infection, wound dehiscence, or return to the operating room. Univariate analysis revealed that BMI and sex had a significant effect on the risk of total surgical complications ( This study uses a nationally validated and representative dataset to shed light on the effect of obesity on distal radius fracture intra-articular comminution, case complexity, and surgical complications. Our authors found that elevated BMI correlated with increased intra-articular comminution in operatively managed distal radius fractures. Elevated BMI had a linear correlation with longer operative times and was associated with higher risk for surgical complications, specifically, return to the OR. Prior literature evaluating the link between obesity and distal radius fracture severity is somewhat controversial. Two single-center retrospective reviews that evaluated BMI and fracture comminution by OTA and AO classification systems found a positive relationship The data from the present study suggests that elevated BMI predicts increasing intraarticular involvement of surgically treated distal radius fractures. The degree of intra-articular involvement is important as it generally impacts technical demands of surgery. Intra-articular fractures and persistent incongruity have been associated with the development of secondary degenerative changes and predilection for radiographic wrist arthrosis The present study found a correlation between BMI and operative time to be significant with each additional BMI point leading to a 0.38 min increase in operative time. While it is statistically significant that BMI affects OR time, there are likely confounders that influence OR time as revealed in the correlation value (R Pre-operative evaluation and assessment in hand and wrist surgery is important for acknowledging risk for surgical complication The limitations of this study are similar to other large database studies including reporting errors and inability to capture all patients. These studies work under the assumption that all data was recorded accurately and the operating surgeon completed appropriate CPT coding documentation. NSQIP database has limited information regarding mechanism of injury or clinical outcomes from the surgical intervention as well. It is also limited as this database does not include information from stand-alone ambulatory surgical centers which are where many distal radius fractures are operated on. We attempted to isolate low energy, isolated trauma by excluding patients less than 50 years of age and excluding polytrauma patients. We acknowledge that this is an inexact method of data collection. The researching team realizes that utilizing CPT codes as a surrogate for fracture severity may not be the most accurate. However, even the reliability of classification systems has been in question among distal radius fractures as well However, this study utilizes a nationally representative, widely-validated, and peer-reviewed database to demonstrate a positive association between BMI and intra-articular fracture comminution of operative distal radius fractures as well as prolonged OR time and an increased risk for return to the OR. This information may be used by surgeons to provide education and counseling to patients regarding risks of surgery and postoperative expectations, as well as by hospital systems to identify at-risk patients for increased case complexity and postoperative complications. Future studies and research should be directed towards outcome measures and functional scoring to determine how these findings impact clinical outcomes, ( None of the above mentioned authors received funding, grants, or in-kind support of the research or the preparation of the manuscript. Additionally, none of the above-mentioned authors have association or financial involvement with any organization or commercial entity having a financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject matter or research presented in the manuscript. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.