The present investigation is focused on the enhancement of tribological properties of 5W-30 engine oil by the addition of Cr2AlC MAX phase nanolamella. The anti-wear properties of engine oil were investigated by four-ball test rig, using stainless steel balls. The obtained results were compared with h-BN and MoS2 nanoparticles incorporated 5W-30 engine oils. Cr2AlC added nano-fluid (modified lubricating oil) enhances anti-wear properties significantly and increased oil film strength (OFS) of base oil to almost three times. Among all, Cr2AlC nanolamella additivated engine oil shows low coefficient of friction (COF) and wear, as compared to that of h-BN and MoS2 modified oils. Cr2AlC modified oil yields least iron content in the oil after the tribo-test. This could be attributed to the high aspect ratio of Cr2AlC crystals than that of MoS2 and h-BN crystals, and the formation of relatively high strength tribofilms. Among all the prepared lubricating oil, Cr2AlC nanolamella additivated engine oil possesses higher stability.The frictional losses from the piston ring and cylinder liner make major contributions towards the total power loss [ Compared to other production methods, ball milling is one of the promising methods to produce a bulk amount of nanomaterials. The size reduction in the ball mill is subjected to the high-energy collision and shear of the balls [ Currently, the research trend is focussed towards the development of MAX phase materials (Ta The preparation of engine oil with Cr In the second step, nanocrystalline powders were dispersed in 500 ml of Castrol Magnatec 5W-30 engine oil (procured from the local market, Chennai, India) with oleic acid (SRL, India). Oleic acid was used as a surface modifier for proper dispersion of nanocrystalline powders. The anti-wear properties were determined according to ASTM D 4172 standard using a four-ball test rig (DUCOM, India, TR-30 L-IAS) (speed 1200 ± 60 rpm; load 392.4 N; 3600 s, at 75 ± 2 °C). The balls specifications were according to AISI 52100 (diameter: 12.7 mm; average surface roughness value (Ra): 0.143 μm; and hardness: 60HRc). Out of four balls, three balls were kept as stationary in the ball pot and the fourth one was rotated. The entire experiments were repeated three times to validate the results and average values of the readings are reported. Wear scar diameter on the balls and average roughness of the contact surface areas were measured after the tribo test by using an optical microscope (Olympus, BX41M) and three-dimensional profilometer (Taylor Hobson, CCI MP-HS). The average roughness (Ra) values were measured along the wear scar diameter in 3 different spots to confirm the results. After the tribo test, the surface of the balls were characterized by using field emission - scanning electron microscopy (F E I Quanta FEG 200) and energy dispersive x-ray analysis (Bruker Quantax 400 - Z30 system) to confirm the wear mechanism. After the tribo test, the used oil samples were stirred rigorously and collected for particle quantifier index (PQ index) analysis by using plasma-optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Perkin Elmer Optima 5300DV) according to ASTM E1613. The behavior of wear involved measured based on the total iron (Fe) content in parts per million (ppm) [  The increase in temperature causes the weakening of the intermolecular adhesion forces and the interparticle separation; as a result the viscosity decreases with increasing temperature (   Maoquan et al. [  After the wear test, the samples (lubricant fluids) were tested for particle quantifier index and iron (Fe) content to identify and confirm the behavior of wear happening during the four-ball wear testing. The PQ index for Cr  The tribological properties of Cr Compared to all the samples, the sample containing 0.5 wt% Cr The addition of surfactant can improve the stability of nanoparticles in aqueous suspensions and it is the common method to avoid sedimentation of nanoparticles [ Comparative studies on the wear and tribological properties of different lubricating conditions and nanofluids have been carried out in the present work. The addition of a surfactant and nanoparticles were found to advance the tribological properties of the existing commercial engine oils, such as 5W-30 oil. Compared to h-BN and MoS The authors would like to acknowledge