This research addresses two important issues confronting coal flotation plants in Australia, the use of saline water and the processing of clayey coal. Two coal samples obtained from BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance (BMA) and Xstrata were tested to represent coarse coal flotation and fine coal flotation, respectively. Saline water with low, medium and high ionic strengths and individual electrolytes encountered in the flotation plants were used. It was found that saline water had a more pronounced effect on fine coal flotation than coarse coal flotation despite similar mineral compositions and clay mineral types present. Although saline water increased froth stability in both fine and coarse coal flotation, coal particle aggregation only occurred between fine coal particles resulting in an increased recovery of coal particles as well as the entrapment of fine gangue minerals.In Australia, saline water is an important issue in mineral processing. Due to the scarcity of fresh water many flotation plants have to use groundwater or sea water with high salinity. In coal preparation plants, water has been re-used and resulted in an increase in the salinity due to evaporation and ongoing salt inputs from groundwater and run off from spoil. The effect of saline water on coal flotation has been studied. In general, saline water increases coal yield during flotation compared to fresh water. This has been attributed to the increased bubble–particle attachment during flotation. With the depletion of high-grade ores, low-grade ores which are usually fine-grained and complex, have to be mined and processed. In order to concentrate these low-grade ores, fine grinding to liberate valuable minerals from gangue minerals is required prior to flotation. It has long been established that fine particles (<10 Meanwhile, the flotation of coarse particles has also been a challenge confronting the mining industry. Poor floatability of coarse sulphide mineral particles greater than 150 Clay minerals present a widespread problem in the flotation of all kinds of minerals. They can coat mineral surfaces and increase pulp viscosity resulting in low mineral flotation recovery ( In this study, the effect of saline water with different salinity levels on the flotation of fine and coarse coal particles in the presence of clay minerals was investigated. Fine and coarse coal samples were supplied from Xstrata and BHP Billiton Mitsubishi Alliance (BHP BMA), respectively. The fine coal sample (CoalA) was obtained from an Xstrata coal plant. In the laboratory, the sample was screened to −150 The coarse coal sample (CoalB) was obtained from a BHP BMA coal plant. The sample was screened with the −710 MIBC (Methyl Isobutyl Carbinol) and diesel, industrial grade, were used as frother and collector, respectively. They are used in both flotation plants where the coal samples were supplied. Saline water with low, medium and high salinity levels were made and used in this study following the study by After screening, CoalA or CoalB was transferred to a 2.5 Froth stability and bubble size measurements were carried out using VisioFroth software developed by Metso Minerals Cisa. The camera was set up above the flotation cell and connected with a laptop. The measurement area was 15.9 Contact angles of coal particles were measured by using a KSV Sigma 700 dynamic tensiometer (Biolin Scientific, Finland) at room temperature up to 10 Rheology measurements were conducted with an Ares rheometer with Couette geometry (bob and cup) from TA Instruments at the ambient temperature. Each rheology measurement used a sample of 15 Flotation was conducted in the saline water with three different salinity levels. Firstly, the effect of water quality on the flotation of fine coal was examined. Results from the flotation of CoalB with the saline water with three different salinity levels are shown in Froth structure and froth stability are known to play a significant role in determining mineral grade and recovery achieved from flotation operation. Many researchers have observed that salts are able to inhibit bubble coalescence by retarding the thinning of the intervening liquid film between bubble pairs (  The froth stability was calculated based on the methodology indicated by Entrainment during flotation can be considered as a two-step process: the first step is the transfer of suspended solids in the top of the pulp just below the pulp-froth interface to the froth phase and the second step is the transfer of entrained particles in the froth phase to the concentrate (  To explore particle interactions, contact angles of CoalA and CoalB samples were measured in different conductivity water. The experimental results are presented in To further explore particle interactions, rheology of CoalA and CoalB flotation slurry was measured when low, medium and high conductivity water was used. However, In fine coal flotation in the presence of clay minerals, both combustible recovery and mineral matter recovery were low when low conductivity saline water was used. An increase in water conductivity significantly increased the recovery of combustible and mineral matter. This is because saline water increases froth stability, promotes fine coal particles aggregation and fine gangue particle entrapment. Saline water has a less pronounced effect on coarse coal flotation in the presence of clay minerals. Although saline water increases froth stability during the flotation test, it does not promote coarse coal particle aggregation and fine gangue particle entrapment. The authors greatly appreciate financial support from