Binary mixtures of tertiary amine and acidic extractant showed synergism on the extraction of metals from a weak acid solution but there is uncertainty in identifying the solvent extraction reaction. The nature of interaction between the extractants in the binary mixture affects synergism in extraction reaction. In order to correlate the interaction with the physical properties of each extractant in the binary mixture, extraction of HCl from dilute solution in the absence/presence of rare earth elements (REEs) has been investigated. The extraction order of HCl and REEs was: Cyanex 272+Alamine 336>PC88A+Alamine 336>D2EHPA>Alamine 336. The interaction between strong acidic extractant (D2EHPA) and Alamine 336 was strong enough to form an amine salt which took part in the reaction. In the binary mixture of weak acidic extractant (Cyanex 272 and PC88A) and Alamine 336, each extractant took part in the reaction independently.The binary mixtures consisting of amines and acidic extractants have been widely used for the extraction of various metals, such as alkali and alkaline earth chlorides ( Mixtures of amine and acidic extractant have also been found to be efficient on the extraction of strong acids ( According to the literature on the extraction of metals with the binary mixture of tertiary amine and acidic extractant, either an amine salt or a free acidic extractant is responsible for the extraction. The basic question is to correlate the extraction reaction with the physical properties of the extractants in the extraction of metals with these binary mixtures. For this purpose, experiments have been done on the solvent extraction of hydrochloric acid with the binary mixtures of tertiary amine and organophosphorus acid extractant in the absence and presence of rare earth metals (La, Ce, Pr and Nd). The effect of basicity of amines, acidity of organophosphorus acid extractant and the composition of the mixtures on the extraction of hydrochloric acid and rare earth metals has been studied. Based on the difference in equilibrium pH obtained after extraction by different binary mixtures, the difference in extraction mechanism is discussed. Cyanex 272, D2EHPA and PC88A were purchased from Cytec Industries, Canada. Alamine 336 and TEHA (tri-2-ethylhexyl amine) were received from BASF Co., and TOA (tri-n-octylamine) was purchased from Samchun Pure Chem Co., Ltd, respectively. All the extractants were used as received without any further purification. Kerosene (Daejung Co.) was employed as a diluent for the present work except for the study on the effect of diluents. Lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium and neodymium chlorides (99.9%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar (A Johnson Matthey Company). The synthetic solutions were prepared by dissolving the corresponding chloride salts. Concentrated HCl and NaOH solutions were used to adjust the initial pH of the aqueous solutions. All other reagents used were of analytical grade. The extraction was carried out by shaking equal volume of aqueous and organic phases in a screwed cap bottle for 20 In solvent extraction of metals with tertiary amines, tertiary amines should be protonated by an acid to act as an anion exchanger. Generally, protonation reaction of tertiary amine (R For a given tertiary amine, Eq. In the extraction of metal ions by organophosphorus acid extractants, some of the extractant first dissolve in the aqueous phase and then dissociate into hydrogen and the anion group of the extractant. The dissociation of the organophosphorus acid extractants in aqueous phase is represented as In a mixture of an organophosphorus acid extractant and tertiary amine, an amine salt can form through the following reaction ( When this mixture contacts the HCl solution, a displacement reaction may occur, which leads to the formation of the ion-pair R When a mixture of an organophosphorus acid extractant and tertiary amine is employed in the extraction of metal, some reactions can occur simultaneously, such as the formation of amine salt, the above-mentioned displacement reaction, and protonation reaction of tertiary amine. Since the solution pH has a great effect on the extraction of metals by a cationic extractant, it is necessary to investigate the extraction behavior of hydrogen ion during the extraction with this mixture. For this purpose, Alamine 336 was chosen as a tertiary amine and its mixture with D2EHPA, PC88A and Cyanex 272 was employed from HCl solution with pH In extraction with the mixtures of Alamine 336 and organophosphorus extractant, hydrogen ions can be extracted by two reactions. One is the protonation reaction of Alamine 336 (Eq. Eq. In order to investigate the extraction of hydrogen ion during the extraction of rare earth metals by the binary mixtures of organophosphorus acid extractants and tertiary amines, the equilibrium pH of the solution was measured. Since the synergistic extraction of Pr and Nd by the mixture of Cyanex 272 and tertiary amine was caused by the extraction of the protons released from Cyanex 272 ( As with the basicity of the amine extractants, the acidity of acidic extractant in the binary mixture also affects the extraction of acid and metals. In order to investigate the effect of acidity of acidic extractant in the binary mixture, binary mixtures containing different organophosphorus acid extractants and Alamine 336 have been employed on the extraction of metals and acid. Furthermore, in order to investigate the separation of light REEs (La, Ce, Pr and Nd) by these mixtures, the solutions containing four light REEs were employed in these experiments. The composition of the solution (La (7.8 The extraction results obtained by the different binary mixtures are shown in The equilibrium pH data of these experiments are shown in The equilibrium constant of this reaction can be represented as: In the extraction of rare earth metals from chloride solutions, mixture of organophosphorus acid and tertiary amine showed some synergism. In order to correlate the extraction with the interaction between the components in the binary mixtures, a series of experiments on the extraction of HCl by the mixtures of Alamine 336 and organophosphorus acid extractants have been done from dilute HCl solution both in the absence and presence of REEs. These mixtures showed synergistic effect on the extraction of HCl at the present condition. The extraction of acid was enhanced with the increase of amine basicity while decreased by increasing of the acidity of organophosphorus acid. The interaction between Cyanex 272 and tertiary amine in the mixture was weak and then Cyanex 272 could be easily displaced by HCl. However, if the mixture contains a stronger acidic extractant, the interaction between cationic extractant and tertiary amine was strong and the displacement of acidic extractant was difficult to occur. During the extraction of rare earth metals, binary mixtures with higher interaction between amine and acidic extractant took part in the reaction as an amine salt, while the one with lower interaction took part in the reaction as two independent components. This work was supported by a grant from the fundamental