Flotation tests were conducted to compare the arsenopyrite depressing effect of MAA with pH control, potassium permanganate and pre-aeration. The recovery and selectivity were optimised by varying the collector and depressant concentration, pH and the effect of copper sulphate addition. It was found that with MAA, depression of arsenopyrite was possible however, the recovery of pyrite was also adversely affected. To achieve the best separation, the pulp conditions were a pH of 8, 2.14×10−3 mol/l sodium ethyl xanthate and 250 mg/l of MAA depressant. These conditions resulted in an overall arsenopyrite recovery of 25.5% and a pyrite recovery of 62.1%, a decrease in recovery of 63.0% and 7.5%, respectively.Separation of pyrite and arsenopyrite by flotation using xanthates presents difficulties due to the fact that xanthates adsorb onto both these minerals as dixanthogen, which is not cation selective. Therefore, a number of separation techniques have been employed by a number of authors to produce separate arsenopyrite and pyrite streams (  The usefulness of the MAA depressant on the separation of arsenopyrite from pyrite has not been investigated. Because arsenopyrite has arsenic ions, it could be inferred that the same process could be followed allowing the depression of arsenopyrite, while maintaining the flotation characteristics of pyrite. A sample of arsenopyrite ore from Coolgardie, Western Australia, was crushed to −2 mm. Eighty kilograms of sample were passed through rotary and riffle splitters to obtain 1 kg samples, which were then stored in a freezer to avoid oxidation of the sulphides. When the ore sample was required for flotation the 1 kg samples were ground to a p80 of 106 μm in a rod mill. The flotation experiments were carried out using a 3 l Leeds flotation cell as a single stage rougher. The flotation collector used was sodium ethyl xanthate (SEX) and Interfroth 50 as frother. A number of flotation tests were conducted to determine the optimal flotation conditions to ensure maximum selectivity and recovery. All tests were performed at a p80 of 106 μm, which was fine enough to ensure adequate mineral liberation. The parameters varied were the SEX concentration, MAA concentration and pH. Additional flotation tests examined the effect of copper sulphate, potassium permanganate and pre-aeration on the flotation of arsenopyrite. The Magnesium Ammonium solution was prepared by adding 0.5 M MgCl The frother (Interfroth 50) concentration remained at 0.03 kg/t for each test. The pH was varied from the natural pH of the ore, which was 8.2, to the desired pH using sodium hydroxide or hydrochloric acid. To determine the recoveries of arsenopyrite and pyrite in each of the tests, a Varian inductivity coupled plasma emission spectrometer (ICP), an X-ray diffractometer (XRD), and a LECO sulphur analyser were used. The ICP provided the amount of arsenopyrite and pyrite reporting to the concentrate from the arsenic percentage, while the LECO gave an initial indication of the sulphur content in the concentrate. The XRD was used to confirm that the sample has only iron–arsenic compounds present, and no other metal sulphides in significant quantities. The effect of changing the concentration of MAA with respect to the recovery of arsenopyrite and pyrite is shown in Comparing the recovery of these tests to the one with no MAA depressant, it can be observed that there was a decrease in recovery of both minerals. An hydrophilic layer cannot form on the pyrite surface as iron (II) and iron (III) species do not form stable arsenides. One explanation could be that when the arsenic sites on the arsenopyrite surface oxidise to AsO The effect of varying the pH with respect to the recovery and selectivity of arsenopyrite and pyrite is shown in The highest recovery occurs when the pH of the pulp is 6. This is expected due to the formation of dixanthogen at lower pHs which is the main collecting species. At higher pHs, unstable dixanthogen is converted back to xanthate ions decreasing the collectors ability to float mineral particles. At higher pHs, the oxidation of the arsenopyrite and pyrite particles is strongly favoured over xanthate oxidation. This results in the formation of an oxidation product on the mineral’s surface, reducing the chemisorption of the collector onto the mineral particle. Based on these series of tests, the pH which best suited the separation was 8. Although the selectivity was poor, it is thought that xanthate species predominate at a pH value between 8 and 9 and are adsorbed selectively on the pyrite surface ( The effect of the concentration of the collector (sodium ethyl xanthate) with respect to the recovery and selectivity of arsenopyrite and pyrite is shown in The increase in recovery of both sulphide minerals with an increase in collector dosage is expected, as there are more xanthate ions in solution to be adsorbed and converted to dixanthogen, which is the collecting species for the two sulphides. However, above 3.21 By establishing the optimal pH, MAA concentration and SEX concentration of 8, 250 mg/l and 2.14 The arsenopyrite is depressed with the addition of the MAA depressant and although the pyrite recovery is also depressed it is not to the same extent as arsenopyrite, giving rise to a higher selectivity compared to the blank test (no MAA present). The activator copper sulphate was added at a dosage of 0.05 kg/t to test if the flotation characteristics of pyrite could be improved resulting in greater recovery. To determine whether the activating effect of the copper sulphate was greater than the depressing effect of the MAA, the reagents are added in different sequence. As shown in the MAA–CuSO By agitating the pulp for 10 min with approximately 7 l/min of air, the following results were obtained ( This test implies that further depression of arsenopyrite is indeed possible however due to the subsequent depression of pyrite, this technique is not recommended when selective depression is desired. The effect of potassium permanganate addition on the recovery of pyrite and arsenopyrite suggest that potassium permanganate is depressing both minerals with less than 9% of the two sulphides being recovered as the minerals’ surface is being severely oxidised. By conducting a test with only potassium permanganate, it was observed that the addition of MAA has a negligible effect on the recovery. This suggests that MAA is a much weaker depressant, which is obvious when compared to the test under optimal conditions. This test has succeeded in depressing arsenopyrite, but has failed with respect to selectivity. A number of tests were conducted to determine the effect of MAA on arsenopyrite depression and the optimal conditions needed for the best separation from pyrite. The optimal conditions were found to be 250 mg/l MAA, pH 8 and 2.14 These conditions resulted in a pyrite and arsenopyrite recovery of 62.1% and 25.5%, respectively. Relating these results to the blank test where no MAA was added, a drop in arsenopyrite recovery of 63.0% was observed whereas a drop of only 7.5% was observed for pyrite. Other tests were conducted to observe any differences in selectivity or recovery. These were pre-aerating the pulp, potassium permanganate addition and the use of an activator, copper sulphate. However it was found that the recovery of both minerals decreased resulting in a smaller selectivity.