The objective of the current study was to design titanium alloys by optimizing tensile strength, yield strength, modulus of elasticity and biocompatibility using the artificial neural network (ANN) and recursive partitioning (RP) models. The database of 308 titanium alloys served as the basis of the model with alloy composition and processing parameters as inputs and each property to be optimized as the target. Levenberg-Marquardt back propagation was used to train the ANN model. RP model was used to elucidate different thresholds of alloying elements that are decisive of biocompatibility. The sensitivity analysis of ANN model revealed that Ta and Nb when used at very high concentrations (30–35%), their tensile and yield strength are higher. With the increase in the concentration of Ta and Nb, the modulus of elasticity was shown to decrease and at high concentrations, modulus of elasticity reaches to that of cortical bone. The RP model showed that these two alloys are safe. Hence, we have generated ANN simulations of Ti-xNb-yTa ternary system to ascertain the optimal combination of Ta and Nb that can provide higher tensile and yield strengths and lower modulus of elasticity. These simulations were compared with already developed alloys with these combinations. To conclude, ANN-based optimization of prerequisite properties facilitated timely and cost-effective solutions in the design of biocompatible titanium alloys.Pure titanium and certain titanium alloys are being used as biomaterials for orthodontic and orthopedic implants Initially, Ti-6Al-4V was used as a biomaterial because of its high strength. However, this alloy exhibits following limitations as biomaterial: (i) it has a higher modulus of elasticity than the human bone (105–110 GPa vs. 20 GPa) Ti-6Al-7Nb and Ti-5Al-2.5 Fe alloys with mechanical properties similar to Ti-6Al-4V ELI were developed in order to overcome these limitations. However, Al also was reported to induce necrosis Thermomechanical processing parameters such as solution treatment and ageing process comprising β solid solutioning, cold deformation, continuous rapid heating and ageing can be optimized to obtain a fine-grain microstructure with a controlled β grain size that ensures higher strength with reasonable ductility In order to predict the mechanical properties of titanium alloys based on the alloy composition, heat treatment parameters, and work temperature, Malinov et al. developed an artificial neural network (ANN) model The experimental data of 308 titanium alloys on the alloy composition, thermomechanical processing, microstructure and mechanical properties were collected using The experimental data were randomly segregated into training data, testing data and validation data. The training data comprised 70% alloys and testing and validation data had 15% alloys in each group. A two-layer feed-forward network with sigmoid hidden neurons and linear output neurons was developed. The neural network was trained using Levenberg-Marquardt back propagation. The number of hidden neurons was optimized by trial and error until least root-mean-square error was obtained. After training the neural network, the regression plots representing regression coefficient (r) corresponding to training, validation, testing and whole dataset were obtained. Once the model was trained, the generated code will be used to predict unknown targets based on given inputs. The ANN models were developed using MATLAB R 2013a. Based on the published data for alloying elements The input variables for this analysis were the compositions of different alloying elements. Since the output variable should be a categorical variable for this analysis, the data on each property was segregated into ‘0’ and ‘1’ based on ≤ median or > median. The computational webpage: The correlation coefficient for the experimental vs. predicted tensile strength in training, validation and testing datasets were 0.94, 0.94 and 0.83, respectively. Whole dataset showed a correlation coefficient of 0.93. ( The ANN model predictability for the modulus of elasticity was as follows: training data set (r = 0.93), validation data set (r = 0.84), testing data set (0.93) and whole data set (0.91). ( Modulus of elasticity (GPa) = +[88.05] − [0.03 ∗ Mo] − [0.03 ∗ V ] + [0.39 ∗ Cr] + [2.1 ∗ Fe] − [0.30 ∗ Ta] − [1.01 ∗ Nb] + [2.34 ∗ Mn] + [3.46 ∗ Al] + [16.21 ∗ Si] + [13.81 ∗ O] + [22.84 ∗ N] + [17.45 ∗ C] − [0.13 ∗ Zr] + [0.29 ∗ Sn] + [26.02 ∗ H] + [10.52 ∗ Ni] − [497.93 ∗ Y] + [59.47 ∗ Pd] + [14.95 ∗ Ru] In order to test whether the MLR generated equation is optimal or not, a genetic algorithm was applied ( The purpose to develop this equation is to quantify the linear effects associated with each alloying element. Nb showed a statistically significant inverse association with the modulus of elasticity. Al and Si showed a positive association with the modulus of elasticity. ANN-based simulations showed that varying the content of Nb from 0% to 30% wt brings down the modulus of elasticity from 92 GPa to 70 GPa while varying the content of Ta from 0% to 30% wt brings down the modulus of elasticity from 92 GPa to 82 GPa ( As shown in Biomaterials should exhibit high tensile and yield strengths; low modulus of elasticity; and they should be biologically safe. Based on our findings, we have studied the possible biomaterials with prerequisite properties. Ti-6Al-4V was used initially as a biomaterial, but discontinued due to toxicity associated with V. Since ‘ Ta’ and ‘Nb’ were found to be safe biologically, much emphasis is being given on Ti-xTa and Ti-xNb combinations. We have developed ANN simulations for ternary system i.e.Ti-xNb-yTa. We have predicted tensile strength, yield strength and modulus of elasticity by modulating x, y = 5, 10, 15, …, 30, 35. Our observation revealed that x and y between 30 and 35 will be an excellent combination with high tensile/yield strength and low modulus of elasticity ( In the current study, ANN-based optimization of prerequisite properties namely tensile strength, yield strength and modulus of elasticity followed by RP-based biocompatibility assessment helped in developing Ti-xNb-yTa ternary system simulations for the design of biocompatible titanium alloys. Genetic algorithm was also applied in parallel for predicting the modulus of elasticity. Three-tier randomization of ANN model ensured network generalization and robustness of the model. The simulations depicted increased tensile strength and yield strength with the increase in the percentage of Ta and Nb. In parallel, the modulus of elasticity was shown to decrease with the increase in these alloying elements justifying their use as biomaterials. These simulations were consistent Li et al. who demonstrated that Ti-Nb alloys with <15% of Nb exhibit a hexagonal alpha phase with acicular, martensic structure. Equi-axed beta phase is retained only when Nb is higher than 30% Addition of interstitial elements to improve strength was reported to be beneficial to certain extent with increase in O up to 0.35% increasing tensile strength, but further increase resulting in the formation of a large proportion of embrittled alpha-phase with a subsequent decrease in tensile strength and ductility Ti-Nb-Sn system exhibits a lower modulus of elasticity and higher strength comparable to that of Ti-Nb and Ti-Nb-Ta-Zr systems. Ti-33.6Nb-4Sn exhibits the lowest modulus of elasticity in α-’’ martensitic phase. Upon heating, this α-’’ martensitic phase is transformed to β-phase, with a slight increase in modulus of elasticity (52 GPa) and still higher tensile strength (800 MPa) In the current study, the thresholds of V, Ta, Fe, and Al were used to differentiate biocompatible and non-biocompatible materials using RP model. Cross-validation of data of experimentally proved cytocompatible titanium alloys (n = 92) justify our model. However, future studies are warranted to confirm this model as apart from alloy composition, phase and microstructure also influence biocompatibility. To conclude, Ta and Nb increase tensile strength and yield strength. Nb and Ta decrease modulus of elasticity while Al increases the modulus of elasticity. Mo, Nb, and Al are biocompatible while V, Cr and Fe are non-biocompatible. Hence, Ti-Nb and Ti-Nb-Ta alloys are the most preferred biomaterials. Addition of Zr to these alloys further decreases modulus of elasticity thus making them more bio-compatible. We thank all the faculty of Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 