Solar power assisted different techniques of MED-VC (multi effect distillation-vapor compression) processes is thermo-economically analyzed and evaluated. In this work, two techniques of solar power cycles are considered to power on MED-PF-TVC, MVC (multi effect distillation thermal and mechanical vapor compressions). In the first technique, the developed solar thermal power is directly transmitted from the solar collector field via boiler heat exchanger unit toward the steam ejector of the MED-PF-TVC process. In the second technique, the electrical power generated from the SORC (Solar Organic Rankine Cycle) is used to power on the vapor compressor of the MED-PF-MVC process. The comparison is implemented according to the operation of PTC (parabolic trough collector) with Toluene organic oil and Water working fluids (2nd technique). Therminol-VP1 HTO (Heat Transfer Oil) is considered across the solar field and water is considered for boiler heat exchanger (1st technique). A case study is performed according to 4545 m3/day of distillate product. As a result, reducing the value of compression ratio with increasing the evaporator’s numbers would reduce the specific power consumption, solar field area, and thermo-economic costs. Also it is clear that the operation of steam ejector would increase the gain ratio instead of increasing the evaporator’s numbers.Countries in south Mediterranean basin usually have abundant seawater resources and a good level of solar radiation, which could be used to produce drinking water from seawater. Although everybody recognizes the strong potential of solar thermal energy to seawater desalination, the process is not yet developed at commercial level Sufficient thermal power can operate MED-TVC via BHX (boiler heat exchanger) unit, however; SORC (solar organic Rankine cycle) can produce electricity via turbine unit that would be sufficient enough for MED-MVC process. However, such kind of solar desalination technologies is still far away from application. There are a very limited number of papers published in this regard. Regarding to thermal vapor compression with steam ejector, Almeria, Spain, at the PSA (Plataforma Solar de Almeria): A parabolic trough solar field was connected to a 14 effect-MED-TVC plant with capacity of 72 m For solar assisted MVC, Helal et al. In this work, two configurations of MED-VC desalination process powered by two different techniques of solar thermal power cycles are thermo-economically investigated and analyzed. The analyses are introduced for MED-VC according to a capacity of 4545 m Investigating and analyzing the design limitations of utilizing solar power with different techniques of MED-VC desalination process. Electing the most reliable MED-VC technique based on energy, exergy, cost and thermo-economic analyses putting in mind the number of MED-PF effects. The design points are summarized according to typical winter operating conditions due to the high demanded thermal load for such types of desalination processes (MED or MSF). Studying the possibility of increasing the evaporators numbers (up to 16 effects) while operating MED-MVC in order to inspect the possibility to achieve higher performance results against MED-TVC. Studying the effect of compression ratio and top steam temperature on the gain ratios of the proposed techniques. Solar energy positively can operate and power on the MED-VC desalination processes according to many reasons such as; low TBT (top brine temperature), low TST (top steam temperature), high gain ratio, and lower specific power consumption comparing against multi-stage flash and/or reverse osmosis desalination types. According to vapor compression type (mechanical or thermal), the combination technique with CSP would be determined from technique to another. The following sub-sections clarify the process techniques and the promise of coupling CSP plants with MED-VC desalination process. First of all, MED-PF (multi effect distillation parallel feed configuration)-regardless the any other configurations- is confirmed by the literature Direct normal irradiance under winter operating conditions is assumed for Egypt and Mediterranean countries. It is estimated by reference The distillate product is assigned as 4545 m According to the design and operating temperature of the proposed HTO and the PTC, the outlet collector temperature would be fixed at 350 °C, and the motive steam pressure is assigned to be 2500 kPa. The steam ejector compression ratio is maintained at value 2. The isentropic efficiencies of the pumps are maintained at 75% Effectiveness of all condensers (BHX and MED end condenser) is assigned at 0.8. The design specifications of the PTC are maintained according to LS-3 type MED-MVC is one of the attractive techniques for remote and small population areas. The MED-MVC is compact and confined. The system is driven by electric power; therefore, it is suitable for remote population areas with access to power grid lines. It can also be driven mechanically by diesel engine. Another advantage of the MED-MVC system is the absence of the down condenser and the cooling water requirements. MED-MVC system is a viable alternative to the RO (reverse osmosis) systems. The barrier to achieving this potential is the absence of a specially designed steam compressor of a capacity comparable to that of the MSF (multi-stage flash) unit capacity Solar radiation and ambient temperature would be fixed at the same as the previous technique (252 W/m The distillate product is fixed at 4545 m Due to the operating conditions of the MED-PF and the BHX effectiveness, the collector outlet temperature is maintained at 350 °C (Therminol-VP1) to dominate sufficient saturated vapor (Toluene) that enters the turbine unit in the range of 300 °C. The outlet turbine conditions would be maintained at 35 °C (saturated temperature) putting in consideration the recuperator unit effectiveness and the top steam temperature (TST  °C). TST  °C temperature is controlled at 60 °C putting in consideration the compression ratio. The compressor adiabatic index is assigned as 1.32 with 75% efficiency. The isentropic and mechanical efficiencies of the turbine are maintained at 85% and 95% respectively. The isentropic efficiencies of the pumps are maintained at 75% The recuperator effectiveness is maintained at 80% PTC configuration and design specifications are adjusted according to LS-3 type Using the developed SDS software package   CR = 2.165, Motive steam pressure = 2500 kPa, MED section represented as 4 effects with TST = 60 °C. The specifications for Nafey’s  CR = 1.35.  Unlike energy, which is conserved in any process according to the first law of thermodynamics, exergy is destroyed due to irreversibility taking place in any process, which manifests itself in entropy creation or entropy increase. The general form of the exergy is defined by the following equation The exergy destruction rate (kW) in solar collector is obtained by Bejan And; For chemical part; the exergy stream (kg/s) should be calculated according to the following relation: In this part, investment and operating & maintenance costs analyses are performed for each unit (solar field, steam turbine, condensers, and pump units). The interest rate set as 5%, Thermo-economic is the branch of engineering that combines exergy analysis and economic principles to provide the system designer or operator with information not available through conventional energy analysis and economic evaluations but crucial to the design and operation of a cost effective system The in use results about this technicality SMED-PF-TVC to produce what equates 4545 m Results obtained related to this technique are illustrated in To distinguish between these two techniques, it is important to united and uniform most of the operating conditions to give clear and real aspects about the best technique. Therefore, the design operating conditions for both techniques are considered as following: Seawater temperature = 25 °C. Neff = 4 effects. CR = 2. Steam temperature = 60 °C. Blow down brine temperature = 46.8 °C. Productivity = 52.6 kg/s. Seawater salinity = 46,000 ppm. Blow down salinity = 69,000 ppm. Motive steam in case of MED-PF-TVC = 25 bar. Outlet collector temperature = 350 °C.  In conclusion, MED-PF-VC has the advantage of using a low-temperature heat source (steam or hot water) when it operates at low TBT, and this can give much lower equivalent work or available consumed energy than MSF units. In this work, suggestions are pin pointed to combine between solar filed (PTC solar collectors) and different techniques of MED-PF-VC (TVC and MVC) desalination plant (capacity of 4545 m Technical limitations for MED concluded in increasing number of effects up to 16∼20 stages and lowering the TBT in the range of 60–65 °C. This may increase the gain ratio moreover; its effect on total water price is still not noticed. Also, increasing the effects number would reduce the SPC kWh/m Decreasing the compression ratio down to a specified limit (CR = 2) may increase the cycle performance and would decrease the SPC kWh/m Increasing the top steam temperature will increase the SPC kWh/m SMED-PF-TVC gives attractive results compared against SMED-PF-MVC technique. It achieves lower SPC, steam flow rate, total water price and thermo-economic product cost compared with SMED-PF-MVC technique. Normally, MED-PF-MVC is operated within 2–4 effects however; it could be in competitive standing only by increasing the Neff’s more than 12 effects. The existence of steam ejector unit may reduce the need of more evaporators to increase the GR.  Area, m Solar collector area, m Effects heat transfer area, m Amortization factor, y Annualized capital cost, $/year Boiler heat exchanger Cost, $ Capital costs, $ Compression ratio Thermo-economic product cost, $/GJ Specific heat capacity at constant pressure, kJ/kgK Direct capital cost, $ Exergy rate, kW Brine blow down exergy rate, kW Chemical exergy rate, kW Distillate exergy rate, kW Flow exergy rate, kW Exergy in, kW Physical exergy rate, kW Exergy transfer, kW Exergy out, kW Exergy of work, kW Gain ratio, Global solar radiation, W/m Enthalpy, kJ/kg Exergy destruction rate, kW Investment capital costs, $ Indirect capital cost, $ Interest, % Load factor Life time, year Multi effect distillation parallel cross feed arrangement Multi effect distillation parallel cross feed mechanical vapor compression Multi effect distillation parallel cross feed thermal vapor compression Mass flow rate, kg/s Brine mass flow rate, kg/s Distillate mass flow rate, kg/s Steam mass flow rate, kg/s Number of effects Number of moles of pure water, gmol Number of moles of salt, gmol Operating cost, $ Pressure, kPa Salinity ratio, g/kg (ppm) Brine blow down salinity ratio, g/kg Feed seawater salinity ratio, g/kg Solar organic Rankine cycle Specific chemical cost, $/m Specific electrical cost, $/kWh Specific heating steam cost, $/MkJ Specific labor cost, $/m Specific Power Consumption, kWh/m Specific entropy, kJ/kg°C Temperature, °C Distillate temperature, °C Last effect brine temperature, °C Seawater temperature, °C Top brine temperature, °C Top distillate temperature, °C Top steam temperature, °C Top vapor temperature, °C Sun temperature, 6000 K Total capital cost, $ Total water price, $/m Turbine power, kW Pump power, kW Fraction of water and salt contents Volume, m Total investment and operating and maintenance cost, $/h Ambient Average Brine Chemical Collector Condenser Distillate product Feed In Multi effect distillation Out Pump Recuperator Salt, steam Steam phase Turbine Vapor Water Thermal efficiency, % Generator efficiency, % pump efficiency, % Turbine efficiency, %