Density functional theory (DFT) simulations have been performed to study the field emission characteristics of pristine, Ga, and Al substituted germanium nanocone (Ge-NC). The influence due to the substitution of group-III elements on Ge-NC is studied using the density of states (DOS) spectrum and electron density. As a matter of fact, from the molecular electrostatic potential surface, it is noticed that the impurity substitution at the apex of Ge-NC leads to increase in the field emission properties due to delocalization of electron by the charge transfer at the apex of nanocone. In addition, the Mulliken charge transfer, work function and current density of the emitted electron were calculated for the pristine and Ga and Al-doped Ge-NC. The results suggest that the substitution of group-III impurity along the apex of Ge-NC leads to the improved field emission, which can be used for the assembly of vacuum electronics and nanoelectronics.The impurity-doped semiconductor with different nanostructures is found to have more applications than the intrinsic one, which is the prime focus among the research community. Owing to the increase in conductivity (decrease in the band gap between the conduction band and the valence band), the doped semiconductors are employed in devices such as detectors, rectifiers, sensistors, thermistors, solar cells and in the components like integrated circuits (heavily doped one). Habib Ullah group [ In the initial stages, the emission of electrons from metals/semiconductors, which is used in various devices are by the phenomenon of thermionic emission, i.e., by heating the material to high temperatures. The thermal breakdown of the material, high energy consumption, slow response and low efficiency in the above-said process is eliminated by adopting field emission phenomena. The field emission property of a nanostructure evaluates the emission of the electron under an applied electric field to categorize the material as a field emitter. Even though planar electrodes initially acquired the field emission theory, electrodes with sharp tips and small radius of curvature advance the flow of electrons from the cathode to anode when a local electric field (∼10 The declination angle θ = nπ/3 commonly characterizes a nanocone. The angle of sector obtained from a flat nanosheet, which tends to form a cone is called the declination angle. Moreover, we would like to address the reason behind the selection of Ge nanocone as field emitters. The tunneling mechanism of an electron to vacuum is hastened in Ge nanocone by applying a large electric field, which arose due to high aspect ratio [ In the current work, we calculated the electronic properties of pristine and group-III doped Ge-NC with density functional theory (DFT) implemented by Gaussian 09 package [ The schematic diagram of pristine Ge-NC is presented in the The declination angle of Ge-NC in the present work is chosen as 180°, and it is found to constitute a triangle at its apex. The height of the cone is calculated to be 15 Å, and the bottom end of the Ge-NC is passivated with hydrogen atoms to limit the boundary effects. Based on the results, the E The peak maxima are noticed in various energy intervals of occupied and virtual orbitals as presented in the DOS spectrum, which infers the fingerprint of the charge present in different intervals [ The electron density is found to be high at the apex of Ge-NC since the unshared electrons in the group-IV elements lead to the high electron density across the apex. On replacing a Ge atom by a Ga atom, the Mulliken charge transfer is observed to be −0.421 e. The negative value of the Mulliken charge transfer infers that the electrons get transferred from the Ge atom to Ga atoms [ The DOS spectrum of Ga substituted Ge-NC is portrayed in the Owing to the generation of new peaks across the valence band in the Ga doped Ge-NC, it is evident that the nature of the semiconductor turns to the p-type semiconductor. To remove an electron from the semiconductor’s Fermi level, the smallest energy required is the work function, Φ. The work function is presumed to be the negative value of the Fermi energy level E The current density of the emitted electron (CDEE) from the semiconductor’s surface is estimated by Richardson-Dushman equation [ The above two equations together lead to the following expression The value of kT is found to be 0.025 eV at room temperature (293 K) and ΔΦ = −0.02 eV. Hence, it is interpreted that j On replacing the Ge atom at the apex by an Al atom, Mulliken charge transfer is observed to be −0.544 The DOS spectrum for Al substituted Ge-NC is shown in the The Fermi energy level for Al substituted Ge-NC is observed at the energy level of −4.285 eV. Also from the DOS spectrum of Al substituted Ge-NC, the contribution of peaks is noticed between the energy intervals of 2–4 eV due to doping of Al atom. Owing to the slight change in the LUMO level on comparison with the pristine Ge-NC, the Al creates a new valence level across the valence band, which infers that the substitution of Al in Ge-NC leads to turn the nature of semiconductor to p-type. The HOMO and LUMO of Al substituted Ge-NC is shown in the The slight decrease in the Fermi energy level (shifting to upper energies) arose due to the Al doping in Ge-NC that decreases the work function Φ. The value of Φ of Al-doped Ge-NC is found to be 4.285 eV which is lower than the pristine Ge-NC. Also, the change in the work function ΔΦ is noticed to be −0.025 eV. Moreover, CDEE is also found to increase due to the decrease in Φ, which makes Al-doped Ge-NC a perfect base material for field emission. This is also confirmed by the expression obtained, (i.e.) j We studied the structural stability and electronic properties of pristine and group-III substituted Ge-NC using DFT method. The field emission characteristics of Ge-NC and impurity substituted Ge-NC is explored with the energy gap variation and work function. Moreover, using Richardson-Dushman formula, the current density of the emitted electron for pristine and Ga and Al substituted Ge-NC is studied. Besides, the results show that upon doping with the group-III elements such as Ga and Al on the apex of Ge-NC, the delocalization of electron takes place along the apex of Ge-NC. Thus, the field emission properties of Ga and Al substituted Ge-NC gets increased, which are also noticed through the electron density diagram along the apex of Ge-NC. The DOS spectrum also shows the modulation in the peak maxima along the valence band and the conduction band due to the substitution of group-III elements. Thus, the findings suggest that Ge-NC is stable in its geometric structure also the electronic properties reveals that the field emission properties can be enhanced with the substitution of Ga or Al along the apex of Ge-NC. Hence, Ga or Al- substituted Ge-NC can be used as a field emitter for potential applications in vacuum electronics and nanoelectronics.