Structures, lithofacies and semi-quantitative sedimentological analysis of volcanic debris-avalanche deposits are essential to constrain syn-emplacement processes along avalanche fault zones in the setting of mass-flow runout distances. At a distance of 28km from the extinct Pichu Pichu compound volcano, we show how internal structures of thrust lobes, faulted as to form horst- and graben-like structures, have recorded the brecciation with granular segregations. Cataclastic gradients have been recognized in more than eleven breccia structures with statistical grain-size parameters, among them fractal D-values between 1.96 and 2.53 related to an extensional fracturing in DADs with fractal D-values between 2 and 2.5 leading to granular disaggregation with fractal D-values between 2.13 and 2.22. Primary fractures related to transport processes and the secondary cataclasis produced during emplacement are quantified as having <50% matrix, while the avalanche transformations into lahar deposits occur with >50% matrix. The hybrid lithofacies in graben-like structures may be the precursory stages of the matrix transformation into lahar deposits.
                  Volcanic debris-avalanche structures of eleven worldwide volcanoes that belong to the Central Andes and the Cascades volcanic arc have been compared using sedimentary and statistical methods (156 sieved samples and Shape Preferred Orientation measured on 30,342 clasts). Median diameter, sorting index, skewness and kurtosis values help differentiate four deposits and processes: (1) the proximal gravitational collapse deposits; (2) the avalanche thrust lobes, located in inverted extensional fault zones, and (3) the hybrid and mixed deposits with polymodal distributions; and (4) the bimodal, transformed matrix with clast sorting. The fractal D-values of avalanche matrix range between 2.3 and 2.7, suggesting that extensional fractures have led to granular disaggregation.
                  From the available statistical dataset, a few equations have been developed that help pointing to a syn-emplacement cataclastic gradient along avalanche fault zone. Three textural classes of avalanche fault zones have been identified based on the ellipse/a/b values of ~2.14 for the planar collapse in fault zone, 1.75 to 2 for the crushing of volcanic avalanche breccias, and <1.7 due to the thermal effect of clast fragmentation. Inherited clast shapes with a/b
                     =2.5 and ellipse=4 suggests a co-evolution of avalanche lithofacies. A sedimentological classification of avalanche fault zones proposed here has been related to the syn-emplacement processes of DAD structural units. As a result, the semi-quantitative texture dataset helps constrain the different stages of avalanche runout and the transformation steps into lahar deposits.Volcanic debris avalanches are a large-scale volcanic hazard, which can have volumes of many cubic kilometers and long run outs (up to 100 Thus structural and sedimentological analyses contribute to the understanding of volcanic debris-avalanche emplacement, and help to distinguishing the different collapse structures, to determining original stratigraphic and lithologic elements and their evolution. Our understanding of emplacement is improved by studying features such as proximal tilted blocks showing the initial lithostratigraphy, longitudinal ridges parallel to strike-slip faults, hummocky structures due to extensive spreading and disaggregation that produce blocks and mixed lithofacies ( To study structures and textures of a debris avalanche, we closely look at the voluminous DAD thrust lobe below the Pichu Pichu volcano in south Peru ( The terminology used in this study concerns the distinction between DADs associated with the primary pyroclastic and lahar deposits, the DAD hybrid lithofacies and its transformation into lahar deposits. From the textural and sedimentological characteristics of 288 DADs from 210 volcanoes worldwide ( Syn-eruptive DADs with juvenile material, often termed the Bezymianny-type deposits ( The hybrid DADs ( The DAD lithofacies have been distinguished along three zones according to the distance away from the collapse scar as follows. (1) In the debris avalanche proximal area (as far as 8 From field observations on the DAD units, we have described the textural variations of the lithofacies assemblages and assessed their relationships to observed structural features, such as fault zones. Sampling of the avalanche matrix contributed to a semi-quantitative, sedimentological analysis to determine grain-size distributions. This has enabled us to establish a cataclastic gradient along the transition from primary to transformed volcanic avalanche deposits and a sedimentological classification of a large number of avalanche lithofacies. From field observations and Google Earth imagery, the mapped DAD units were identified related to their geomorphological context and the ratio of the vertical drop with runout distance ( Image analysis of outcrop faces was used to calculate the grain-size distributions with the inertia and intercepts methods of the Shape Preferred Orientation 2003 software (SPO, Eighteen, non-cohesive samples from the DAD matrix were collected and sieved at one- Grain-size distributions were processed using the Gradistat v8 software in Excel (from decimeter-size clasts to matrix ≤2 Statistical and shape parameters were compared with those from other structural DAD units in the Central Andean Volcanic Zone (CAVZ) such as the thrust lobes of El Misti deposits, and the Tutupaca ridge DAD (50 sieved samples, SPO from 6746 clasts, As many as 75% of Andean volcanoes have large scale collapses due to fault systems ( The WNW-ESE oriented Arequipa pull-apart basin is filled by no fewer than five DADs ~100 Using Google Earth imagery, this western flank collapse of the extinct Pichu Pichu volcano shows at the summit, a composite scar about ~15 The largest Pichu Pichu DAD is associated with five nested scars forming an erosional amphitheater ~10.8 At a distance of 28 Lithostratigraphic and textural variations in the Pichu Pichu thrust lobe help to distinguish the different stages of the cataclastic gradient in the avalanche breccias. We first consider the Alto Jesus open-pit quarry ( Eight lithostratigraphic sections in the Alto Jesus open-pit quarry (sections 1–8 in At the N80E downstream thrust section, a condensed succession (M and bC, section 6 in More than eleven mesoscale structures have been studied with the SPO analysis from 812 clasts in the thrust lobe ( At the thrust section, lava breccias show injections of M2 matrix in the extensional fractures (section 4 in Along the ~8 Outcrop-scale deformation structures are well preserved in lava rich-breccias showing a basal thrust fault of the DAD lobe. Lava rich-breccias have undulating and sheared contacts (sections 9–10 in In the Alto Jesus open-pit quarry, six non-cohesive samples were collected from two lava sheared sigmoids to define the structurally controlled syn-emplacement processes generating secondary cataclasis of matrix in lava rich-breccias. Along the Pampa Blanca graben, five samples of the matrix in jigsaw-fractured breccias have been compared to seven samples of matrix from mixed and transformed deposits collected along a 10 Each grain-size fraction was compared to distinguish the sandy-gravel textures of the bimodal matrix-supported jigsaw breccias ( Each grain-size fraction was compared to distinguish the sandy-gravel textures of the bimodal matrix-supported jigsaw breccias ( Along two lava sheared sigmoids of the Alto Jesus thrust lobe, the texture is sandy gravel ( Along two lava sheared sigmoids of the Alto Jesus thrust lobe, the texture is sandy gravel (  Statistical grain-size parameters highlight the granular differences between the syn-emplacement textures observed along the Pichu Pichu DAD lobe. The sorting index ( The skewness values of lava sheared sigmoids are intermediate ( The skewness values of lava sheared sigmoids are intermediate ( The diagram showing ellipse/ The SPO analysis from 13,327 clasts ( The ellipse Based on these regressions, a textural tree diagram shows the co-evolution between the lithofacies of lava-rich breccias along the thrust lobe including inherited jigsaw-blocks with Sedimentary features of Pichu Pichu thrust lobe enable us to differentiate structural segregation of lithofacies along distal debris-avalanche fault zone with basal backthrust and inverted extensional fault. We differentiate (1) primary fracturing of clastic matrix with <40% matrix along thrust basal contact. Mesostructures along sheared zones characterize syn-emplacement brecciation with decreasing granular sorting, cataclastic shear bands along sigmoids structures. A co-evolution of lithofacies is inferred from features such as clast breakage, fault cataclasis, cataclastic gradient with granular segregation, and thermal fracturing dilation. (2) In an extensional sheared context, we observe fluidized cataclastic matrix in tension cracks and vertical injections. The initial lithofacies assemblage disappears with inherited jigsaw-fits and matrix mixture in graben. Mixed and transformed matrix may be related to cataclastic mixing with longitudinal sorting, which may be the precursory stages to the matrix transformation of the hybrid DAD into lahars. Structures, lithofacies assemblages and sedimentary analysis of syn-emplacement textures contribute to correlate the different stages of the cataclastic gradient in thrust avalanche breccias. Sedimentological parameters of the distal thrust lobe of the Pichu Pichu DAD are compared to a dataset from documented worldwide debris avalanches and associated lahar deposits. These have enabled the establishment of a textural classification of volcanic debris-avalanche deposits showing structural controls along internal fault zones. The mapped DADs at Pichu Pichu show that there was a succession of destabilizations with each deposit having an Excessive avalanche runout distances change against topographic obstacles (Socompa, Sedimentological characteristics of the Pichu Pichu thrust lobe are compared with other DADs and associated lahar deposits in Peru and Canada ( The ratio of matrix percent We compare statistical grain-size parameters of the matrix-rich lithofacies in the −5 to 5 The sorting index ( Fractal The energy of the gravitational flank collapse ( Statistical comparisons of avalanche breccias contribute to establishing a sedimentological classification for syn-emplacement processes of DAD structural units ( Sand-sized matrix percent and ellipse/ Lithofacies and textural variations along the Pichu Pichu thrust lobe are compared to other debris avalanche textures ( The ellipse/ The mean ellipse The ellipse/ Two points of intersection (A1 and A2 in The transformed DADs show a similar, cataclastic evolution linked with frictional faulted deposits (C1 and C2 in From the primary inherited textures linked with the collapsed edifice, a transitional stage of the cataclastic transformations appears with a convergent evolution of DAD lithofacies along shear fractures during the runout process. Regressions of thermal effects ( The Pichu Pichu thrust lobes compared to other worldwide debris-avalanche deposits define the studied distal fault zone such as a channelized and faulted DAD, showing the hybrid lithofacies in an extensional context, a precursory stage to syn-sedimentary transformations into lahar deposits. The comparison of sedimentary characteristics of DAD matrix implies a syn-transport deflection of the Pichu Pichu thrust lobe against a topographic obstacle in the Arequipa basin generating primary and secondary fracturing along N130 strike-slip faults cutting the basement. Lava breccias with secondary fractures are thrust on the basal fluidized matrix. Syn-emplacement brecciation is related to a co-evolution of lithofacies along the thrust lobe in rotational shear ( Basal sheared brecciation produced cataclastic and fluidized matrix, similar to the Pungarehu DAD and El Misti transformed deposits ( Debris avalanche fault textures studied with quantitative sedimentological analyses help us to characterize the internal structures of volcanic debris-avalanche deposits, at a distance of 28 From the statistical dataset of eleven DAD structural units, we compare the transformed and hybrid deposits, the reworked DADs into secondary hybrid lithofacies and transformations into lahar deposits. Sand-sized matrix percent and fractal Equations have been developed that imply a syn-emplacement cataclastic gradient along avalanche fault zone. Tectono-volcanic controls of recurrent avalanche deposits in Peru are differentiated such as Ticsani DAD ( The following is the supplementary data related to this article. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The fieldwork in Peru trip has been funded by the ANR Laharisk research project (ANR-09-RISK-005, Thouret et al.), the French-Peruvian University network termed R. Porras Barrenechea and the Institut de la Recherche pour le Développement (IRD) for Tutupaca volcano. We gratefully acknowledge F. Garcia and G.E. Tarqui (UNSA), M. Rivera, P. Valderrama and J. Mariňo (INGEMMET) for field assistance. The fieldwork in Canada has been funded by the French Embassy (D. Marty-Dessus) and Simon Fraser University (SFU), and we gratefully acknowledge J. Clague, G.W. Jones and K. Russel, all from SFU. We acknowledge two anonymous reviewers and the Chief Editor Dr. J. Marti for the constructive comments and suggestions that have greatly improved the manuscript.