The effect of pyrite on gold dissolution was investigated in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leaching system using pure gold foils. Special emphasis was placed on gold leaching in association with pyrite dissolution, thiosulphate decomposition and gold leaching passivation. The presence of pyrite retarded gold dissolution and this detrimental effect became more pronounced at higher pyrite contents. Pyrite catalysed the decomposition of thiosulphate to trithionate. The addition of sulphate enhanced gold leaching by retarding the dissolution of pyrite in ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions. XPS analysis indicated the presence of iron hydroxide species at the gold surfaces in the presence of pyrite, which was likely responsible for the reduced gold dissolution. SEM analysis indicated a lesser extent of gold dissolution occurring in the presence of pyrite.Thiosulphate as an alternative lixiviant for gold has received much attention in recent years due to the growing environmental concerns over the use of cyanide. Acceptable gold leaching rates using thiosulphate were achieved in the presence of ammonia with the cupric ion acting as the oxidant ( The thiosulphate leaching system is complicated by the homogeneous reduction of Cu(II) by thiosulphate according to the simplified overall reaction, Eq.  Pyrite (Py) and quartz (Qz) samples were obtained from Geological Specimen Supplies, Australia. The minerals were crushed, dry milled in a ring mill, sieved into the size fraction of 45–75 μm and stored in air-tight plastic bags in a refrigerator to avoid any further oxidation. Quantitative XRD results indicated that the mineral samples are of over 98% purity. Gold foils (99.99% Au, thickness 0.2 mm) were used in the experiments with a surface area of about 0.20 cm Elemental concentrations in solutions were determined by ICP-OES, involving the oxidation of sulphur species as very stable sulphates prior to the analysis. After oxidation by hydrogen peroxide, HCl was added to the solution, which was boiled to ensure complete conversion of the metal species to the chloride form. The thiosulphate concentration was determined by iodometric methods. In order to eliminate the effect of the cupric–ammonia complex on iodine titration, a certain amount of acetic acid (10% solution) was added prior to the titration with the indicator Vitex. Polythionates were determined by ion-chromatography on Dionex DX-500 (Sunnyvale, CA, USA) using ion-interaction chromatography with conductivity and UV detection, as described by A platinum electrode (M21Pt, Radiometer) was used to measure the mixed solution potential with a double-junction reference electrode (Ag/AgCl, saturated KCl, Orion) to avoid the interference of thiosulphate with the reference electrode. All potentials are given with respect to SHE. X-ray photon spectroscopy (XPS) was used to identify the surface species of the leached gold foil and pyrite samples. XPS was performed on a nanoprobe (Fisons Instruments) at about 10 Experiments were performed in a 400 mL open-top reactor using a magnetic stirrer at a rotating speed of 400 min  Thiosulphate is a metastable anion that tends to readily undergo chemical decomposition in aqueous solutions, particularly in acidic solutions. In the presence of cupric ions, thiosulphate can be oxidised to tetrathionate following the route in Eq. Trithionate can also further decompose to give thiosulphate and sulphite, as shown in Eq. The decomposition of tetrathionate to form trithionate is much faster in alkaline solutions following Eq. Polythionates were found to reduce copper(II) ions and hence decrease the leaching kinetics of gold ( The slurry pH remained constant at 10.5 during leaching, due to the buffering effect of NH The catalysis of pyrite in this reaction originated from its strong affinity for aqueous sulphur species and its semi-conducting properties. Pyrite was believed to form an interfacial intermediate complex with thiosulphate, the aqueous electron donor, on anodic sites, and oxygen, the terminal electron acceptor, on cathodic sites. The electrons could transfer from the anodic site to the cathodic site via the conduction band of pyrite. This mechanism could also contribute to the catalytic effect of pyrite on the oxidative decomposition of thiosulphate in alkaline aqueous solutions. In the presence of the copper(II)-ammine complex, the electron acceptor would be preferentially the copper(II)-ammine complex.  Oxidative dissolution of pyrite in the ammoniacal thiosulphate leach is expected to form the final product of sulphate. The addition of sulphate depressed the dissolution of pyrite in terms of the variation of the sulphur concentrations in solutions. The released sulphur concentration from pyrite was reduced from 21.3 to 12.5 mg/L in the presence of 2 g/L pyrite. The XPS analysis of sulphur and iron speciation at the pyrite and gold surfaces after contact with ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions by using XPS allows a better understanding of the mechanism for pyrite reducing gold dissolution. The XPS spectra were recorded for Fe 2p and S 2p for these samples.  The Fe 2p spectra for pyrite in In order to study the surface morphology of the gold foils after leaching, the gold foils were subjected to SEM analysis coupled with EDAX.  The presence of pyrite significantly reduced gold dissolution in ammoniacal thiosulphate solutions and this detrimental effect became more prominent at higher pyrite contents. Pyrite had a catalytic effect on the decomposition of thiosulphate. The decomposition of thiosulphate mainly formed trithionate under the experimental conditions. The addition of sulphate in the pyrite system increased the gold dissolution rate because of the depression of pyrite dissolution in the leaching system. XPS results indicated the formation of iron hydroxide species at the gold surfaces in the presence of pyrite, which likely contributed to the reduced gold dissolution. Topological studies by SEM demonstrated that gold dissolved to a lesser extent in the presence of pyrite. The financial support from Newcrest Mining Limited, Placer Dome Technical Services Limited, and the Australian Research Council is gratefully acknowledged. Appreciation is also expressed to Hui Tan for assistance with the experimental work.