The anisotropy of several PVA/magnetosome magnetically textured films has been investigated. The thin film synthesized under the influence of a magnetic field (99mT) shows the typical behavior of an anisotropic material. The results show that the magnetic field applied during the synthesis promotes an orientation of the chains of magnetosomes and permanent textured film is obtained after solidification.Magnetic nanoparticles are key components for development of many novel bio- and nanotechnological applications. One of them is “new” biological magnetic particles, the so-called magnetosomes, which were found as a product of the biomineralization process from magnetotactic bacteria (MTB). Magnetosomes, which can be isolated from microbial cells in large quantities, consist of a magnetic mineral crystal, magnetite or greigite, enveloped by a biological membrane that contains phospholipids and specific proteins Here, we report some anisotropy measurements of magnetically textured polymer films doped with magnetosomes. The aim of this study is to investigate the optical and magneto-optical potential of such a composite material. Bacterial magnetosomes ( For the isolation of the magnetosome particles, we have used the modified method described by Grünberg et al. The morphological properties and the size of magnetosomes were estimated by transmission measurements using a FEI Tecnai F20 S-TWIN (Philips Corp.) transmission electron microscope (TEM) working at the accelerating voltage of 200 Magnetosome films are bacterial magnetic particles embedded in a polymer matrix. PVA polymer was used. The process of the preparation of thin films was based on the blending of some mg of magnetosomes with 1.5 Dynamic light scattering (DLS) at varied laser beam angle perspectives was applied in order to obtain the statistical distribution of sizes of magnetosomes. For a long time this was the perfect tool to describe the size of small particles dispersed in a solution as well as their distribution broadening as a function of the angle. For the DLS experiment 10 A DLS study was performed with a standard photon correlation system consisting of an ALV5000 multiple tau digital correlator (ALV GmbH, Germany). An experiment duration of 120 For the description of the dispersion of magnetosome particles lognormal distribution was used for the different laser beam angle perspectives As anisotropic media play a role in the behavior of polarized light, the study of the modification of the state of polarization of linearly polarized light is a way to measure the anisotropy. A complete description of such measurements is given in Refs. Thus measuring this modification of the state of polarization using an ellipsometer is a way to determine the ellipsometric angles and then the anisotropy. During the measurement a magnetic field up to 10 As a representative we plot the DLS data for 60°, 90° and 120° of laser beam angle perspective ( The DLS data has been normalized to unity and fitted to logarithmic-normal function. The logarithmic-normal function parameters and mean values of hydrodynamic radius as well as its standard deviation are shown in The narrowest intensity peak can be observed for 90°, showing the mean hydrodynamic radius of 89.5 For smaller and higher laser beam angle perspectives the mean hydrodynamic radius increases. This is, obviously, due to broader magnetosome distribution at such angles. The magnetosomes covered by a phospholipid shell (in a solution) are allowed to interact with each other, which is attributable to the negatively charged phosphate group of phospholipid molecules (electrostatic interaction) and due to hydrogen bonding of amino and carboxylate groups. The interaction origin can be found also in van der Waals interactions. The specific chemical construction of phospholipid molecules permit also to interact with water and HEPES, since these molecules are polar and able to create hydrogen bonds as well. When the magnetosomes are placed in water the phospholipid molecules can lead to a variety of structures. This finally causes a broad distribution of magnetosomes. This effect might be stronger in non-polar solutions, since the phospholipid molecules then have no interaction competitor, i.e. solution molecules. The mean hydrodynamic radius varies for different angles; however, the hydrodynamic radius at the maximum of distribution intensity is stable and approximately equal to 90 The magneto-induced anisotropy of magnetosome suspensions in HEPES has been measured as a function of the magnetic field. This measurement is made using a null ellipsometer at a wavelength of 820 One should remember that a The measurements show that a very low field around 10 The anisotropy of several PVA/magnetosome films has been investigated without any magnetic field applied during the measurements. For film F2, which has been synthesized without any field, the curve remains approximatively null for whatever the value of Our investigations also confirm that the parameters Unfortunately, even if it has been possible formerly on magnetosome suspension, no measurement of this effect could be done on the film. This may be due to the unoptimized optical quality of the films, or to the low intrinsic value of the Faraday rotation of magnetite nanoparticles compared to other particles. For example, cobalt ferrite nanoparticles have an intrinsic Faraday rotation about 250°/cm for a volume concentration of 2%, which is ten times higher than that of magnetite But due to the potentiality of these films the group is currently working on these measurements. From DSL measurements it was shown that mean values of the hydrodynamic radius was 89.5 The results from magneto-optical measurements showed that the magnetic field applied during synthesis promotes an orientation of the chains of magnetosomes. Thus, after solidification, a permanent textured film is obtained. Optical microscope pictures confirm this texturation. The future works concern the study of the Faraday rotation of these films. To do so, the optical quality of the films has to be improved. This work was supported by a