The sustained casing pressure (SCP) problems occur mainly in intermediate casing that might affect the safety and efficiency of shale gas production. Cement sheath is the main barrier against leakage and migration of gas from the pay zone to the shallow zones. Since the production casing is cemented all the way up to the intermediate casing in the vertical section of the well, the in-situ stress can only act on the intermediate casing and not directly on production casing. Based on this situation, an analytical model considering the well completion steps is established to study the integrity of cement sheath as a two-layer casing-cement system. The effect of mechanical and geometrical parameters of casing and cement are further investigated through a sensitivity analysis. The results show that the tensile failure more likely occurs at the inner face of the cement sheath in the intermediate casing. The casing thickness is in favor of decreasing the tensile stress in the cement sheath. But on the contrary, increasing the thickness and elastic modulus of the cement sheath may increase the risk of tensile failure in the cement sheath while reducing the costs. However, an appropriate increase of back pressure in the annulus during cementing is beneficial to reduce the tensile stress in the cement sheath.The application of hydraulic fracturing and horizontal drilling has made the economic exploitation of natural gas from low-permeability shale formations possible. These technology advances have unlocked vast new energy sources and initiated significant changes to the gas industry around the world. After the United States has achieved commercial production of shale gas, the investment in producing shale gas is widely growing around the world. More and more shale gas fields are explored and thousands of shale gas wells are drilled in America, Canada and China ( Cementing is mainly to support the casing and isolate the wellbore from hydraulic communication with other formations. In the studies about the integrity of cement sheath, the cement is treated as elastic-brittle or poroelastic material and the stress in cement sheath is affected by the cement properties ( In shale gas wells, the high fluid pressure and its large fluctuations during fracturing treatments may lead to the generation of SCP. During hydraulic fracturing in shale gas wells, incomplete cementing and weak cement sheath can cause shear failure and evolution of long fractures broaching along the vertical section of the well ( In the vertical section of the well, the structure of the well from inside out is consisted of the production casing, cement sheath, intermediate casing, cement sheath and then the formation rock. Due to the presence of two layers of casing and cement sheath (see It is frequently observed in some areas to have gas migration to the surface through the well annulus. About 43% of 15,000 tested wells, inspected in Gulf of Mexico, have shown some degrees of cement damage after well completion that was a triggering point for formation of sustained casing pressure ( Based on the feedback from operators in the Marcellus shale, 25% of the wells located in this area still show measurable annular surface gas ( The failure of the cement sheath in a well has been determined with various criteria. Mohr-Coulomb criterion is used very frequently to determine the shear failure of the cement and tensile criterion is used for the tensile failure ( During hydraulic fracturing, the fluid pressure inside the casing would increase the radial stress in the cement sheath hence no debonding is expected to occur unless due to residual plastic deformations when the fluid pressure drops or due to shear stresses developed near the interfaces. A sketch of the vertical section of a cemented well is shown in The wellbore is assumed to be long enough that the problem can be assumed as a plane strain problem. In the vertical section, we have minimum horizontal stress To have a clear notation about different interfaces involved in this problem, casing strings, cement sheath and formation from the production casing to formation are numbered as ring 1 to ring 5, respectively. The interfaces between these rings are also numbered from I to IV accordingly. In previous studies about the integrity of the cement sheath in oil and gas wells, all loads are assumed to act on the casing-cement system simultaneously and the sequential steps of cementing works is ignored in stress analyses. Model A described in In model A, a multilayered cemented casing system has been studied by the assumption that the loads act on a cemented casings simultaneously. Under this condition, we use a generalized solution ( The stress at any point in casing, cement sheath and formation will be ( According to boundary conditions in Eq. As discussed before, stress analysis should be decomposed into three steps: Stress analysis under the loads generated by in-situ stress; Stress analysis for the loads generated by the fluid pressure in production casing; and Thermal stress analysis caused due to the change of temperature during hydraulic fracturing. The in-situ stress only acts on intermediate casing and its corresponding cement sheath, shown in Under uniform stress conditions, the radial stress at the interface Ⅲ is set as According to the displacement continuity at the interface Ⅲ and Ⅳ, the displacement of ring 3 is equal to the one of the ring 4 on the interface Ⅲ ( In the above formula, For the case of deviatoric stress, Using superposition, the radial stress at the interface Ⅲ and interface Ⅳ can be presented as Here, we developed a method for calculating the radial stress at interfaces Ⅲ and Ⅳ generated by in-situ stress, in the next section, we will discuss the radial stress at the interface Ⅲ and Ⅳ caused by fluid pressure inside the production casing. The method for calculating the stress and displacement of a ring is explained in The fluid pressure at the inner wall of ring 1 is Displacements are continuous at the interfaces. The relevant geometry and property parameters are substituted into Eq. There are four equations with four unknowns of stress on interfaces ( During hydraulic fracturing, the temperature around the wellbore is decreasing temporarily. The change of temperature may lead to the expansion or shrink of rings. The induced thermal stresses in these rings can be calculated as ( From Eq. The temperature at the interface The temperature at the interface The temperature in the casing-cement system can be calculated by substituting the geometry and conductivity parameters of casing and cement into Eq. According to the analysis from section The circumstantial stress of the cement at interfaces are calculated according to the model B and the results are shown in The circumferential stresses at the interfaces I and II are calculated according to model A and model B. The results are shown in From In Eq. Also, a method that the increasing of the fluid pressure of cement slurry between production and intermediate casings during cementing is proposed to balance stress on interface I and II (we call it back pressure). This technique can decrease tensile circumferential stress in the cement sheath. The effect of back pressure on the tensile stress of cement sheath is discussed last. Increase of casing thickness can prevent casing collapse in some extents and protect the cement sheath when the fluid pressure inside casing is too high during hydraulic fracturing treatment, but it increases completion costs, significantly. So that optimized design of casing thickness is very important. The effect of the thickness of production casing on circumferential stress in the cement sheath at the interface I and II can be calculated using Eq.   The effect of the thickness of intermediate casing on the circumferential stress in cement sheath at the interface I and II are calculated according to Eq.  The change of the elastic modulus of cement sheath is assumed to vary from 8 GPa to 20 GPa. The rest of the parameters are assumed to be equal to the benchmark shown in  The thickness of the cement sheath is assumed to vary from 24 mm to 80 mm. The rest of the parameters are assumed to be equal to the benchmark shown in The effect of geometry parameters and elastic modulus of the cement on stress was discussed in the previous subsections. Here, the well completion operation is considered to reduce the circumferential stress in the cement sheath. From Eq. With the increase of back pressure in the annulus between production casing and intermediate casing, the circumferential stress of cement sheath at the interface I and II are calculated according to Eq.  During hydraulic fracturing, if the fluid pressure reached to 90 MPa, when the back pressure is low, the increase of backpressure can cause a rapid decrease of circumferential stress in the cement sheath. When backpressure in the annulus is higher than 7.2 MPa, the tensile failure may not happen. But more importantly, when the annulus backpressure is 30 MPa, the tensile stress is reduced to 0.8 MPa and the integrity of cement sheath cannot be affected by the change of fluid pressure in production casings. It means that the backpressure in annulus can be an appropriate way to reduce the tensile failure of the cement sheath in shale gas wells. The sustained casing pressure widely existed in Fuling shale gas field. Five shale gas wells with SCP problems in China are considered here for analysis. The initial geometry and property parameters of casing, cement and formation are shown in On the other hand, the optimized parameters according to the analysis in this paper are proposed to increase the integrity of the cement sheath, as shown in  The results calculated according to optimized parameters show that the circumferential stresses are much lower than the tensile strength of cement sheath. In well 1, the tensile stress decreases from 7.2 to 2.6 MPa. In well 2, the stress decreases from 9.7 MPa to 3.6 MPa. In well 4 and well 5, the circumferential stresses are decreased to 3.8 MPa and 3.4 MPa respectively. As can be seen from the optimized parameters, the increase of thickness of casing and annulus back pressure play key roles for the decrease of tensile stress in cement sheath. It means that the method proposed in this paper is useful for the integrity of cement sheath. As the size of these five wells in the case study cannot be changed in field, the optimized size of the casing can be just used for the well designs in the future. Our analysis shows that the mechanical model that ignores well completion steps is improper for analyzing stress of the two-layer casing-cement system. The results according to this model may improperly predict the circumferential stress and cannot accurately demonstrate tensile failure of the cement sheath during the fracturing process in shale gas wells. The second model proposed in this paper (Eqs. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the In polar coordinate system, stress equilibrium differential equations are shown in Eq. In polar coordinate system, strain-displacement equations are shown in Eq. In polar coordinate system, strain-stress equations are shown in Eq. In polar coordinate system, compatibility equation of stress function is shown in Eq. (A-4). In polar coordinate system, relationships between the stress function and stress components are shown in Eq. The boundary condition that stress on the inner wall of ring is set as