Rocks are used in engineering works as monument or building stone and as architectural covering stone. As a result, they can be subjected to recurrent cycles of freezing and thawing and will be subjected to heating and cooling. They loose some of their integrity under these cyclic temperature variations and the more frequent and severe these cycles, the higher the integrity loss. However, the rates of progressive disintegration is not the same for different rock types, or even within rock types. This paper presents a mathematical model describing the integrity loss process when a rock is subjected to such recurrent cycles. The model postulates a first order process, and provides meaningful parameters for the integrity characteristic of rocks. The validity of the model has been established by an experimental laboratory study carried out on 10 different rock types.Stone used for a monument or sculpture or as architectural material is now called ‘cultural stone’ The weathering effect of H–C is also well known, and there are several types of processes involved. For instance, Selby Even though the weakening and disintegrating effect of the recurrent F–T or H–C cycles is known, there is no associated meaningful parameter to measure this integrity loss in rocks. Therefore, a descriptive-behavioural model is postulated and its validity has been examined by a laboratory study using 10 different rock types. The following working hypothesis is used to formulate the model: the process of integrity loss due to the weathering effect of recurrent freezing and thawing (F–T) or heating and cooling (H–C) can be modelled as a first order process. That is the rate of integrity loss (or disintegration rate) is proportional to the rock integrity present at the beginning of the each cycle. This proposition can be mathematically expressed as follows: By integrating this equation, between This model is not causative but descriptive; in other words, it explains The term e When this first order process model for rock disintegration under recurrent cycles of F–T or H–C is valid for a given rock, then these parameters (i.e. decay constant, decay factor, and half-life) can provide useful information for rocks’ behaviour under such thermal perturbation and can help making decision in many practical applications. In order to investigate the validity of the proposed model, a laboratory experiment was carried out with 10 different rock types. The samples of the rock types were obtained from various places in Turkey. Their physical properties and mineralogical characteristics were determined by standard methods. The recommended procedures of ISRM Density, dry and saturated unit weights determined by saturation and caliper method. The pore volume values were obtained by the water saturation procedure. Total porosity values were measured by fluid displacement in pycnometers, using crushed samples. The P-wave velocity values were determined by applying ultrasonic compression wave pulses to the rock samples. The results of these determinations are given in Optical microscopy was used to determine the mineralogical and textural characteristics of the rock types. First, the thin section of each rock type was prepared by standard procedures, and then examined under a petrographic microscope with respect to mean grain size, grain shape and types of grain contacts. The mineralogical descriptions of the rock specimens are given in To carry out the intended experimental investigation, a measure for rock integrity and a procedure for simulating the F–T (or H–C) cycles are needed. The concept of rock integrity involves both the hardness and the structural wholeness of the rock. Consequently, different parameters can be used as proxies for rock integrity. In this study, the Shore hardness (SH) was used as the measure of rock integrity. The SH test is a non-destructive and inexpensive, but reliable, way to compare the hardness values of the rock samples. To measure the SH values, a C-2 type Shore scleroscope at the SDU Applied Geo-engineering Lab was used. The Shore scleroscope measures the hardness of the rock in terms of impact hammer rebound height. During the test, a diamond-tipped hammer is dropped vertically onto the surface of the specimen, and the height of its rebound indicates the relative hardness of the rock. This rebound depends upon the characteristics of the spot hit. Therefore, the measurement of SH values will be sensitive to the roughness of the surface of the test specimens, as shown by Bailey To remove the effect of surface inhomogeneity, the mean of rebound values at different spots can be used, and McFeat To measure the SH value of the specimen, the test was performed 30 times using different spots on the specimen surface and the mean of these 30 readings was used as the SH value. The SH values for each type of rock were measured initially and after every 5 cycles up to the 25th cycle and then after every 10 cycles up to the 50th cycle. The SH value of the each rock type was obtained as the mean value of three replicates. In short, to obtain the SH values of each rock type at 9 points of treatment with cyclic action, a total number of 16 200 test drops was carried out. The initial SH values for each rock type, along with their standard deviation and coefficient of variation, are given in The heating portion of the cycle is simulated by placing rock specimens at room temperature, 20°C, into an oven preheated to 100°C for 2 At the beginning, three specimens were prepared for each type of rock, and a set of 30 specimens from 10 different rock types was formed by this way for H–C treatment. After the determination of their initial SH values, these 30 specimens were put into the oven. H–C cycles were applied to all specimens five times. After the 5th cycle, the SH values for 30 specimens were determined, and then they were again subjected to H–C cycles. This routine was repeated 50 times with SH value determinations after the 10th, 15th, 20th, 25th, 30th and 40th cycles. After the 50th cycle, the determination of the final SH values was made. Here, the official Turkish standard for a F–T experiment, namely TS 699 was followed There are several questions that should be considered, such as the validity of the model and the interpretation of model parameters, and the behaviour of different rock types. The first and the most important result of this experimental work is this: the proposed first order process model for the integrity loss under the cycles of F–T and H–C was found to be valid for all rocks used in this study. The validity of the model can be assessed by considering how well the postulated model fits the experimental data. The degree of fit to a non-linear curve can be measured by the value of the Depending on the type of rock, the explanatory power of the model varies from 67.4% to 97.7% for F–T, and from 67.7% to 96.6% for H–C. Considering the fact that the relative error in the determinations of SH values is fairly high (see The square roots of the coefficients of determination vary between 0.821 to 0.998 for F–T and from 0.823 to 0.983 for H–C; all are found statistically significant beyond the 1% level. The statistical significance implies that the observed relations between integrity loss of rock and the said cyclic actions are not simply due to sampling variation of the measured values of the rock integrity, but a manifestation of a real connection between the number of cycles and integrity loss. This means the proposed model can be considered as valid for engineering purposes for each of the 10 rock types studied. This model was also tested using data for volcano-sedimentary rocks of Yazilikaya. Binal et al. The values of However, the rocks under study seem to be divided into two classes as resistant and non-resistant. In fact, the Nor can the resistance to H–C action be inferred from the rock type for the 80°C H–C cycle used here. Limestone-II is also the most resistant rock to this action ( However, there is no apparent grouping of the rock types under study with respect to their resistance to recurrent H–C cycles (see When considering weakening of a rock under cyclic actions, its The half-life values are given in The rock type itself provides no clue for the half-life of rocks under recurrent actions of F–T (or H–C). The rocks from Yazilikaya provide further evidence in this regard. Using Binal et al. Since the half-life and decay constant are inversely proportional, their interpretation should provide the same conclusion. Rocks in this study divided into two groups according to their half-life under F–T action ( Although the weathering of rocks under recurrent cycles of F–T and H–C is a well-known phenomenon, to our knowledge, there is no model for these processes. A first order process model has been postulated here and verified by laboratory work. The model provides several meaningful parameters for rock disintegration or rock durability that can be used profitably for engineering evaluations. Another conclusion of this study is that the rock types themselves do not provide any clue for rock durability under recurrent F–T (or H–C) cycles. Consequently, it is hoped that having a model that provides meaningful parameters (such as