Three commercial cellulases were evaluated for their effects on deinking of both fresh and artificially aged old newsprint (ONP) mixed with fresh old magazines (OMG) at a ratio of 7:3. The enzymes were added at the beginning of the repulping stage followed by incubation for up to 3h. Although these enzymes were able to detach a significant amount of ink from the ONP/OMG, cellulase deinking was less efficient than either sulphite or alkaline deinking chemistry. None of the three cellulase enzymes tested were able to deink aged ONP/OMG, and a poor deinkability was also observed by using either sulphite or alkaline chemistry. However, combining enzymes with sulphite chemistry significantly enhanced sulphite deinking and provided a potential strategy to achieve effective deinking of aged newsprint at neutral pH.A mixture of old newsprint (ONP) and old magazine (OMG) is the primary furnish used in most Canadian recycling mills. Conventional ONP/OMG deinking chemistry employs sodium hydroxide in combination with a range of other chemicals including sodium silicate, hydrogen peroxide and surfactants. This high pH and chemical-intensive process causes several major problems to the process and recycled paper quality, including a high degree of fragmentation of large sticky contaminants, darkening of pulp fibre, increasing COD in process waters and the need for substantial amounts of acid for neutralization Recent studies have shown that sulphite deinking chemistry operating at around pH eight yields a comparable deinking efficiency to alkaline chemistry During the past 20 years, a number of enzymes, including cellulase, xylanase, laccase and lipase, have been evaluated for their potential to replace hazardous chemicals in deinking recycled paper Recently, the “summer effect” has become a major challenge to recycling paper mills primarily using ONP. “Summer effect” refers to a period during the summer months when mills experience a loss in pulp brightness. The exposure of recovered paper to high temperatures, especially in closed containers during transportation, accelerates the oxidation and polymerization of ink particles In this study, we determined the effects of cellulases on deinking fresh and aged ONP and compared the results with both alkaline and sulphite deinking. Subsequently, we examined the potential of combining enzyme with sulphite chemistry to achieve a better natural deinking strategy for deinking aged ONP. A mixture of ONP/OMG at a ratio of 70:30 was used as recycled paper furnish. Three commercial cellulases, NS613, NS476 and NS342, obtained from Novozymes North America were used in the study and designated as EA, EB and EC, respectively. NS342 is a multi-component cellulase, while NS476 and NS613 are mono-component endoglucanases. All three cellulases used in the study have broad pH profiles, exhibiting more than 50% of their maximum activity in a pH range from 6 to 9. An enzyme dosage of 300 An artificial aging procedure was used to convert fresh ONP to aged ONP The repulping of ONP/OMG at a ratio of 70:30 was carried out at 10% consistency and 50 After repulping, 10 The effective residual ink concentration (ERIC) and brightness values were determined according to the procedure previously described Pretreatment of recycled paper with these enzymes has shown some promising effects for deinking The total ink content of enzyme treated and control samples are shown in It appeared that EB-treated samples were about one point brighter than the controls. There was also a slight increase in brightness of EA- and EC-treated samples. The total ink content indicates the degree of ink fragmentation during the repulping. The lower ERIC and higher brightness values obtained after enzymatic treatments suggested that the cellulases may help facilitate ink removal with less fragmentation. The ERIC value measured on the pulp pads obtained after hyperwash determines the concentration of bound ink attached to fibres and/or irreversibly redeposited on long fibres after repulping. All three enzyme treatments led to a significant decrease in bound ink content ( The positive effects of cellulase treatments on reducing ink content and increasing brightness of ONP have been observed in a number of previous studies Sulphite deinking operates at near neutral pH conditions and has been implemented in at least two recycling mills. Both sulphite and alkaline deinking chemistries were also evaluated in our study using the same ONP/OMG furnish and compared with the results obtained from enzyme deinking. The results obtained from EB treatment were used for the comparison as it seemed to be the most efficient cellulase among the three. It was apparent that alkaline chemistry resulted in the best deinking effects. The total ink content of alkaline-deinked pulp was about 75 Although enzymes had shown positive effects on ink removal, it must be recognized that enzyme deinking was overall inferior to either sulphite or alkaline deinking methods. The attempt to replacing chemicals with enzymes in deinking has been pursued for over 20 years, with promising applications achieved in recycling plants using mixed office waste. However, enzyme deinking of ONP/OMG has not been successfully demonstrated at a commercial level. The lignified nature of the ONP fibre surface is likely a major factor hindering the effects of cellulase enzymes. So far, there has been little investigation of using cellulase enzymes for deinking aged ONP. Unlike with chemical deinking, cellulases can dislodge ink particles through peeling off surface fibres or fines The efficiencies of either alkaline or sulphite deinking of aged ONP/OMG mixture were also examined. Comparing The causes of poor deinkability of aged ONP have been previously studied As mentioned, sulphite deinking is typically carried out at a pH around 8 and temperature around 60 The residual enzyme activity in the combined recipe after repulping was also determined to assess the effects of sulphite chemistry on the enzymes. Aliquots from the repulper before and after pulping were taken for measuring enzyme activity. The pH of ONP/OMG stock after the addition of sulphite chemistry was around 8.6; therefore the enzyme activity was also determined at pH 8.6. It was found that approximately 64% of the cellulase activity remained after repulping at pH 8.6. This result suggested that neither the repulping conditions nor the presence of sulphite had a significant negative effect on enzyme activity. It seems possible that combining enzyme with sulphite deinking can provide a potential effective strategy for neutral deinking of aged ONP. Adding cellulase enzymes at the repulping stage without pH adjustment was tested as a possible approach for enzymatic deinking. All three cellulase treatments showed some reduction in both total and bound ink content of ONP/OMG, when compared with the use of surfactant alone. The addition of Novozyme 476 (EB) reduced ERIC content of hyperwashed pulp by 30 The authors are thankful to Drs. Gilles Dorris, Luc Lapierre, Thomas Browne and Ms. Natalie Pagé for their advice and help during this work. We also thank Novozymes North America for providing us with enzymes. The financial support from Paprican Member Companies is greatly appreciated.