In this paper, the thermodynamic activity of two lanthanide chlorides (CeCl3 and NdCl3) in molten LiCl-KCl eutectic salt measured using open circuit potentiometry has been reported. Activity coefficient of CeCl3 was found to be strongly dependent on the concentration of CeCl3 in a concentration window of up to 4.66 mol % CeCl3. The activity coefficient of NdCl3 could not be measured due to the uncertainty in NdCl3/NdCl2 molar ratio in the salt, however the thermodynamic activity was measured relative to a 5 mol% Ag∣AgCl reference electrode.
                  The concurrent analysis of data presented in this paper along with previously published activity data for LaCl3 and GdCl3 demonstrates that the departure from ideal solution behavior shown by the rare earths chlorides correlates with ionic size of underlying rare earth element. The smaller the ionic size of the species under consideration, the greater its departure from ideal solution behavior. Further, using the activity data of all four rare earth chlorides, an ionic size dependent correlation was developed. Using this empirical correlation, it is possible to calculate the activity of all species from La(Z = 57) to Gd (Z = 64) for a concentration of up to 2.5 mol% rare earth chloride in LiCl-KCl molten salt at 773 K.The pyrochemical processing of spent nuclear fuel is currently under active research and development in various countries for potential use to recover actinides from molten salts along with partitioning fission products, including rare earth metals, into waste forms suitable for permanent disposal. Molten chloride salts play essential roles in pyroprocessing as the electrolytes for both oxide fuel reduction and metal fuel electrorefining. The use of molten chloride salts as a separation media rather than water or organics has multiple advantages, including resistance to radiation damage and absence of neutron moderation. The key unit operation for achieving actinide separation from fission products in a pyroprocessing facility is electrorefining. In electrorefining, the anode is a basket loaded with chopped spent fuel. Actinides (U and/or transuranic actinides) are reduced onto a cathode. The molten chloride salt consists initially of only eutectic LiCl-KCl and UCl Thus, waste volume minimization and separation of actinides and fission products from LiCl-KCl are areas of active research and need for improvement. In particular, separation of actinides from rare earths is a critical function needed for a spent fuel processing system to achieve optimal actinide recycling and minimal contamination of nuclear waste forms with actinides. If pursuing an ideal electrochemical separation between actinides and rare earths, the thermodynamic activity of both oxidized and reduced species needs to be known. This entails understanding alloy formation in the reduced metals and non-ideal solution behavior in the molten salt. In this paper, the non-ideal solution behavior of two previously unreported rare earth chlorides: CeCl In this subsection, the previously published literature for the activity of CeCl It appears that the wide range of the reported values available in the literature is mainly due to different definitions of standard states and measurement techniques. In this study, the activity of CeCl Dissolved Nd is present in the two stable oxidation states of +3 and +2 in LiCl-KCl eutectic salt, making the measurement of the NdCl Another aspect of electrorefining to consider is that the molten salt compositions are extremely complex. Many active metal fission products (Group I, II, and rare earth) form chlorides in the salt. Other fission products (I and Te) are suspected to accumulate in the salt as anions. Since it is not practical to make measurements with thousands of salt compositions, it is necessary to devise simple model systems to probe for possible interaction based effects. In this study, one of the Group I fission products (Cs) has been included in some of the test salts in order to evaluate interaction between it and the rare earths. Cs is not expected to interfere with the electrochemistry of the rare earths, but interaction could in theory affect activity coefficients. Thus, the effect of added cesium chloride on the activity coefficient of the rare earths was examined in this study. All experiments were performed in an argon atmosphere (≤0.1 ppm O Reagents used for this study included ultra-dry 99.99 % LiCl-KCl (SAFC Hitech), 99.998 % cesium chloride salt (Sigma-Aldrich), 99.99 % cerium chloride salt (Sigma-Aldrich), 99.9 % neodymium chloride salt (Alfa Aesar), cerium metal rod (6.35 mm x 25 mm; 99.9 % ESPI Metals), neodymium metal rod (6.35 mm x 25 mm; 99.9 % ESPI Metals), cerium metal sheet (0.050” Thick x 3mm Wide x 8” Long, 99.9 %; ESPI Metals). For each experiment, a mixture of LiCl-KCl was heated overnight to reach the desired temperature (773 K) with the reference electrode submerged in the molten salt overnight. Subsequently, pre-weighed quantities of the rare earth chloride salt was added to this molten salt mixture. After the addition of the rare earth chloride salt, the solution was allowed to stand and equilibrate for about an hour. Subsequently, a stainless steel basket containing the rare earth metal rod was inserted into the molten salt mixture, and open circuit potential (OCP) was monitored for stability. After the OCP had stabilized to a dE/dt limit of 10 It was originally anticipated that the presence of the stainless steel basket would not influence the open circuit potential measurement value. This is based on that fact that stainless steel is electrochemically more noble than Nd/Ce redox couples in LiCl-KCl eutectic salt For the NdCl Both the Ce and Nd mixed potential data shows that the mixed potential effects due to the presence of stainless steel in open circuit potential measurements is fairly insignificant and can be used for accurate OCP measurements. For the cerium chloride system, the activity was measured using a saturated Ce∣CeCl As previously stated, the activity of CeCl The first test examined the activity coefficient of CeCl The corrected open circuit potential ( Finally from the activity, it is possible to calculate the activity coefficient of CeCl It is clear from In the Introduction section, it was noted that the activity coefficient of cerium chloride has been reported by Marsden and Pesic Finally, in the work by Yoon A salt with a fixed concentration of CeCl It is considered to be useful to report apparent standard potentials versus a standard Cl As previously mentioned, Nd can be present in two oxidation states of +2 and +3 in the molten LiCl-KCl eutectic salts at 773 K. The existence of two oxidation states of Nd has been well established in the literature and extensively documented It is evident from Equation It was first attempted to measure the activity of NdCl Using the above mentioned experimental methodology, the open circuit potentials for the system were determined as a function of concentration of NdCl Using these measurements, the activity of NdCl Now, using the experimentally determined value of In previous works, the activities of LaCl From From The correlations generated from In the molten salt literature, Lantelme and Berghoute The reason for the unique behavior of activity coefficients for the three rare earth chlorides is not entirely clear. A literature search about about the possible mechanisms did not yield any definitive results. Further research into the fundamental factors that influence activity coefficient is merited, including MDS simulations and experimental testing. In this paper, data on the activity of four rare earth chlorides in molten LiCl-KCl has been reported. Knowledge of the relationship between thermodynamic activity and concentration is critical for designing processes for separating fission products from molten salts found in spent fuel electrorefiners. For both of the rare earth chlorides included in this study, CeCl From the activity data of all of the four rare earths chlorides, it is concluded that their activities for a fixed concentration are very well correlated with their ionic size. It is observed that as the ionic size decreases, a greater deviation from ideal solution behavior is observed for the rare earth chlorides. This may be a small step in the direction of better understanding how to predict thermodynamic properties of complex molten salt mixtures. Further work to model these solutions using molecular dynamics methods is needed to fully understand the fundamental factors that affect the activity coefficients. This work was supported by the United States Department of Energy’s Nuclear Energy University Program [grant number 14-6489]. We gratefully acknowledge both the support of the Department of Energy and Prof. Jinsuo Zhang from Virginia Tech, who is the lead investigator on the DOE project. 