During the recovery of the valuable platinum group minerals and base metal sulphides in the Merensky Reef ore by flotation, a certain amount of naturally floatable gangue (NFG) is recovered, which dilutes the concentrate. Although talc is the only silicate mineral well known for it naturally floatable properties, the proportion of NFG recovered in batch flotation tests of the Merensky ore, however, cannot be solely accounted for by the mass of pure talc present in the feed ore. Using methodology developed at the University of Cape Town to decouple the NFG from entrained gangue recovered in flotation, a series of concentrate samples have been analysed in this study using quantitative mineralogical analysis methods. Results show the major diluents of concentrate grade are orthopyroxene, talc, clinopyroxene and plagioclase in decreasing order of abundance. Orthopyroxene is however, by far the greatest diluent of concentrate grade even though the particles recovered are classified as liberated or high grade middlings. On closer examination, these orthopyroxene particles show a preferential surface association to talc and vice versa which is consistent with the low temperature alteration of anhydrous orthopyroxene to a hydrous phase, namely talc. These composite orthopyroxene particles with partial talc rims are therefore thought to be one of the main contributors to NFG in the Merensky Reef ore.The Bushveld Complex in South Africa is a layered igneous intrusion stretching over approximately 65 Typically the platinum group minerals and base metal sulphides in the Merensky Reef are recovered by froth flotation. Flotation is generally controlled by the addition of various reagents such as collectors; which promote valuable mineral recovery and depressants; which inhibit the flotation of undesirable minerals. Although by controlling the dosage of these polymeric depressants the recovery of the undesirable minerals can be minimised, this sometimes occurs at the expense of the recovery of the valuable mineral ( There have been a number of studies which have incorporated process mineralogy into the interpretation of flotation performance such as Merensky Reef ore was sourced from the Impala Platinum mine as run of mine ore and has been used in an extensive programme investigating the floatability of this ore (e.g. Feed and concentrate samples were subsequently submitted for analysis at Mintek in Johannesburg on the Impala QEMSCAN. A common feed sample was analysed in four size fractions; namely + Given the similarity in bulk chemical composition and the back scattered electron (BSE) level between talc (Mg The composition of run of mine Impala Merensky feed is shown in The mineralogy of the concentrates as determined by QEMSCAN for tests conducted with and without depressant addition is given for the + The variation in clinopyroxene recovery as shown in  The effect of depressant addition on the mass recovery of talc is noted to be fairly significant and caused a decrease from 4.3 On the basis of the methodology previously described by By examination of the differences in recovery of the silicate minerals in the + During the grinding process, particles are produced which are variably liberated with respect to the mineral of interest. It is noted that in process mineralogy, the definition of Comparison of the liberation characteristics of orthopyroxene recovered in the concentrates as illustrated in In order to investigate further the nature of these orthopyroxene and talc particles which are causing considerable dilution to concentrate grade, the associations of the different liberation classes of the particles can also be evaluated. The surface association of orthopyroxene is shown in In the flotation of the Merensky Reef ore, the four dominant silicate minerals recovered which dilute concentrate grade are orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, talc and plagioclase of which only talc is known to be hydrophobic and naturally floatable. Comparison of the concentrate mineralogy from batch flotation tests conducted with the addition of depressant in order to minimise the recovery of NFG with batch flotation tests with no depressant addition, where all the NFG is recovered, shows that orthopyroxene and talc are the major minerals which constitute NFG. The results presented also clearly show that plagioclase, one of the other dominant gangue minerals recovered during flotation, does not contribute to NFG since the concentrate grade of plagioclase is higher for tests conducted with depressant addition relative to those where no depressant is added ( It has also been shown that the majority of the orthopyroxene reporting to the concentrate in the no depressant flotation tests are classified as liberated or high grade middlings (  Additional evidence to support the argument that the association of orthopyroxene with talc is critical to NFG, can be found in the study of This paper has demonstrated the value which quantitative mineralogical analysis (QEMSCAN) can add in characterising and interpreting the characteristics of naturally floating gangue (NFG) in the flotation of Merensky Reef ores. Mineralogical analysis of the concentrate recovered in batch flotation tests shows that middlings and liberated orthopyroxene, as well as both liberated and unliberated talc are the dominant particles that constitute NFG. The preferential association of orthopyroxene with talc and vice versa is noted. This is manifested as orthopyroxene with partial rims of talc. The sheer volume of liberated orthopyroxene recovered with no significant association to talc, is most likely due to the presence of submicron talc coatings that cannot be resolved with QEMSCAN. This suggests that only very minor amounts of talc associated with orthopyroxene are necessary to cause an orthopyroxene particle to be naturally floatable. The need to interpret quantitative mineralogical data in terms of both liberation and surface association has been shown in order to avoid misinterpretation, given that flotation is based upon the surface properties of the particle of interest. This is of particular relevance when complex ore textures such as partial rimming exist. Mineralogical analysis of concentrate samples from flotation tests with depressant addition relative to those with no depressant, has shown that the floatability of plagioclase is relatively enhanced due to the addition of a depressant and suggests that some depressant selectivity may occur. Our appreciation goes to