Frothers are heteropolar surface-active compounds containing a polar group (OH, COOH, C=O, OSO2 and SO2OH) and a hydrocarbon radical, capable of adsorbing in the water–air interface. The frother concentrates at the interface of water and air bubbles, forming an envelope around the bubbles, which prevents them from colliding or touching. Frothers also lower the surface tension of the water. The forces created around the air bubble in the presence of a frother prevent the bubbles from collapsing. The volume of froth generated in the flotation machine under standard operating conditions is often referred to as froth power. The froth power is influenced by the type of collector and frother used. Acidic frothers perform well only in acid pH. Typical examples of these reagents are phenols and alkyl-lauryl sulfonates. Basic frothers are represented by pyridine and homologs, recovered as by-products from coal tar distillation. Neutral frothers are the most important group of frothers used widely in flotation of base-metal ores, oxidic minerals, and industrial minerals. They are functional in both acidic and alkaline pulps.Frothers are heteropolar surface-active compounds containing a polar group (OH, COOH, C=O, OSO Many investigations have been carried out on froths and free liquid films [ Recent attempts to provide guidelines for frother selection [ The volume of froth generated in the flotation machine under standard operating conditions is often referred to Mixing a longer chain xanthate (amyl) with a short chain alcohol increases the volume of the froth. The froth power increases strongly when amyl xanthate is combined with an alcohol containing 7–8 carbon atoms in the hydrocarbon radical. Xanthates with a shorter chain length (ethyl) decrease the froth power for alcohols with 5 or less carbon atoms. In fatty acid flotation, certain alcohol-type frothers, such as pine oils, cresylic acid, etc. act as froth modifiers. For example, mixing tall oil fatty acid with a cyclic alcohol frother (pine oil) produces a froth that has improved loading properties and that collapses after discharge. In cationic flotation with amines, addition of frother to the amine reduces collector consumption and improves the rate of flotation. In the literature, there are several different classifications of frothers depending on their properties and behavior in solution. Dudenkov The acid frothers have been used extensively until the 1960s. Their application has been diminishing because of environmental considerations. Two types of acid frothers are common, namely, phenols and alkyl sulfonates. Neutral frothers are a much larger family of frothers and are more widely used. Frothers that have both collecting and frother properties have already been discussed. Froth modifiers are compounds different in nature from either acid or neutral frothers. These frothers perform well only in acid pH. In an alkaline medium, their frothing properties are reduced. Typical examples of these reagents are phenols. These frothers are obtained as a by-product during gasification of coal tar and distillation of crude oil. The following two groups of frothers have been used in mineral processing plants, phenols and alkyl-lauryl sulfonates. Phenols are also known as aromatic alcohols. A typical frother from this group is cresol, consisting of a mixture of ortho ( The most effective frothers from this group are the The main problem associated with the use of phenols as a frother is its variable composition, which depends on the source from which the frother is derived.  Phenols and xylenol can be added to tall oil fatty acids to improve selectivity as well as power. A mixture of tall oil and cresol has been successfully used for flotation of spodumene and phenacite [ Alkylaryl sulfonate can be described as an anionic frother with a structure that is composed of an aromatic hydrocarbon and an aliphatic radical: In spite of the fact that these frothers have good frothing properties, their application was limited, likely because most alkylaryl sulfonate frothers contain traces of sulfur, which interfere with flotation. These frothers are represented by pyridine and homologs, recovered as by-products from coal tar distillation. They are used for flotation of base-metal ores, mostly in the former Soviet Union. In Europe, a similar product was used to produce a collector used in the This is the most important group of frothers used widely in flotation of base-metal ores, oxidic minerals and industrial minerals. They are functional in both acidic and alkaline pulps. These frothers are divided into six sub-groups, with wide differences in chemical composition. These frothers are mixtures of alcohols containing 6–8 carbon atoms. They were at one time marketed by DuPont and they are tailored frothers for specific ore types. The best-known frother from this group is methyl isobutyl carbinol (MIBC) with the following formula: Aliphatic alcohol frothers are used as mixtures of different carbon lengths and as a mixture of hydrocarbon oils. The following mixtures are common in mineral flotation:    These frothers were popular in the early days of flotation along with eucalyptus oils. These frothers are basically mixtures of different cyclic alcohols and they are produced as synthetic mixture or from the pine resins. The following are the basic structures of different components of cyclic alcohol frothers: The most abundant cyclic alcohols in the frother mixtures are terpineols (i.e. 90%) followed by borneol and pinene. The physical–chemical characteristics of cyclic alcohol frothers are shown in These frothers are less sensitive to the presence of clay minerals than other types of frothers and therefore they are extensively used in mixtures with aliphatic alcohol frothers for flotation of base metals and copper porphyry ores containing clay minerals. They are also used as additives to tall oil fatty acid in fatty acid flotation to improve froth stability. The major problem in the use of cyclic alcohol frothers derived from natural sources is that their composition is not always constant, and consequently frothing properties are variable. This group of frothers was developed in 1951 by Dr. Powell of South Africa. In recent years, a number of frothers were produced based on two main structures: 1,1,3-Triethoxybutane (TEB) 1,3,5-Trialkoxypropyl trioxane Only limited information is available on the chemistry and the properties of these frothers, although they are extensively used for flotation of base metals and oxidic mineral ores. Their frothing properties are much different from those of aliphatic and cyclic alcohols with respect to froth stability and sensitivity to the presence of clay minerals. However, they are selective and in many cases gave improved rates of flotation of copper and zinc minerals. They are highly effective during the flotation of oxide copper minerals using the sulfidization method. Tueter of Dow Chemicals and Booth of Cyanamid first developed the polyglycol ether frother series in the early 1950s. These frothers are manufactured from synthetic brake There are several variations of polyglycol ethers produced by different manufacturers. Some of the more important frother structures are listed below: Some polyglycol ethers are also produced by condensation with butanol or ethylene oxide (structure (c)) or result as a reaction product of butanol and caustic soda. The molecular weight and carbon length of polyglycol ether frothers determines its power and performance. A higher molecular-weight frother gave more persistent froth and less selective than a lower molecular-weight frother. Unfortunately, the polyglycol ethers from different manufacturers behave differently. For example, Hoechst (Germany) polyglycol ether frothers (i.e. D13, D14 and D16) gave more selective froth than those produced by Dow (same general structure). Polyglycol ethers produced from butanol and ethylene oxide are more selective and have a better carrying power than similar frothers produced from butanol and caustic soda. These frothers are partially soluble in water, and are a mixture of monomethyl ethers of polypropylene glycols with the following formula: These frothers are normally used in base-metal flotation. They produce persistent froth and have relatively high carrying power. Originally, these frothers were developed in the former Soviet Union under the trademark Frother E1, and in 1985 Dow Chemicals, under the trade names XK35004, XK35004.O1L