Treatment of proximal humeral fractures remains controversial, with multiple reported techniques and variable results. Recently, locking plates have become available for fixation of osteopenic and comminuted fractures. This study reports our initial experience with a new locking plate designed specifically for proximal humeral fractures. We observed 16 patients until union or revision with a mean of 12 months’ follow-up. Of the 16 patients, 9 had high-energy injuries. There were nine 3-part, five 2-part, and two 4-part fractures. Twelve of sixteen patients healed without complications. There were 4 nonunions; all occurred in patients with 3-part fractures with metadiaphyseal comminution, 3 of whom were heavy smokers. In patients with united fractures, mean elevation was 132° and mean external rotation was 43°, with mean internal rotation to T11. Locking plate fixation achieved union in 75% of patients in this series. Risk factors for delayed union or nonunion included comminution, smoking, and 3-part fractures. These fractures remain challenging despite the availability of locked plating systems.Proximal humeral fractures constitute approximately 4% of all fractures. The majority are nondisplaced or minimally displaced injuries treated adequately with closed treatment and early functional rehabilitation. However, displaced or unstable fractures fare poorly with nonoperative treatment and may be better treated with surgical intervention. Operative treatment of displaced and unstable proximal humeral fractures is challenging. When these fractures occur in young patients, they are typically high-energy injuries with accompanying damage to the soft-tissue envelope. In elderly patients, proximal humeral fractures frequently occur as a result of low-energy injuries to osteoporotic bone. Nonoperative treatment of significantly displaced fractures frequently yields poor results, except in certain rare fracture patterns in the elderly. The osseous architecture of the humeral head with poor central cancellous bone stock, particularly in elderly patients, leads to a high risk of fixation failure with classic plate-and-screw fixation. Locking plate fixation has recently become available for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures. Locking plates offer the potential advantage of a fixed-angle device with multiple points of proximal fixation, increased load to failure when compared with unlocked plates, increased stability of fixation in osteoporotic bone, and the ability to limit soft-tissue stripping during fracture fixation. A more recent locking plate design has been developed that allows up to 9 locking cancellous screws to be placed in the head fragment with standard or locking screw fixation to the humeral shaft. Early reports from European centers using a plate similar to, but not identical to, that readily available in North America have provided excellent initial results. The Synthes LCP Locking Proximal Humerus Plate (Synthes, Paoli, PA) was used for the treatment of proximal humeral fractures in 16 patients ( Patients were observed during their standard clinical fracture follow-up. Rehabilitation protocols were at the discretion of the attending surgeon but typically involved early pendulum and passive motion exercises to prevent stiffness. Fractures were classified according to the system of Neer based on radiographs and, when available, computed tomography. Radiographic union was defined as bridging trabeculation across the fracture site in the absence of hardware breakage or cutout. We identified 16 patients who underwent surgery with the Synthes LCP proximal humeral locking plate in the first 12 months of its availability at our institution (Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN). There were 9 women and 7 men, ranging in age from 18 to 78 years (mean, 51 years). Of the 16 patients, 8 had polytrauma. The mean delay from injury to surgery was 4 days. The mean follow-up was 1 year (range, 6-20 months), with all patients being followed up to union or revision surgery, except for one currently being followed up for a nonunion at 13 months. Patients were instructed on passive range-of-motion exercises within 3 weeks of their injury; however, those who were clinically judged to have severe osteoporosis at the time of surgery or marked fracture comminution continued to perform pendulum exercises with sling immobilization for up to 6 weeks. Of the patients, 5 had 2-part fractures based on the Neer classification, 9 had 3-part fractures, and 2 had 4-part fractures. One patient had a grade I open injury, and one had a vascular and neurologic injury. Two patients had fracture-dislocations (one posterior and one intrathoracic). Surgical reduction was considered anatomic in 13 cases and good in 3, with no patient having angulation greater than 10° in any plane after reduction ( Twelve patients achieved uneventful union at a mean of 4 months after their injury. In 4, nonunions developed, with 3 subsequently undergoing revision surgery. No infections, postoperative neurologic deficits, or avascular necrosis was noted at follow-up. In the 12 patients in whom healed occurred uneventfully, clinical function was excellent, with a mean elevation of 132°, internal rotation to T11, and external rotation of 43°. Ten had no pain, and two had mild occasional pain; all returned to their preinjury activities (unless limited by other factors in polytrauma patients). Adhesive capsulitis did not develop in any patient. In 4 patients, the fractures failed to heal. All had 3-part fractures with extensive metaphyseal comminution, and 3 had diaphyseal fracture extension. In addition, 3 of the 4 were heavy smokers, 3 had psychiatric illness, and 2 had chronic medical illness. A representative case is shown in Fracture characteristics associated with nonunion included metaphyseal comminution (present in 4/4 patients with nonunions but only 6/12 with union) and diaphyseal fracture extension (present in 3/4 patients with nonunions and 0/12 with uneventful union). Patient-related factors associated with nonunion included smoking, psychiatric illness, and the presence of systemic medical comorbidities (diabetes mellitus or chronic pulmonary disease). The relative frequency of these risk factors in patients who went on to union and those with nonunion are shown in Optimal fixation of proximal humeral fractures remains challenging. Locking plate fixation has the potential to provide greater fixation in the proximal humerus than standard techniques of internal fixation, with a greater load to failure and less soft-tissue dissection along the humeral shaft. The stainless steel locking proximal humerus plate was introduced in North America in 2002. A related implant has been used in Europe during this time, which differs from the North American implant in being available in titanium and in longer lengths. Early data on the performance of the titanium implant have been reported by Saudan et al, In our initial 12-month experience with the newly available North American implant, we were encouraged by the performance of locking plate fixation for difficult proximal humeral fractures. Anatomic reduction was achieved in the majority of cases, with near-anatomic fixation being achieved in the remainder. There were no postoperative infections, neurovascular complications, or instances of avascular necrosis. There were also no episodes of device failure. This study is admittedly limited in that it involves an unselected consecutive initial series of patients and, thus, includes the learning curve for use of the device and appropriate patient selection. Standard shoulder outcome scores are not available for the patients. The numbers available are insufficient for detailed statistical analyses. However, within these limitations, the data generated are useful in evaluating early results and complications of the implant and in identifying fracture patterns and cases in which this implant may not be well suited. The fractures healed uneventfully in 75% of the patients in this series, with excellent clinical function. The stability of fixation provided by this construct allowed early rehabilitation of patients and aided in the care of polytrauma patients. The motion at follow-up was remarkable, given the complexity of the reconstructive undertaking. Although alternative fixation techniques are available, few have demonstrated excellent functional outcomes. Perhaps the additional fixation that locked plating offers allows earlier functional rehabilitation and, in some way, accounts for the excellent motion noted in the patients with healed fractures. Four patients went on to nonunion of their injuries. These individuals probably represent the high-risk patients with high-risk fractures in the study group. All had metaphyseal comminution, 3 of 4 had diaphyseal extension, and smoking and psychiatric and medical comorbidities were prevalent in these patients. In 2 cases, distal fixation was suboptimal. These failures underscore the belief that the locking plate currently available in North America provides inadequate fixation in cases in which diaphyseal fracture extension exists. It is unclear whether the extended plate version, available in Europe and being introduced in North America, will better suit such injuries. Although, with the small numbers available in this series, definitive recommendations are difficult to make, the treatment of these high-risk injuries remains challenging; smoking, metaphyseal comminution, diaphyseal extension, and medical and psychiatric comorbidities appear to be risk factors for nonunion of fractures treated with locking plate fixation. Perhaps longer plates allowing better distal fixation would have improved the clinical outcomes. Locked plating has improved the proximal stability of the fractures; additional distal fixation via longer plates may allow a more balanced construct in the future. In summary, locking plate fixation appears to provide a good option for the majority of patients with unstable proximal humeral fractures, with good functional outcomes. The optimal treatment for high-risk patients with metaphyseal comminution, diaphyseal extension, and medical comorbidities remains unclear. Although the fractures failed to heal in 25% of the patients in this challenging cohort, we were encouraged by the performance of this new technology in improving the functional outcome of these difficult injuries. Extended follow-up will be necessary to determine the long-term results of locking plate fixation of proximal humeral fractures. However, our initial experiences with this implant are encouraging.