The fracture and fragmentation processes of ice are reviewed using fractal concepts. Numerous evidences for the scale invariance of fracture and fragmentation patterns in ice are given, including fracture networks at small (laboratory) and large (geophysical) scales, the distribution of fragment sizes in crushed ice or the distribution of sea ice floe sizes, or self-affine fracture surfaces. These observations strongly argue for the scale invariance of fracture and fragmentation processes in ice. This implies that the fracture mechanisms and the physical parameters revealed at the laboratory scale are still relevant at large scale. However, apparent scale effects can be observed for some parameters if the fractal geometry is ignored or neglected. Scale invariance also implies that the homogenization procedures used in the damage mechanics of ice have to be taken with caution.Ice Ih is encountered on earth at very different scales, from the sub-mm scale of some snow crystals, to the hundred/thousand of kms scale of large ice sheets or of the Arctic sea ice cover. Fracture and fragmentation of ice has been observed and studied over this entire scale range, from the individual crystal scale to geophysical scales (crevasses on glaciers Because fractal analysis is a tool that tests the scaling properties of a data set, it is pertinent to develop a fractal analysis of fracture and fragmentation patterns in ice, from the laboratory scale to geophysical scales, in order to quantify this scale invariance (e.g. fractal dimensions) and to determine the associated upper and lower bounds. Beyond the possible fractal character of fracture and fragmentation The purpose of the present paper is to present an analysis of fracture and fragmentation in ice at different scales using fractal concepts, to discuss the physical/mechanical interpretation of this analysis in terms of processes, and to focus on some consequences of scale invariance in terms of size (scale) effects. The paper is organized as follows. In The concept of fractal geometry and fractal dimension has been introduced by Mandelbrot As an introduction to the concept of fractal dimension, let us consider a curve on a plane ( So-defined fractal curves have the important following characteristic: they look the same whatever the scale of observation (within the scale range of validity for relation (1)). This introduces the concept of scale invariance. In other words, they are statistically (or exactly for some mathematical fractals) self-similar, “meaning that each portion can be considered as a reduced-scale image of the whole” An alternative to the yardstick method to determine The box-counting method, of large applicability in numerous fields of physics, can be easily extended to any set of points on a plane, or in 3D (the 2D cells become 3D boxes). Because the length of the curve Relations (1) or (2) are power laws. Therefore, a fractal dimension We will try in this section to state precisely the significance of some terms which will be used throughout the paper. However, exact, rigorous definitions are sometimes not yet available, owing to the disagreement between different authors about the range of applicability of these definitions. As mentioned by Feder Consider an extensive measure Scale invariant systems look the same (for geometrical self-invariance; or more generally, present the same statistical properties) whatever the scale of observation within the scale range which exhibits scale invariance. This is equivalent to a statistical self-similarity, as defined by Mandelbrot Several ways to define a fractal set of points within an euclidian space can be tentatively proposed. The one which will be used here, following Ref. In simple words, a fractal is a set exhibiting geometrical scale invariance with an non-integer exponent (so the term “fractal” introduced by Mandelbrot It is possible to extend this definition of fractals to sets of distinct objects by defining a fractal set according to the power law Therefore, it appears that fractals are geometrically scale invariant systems. Originally, fractal geometry refers to the geometrical characterization of objects or set of objects, and not to physical quantities or processes. Because the concept of scaling is intimately linked to fractal geometry through scaling laws such as relations (5) or (6), it is natural to ask about a possible scale effect as a result of fractal geometry. In a general sense, a scale (or size; both terms are used in the literature) effect can be defined as a variation with scale of a physical parameter which “should not” depend on it, according to classical theories or convention. Examples are an intensive thermodynamic parameter, a density, or, in fracture mechanics, the nominal strength or the fracture toughness of a material. Depending on the physical process under consideration, a size effect can have various origins (see e.g. Ref. Interestingly, several authors, including Carpinteri We will briefly present in this paragraph the concept of The yardstick method, described in In this section, we will introduce the concept of The standard method to test the multifractal properties of a measure is based on the box-counting method (see e.g. Refs. For self-similar measures, As Some authors As this will be illustrated later for the study of fracture, damage and fragmentation of ice, different sorts of information can be extracted from a fractal (or multifractal) analysis. Firstly, a (multi)fractal analysis aims to reveal possible scale invariant properties of objects or measures. The associated exponents, or fractal dimensions, characterize this scale invariance (if any) and the physical processes involved. Note, however, that the theoretical determination of fractal dimensions associated to (a) physical process(es) through renormalization methods Secondly, in nature, scale invariance (if any) is always bounded within a limited range of scale. As already mentioned above, the lower bound generally reveals a characteristic scale associated to the physical process involved or is simply the result of the resolution of the analysis, whereas the upper bound can be associated to the size of the object under consideration. This is called a finite size effect ( Thirdly, as discussed above, multifractal analysis is a powerful tool to reveal and characterize the degree of heterogeneity, or the spatial clustering of a measure. Before focusing specifically A pioneering work on the use of fractals for the study of fracture of materials is Mandelbrot et al. If one defines the “roughness” of a fracture surface as related to the standard deviation of elevation (see Ref. Different authors have proposed theoretical explanations of such fractal geometry of fracture surfaces (see e.g. Ref. Whereas the references cited above refer to lab-scales studies and μm to cm scales, Scholz One can note finally that some characteristic scales of the material, such as the mean grain size or the mean particle spacing, can be revealed by breaking slopes in a fractal analysis of fracture surfaces or profiles. Examples are found in Dauskardt et al. From the sub-mm scale (see e.g. Refs. The basic method to analyze (multi)fractal properties of fracture patterns is the box-counting method. The minimum number Barton and Larsen On the basis of these analyses, the fractal character of fracture patterns, from the laboratory scale Power laws Fragmentation of materials into isolated pieces can be observed at all scales, from the μm scale There are numerous observational evidences for a power-law cumulative distribution of fragment sizes (relation (6)), for many different situations and materials and a wide range of scale (see e.g. Refs. To make the link with the fractal analyses of 2D fracture patterns ( Historically, the first evidences of scale invariance for fracture and fragmentation of ice came from the analysis of sea ice floe size distributions. In all the references given below, the floe “size” is defined as a mean diameter, or a mean radius on 2D images. The sea ice cover is not uniform, instead intensely fractured We summarized in Satellite and aerial observations summarized above gave insight into the fragmentation of ice at m to km scales. However, ice fragmentation, or crushing, is also observed at much finer scales during laboratory compression experiments or at the interface between an offshore structure and a moving ice cover (see e.g. Refs. Weiss and Gay A series of uniaxial compression creep tests ( (i) At the early stages of deformation, before the onset of primary creep, fracture patterns, which consisted of isolated cracks, were not fractal. All the generalized dimensions (ii) As fracturing proceeds beyond the onset of tertiary creep, a fractal organization of the fracture patterns emerge progressively. Above a threshold scale (iii) The threshold scale Thin sections of damaged ice were impossible to perform within highly damaged ice, close to failure. A fractal analysis can only be performed after the general failure by studying the distribution of fragment sizes. This is detailed in the next section. The main result of the work described above was to reveal a spontaneous self-organization of fracturing of ice under compression towards scale invariance. This multifractal scaling of ice fracturing at the laboratory scale should also be compared with the multifractal analysis of synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images of sea ice  If all the fractures of the networks analyzed in The multifractal analysis of fracture patterns described in These results are in close agreement with a former work of Cammaert and Crocker During the indentation of a floating 9 mm thick ice sheet against a 63.6 mm wide indenter, Timco and Jordaan Tuhkuri From these observations of ice fragmentation at various scales and under various loading conditions ( (i) Ice fragmentation was observed to be scale invariant over an extremely large scale range, at least from 10 (ii) The reported values for the distribution dimension There are only scarce observations and data on fracture surfaces in ice, either at the laboratory scale or at larger scale. Wei and Dempsey In order to test with a better accuracy the possible scale invariance of fracture surfaces in ice, we recently studied fracture profiles from tensile tests performed at HSVA (Hamburg, Germany) on S2 sea ice under various strain rates ranging from 10 The observed fractal dimension of ice fracture surfaces, Few uniaxial Several authors Cammaert and Crocker The observational results described in Over a scale range covering at least 9 orders of magnitude of length, the analyses of fracture surfaces, fracture networks and fragmentation presented in Whereas the crack (i) Fracture patterns at large scales resemble those observed at small scales. This is the fractal, scale invariant geometry discussed above in details, although Allègre et al. (ii) The fracture at large scale is a consequence of accumulation of ruptures at smaller scales, and to their interactions. This qualitative observation is classically proposed to explain the formation of shear faults under compressive loading. Models of interaction between (iii) The fracture at large scale is not preceded by an accelerated and homogeneous increase of fracture density over the whole sample. This refers to the localization of damage and to the heterogeneity of fracturing, inherent to fractal geometry. From this, Allègre et al. (i) A volume of material constructed in such a way presents a fractal distribution of fragile domains: the “fracture” pattern is fractal. (ii) If we follow the evolution of the fragility probability of a domain of infinite order, Turcotte The link between the approaches of Allègre et al. Although these different RG models could appear oversimplified, especially the fragility criteria, they illustrate clearly the association between the scale invariance of the fracturing processes and the resulting fractal fracture patterns. Steacy and Sammis As an important consequence of a universal scaling for the fracturing and fragmentation processes in ice, the fracturing mechanisms revealed at the laboratory scale as well as the associated physical parameters are still relevant at large, geophysical scale. Wang and Poplin As stressed by Kagan One should however note that the vision of a universal scaling for fracturing and fragmentation of ice is not shared by everyone. Dempsey et al. To conclude this section, one should stress that any model of ice fracturing should be able to reproduce the scale invariances observed. Any model assuming the coexistence of different processes acting at different scales will necessarily In (i) Some scatter could result from the uncertainty on the determination of fractal dimensions. Because of possible sampling bias (ii) The differences observed between ice floes and ice fragments at the laboratory scale could be explained by different definitions of the size. The fragment size is defined from a measure of a mass (or volume), whereas the floe size is a 2D measure. The thickness of the ice floes is small compared to the other floe dimensions, and can be considered to be constant. If the distribution dimension of floe sizes (2D measure) is (iii) The fractal dimensions associated with a physical scale-invariant process are considered to be universal On the other hand, we noted previously ( The determination of fractal dimensions from a physical model is a difficult task, not reached completely so far for fracture and fragmentation processes. Further work should focus on this important problem. Indeed, for example, the distribution dimension By analogy with the study of critical phase transitions in statistical physics, it has been argued recently that the fracture of materials could be viewed as a critical phenomenon (i) As the system evolves towards the critical point (the general failure), scale invariance spreads over larger scale ranges. At the critical point, no characteristic scale remains within the system. This evolution was observed during compression creep of granular ice (see (ii) As the critical point is approached, the correlation length between the different entities of the system (in our case, the entities are the cracking events) diverges: the system becomes long-range correlated and a local cracking event can trigger a general breakdown through an avalanche phenomenon. On the other hand, far from this critical point, i.e. at the early stages of fracturing, the correlation length is small, which means that the crack nucleation events are not (or weakly) correlated. Crack nucleation events are therefore more dependent on microstructural scales and local details (see Ref. (iii) Focussing on a small, elementary, scale, nothing announces the sudden breakdown at large scale. This is exactly one of the main characteristic of the RG model of Allègre et al. (iv) Near (or at) the critical point, the evolution of the system becomes unpredictable, in a deterministic sense, in terms of energy, spatial or temporal fluctuations. One small event (a local cracking) may cascade into a very large one (a global failure). The prediction of local cracking events on the basis of the knowledge of microstructural details or former cracking events becomes elusive. As a possible illustration of these spatial and temporal fluctuations, it is now well established that ice loads on structures vary considerably through time and space. Sodhi et al. (v) At the critical point, the collective organization (which results from the long-range correlations) as well as the critical exponents associated with the criticality, such as the fractal dimensions, do not depend on microscopic physical details. They are, in some sense, universal. We have shown in Beyond fractal fracture patterns, other observations are considered as landmarks of criticality in fracture phenomena. Power-law scaling in energy is an important one. This is generally expressed by a power-law scaling Homogenization procedures have been widely used to study the mechanical behavior of heterogeneous solids. Homogenization aims to simplify the microscopic heterogeneity of materials, resulting from the microstructure, particles, defects, damage, by averaging (homogenizing) the behavior of an elementary volume of matter, However, because fractal geometry excludes by nature any characteristic scale and therefore the definition of an “elementary representative volume” A good illustration of the effect of scale invariance of fracturing on the mechanical behavior of materials was given by the theoretical work of Straumsnes et al. We have shown in Because of this failure of homogenization as a result of scale invariance, a threshold global density of “damage” is an inappropriate failure criterion. Note that, from what we said in In the previous section, we showed how scale invariance, when misinterpreted, can generate size effects on intensive (and therefore a priori scale invariant) parameters, such as a fracture density. We stressed also the ambiguity of defining a density by averaging a fractal measure over an euclidian volume. Carpinteri During ice/structure interaction, the contact and the forces can be transmitted through small areas of direct contact, or through a layer of crushed ice From a compilation of laboratory test results, “medium scale” indentation tests, as well as full-scale measurements, Sanderson Bhat Parsons Starting from the same simple idea, i.e. a self-affine surface deformed at the interface, we can propose the following two-dimensional model. We consider a self-affine surface of dimension The models described above considered an uneven fractal contact, but ignored possible damage and fragmentation of the ice near the interface. Other models are doing exactly the reverse. The second Bath’s model Fractal fragmentation of ice near the interface is ignored in the models described above, but was the starting point of the model of Palmer and Sanderson Then, Palmer and Sanderson In conclusion of this section, we note that a fractal geometry of the surface of ice can result in a scale effect on the apparent peak indentation pressure if this fractality is ignored or neglected. On the other hand, a possible role of a fractal crushed layer of ice is still unclear in this context. Although the observed scale effect on indentation pressure cannot be the result of a scale-dependence of the compressive strength of ice, which is scale invariant The fracture and fragmentation processes of ice were reviewed using fractal concepts. Numerous evidences for the scale invariance of fracture and fragmentation patterns in ice have been given, including the analysis of fracture networks at small (laboratory) and large (geophysical) scales, the distribution of fragment sizes in crushed ice or the distribution of sea ice floe sizes, or self-affine fracture surfaces. Over a scale range covering at least 9 orders of magnitude of length (10 The work of the author on scale invariance, fractals and fracture of ice during the last few years or during the preparation of this article has benefited from the technical assistance and/or valuable discussions with different colleagues or students, including Olivier Gamot, Michel Gay, Jean-Robert Grasso, Nicolas Hotellier, Franz Lahaie, Corinne Laurent, Bruce Parsons, Erland Schulson. Thanks to the comments of Charles Sammis and of another (anonymous) reviewer, the clarity of the initial manuscript has been improved. The author was supported on this topic by the GDR “Géomécanique des Roches Profondes” of CNRS, as well as the program “Action thématique innovante” of INSU. LGGE is a laboratory associated to Université J. Fourier, Grenoble I.