This study deals with, on a laboratory scale, the influence of additions of Gelatin and Thiourea on the quality of copper electrorefining in a sulphuric acid electrolyte bath. Results showed that the quality and, in particular, roughness of cathodic deposits could be monitored and analysed using Electrochemical Noise Measurements “ENM”. In addition, different characterization techniques such as profilometry, AFM, SEM, XRD and optical microscopy have been employed to evaluate the deposits. For an electrolyte containing 2mg/L of Gelatine and 4mg/L of Thiourea, frequency analysis showed that the highest value of power spectral intercept (A
                     
                        v
                     ) corresponded to the best characteristics of the deposit such as homogeneity, smoothness and grain size. Important oscillations in the potential-time curves during galvanostatic experiments have been also related to the presence of nodules.In commercial practice, the quality of copper deposit obtained during electrowinning and electrorefining is important. Smooth, pure, homogenous, pore-less and non nodular or dendritic surfaces are considered essential for a high quality copper deposit. The nodular or dendritic growth may cause short circuit thus reducing current efficiency. A rough surface of the cathode can cause entrapment of electrolyte, slimes, and suspended particles. This leads to the contamination of the deposit, resulting in reduced ductility and conductivity. To prevent the formation of nodules, dendrites, and to obtain smooth deposits, various organic and/or inorganic additives are employed. Glue, Thiourea and chloride are the typical additives being used in the industry and their effects on deposit quality have been widely investigated. Organic substances change the composition and the properties of the double layer on the electrode surface. Glue acts upon mass transport with diffusion control producing a FT (Field-Oriented texture type) deposit with 2D germination while Thiourea gives a 3D germination resulting in UD (Unoriented Dispersion) type deposit ( Various researchers have studied the influence of different additives on deposit roughness. The effect of simultaneous additions of Gelatin, Thiourea and chloride has been studied by our group and the formation of nodules has been identified with electrochemical noise measurements (ENM) at 500 An easy tool of continuous monitoring the quality of copper deposit is essential for industrial production. The present research concerns the development of an “ENM” method in-situ by statistical and frequency analyses. A current density of 300 The standard electrolyte “STD” was composed of one litre containing 42 Both anode and cathode electrodes (1 EN data were analysed in the time domain using two statistical parameters of skewness and normalized kurtosis indicating the shape and symmetry of distribution, respectively. A positive value of skewness indicates a distribution tail in the positive direction and vice versa. The kurtosis is a measure of distribution shape. A positive kurtosis implies a more spiky distribution while negative kurtosis implies a flatter distribution. The normalized kurtosis is equal to zero for a normal distribution ( Frequency analyses were conducted calculating intercepts of power spectral density of voltages ( Based on Eq. It is already shown that there is a relationship between the spectral noise resistance ( Considering a constant negative value of For both statistical and frequency analyses, the back-ground noise was removed by means of a linear fitting. In this way, the trend was eliminated using first order polynominal approximation. Profilometry technique was employed to obtain general information about deposits roughness after 2 The Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) was employed as the second technique to study the morphology and the surface roughness of the selected electrodeposited specimens, after a period of 30 Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was used to examine deposits after 30 Cross-section images and grain analyses of the copper deposits were conducted for characterization after 2 A Philips PW1011 diffractometer using CuK Two series of electrolytic tests were conducted for 2 These two series of experiments were reproducible and the curves showed the same trend as those obtained at 500 The skewness and kurtosis values were calculated for the stable portion of each polarization curve by eliminating the abrupt variations of the potential at the very beginning of the experiments. Effectively, measured electrochemical noise at the first period of experiments is related to nucleation and growth of copper on the surface of stainless steel electrode. These eliminated portions were frequently longer at 300  It can be observed in For an electrolyte containing high Gelatin concentration such as G10 with Thiourea concentration less than 2 As for skewness measurement, the slope of the average of potential kurtosis was calculated between 2000 and 7000 According to these results, a progressive decrease of slope of  Frequency analyses were carried out to investigate more adequately the different morphologies obtained due to different concentrations of additives. The values of Although the values of According to these observations, a correlation between smoothness of copper electrodeposits and The morphology of electrolytic deposits according to these series of experiments can be categorized macroscopically into two general classes: nodular and smooth. The G2T8, G10T4 and G10T8 electrolytes were considered as deposits that are not satisfactory at both current densities of 300 and 500 Excluding porous and nodular deposits, profilometry measurements were carried out on the deposits of STD, G2T0, G2T2, G2T4, G10T0 and G10T2. Six measurements of Considering the Two parameters of AFM images of STD and G2T4 are presented in The SEM images of the copper deposited (STD, G2T2, G2T4 and G10T2) after 30 In order to obtain additional information about grain size and roughness of deposits, the cross-sections of four specimens of STD, G2T2, G2T4 and G10T2 were studied using optical microscopy. According to these results, the samples are classified from rough to smooth as STD Optical micrographs of these specimens are presented in The deposits were examined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) to determine the preferred crystal orientation.  The obtained characterization results were summarized in The quality of copper deposits obtained in presence of different Gelatin and Thiourea concentrations was investigated employing Electrochemical Noise (EN) and various surface analysis techniques. Non-nodularity, non porosity and smoothness were considered as the most important characteristics of a good deposit. The results showed that: To obtain a smooth deposit during copper electrodeposition, Electrochemical Noise could be considered as a promising technique to monitor and adjust the concentrations of additives. The intrinsic quality of deposit can be determined by statistical analysis in the time domain, following the slopes of potential skew and kurtosis in situ. Frequency analyses complement the statistical studies by quantifying the variation of According to EN analysis and other characterization studies such as AFM, SEM, it is evident that the electrolyte containing 2 The quantity of nodules in the copper deposit can be correlated to the number of sharp and important oscillations on the For non-nodular deposits, X-ray diffraction patterns showed that the preferred orientation of 111 for smooth deposits, while 220 for rough ones. The authors are grateful to the