Eudialyte – a sodium rich zirconosilicate – is often enriched in relevant amounts of Zr and Hf as well as other valuable metals such as rare earth elements (REEs), Mn and Nb. Due to its high solubility in mineral acids, all valuable components can be leached with high yields under mild conditions. The subsequent separation and purification of individual components from the resulting highly complex solutions can be challenging, especially due to the release of silica. This study deals with REE separation by in-situ precipitation during leaching of a thermally pre-treated H2SO4/eudialyte concentrate mixture. In contrast to common practice, the precipitation was undertaken before solid/liquid separation. Moreover, it was demonstrated that sulfuric acid plays a crucial role in the process, reducing REE and silica solubility and enhancing leaching yields of other valuable components (Zr, Hf, Mn and Nb). The best precipitation yield of 90% for REE was achieved by a solution phase comprising 117 g/L Na2SO4 and 477 g/L H2SO4 after 120 min at a temperature of 95 °C and a solid/liquid ratio of 150 kg/m3. After the precipitation step, REEs were transferred into the liquid phase by two different methods: direct water treatment and NaOH/HCl-route. Through direct water treatment, the separation efficiency decreased with an increasing solid/liquid ratio due to higher amounts of adsorbed mother liquor and a higher concentration of valuable components in it. The conversion of precipitated REEs into sparingly soluble hydroxides using NaOH and subsequent acid treatment using HCl significantly improved the purity of the REE solution. Compared with direct water treatment, the separation efficiency could be enhanced.For commercial purposes, rare earth elements (REEs) are obtained from concentrates with a rare earth oxide (REO) content of about 60 wt% ( The Norra Kärr eudialyte deposit in southern Sweden is the only heavy REE deposit in the European Union ( Nevertheless, several approaches have been described for REE separation after or during the leaching process. In a pre-feasibility study for the Norra Kärr deposit, REE separation by solvent extraction with primary amines after neutralization of the pregnant leach solution is proposed (  A similar approach has been patented by  As a precipitating agent, Na The REE precipitation from sulfuric acid solutions has also been applied to secondary raw materials such as NiMH batteries ( Although the H In the present study, REE separation by in-situ precipitation using eudialyte concentrate was investigated. The precipitation was undertaken after dehydration of a H The eudialyte concentrate used in this study was obtained by a high gradient magnetic separation method. Its mineralogical composition was determined by mineral liberation analysis (MLA) and chemical composition was determined by lithium metaborate fusion and acid digestion with HNO The investigated method consisted of three stages: sulfation, REE precipitation and REE transfer into the liquid phase ( In the first stage, metal ions were converted to sulfates (Eq. The mixture was homogenized and heated at 110 °C for 24 h to dehydrate released polysilicic acid according to Eq. The dry mixture was then crushed and treated with an aqueous Na The values for Na In the calculation, the precipitated amounts of sulfate and sodium ions contained in REE Finally, the transfer of REEs into the liquid phase was investigated. In general, there are three options available described by the methods The simplest way is water treatment of the precipitate. Through the addition of calcium chloride or nitrate, anion exchange can also be achieved, whereby sulfate ions are precipitated as CaSO In the NaOH/HCl route, the solids enriched in REEs was suspended in 50 mL water and treated with 1 mol/L NaOH solution until reaching a pH value of 8.5. After filtration, the residue was mixed with 100 mL of 0.1 mol/L HCl solution (ϱ The composition of the liquid phase was analyzed by ICP-OES (Thermo Scientific IRIS Intrepid II XDL; Na, Al, Si, Ca, Fe) and ICP-MS Thermo scientific XSERIES 2, internal standards: 10 μg/L Rh and Re; REEs, Mn, Zr, Nb, Hf, Th). The mineralogical and chemical composition of the concentrate is given in The concentrate contains 7149 mg/kg total REEs (TREEs) and high amounts of other valuable components such as zirconium (16,270 mg/kg), manganese (3210 mg/kg) and niobium (882 mg/kg). For further details on the distribution of individual REEs and the stability of all minerals in the concentrate against H Experiments were first carried out at a low solid/liquid ratio ϱ In further experiments the REE solubility at different Na The results are shown in In order to achieve an optimal mass balance of the whole separation process, the maximum amount of valuable by-products should be transferred into the solution phase during REE precipitation. Thus, they can subsequently be recovered from the resulting aqueous phase. As it can be seen from Besides the valuable components, contaminants (Al, Fe, Ca, Th and Si) were also released during acid digestion, as shown in As shown in the previous discussion, REE solubility can be significantly reduced by raising the temperature, and increasing the concentrations of Na With the increase in solid content, the precipitation yield of TREEs continuously increased and reached 88% at 200 kg/m The change in concentration (at saturation) indicates the formation of more than one sparingly soluble salt. During precipitation of REEs from a solution phase containing Na In additional experiments, the concentrations of Na After precipitation, the transfer of REEs into the liquid phase was investigated by two different methods, using the experimental conditions described in First, direct water treatment was tested. Upon contact with water, all considered species were leached directly from the dried solids, with the exception of silica ( This confirmed the formation of easily soluble compounds such that REE transfer into the aqueous phase can be carried out without major effort. In further experiments, the solid contents were increased and the leaching time was set to 30 min. Raising the solid content led to a large increase in the concentration of Zr, Hf, Mn, and Nb compared with the REEs, negatively affecting the purity of the REE solution ( To evaluate the purity of the REE solution as a function of solid content, the separation factor was calculated with Eq. The separation factor decreased from 6.4 at 50 kg/m The estimated amount of adsorbed mother liquor ( Based on the obtained data, a sharp REE separation is not possible. Improvements in REE precipitation yield by raising solid/liquid ratio cause an increase in the amount of adsorbed liquor which in turn results in losses of Zr, Hf, Mn and Nb. Due to the short equilibration time during precipitation ( In addition to the valuable components, contaminants and precipitating agents were transferred into additional process stages. The transferred amounts of Al, Fe, Na It is important to note that during water treatment, a supersaturated solution was formed and calcium sulfate was precipitated again. Another possibility for improving the purity of solution is to treat REE enriched solids with a base followed by filtration and leaching the solid with aqueous acid solution. During such a base treatment, the REEs form sparingly soluble hydroxides (Eq. To investigate the NaOH/HCl route, the solids suspended in water at a solid/liquid ratio of 200 kg/m The pre-treatment with NaOH solution caused a reduction of the concentrations of all considered accompanying components, with the exception of silica. Its determined concentration of 116 mg/L was approximately six times higher compared with the concentrations measured by direct water treatment. The higher Si amount can cause problems during the further hydrometallurgical treatment of the solution ( The study deals with REE separation by in-situ precipitation during the processing of eudialyte concentrate. It demonstrates that H The REE precipitation in the investigated complex system was evidently not only due to the formation of the double sulfates but also the reduction of the solubility of the sulfates at high H The transfer of REEs into the aqueous phase was conducted by two different methods without major effort. Through direct water treatment, the separation factor β The precipitation method described in this work is an efficient method to separate the REEs from complex leach systems and may be a good alternative to solvent extraction, selective sulfation, neutralization and other separation operations. As intermediates, two solutions enriched in REEs and other valuable components are obtained, which can be used directly for their winning. In addition, the separation is achieved using only Na None. This study was conducted within the framework of the SE-FLECX-project founded by the BMBF (