The agricultural use of anaerobically digested sewage sludge (ADSS) as stable, mature compost implies knowing its total content in heavy metals and their bioavailability. This depends not only on the initial characteristics of the composted substrates but also on the organic matter transformations during composting which may influence the chemical form of the metals and their bioavailability.
                  The objective of this work was to examine the relationships between the changes in the organic matter content and humus fractions, and the bioavailability of heavy metals.
                  A detailed sampling at 0, 14, 84, and 140 days of the composting process was performed to measure C contents in humic acids (HAs), fulvic acids, (FAs) and humin, the total content of Zn, Pb, Cu, Ni, and Cd, and also their distribution into mobile and mobilisable (MB), and low bioavailability (LB) forms.
                  Significant changes of C contents in HA, FA, and Humin, and in the FA/HA, HA/Humin and Chumus/TOC ratios were observed during composting. The MB and LB fractions of each metal also varied significantly during composting. The MB fraction increased for Zn, Cu, Ni, and Cd, and the LB fraction increased for Pb. Stepwise linear regressions and quadratic curve estimation conducted on the MB and LB fractions of each metal as dependent on the measured organic variables suggested that Zn bioavailability was mainly associated to percentage of C in FAs. Bioavailability of Cu, Ni and Cd during composting was associated to humin and HAs. Pb concentration increased in the LB form, and its variations followed a quadratic function with the Chumus/TOC ratio. Our results suggest that the composting process renders the metals in more available forms. The main forms of metal binding in the sludge and their availability in the final compost may be better described when metal fractionation obtained in sequential extraction and humus fractionation during composting are considered together.The agricultural use of anaerobically digested sewage sludge as an organic amendment to improve soil fertility is becoming increasingly important. The management of the raw sludge involves many problems such as pathogens, plant seeds, odors, and a pasty structure with high water content. This later feature makes it hard to store and may lead to immobilization and volatilization of plant nutrients ( Composting of organic wastes has been defined as a well-established method, which leads to a stabilized product rich in humic substances that resemble native soil humic substances ( Most of the studies on the speciation of heavy metals have been carried out in raw or composted sludges-amended soils ( The speciation of each metal in the sewage sludge-based compost may depend not only on its initial chemical state in the sewage sludge which also depends on their nature and processing ( The objective of this work was to examine the relationships between the changes in the organic matter content and humus fractions, and the bioavailability of heavy metals. This was tested in a 70:30 (on wet basis) mixture of ADSS and wood chips with an initial C/N ratio of 30.4, during its aerobic batch composting at 30 °C of external temperature in an open type lab-scale reactor without lixiviation. The raw material used in the composting process was a mixture of sewage sludge and wood chips as bulking agent, in the ratio 70:30 (on a wet basis). Sewage sludge was an anaerobically digested dewatered cake of sludge (FACSA Sewage Treatment Plant in Castellón, Spain). The characteristics of the raw sludge were 94.3% moisture content, pH8.51, EC 1.51 dS m The pilot-scale composting experiments were carried out in five 65 L capacity open type lab-scale reactor without drainage of lixiviates. Aeration was controlled daily, moisture every five days, and mixture turned every 15 days. Composting was monitored for 140 days, when oxygen consumption finished ( To obtain representative samples for the physico-chemical analysis of the sludge based compost during the time of composting, good homogenization was ensured, and five aliquots of about 80 g (on dry basis) were taken and mixed at every sampling date. Three replicates of each composite sample were analysed at 0, 14, 84, and 140 days of composting. The time intervals were determined according to the changes of composting temperature and oxygen consumption ( Compost samples were extracted with 0.1 M NaP Heavy metal fractionation for Zn, Cu, Pb, Ni, and Cd was determined according to Sposito’s procedure ( The levels of bioavailability considered in this work are: Medium, MB (mobile and mobilisable fractions): Low, LB (Sulphides. Hardly mobilisable fraction): Statistical analyses were performed with the SPSS v.17.0 statistical software. A one-way ANOVA was used to detect the significant effect of time of composting on different compost parameters. The Tukey’s The main physico-chemical properties of the composted sludge at different times of the process, the ANOVA and the Tukey’s Because of the high moisture content of the raw sludge, the ratio of sewage sludge and wood chips on a dry weight basis was 15:85. As shown by Total organic C content (TOC) decreased significantly during composting ( The C/N ratio significantly decreased from 30.4 in the initial mixture to 21.6 at 140 days. This relatively high C/N ratio at the end of composting indicates that organic matter has not achieved an adequate stabilization ( Since metal loss by leaching did not occur in our experiment, we observed a continuous increase of total heavy metal concentration in the compost due to the weight loss during composting, the release of carbon dioxide and water, and the mineralization process as shown by The sum of the amounts extracted by sequential extraction (MB and LB fractions, For all metals except Pb, the concentration of the MB forms is higher than that in the LB forms ( For Cu, Ni and Cd, the concentrations of the MB fraction follow a linear significant increase with time of composting. Cu Increased availability for Zn and Cu through composting is in agreement with results obtained by several authors ( The changes in C in humic (FAs, HAs) and humic-like substances (hydrolyzed humin) and their ratios during composting are shown at the bottom of C in HAs increased linearly during composting. Its rate of increase was similar or even higher than that of C in FAs, as deduced from the b parameters of models. The linear rate of increase observed for C in hydrolyzed humin is higher than that of C in HAs as deduced by comparison of the corresponding b parameters. This suggests that both FAs and HAs of the sludge may polymerize in the form of humin. The abundance of aliphatic compounds in sewage sludges may have a negative effect on the formation of the condensed structures typical of the true HAs ( Finally, the progressive increase of the C  Overall, results in Regressions indicate that Zn availability is positively associated with the FA fraction and negatively with humin. This result agrees with those by The C Ni As indicated in Finally, the model for Pb differs from the rest of metals. Since the MB fraction did not change through composting ( The 140 days composting process of a mixture of sewage sludge and wood chips (C/N ratio of 30.4), resulted in a product with a relatively high C/N ratio of 21.6, a relatively low stabilization of the organic matter if considered the dominance of FAs over HAs, and total heavy metal concentrations below the maximum permitted for land application. With exception of Pb, the relative bioavailability of metals increased with composting. Zn bioavailability was mainly associated to percentage C in FAs. Bioavailability of Cu, Ni and Cd during composting was associated to percentage C in humin and HAs. Pb concentration increased in unavailable forms, and followed a quadratic function of the C Our results suggest that the composting process renders the metal in more available forms. The main forms of metal binding in the sludge and their availability in the final compost may be better described when metal fractionation obtained in sequential extraction and humus fractionation during composting are considered together. This work was part of the Generalitat Valenciana projects IIARCO2004-A-196, IIARCO2004-A-212, and IIARCO/2004/213, and the national project 135/2004/3 (Ministerio de Medio Ambiente). We thank FACSA Sewage Treatment Plant (Castellón, Spain), and University Jaume I of Castellón (Spain) for providing materials and technical assistance. We thank the two anonymous reviewers for their useful comments on the manuscript.