The aqueous chemistry of micron-sized lignite particles has essential influences on the dispersion stability of water-lignite slurry. In this work, the adsorption behaviors of dissolved humics on lignite surface in lignite–water slurry were studied through batch adsorption experiments. The influences of adsorbed humics on the surface properties, particle size distribution and dispersion stability of lignite particles in water-lignite slurry were examined by advanced analysis techniques, EDLVO theory and settlement tests. The adsorption results indicate that the adsorption capacity of humics on lignite increases from 4.11 mg·g−1 to 8.25 mg·g−1 with the humics concentration increasing from 100 mg·L−1 to 200 mg·L−1. The adsorption process can be well described by the pseudo-second order kinetic model. The adsorbed humics significantly improves the hydrophilicity and electronegativity of lignite surface and reduces the apparent particle size of lignite. The EDLVO calculation and settlement tests reveal that the total interaction energy of the humics-adsorbed lignite particles at 18 nm of separation distance is enhanced from 0.85 × 10−17 J to 1.45 × 10−17 J with the initial humics concentration increasing from 100 mg·L−1 to 200 mg·L−1. The dispersion stability of micron-sized lignite particles is improved with humics adsorption on lignite surface.Lignite, a kind of low rank coal, is abundant in China, being estimated approximately 130 billion tons inventory [ Coal–water mixture (CWM) often exists in the processing technologies including coal washing processes (flotation and jigging), coal–water slurry (CWS), and disposal of coal [ Actually, the oxygen-containing functional groups are mainly born of humics in lignite, and the adsorbed-water in lignite is due to the binding site of humics. Humics is a kind of hydrophilic matter and possess lots of oxygen-containing functional groups such as carbonyl, carboxyl, quinonyl, phenolic hydroxyl and alcohol hydroxyl [ In order to investigate the influences of interactions between dissolved humics and lignite that might occur in the lignite flotation or the lignite cleaning technology, it is absolutely necessary to obtain more information about the effects of humics adsorption on the aqueous chemistry of micron-sized lignite particles. In this work, the adsorption behaviors of humics on the micron-sized lignite particles in the lignite–water slurry were studied by the batch adsorption experiments at the various humics concentration. The effects of humics adsorption on the particle sizes and surface properties of lignite were investigated using advanced analysis techniques including optical microscope, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), Zeta potential test and contact angle analysis. The dispersion behavior of lignite–water slurry after lignite adsorbing humics were examined EDLVO calculation and settlement tests. Lignite used in this work was obtained from Yunnan province, China. The typical elemental composition, proximate analysis and humics content of lignite were determined respectively according to GB/T 476-2001, GB/T 212-2008 and GBT 11957-2001, and the results are summarized in Unless specifically noted, all chemicals used in this work were analytical reagents and purchased from Tianjin Kermel Reagent Technologies Co., Ltd., China. The humics was bought from Tianjin Zhiyuan Chemical Reagent Co. Ltd., China. Hydrochloric acid and sodium hydroxide were used to adjust solution pH. All the adsorption experiments were conducted using a batch equilibration approach at 25 °C. The 100 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing lignite and humics solution were shaken for a certain time in a thermostatic rotary shaker operating at 150 rpm, and then the mixture was centrifuged for 5 min at 3500 rpm. The concentration of lignite was fixed at 4 g·L The effect of humics concentration on adsorption was investigated through varying the initial concentration of humics from 100 to 200 mg·L The concentration of humics was determined by the photometric method. The photometric measurements were performed at 465 nm with a model TU-1901 double-beam ultraviolet and visible spectrophotometer (UV–Vis, PERSEE, China) with deionized water as reference. The standard curve of humics was tested as: The size distribution of lignite particles was obtained from the optical microscope equipped with statistical analysis software (ZEISS Axio Scope. A1, Germany). And D Zeta potentials of lignite particles were measured with a JS94H2 model microscopic electrophoresis apparatus ( The adsorption capacity of lignite for humics as a function of contact time with different humics concentration is shown in To investigate the rate process of humics transporting from the bulk solution to lignite surfaces, the adsorption process was simulated by two well-known kinetic models namely pseudo first-order model and pseudo second-order model. The pseudo first-order model is represented as: Based on the results of The FTIR spectra of lignite before and after adsorbing humics with different initial concentration of humics are shown in Additionally, the double peaks at 2855 cm To further investigate the surface properties of the lignite after adsorbing humics, contact angle and zeta potential of the humics-adsorbed lignite were measured, and the results are illustrated in Apparent particle size of lignite in the slurry is an important property of lignite–water slurry, which expresses the information of dispersion stability of the lignite–water slurry [ The dispersion and aggregation of micro-sized particles in lignite–water slurry are mainly decided by the interaction energy between lignite particles including Van der Waals energy, electrostatic energy and hydrophobic energy. To study the dispersion stability of micron-sized particles in lignite–water slurry, the interaction energy of the humics-adsorbed lignite was calculated based on EDLVO theory. The total interaction energy ( Considering the surface properties and particle size of lignite particles in slurry were both affected by the adsorbed humics, van der Waals energy, electrostatic energy, hydrophobic energy and the total interaction energies between micron lignite particles with different separation distances and humics concentrations were calculated, and the total interaction energies are shown in It can be seen from In order to verify the above theoretical prediction, the settlement experiments of micron-sized lignite were carried out at 25 °C. The suspensions of micron-sized lignite and humics with different concentration and solution pH 7 were dispersed by agitating for 90 min and allowed to settle. The concentration of lignite was fixed at 4 g·L Obviously, the settlement rate of micron-sized lignite decreases with increasing humics concentration, as seen from The adsorption behaviors of dissolved humics on lignite and the effects of adsorbed humics on the properties of lignite in lignite–water slurry were studied in this work. The adsorption capacity of humics on lignite surface increases from 4.11 mg·g The financial supports from the