As the mining industry is facing an increasing number of issues related to its fresh water consumption, water-saving strategies are progressively being implemented in the mineral processing plants, often leading to variations in the process water chemistry. However, the impact of water chemistry variations on the process performance is rarely known beforehand, thus creating an obstacle to the implementation of those water-saving strategies. To tackle this problem, the effect the different dissolved species present in the process water have on the processing plant performance must be quantified, and this information must be digitalized in a practical and suitable form to be used in mineral processing simulators. To achieve this goal, a methodology to digitalize the influence of the process water composition on the flotation performance is presented in this paper. Using the flotation of a fluorite ore as case study, the relationship between process water composition and the flotation kinetics of that fluorite ore was determined. This relationship was digitalized in HSC Sim, a mineral processing simulator, turning it into a tool capable of simulating the flotation performance under a variety of process water compositions. Finally, the potential of this new tool to help implementing water-saving strategies on the mine site is discussed, and the challenges that need to be overcome in order to apply this tool at industrial scale are being addressed.There exist a large number of incentives for the mining industry to reduce its fresh water consumption and process water discharge. Those incentives can be legal, social, environmental, or even economical when mining projects or activities are suffering from fresh water scarcity in arid to semi-arid regions of the globe. It is thus tempting to implement water-saving strategies on the mine site, such as using unconventional water sources ( To date, the traditional approaches to establish the dependency between process water quality and flotation performance can be divided into two major methods: Determination of the shift in the grade – recovery curve as the water chemistry is changing. The shift in such curve is established under a limited number of pre-determined water chemistries, as illustrated in Determination of the flotation recovery and/or concentrate grade as a function of dissolved species concentration, as was for example done by The first method has often been used to determine the potential impact of water recirculation in the flotation circuit or to investigate the possibility of using alternative water sources in the flotation plant ( Using a kinetic approach does not only allow more flexibility with respect to flotation time and ore variability, it also yields relationships that can be implemented in mineral processing simulators. Implementing those relationships in a mineral processing simulator creates a particularly pertinent tool to address the challenges faced with the implementation of water-saving strategies on the mine site. Indeed, once the whole processing plant has been digitalized in said simulator and the influence of the process water composition has been accounted for in the different unit operations, it becomes possible to simulate how the implementation of different water-saving strategies would impact the global plant performance. Moreover, digitalizing the effect of water chemistry in a mineral processing simulator enables new possibilities in the field of process optimization. As was acknowledged in a recent review by The main scope of this paper is to present how recent developments in the Outotec simulation software HSC Sim ( In order to implement in a mineral processing simulator the effect of water chemistry on the flotation performance, it is first necessary to determine a quantitative relationship between the process water chemistry and the flotation kinetics of the ore under investigation. To do so, the flotation of a fluorite ore has been investigated as a case study. As presented in this section, kinetic flotation tests were performed on this ore in waters that contain a variety of electrolyte concentrations. The resulting flotation kinetics were then parametrized to be expressed as a function of the process water chemistry, hence yielding the desired relationship to be implemented in the mineral processing simulator. The ore is a fluorite pre-concentrate grading 81.5% CaF To investigate the effect of electrolytes on the flotation kinetics of the 3 major minerals ( Based on this experimental design, a total of 25 kinetic curves were obtained, each of which relate to a specific water composition. Those curves must then be parametrized so that the flotation kinetics of the ore can be numerically expressed as a function of the process water composition. To parametrize the flotation kinetics under varying water compositions, a flotation model first has to be selected. As is commonly done when modeling the flotation rate of minerals (    For the 25 different water compositions containing different proportions of the electrolytes under investigation, the kinetic model in equation The linear model obtained from this approach could systematically be expressed as in equation The coefficients from equation As the concentration of the minor minerals in the concentrates was insufficient to be accurately measured or even detected in some instances, those minerals were considered non-floating and entirely reporting to the tailings of flotation. Alternatively, in order to avoid the assumption of minor minerals not floating in the investigated system, it could have been hypothesized that the minor minerals have a similar flotation behavior to that of quartz, hence attributing the same flotation kinetics to all gangue minerals. However, as this alternative does not noticeably affect the simulation results presented in the following sections, the minor minerals were still considered as non-floating. As the relationship between process water composition and flotation performance has been established in a practical and suitable form to be implemented in a mineral processing simulator, this relationship now has to be integrated in said simulator. Therefore, this section aims at presenting a procedure to integrate the composition of the process water in HSC Sim and implement the relationships established in the previous section in this simulation platform. In addition, applications directly resulting of such implementation are presented, in particular the possibility of performing process sensitivity analysis to the composition of the process water and determining the optimum water composition to maximize flotation recovery under specific constraints. The integration of water chemistry in traditional mineral processing software is by itself a challenge, essentially because such software products are particle/mineral-oriented and tend to consider water as a transport medium only. In other words, the water throughput can be included but the water composition is not yet part of the simulation. However, recent developments at Outotec with the simulation software HSC Sim have enabled the possibility of merging the mineral processing and the hydrometallurgical parts of the simulator, thus rendering possible the inclusion of water chemistry during the simulation of a mineral processing flowsheet. To demonstrate this possibility, the process under investigation (as described in Section In Since the process performance is now linked to the composition of the process water, it becomes possible to analyze the process sensitivity to the concentration of the four different ions under investigation: Ca The sensitivity analysis in In As was demonstrated in Section To demonstrate this new feature, an optimization problem for the flowsheet presented in Objective function: In Under the constraints presented in The result in The inclusion of water chemistry in a mineral processing simulator and the possibility to link the simulation platform to optimization algorithms provide a powerful tool that could be used to help implementing water-saving strategies on the mine site. To illustrate this possibility, two different scenarios were considered in this section: Use of multiple water sources as process water in order to reduce the fresh water intake; Monitoring and control of the process water composition to avoid the rejection of “process-friendly” water out of the processing plant. For illustration purposes, the flowsheet in To reduce fresh water consumption on the mine site, a solution would be to use “impure” water sources that are available on or near said mine site. Traditionally, this solution is investigated through lab flotation tests using the alternative water sources as process water, and the flotation performance in each of those water sources is thereby determined ( In When solely two water sources are considered, the HSC Sim Scenario Editor is sufficient to determine their ideal mixture so that the process performance is maximized. However, as the number of water sources being considered is increasing, this problem gets exponentially more complex. In such a case, it is worth using the optimization tool presented in Section 3.3. Indeed, finding the optimum mixture of the water sources available so that the process performance is maximized constitutes an optimization problem where at least the following constraints need to be implemented: The solution to the optimization problem is limited by the composition of the different water sources available; The amount of water originating from the different water sources is restricted by the availability of said water sources; The concentration of inorganic ions in the water mixture cannot exceed the solubility limits fixed by solution thermodynamics. Solving this optimization problem would thus lead to an improved management of the water sources on the mine site. Additional restrictions can also be applied, so that the contribution of the fresh water source is minimized in this “ideal” water mixture, hence reducing fresh water consumption in the processing plant. Process control is crucial in the mining industry: it ensures that the desired process operating conditions are maintained in the processing plant ( Since the influence of the process water composition on the process efficiency can now be included in the simulation of a mineral processing flowsheet, it is possible to improve the quality of the process control by monitoring not only the mineralogy of the feed, but also the composition of the process water in the processing plant, and include both online measurements in the simulation platform. This improvement would lead to an even more efficient beneficiation of the mineral resources by adjusting the process operating conditions according to both the ore properties and the composition of the process water being used. Moreover, as illustrated in In Direct reuse of the process water in the processing plant; Water treatment prior to reuse; Rejection of the currently used process water, replacing it with fresh water. Each of those options has a certain impact on the process performance, and this impact can be simulated in HSC Sim. In this example, it was assumed that the composition of the water fed to the processing plant as a function of the chosen option is as displayed in Based on the simulation result associated to each option, the plant operator can determine the best solution in order to reduce the rejection of process water while maintaining sufficient process performance. However, it is clear that additional decision factors should be taken into consideration, such as the costs associated to water treatment, the pumping costs, etc. Those elements can be accounted for with an objective function defined in MATLAB that aims at maximizing production revenue. In conclusion, as illustrated in The development of HSC Sim as a mineral processing software capable of taking water components in consideration during the process simulation has enabled the possibility of simulating the impact of process water chemistry variations on the process performance. To demonstrate this possibility, the flotation of a fluorite ore in a variety of water compositions was selected as a case study. A specific methodology to parametrize the relationship between the flotation kinetics of the ore and the process water composition was presented, as well as a procedure to implement this relationship in the mineral processing simulator. With this implementation, along with the possibility of calling an HSC Sim flowsheet from MATLAB, it was shown with the simplified case study that the mineral processing simulator could be used as a tool to help implementing water-saving strategies in the mining industry. However, to implement those water-saving strategies with this tool in a real case, at least two challenges need to be overcome: The whole processing plant needs to be digitalized in the simulation platform, and all unit operations that influence/are influenced by the composition of the process water require a model that properly reflects such influence ( Online sensors used to monitor the composition of the aqueous and the solid phases need to be combined for improved process control in the processing plant, and the data resulting from such monitoring should be used to develop sufficiently accurate models for each unit operation where the influence of the process water composition needs to be considered. In the wake of process digitalization and in view of a water-constrained society, it appears clear that those challenges can and must be overcome in order to optimize resource efficiency (both minerals and water) and to minimize the environmental footprint of the mining industry. Helmholtz Association is thanked for its support as is Outotec for helping with the implementation of the ideas in this paper into HSC Sim 9.7.