The rheology of modified poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) solutions can be tuned by controlling the inclusion interactions between α-cyclodextrins and alkyl hydrophobes. We demonstrate three modes of control: (1) using free cyclodextrins (CD) to displace hydrophobe–hydrophobe association in hydrophobically modified poly(acrylic acid) (HMPAA) polymers—which reduces fluid viscosity, (2) using competitive inclusion interactions where stronger SDS:CD binding can be used to ‘unmask’ CD:hydropobe inclusion interactions—which increases viscosity, and (3) employing HMPAA inclusion interactions with CD groups grafted to PAA chains (CDPAA)—which produces higher viscosities than purely hydrophobic association systems at the same concentration. The inclusion association between alkyl side-group in HMPAA and CD, either free or grafted onto PAA, obeys a 1-to-1 stoichiometry at low polymer concentrations (<1wt%). In contrast to purely hydrophobically associating polymers, the CD:hydrophobe interaction is only binary, and, therefore, these associated networks should be ideal model systems to test theoretical predictions for associative fluids.Interactions among polymer chains give the ability to control solution rheology However, hydrophobic interactions do not provide the specificity to enable ‘triggered’ changes in rheology by minor changes in composition. The inclusion or ‘host–guest’ interaction between a cylcodextrin (CD) host and a hydrophobic guest is an ideal reversible, specific, physical interaction that can be exploited to modulate the rheology of polymer solutions. Cyclodextrins are cyclic oligosaccharides containing 6, 7 or 8 glucose rings, which are called α-, β- or γ-cyclodextrin, respectively. The internal cavity of a CD is hydrophobic and can accommodate suitable hydrophobic groups to form an inclusion complex More interestingly, if CDs are grafted onto polymer chains, novel polymer networks can be generated by host–guest interactions between polymers with hydrophobes and those with CD side-groups In this paper, we demonstrate how the rheological behavior of hydrophobically modified polyacrylic acid (HMPAA) aqueous solutions can be controlled through manipulation of hydrophobic and inclusion interactions. We show that the inclusion interactions can be used either to reduce solution viscosity by capping hydrophobic interactions upon addition of free CD or to enhance viscosity by displacing capped hydrophobes with a stronger binding inclusion interaction. Finally, we present a novel associative polymer network based on inclusion interactions between CDPAA and HMPAA, which shows higher viscosity solutions based on purely hydrophobic associations. Poly(acrylic acid)s (PAA) ( Poly(acrylic acid)s with α-cyclodextrin side-groups (CDPAA) were synthesized by the reaction of monoamino cyclodextrin with carboxyl group in an aprotic solvent in the presence of dicyclohexylcarbodiimide (DCI). In a typical run, 1.0 The crude product was dissolved into 20 Following the procedure developed by Iliopoulos et al.  The hydrophobic substitution level for HMPAA3%250kC18 was determined as 3.0% from the peak areas of CH The steady and dynamic rheological measurements were performed on a Rheometrics DSR stress-controlled rheometer with 25 Hydrophobic association can be masked by the addition of free CD as shown in For higher concentrations of HMPAA the effect of CD is even more pronounced. The addition of CD is analogous to reducing the degree of hydrophobic substitution on the PAA chain. Rubenstein and Semenov  This ‘unmasking’ has been exploited for the novel aqueous synthesis of hydrophobically modified polymers from water soluble monomers and hydrophobic monomers solubilized by CD The previous section considered only free CD added to HMPAA solutions. We now consider binary mixtures of polymers where one polymer is grafted by CD and the other by C18. The inclusion interactions between CDs and hydrophobic alkyl groups on different chains can form labile cross-links between polymers. Indeed, as shown in The viscosities of inclusion associated polymers increase significantly with increasing polymer concentration. The zero shear viscosity rises three orders of magnitude when the solution is concentrated from 1 to 4 The critical rheological parameters from The viscosities of modified poly(acrylic acid) solutions are tunable by modulating hydrophobic and inclusion associations between C18 alkyl groups (HM) and α-cyclodextrins (CD). Hydrophobic association in HMPAA can be screened by adding free CD. The masking of the hydrophobic association occurs at approximately a 1:1 stoichiometric ratio of CD to HM at low polymer concentrations (<1 The binary mixtures of polymers with grafted hosts (CD) and grafted guests (HM) show higher viscosities than HMPAA or CDPAA solutions at the same concentration. The maximum viscosity of the mixture of HMPAA and CDPAA also appears at approximately a 1-to-1 stoichiometric ratio at low concentrations (≤1 Finally, while we have merely laid out the phenomenology of the associations for this novel host–guest system, we believe that this will provide a model system to test theories of associating fluids. R.K.P. and S.A.K. gratefully acknowledge NSF for partial support of this work. Because the rheology of associating polymers can be very sensitive to architecture, we present the solution viscosities of the pure hydrophobically modified polymers synthesized for this study. Since, the syntheses follow the procedures of Illiopolous The steady shear viscosities of solutions of HMPAA3%250kC18 and its precursor as a function of shear rate are shown in The non-specific hydrophobic interactions among alkyl side-groups in HMPAA allow the formation of both intra and inter molecular, micelle-like associations Another feature of the steady shear viscosity profile of HMPAA at concentration above The concentration dependence of the zero shear viscosity of HMPAA solutions with various C18 substitution levels is shown in HMPAA3%250kC18 shows the lowest Another interesting observation in As shown in Since HMPAA is a polyelectrolyte, addition of salt changes the solution properties. Indeed, as shown in In