In this note, the non-linear fluid flow through rough fracture is investigated experimentally. The rough surface of fracture is generated synthetically based on the fractal dimension (D) and standard deviation (σ). 3D printing technique is used to produce the fracture specimen, in which, different components of the specimen are printed and assembled so that the fracture roughness and aperture can be easily controlled. After that, the self-designed apparatus is used to conduct the fluid flow test on the fractured specimens under various pressure gradients. It is found that, the surface roughness imposes an important impact on the nonlinear characteristics of fluid flow through fracture; and the root-mean-square of the first derivative of profile, Z2, is found effective in characterizing the fracture roughness. Based on the test results and the derived parameters in Forchheimer equation, an empirical equation is proposed to relate the hydraulic aperture (e
                     
                        h
                     ) to Z
                     
                        2
                      and mechanical aperture (e
                     
                        m
                     ). Furthermore, the correlation among the nonlinear coefficient 
                        β
                     , e
                     
                        m
                      and Z
                     
                        2
                      is established.Fracture is the main path for mass and heat transfer in rock masses, and research on fluid flow through rock fractures has been a popular topic for decades in a variety of disciplines including rock engineering, petroleum engineering, hydrological engineering and mining engineering. The accurate characterization of fluid flow through fractures is of great importance to the production of gas and oil in reservoir, the dissipation of nuclear pollution and the hydro-mechanical coupled analysis in rock mechanics. The cubic law has been widely accepted since Lomize, Extensive works have been conducted to explore the mechanism of the non-linear fluid flow in rough fractures. For example, Ranjith and Darlington However, even with dramatic achievements in the study of non-linear fluid flow in rough fracture, the quantitative parametric study of Forchheimer equation is not clearly investigated for two possible reasons: 1) most of the experiments were conducted on artificial fractures or real rock samples, the geometric of fracture roughness cannot be controlled easily; 2) the aperture is hard to be quantified under stress condition, which leads to undesirable uncertainties and difficulties in the determination of the parameters in Forchheimer equation. To solve those problems, experimental study on non-linear fluid flow through printed fractured specimens is conducted in this paper. The fractal dimension, standard deviation, mechanical aperture and the mismatch length are used to characterize the rough fracture, and 3D printing technology is employed to produce the fractured specimens. Based on the experimental results, the quantitative characterization of the parameters in Forchheimer equation for the nonlinear fluid flow in rough fractures is provided. The parallel-plate model is the simplest conceptual model to characterize fluid flow in rock fracture, in which, the fracture is simplified as two smooth, parallel plates with a certain gap. The flow rate Eq. Therefore, Eq. To find the hydraulic aperture and explore its relationship with mechanical aperture, the accurate characterization of fracture roughness is required. According to the literatures, there are different methods to quantify the roughness of fracture, such as joint roughness coefficient (JRC), fractal dimension ( According to Mandelbrot and Wheeler, And the fractal dimension, Based on the mathematical method proposed by Brown, The effect of roughness on fluid flow through fracture is experimentally conducted, in which the conceptual model of fracture is generated synthetically based on Brown's mathematical model. To produce desirable roughness and aperture for the fractured specimen, the assembling approach is proposed in this paper, shown in An economical apparatus is designed to conduct the water flow through rough fractures under a variety of pressure gradients. As indicated in In this study, the fractal dimension of the fracture varies from 1.2 to 2.4, the standard deviations are set as 1.0 mm and 2.0 mm, the aperture of the fracture ranges from 0.5 mm to 2.0 mm, and the pressure gradient is in the range of 0–12,000 Pa/m. To produce a more realistic fracture with inconstant aperture, the mismatch length varies from 0 mm to 10 mm, thus reflecting the deformation due to shearing. During the flow test with given pressure head ( The accuracy and efficiency of this experiment is verified by conducting the fluid flow through parallel plate model. The aperture of the fracture is set as 0.5 mm, and the pressure gradient increases from 1.4 kPa/m to 12 kPa/m. A good agreement between the experimental results and parallel plate model is approached, which shows the accuracy of both the apparatus and the printed specimens (see The flow tests are carried out under different hydraulic gradients for fractured specimens with different roughness and constant mechanical apertures, and the relationship between the hydraulic gradient and the flow rate for different tests are summarize in Considering that the constant aperture cases maybe not representative for the reality, experimental study is extended to the fractured specimens involving mismatch effect, which is presented in According to the literatures, the effect of roughness on the non-linear flow cannot be quantified since the parameters, such as the hydraulic aperture, To quantify the surface roughness of fracture, the root-mean-square of the first derivative of profile, Inspection in Similarly, the influence of mechanical aperture and fracture roughness on parameter, In this paper, the 3D printing technique and fractal theory are used to produce fractured specimens with desirable roughness. The non-linear fluid flow though rough fracture is performed based on the self-designed apparatus, in which, the pressure gradient, fracture roughness and mechanical aperture can be controlled precisely. Based on the experimental results, the following conclusion can be drawn: The non-linear behavior of fluid flow through fracture is observed from the experimental results, and it is found that the hydraulic aperture decreases with the fractal dimension and standard deviation. Meanwhile, the root-mean-square of the first derivative of profile, Empirical equations are established for the hydraulic aperture The applicability of the proposed mathematical equation is also validated for the fluid flow through rough fractures with mismatch effects, with good agreement being obtained between predictions and experimental results. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This research is founded by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at