The behaviour of scandium, yttrium and uranium during the precipitation of potassium jarosite and sodium jarosite was investigated in laboratory experiments. The end-member scandium, yttrium and uranium analogues of potassium jarosite could not be synthesized from iron-free solutions under the acidic conditions required for jarosite formation. However, scandium contents as high as 2.70 wt.% Sc were detected in potassium jarosite precipitates, and supporting mineralogical studies indicate that Sc(III) substitutes for Fe(III) in the jarosite structure. The extent of Sc incorporation in potassium jarosite increases slightly as the pH of the solution increases, and this behaviour is consistent with the enhanced hydrolysis of Sc(III) ions at the higher pH values. Nevertheless, the scandium molar partitioning coefficients are only about 0.2, indicating that Fe is preferentially precipitated relative to Sc in acid media. Increasing concentrations of yttrium have little effect on the composition of either potassium jarosite or sodium jarosite synthesized at 98 °C from solutions at pH 1.6. Although the yttrium contents increased systematically as the yttrium concentration increased to 8 g/L, the yttrium contents of the potassium jarosite precipitates were <0.082 wt.% Y, Similar results were obtained for potassium jarosite made using a slow addition method or precipitated from predominantly chloride media. The yttrium content of the potassium jarosite precipitates increased linearly from 0.023 to 0.111 wt.% Y as the solution pH increased from 0.8 to 2.2. In contrast, the yttrium content of the precipitates is nearly independent of the K2SO4 concentration. Uranium is not significantly incorporated in jarosite-type compounds; for example, a sodium jarosite precipitate made from a solution containing 25 g/L UO2SO4 contained <0.0032 wt.% U.Jarosite-type compounds [MFe The precipitation of jarosite-type compounds involves the hydrolysis of dissolved Fe(III) ions in acidic media (Eq. Although scandium and yttrium are not strictly lanthanide elements, their behaviour is often similar to that of the lanthanides ( Low concentrations of scandium, yttrium and uranium, together with significantly higher concentrations of Fe(III), can be encountered in various hydrometallurgical operations, especially in rare earth or uranium leaching processes. Although the iron is often rejected from such processing solutions by jarosite precipitation, the behaviour of scandium, yttrium and uranium during jarosite precipitation has not been systematically defined. To better understand the behaviour of these elements during jarosite precipitation, various laboratory experiments were carried out under the general conditions likely to be encountered during hydrometallurgical processing, and the results of those studies are summarized in this paper. All the experiments were carried out using reagent grade chemicals and the procedures reported previously ( All the precipitates were analyzed chemically; the solids were dissolved in HCl and the elements of concern were determined using either inductively coupled plasma (ICP) spectroscopy or atomic absorption (AA) analysis with matrix-matched standards. Most of the precipitates were also subjected to X-ray diffraction analysis using a Rigaku rotating anode diffractometer with CuKα Although the scandium analogue of potassium alunite has been synthesized at pH  The data of It seems that the relatively low level of Sc incorporation in jarosite-type compounds is due mostly to the limited degree of hydrolysis of Sc(III) in the acidic solutions required for jarosite formation ( If this postulate is correct, the extent of Sc incorporation in jarosite-type compounds should be relatively low ( The above results suggest that Sc(III) substitutes to a limited degree for Fe(III) in the structure of potassium jarosite. This conclusion is supported by microscopic studies, X-ray mapping, electron microprobe determinations and X-ray diffraction analyses. SEM-EDX study of a precipitate containing 2.00 wt.% Sc detected only potassium jarosite, and there was no indication of other Sc-bearing compounds, such as KSc(SO X-ray diffraction analyses of the scandium-bearing potassium jarosite precipitates shown in Initial efforts were made to precipitate the end-member yttrium analogue of potassium jarosite [KY Although the end-member yttrium analogue of jarosite-type compounds does not precipitate, the incorporation of some yttrium in jarosite-type compounds might be possible, according to the following general reaction sequence for the potassium compound. In this regard, A series of slow-addition experiments was carried out wherein 100 mL of solution containing various amounts of Y as Y(SO  The effect of the initial solution pH on the extent of Y incorporation in jarosite-type compounds after 5 h of reaction at 98 °C was investigated, using 0.15 M Fe(SO Thus, the very low level of Y incorporation reflects both the low degree of hydrolysis of yttrium in acid media as well as the substantially larger size of the Y The effect of the concentration of K The extent of yttrium incorporation in jarosite-type compounds is partly controlled by the solubility of yttrium. The solubility of yttrium in sulphate solutions decreases with increasing temperatures and is limited by the precipitation of KY(SO The trace concentrations of yttrium detected in the jarosite-type precipitates could reflect either a very limited solid solubility of yttrium in the jarosite structure or the presence of trace amounts of yttrium-rich impurity species. Quantitative electron microprobe analyses of both the cauliflower-like masses and the lozenge-shaped particles were carried out. Analysis of 70 cauliflower-like particles indicated an average composition of 6.9 wt.% K, 33.9 wt.% Fe and 43.4 wt.% SO  The behaviour of scandium, yttrium and uranium during the precipitation of potassium jarosite and sodium jarosite under the conditions likely to be encountered in hydrometallurgical processing was investigated in a series of laboratory experiments. The end-member scandium analogue of potassium jarosite could not be synthesized from iron-free solutions under the acidic conditions required for jarosite formation (i.e., at pH values < Efforts were made to precipitate the end-member yttrium analogue of potassium jarosite from iron-free acidic solutions, but the efforts were unsuccessful. Furthermore, increasing concentrations of Y have little effect on the composition of the potassium jarosite precipitates synthesized at 98 °C from 0.15 M Fe(SO Uranium is not significantly incorporated in jarosite-type compounds; for example, the sodium jarosite precipitate made from a solution containing 25 g/L UO The authors wish to thank CANMET staff members Al Kuiper for assistance with the synthesis experiments and Derek Smith for the X-ray diffraction analyses.