The behaviour of dry powder blends for inhalation, depending on the amount of fine lactose particles smaller than 10μm and the presence of magnesium stearate (MgSt), was studied in this work. A laser light diffraction method was developed to determine accurately size and volume fraction of these fine lactose particles in coarse carrier lactose (x
                     50
                     ∼220μm). A linear relationship between measured volume fraction undersize at 10μm Q
                     3(10μm) and added fine lactose could be established. Aerodynamic particle size distribution analysis of lactose showed that the fine lactose was attached to the coarse particles. In the presence of MgSt this interaction was increased. Consequently, the number of free active sites on the carrier surface was reduced and the investigated drug (formoterol fumarate dihydrate) was more effectively delivered. Addition of fine lactose and MgSt improved the aerodynamic performance the drug, as determined by resulting fine particle fraction, by 3% (for each 1% of added fine lactose) and 10%, respectively. Stability tests indicated that added MgSt was the most relevant of the studied parameter to achieve a stable aerodynamic performance. Its ability to protect the moisture uptake into the system was considered as rational for this effect.Ensuring development and manufacture of effective, reliable and robust drug products is a major objective of pharmaceutical companies. Over recent years it became apparent that inhalation products and specifically dry powder inhaler (DPI) formulations present multiple challenges during development to achieve this goal. A large number of contributing factors to the performance of a DPI system have been studied. However, there is a mutual agreement in the scientific community that parameters closely linked to particle–particle interactions are the main contributors to the behaviour of DPIs as characterised by the aerodynamic particle size distribution ( DPIs commonly consist of a carrier material (alpha-lactose monohydrate), ensuring flowability, reducing agglomeration and providing bulk to make handling and dosing possible, and a relative low amount (0.05–10%) of active pharmaceutical ingredient (API) with particle size typically below 10 Fine lactose particles in the same size range as the API have been pointed out as key component in this system of forces to improve the formulation performance ( Although the influence of carriers on the performance of DPI formulations has already been demonstrated in various publications, there is a lack in available literature concerning not only the particle size of the carrier measured by laser light diffraction but also the aerodynamic particle size distribution. The result of these kinds of investigations is likely to be of relevance in gaining better insight into the modelling of the discussed systems. This problem will be addressed in the presented work. An inhalation product such as a DPI formulation needs to have a stable aerodynamic performance during its designated shelf life to become a commercial product. Moisture has been identified as an important factor for decreasing performance over time ( Formulations with a low concentration of active substance (such as the formulation studied in this work) are more influenced by the properties of the carrier. This might be associated with the number and availability of active sites on the carrier. In fact, For this work, the composition of carrier was varied, by changing the amount of fine lactose particles, and by changing the ratio of available surfaces from one carrier substance (lactose) to a controlled mixture of a main carrier and a ternary agent (magnesium stearate). The influence of these changes on the performance of the dry powder inhaler formulation was investigated using a formulation similar to Foradil Formoterol fumarate dihydrate (formoterol fumarate, FF) was supplied by Novartis Pharma AG (Switzerland), coarse α-lactose monohydrate of pharmaceutical grade (Respitose SV001, Isopropanol, methanol, acetonitrile, glacial acetic acid, perchloric acid were purchased from Merck (Germany) and sodium hydroxide, as 50% solution in water, from Fluka (Switzerland). Deionised water (18 Lactose pre-blends containing Respitose and different amounts of fine lactose were prepared as 20 Laser light diffraction (LLD) analysis was performed using a Sympatec HELOS (Sympatec GmbH, Germany) equipped with a 500 The aerodynamic particle size distribution (APSD) was determined using an eight-stage Andersen Cascade Impactor (ACI) with pre-separator (Copley, UK) operating at an airflow rate of 60 The fine particle fraction (FPF) was calculated from the amount of FF with aerodynamic size lower than 4.6 Formoterol fumarate (FF) was analysed by HPLC employing acetic acid (0.5 Lactose was analysed by HPLC employing a mixture of methanol and water (20/80, v/v) as solvent and a NaOH solution (0.1 The particle size distribution (PSD) of the carrier lactose, especially the fine lactose particles below 10 As lactose is not completely insoluble in isopropanol a saturated solution was prepared. The suitability of this approach was confirmed by a consistent size distribution in the suspension over a period of 30 The two main method related parameters of the wet dispersion system are pump speed and ultrasonication time. If the speed power is too small larger particles might settle within the system, whereas a set-up above the suitable limit can introduce air bubbles into the system. The ultrasonication time influences the de-agglomeration process. If the time is too short, the de-agglomeration might not be sufficient. On the other hand, particle comminution might lead to an overestimation of the fine grain as result of a long ultrasonication time ( As the ultrasonication time ( Analysing un-blended fine lactose, the ultrasonication test series resulted in constant particle size distributions after 60 Sixteen blends, covering the whole range from 0 to 100% (m/m) of fine lactose, were analysed to study the relationship between the amount of fine lactose and measured The PSD of a selected number of blends can be seen in Above the 10% (m/m)-threshold, FF blends were prepared with different amounts of fine lactose and MgSt (see A potential variation in metered weight and, consequently, in the total amount of recovered drug was expected, based on the slight variation in powder bulk density as a result of the different blend composition and the volume-defined metering of the device. However, this phenomenon was not observed in this study with the average of total drug recovery for all tested blends being almost constant. The fine particle fraction (FPF) of FF (particles between 0.4 and 4.6 The result for 10% of added fine lactose deviated from the apparently linear relationship by showing a similar behaviour as the formulation containing 5% of fine lactose. It might be assumed that above 5% of fine lactose the mechanism of influence on the performance undergoes a change. Competing effects such as the saturation of activated areas on the carrier surface ( Adding MgSt to the formulation also increased the FPF (see The APSD of FF of four samples with and without MgSt is shown in In terms of retention in the pre-separator, there was an inverse relationship between the amount of fine lactose and amount of retained FF: With an increase of added fine lactose the retained drug was decreased. The presence of MgSt further decreased the amount of retained FF. Similarly to the behaviour described above, this fits in the active sites and fine agglomerates models as most of the large lactose carrier particles are trapped in the pre-separator. If the amount of added fine lactose, whether it being lactose or MgSt, is increased, the actives sites are covered and more “free” active drug is available. Regarding the agglomeration model, the increased presence of fine lactose increases the likelihood for agglomerates and a concomitant reduction of retained drug on the large lactose carrier. The deposition of FF in the APSD range of 8.7–4.6 In terms of FPF (particles between 0.4 and 4.6 The APSD of lactose of these samples was determined and is shown in The change in the aerodynamic behaviour over time was monitored by open storage of the assembled Certihalers containing the various formulations at 20 Blends comprising MgSt show, after storage, FPF values similar to the initial results. The regression surface (contour plot) for the system was determined (see Eq. Eq. The stability effect described above might be caused by water entering the system. It can act as a plasticizing agent, triggering thermodynamic changes on the surfaces and, possibly, inducing strong particle–particle bonds ( In order to investigate the influence of fine lactose particles smaller than 10 The developed LLD method was used to investigate the relationship between the amount of fine lactose and performance of a commercial DPI (Foradil Certihaler). An increase in performance of about 3% (absolute) for each percent of added fine lactose was observed. Fine lactose in excess of 5% (m/m) did not show a significant improvement, what probably points to a saturation of the active sites. APSD of FF particles smaller than 10 APSD measurements after stability storage indicated that the presence of MgSt was the most relevant factor to stabilise the formulation. The usually observed decrease in FPF during stability is probably associated with moisture, and MgSt protects the formulation against moisture uptake. This benefit of adding MgSt to the formulation is sometimes questioned due to potential risk caused by this agent delivered to the deeper lung. However, evaluations performed in parallel to this study showed that only about 15% (3.5 The APSD data obtained for the carrier lactose and FF in DPI formulations provides further support for the free active sites model as proposed by The authors are grateful to B. Haeberlin and G. Provot for fruitful discussions and valuable input.