The present study deals with the development of the principles and conditions of fish waste mineralization using the method of wet combustion with hydrogen peroxide in alternating electromagnetic field and describes testing mineralized human waste and fish waste as sources of nutrients for plants in the biotechnical human life support system (BTLSS). The study shows that mineralization of fish waste in the wet combustion reactor should be performed in the presence of readily oxidized organic matter, represented by human waste, as an activator of oxidation. Re-mineralization of the sediment in the mixture of hydrogen peroxide and nitric acid in the wet combustion reactor converts mineral elements bound in the sediment into the form available to plants. Using mineralized fish waste as an additional source of mineral elements in the nutrient solutions for growing plants based on mineralized human waste is a way to reduce the amounts of mineral elements added to the solution to replenish it, enabling fuller closure of material loops in the BTLSS.The biotechnical life support systems (BTLSS) intended for long-duration crewed missions to Mars and other celestial bodies should be based on closed-loop mass transfer processes. These processes are of crucial importance, as they are intended to recover essential products such as oxygen, water, and food for humans from the crew's excreta and other organic wastes typical of the BTLSS. This can make planetary bases less supply-dependent and, hence, cheaper to use and more self-sustaining. One of the major issues in creating closed-loop processes in the BTLSS is developing the technologies capable of controlling incorporation of human waste into the material cycling of the system ( In the BTLSS intended for space missions, this could be a way to enhance the closure of the loops by involving human liquid and solid wastes into them. This issue still remains unresolved although the leading space agencies and research centers developing long-duration BTLSS have been closely investigating it ( However, if fish is included in the crew's diet, the system will have a new type of organic waste – fish waste (scales, bones, viscera). Therefore, the purpose of this study was to develop the conditions and principles of fish waste mineralization using the wet combustion method and to test mineralized human waste in combination with mineralized fish waste to grow wheat plants. In this study, crucian carp was used as a potential source of protein for the crew. Crucian carp is an omnivorous freshwater teleost fish showing no habitat preferences ( All fish waste biomass was dried at 70 °C, ground, and mixed with an aqueous solution of hydrogen peroxide (36 %): 4 mL H Two approaches to fish waste mineralization were tested: 1) mineralization of fish waste alone and 2) co-mineralization of human and fish wastes. To incorporate human waste into mass transfer, it was first necessary to determine the proper human waste to fish waste ratio. The daily requirement for protein is 0.8 g/kg body weight for American astronauts and 1.5 g/kg body weight for Russian cosmonauts ( In this study, mineralization means oxidation of organic material in an aqueous solution of hydrogen peroxide in an alternating electromagnetic field followed by conversion of organics into inorganic material ( Human waste was mineralized as follows. Daily amounts of urine and feces (150 g feces and 1.5 L urine) were mixed with hydrogen peroxide (36 wt.%). The amounts of H Fish waste was mineralized in a reactor containing 1.25 L of the mixture composed of 19.2 g dry fish waste, 57.7 g feces, 577 mL urine, and 596 mL H After the waste had been mineralized, the solutions with the sediment were centrifuged for three hours on a floor-standing centrifuge at room temperature at 5000 rpm. Then, the supernatant fluid was decanted; the mass of the dry sediment was 2.2 g per 1 L of the solution on average. After that, the sediment was mineralized in the mixture of hydrogen peroxide (36 %) and nitric acid (65 %) in the wet combustion reactor ( Experiments were performed with wheat, which is one of the plant-derived staple foods in the European-type diet. We used Seepage irrigation was done for 3 min every 6 h. DM3-3000 metal-halide lamps were used as a light source. The intensity of photosynthetically active radiation (PAR) at the level of the leaves of the upper tier was 700 µmole•m In the control, wheat plants were grown on nutrient media containing mineralized human waste. We did not use the standard nutrient solution as the control, as it seems unlikely that large amounts of mineral nutrients for plants will be delivered to planetary bases. Therefore, the use of organic waste to grow plants appears to be a promising approach for the BTLSS. Moreover, previous research showed that human wastes could be successfully used to prepare nutrient solutions for growing wheat in a long-lasting uneven-aged plant community ( In the control and in the treatment, after the human wastes (control) or mixed human wastes and fish waste (treatment) were mineralized with hydrogen peroxide, the urea that stayed in the solutions after the physicochemical oxidation was subjected to enzymatic decomposition with soybean flour urease. Then, ammonia was distilled off from the solutions. Total nitrogen concentration in liquid products of mineralization after urea decomposition and ammonia distillation was 700 mg/L in the control (350 mg of ammonia nitrogen and 350 mg of organic nitrogen) and 750 mg/L in the treatment (350 mg of ammonia nitrogen and 400 mg of organic nitrogen), as this method of physicochemical oxidation does not enable 100 % mineralization of organic matter. In order to prevent NH The treatment and the control had two tanks each for growing wheat plants. The larger tank was used to grow the main wheat plant conveyor until the age of 56 days. To avoid an increase in NaCl concentration of the nutrient solution, every two weeks, 56-day-old wheat plants were placed in a separate smaller tank, where they reached maturity. Immediately after these plants were separated, 5 L of the nutrient solution was taken from the vessel with the solution used to irrigate the main portion of the wheat community and placed into another vessel, to irrigate the separated wheat plants. As wheat plants did not need mineral elements in that phase of their development, no additional nutrients were added to the solution for the separated plants. An equal amount (5 L) of dechlorinated tap water was added to the vessel with the solution used to irrigate the main portion of the wheat community, grown in the larger tank. After the conveyor-grown wheat communities were established, 250 mL mineralized human waste (control) or 250 mL of a mixture of mineralized human waste and fish waste (treatment) was added to the nutrient solution every day ( Concentrations of mineral elements in mineralized human waste and in the mixture of mineralized human waste and fish waste and mineral requirements of the wheat over the growing period are listed in Nitrogen concentrations in mineralized human wastes and the mixture of mineralized human wastes and fish waste were high enough to fulfil daily nitrogen requirements of the wheat plants ( In the present study, after urea was converted into ammonium nitrogen using soybean flour urease and ammonia was distilled off, the amount of nitrogen in mineralized wastes was not high enough to satisfy nutritional needs of the plants. In an actual BTLSS, ammonium nitrogen can be converted into nitrate nitrogen by nitrification, which is a well-developed process ( The state of the plants was evaluated by the plant productivity, mineral and biochemical composition, and external CO Elemental composition of sediments and solutions was detected using ICP-OES spectrometer iCAP 6300 Duo (Thermo Scientific, U.K., 2010) according to (EPA 200.7. Trace elements in water, solids, and biosolids by inductively coupled plasma (33 elements)). Merck (Darmstadt, Germany) ICP multi-element solutions (IV, XVI) and pure chemicals for spectrometry (CaO, MgO, KCl, Na The content of crude protein in grain of wheat was estimated by multiplication of nitrogen quantity and generally accepted coefficient 5.7 ( CO The significance of the difference between the means was determined by Student's In the experiment with fish waste mineralized alone, complete oxidation was not achieved: after the 13-h reaction, the solution contained a considerable amount – several percent – of hydrogen peroxide. The reason for that was that fish waste contained large amounts of highly reduced organics, including polyunsaturated fatty acids, which could be resistant to oxidation or even have a stabilizing effect on hydrogen peroxide ( The process of co-mineralization of fish waste and human waste is shown in Mineralization conducted in the standard mode took longer and consumed more power ( Results of measuring concentrations of mineral elements in the solution (  Thus, an optimal way to process fish waste is to mineralize it in combination with human waste in the wet combustion reactor and, subsequently, to re-mineralize the sediment in a mixture of hydrogen peroxide and nitric acid. In the experiment with wheat plants grown on the solution supplemented with mineralized human waste and fish waste (treatment), nitrate nitrogen concentration in the nutrient solution varied within a range of 127÷250 mg/L ( In the control, where the solution was supplemented with mineral salts, nitrate nitrogen concentration in the nutrient solution varied between 159 and 318 mg/L. Ammonium nitrogen concentrations in the control and treatment solutions did not differ significantly, varying within a range of 0.34÷18.74 mg/L. Thus, nitrogen concentrations in the treatment and control solutions were at levels enabling normal plant growth and development. Na concentrations in the nutrient solutions were no more than 200 mg/L in the treatment and 285 mg/L in the control ( Potassium concentrations in the treatment and control solutions were maintained at levels suiting potassium requirements of the plants ( Mg, P, and S concentrations in the treatment and control solutions were sufficient to satisfy mineral requirements of the plants ( During the 180-day cultivation of wheat plants on a planting area of 0.16 m No significant differences were found between the treatment and the control in the dry mass of the grains, straw, and the mass of 1000 wheat grains throughout the experiment ( Net photosynthesis of the 21-day-old treatment plants did not differ significantly from the photosynthesis of control plants ( Conditions of plant mineral nutrition did not affect considerably the proportions of mineral elements in the edible biomass of wheat plants ( The main component of wheat biomass was starch while the percentages of water-soluble sugars and crude protein were relatively low ( An approach has been developed to processing fish waste in order to involve it in mass transfer processes in the BTLSS for space applications. The present study showed that mineralization of fish waste in the wet combustion reactor should be performed in the presence of readily oxidized organic matter as an activator of oxidation. In the BTLSS, this organic matter is represented by human waste. The standard mode of mineralization, with stable oxidation and without critical increases in gas production and foaming, resulted in deeper oxidation of the wastes without considerably increasing specific power consumption. Wheat plants grown on the nutrient solution that contained mineralized human waste and fish waste produced a high yield, which was comparable to the yield of the wheat plants grown on solutions that contained liquid products of mineralization of human waste. The mineral and biochemical composition of the edible biomass of the wheat plants was not inferior to the composition of the grain of wheat plants grown on the solution supplemented with mineralized human waste alone. Moreover, mineralized fish waste was an additional source of major elements to variously aged wheat plants grown in the conveyor mode on the inert substrate, and no replenishment of the nutrient solution with mineral salts was needed, enabling fuller closure of the material loops in the BTLSS. The full life cycle of different materials used during organic waste mineralization by this method needs separate study. Now we are certain that, e.g., the life cycle of the graphite electrodes in the wet combustion reactor is several dozen hours. However, graphite electrodes can be replaced by electrodes made of more expensive inert chemically stable material – gold or any other noble metal. The reactor must be made from chemically and thermally stable material such as quartz, fluoropolymer or caprolon. Hydrogen peroxide can be synthesized using the water and oxygen contained in the system and a small amount of mineralized human waste ( We wish to confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication. The study on developing the principles and conditions of fish waste mineralization and on growing wheat plants in the conveyor mode on solutions based on mineralized human waste and fish waste was performed within the framework of subject No. 56.1.4., in accordance with State Program for IBP SB RAS for 2013–2020. The research in mineralization of human waste and growing wheat plants in the conveyor mode on solutions based on mineralized human waste was supported by the Russian Science Foundation (Project No. 14-14-00599П) and carried out in the IBP SB RAS at FRC KRC SB RAS. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 