The electroextraction of zinc on a specpure aluminium cathode from sulphate electrolytes containing antimony and hydroxyethylated-butyne-2-diol-1,4 (EAA) has been studied. It was established that the process of reverse zinc dissolution in the presence of antimony ions starts from the very beginning of electrolysis. It is found that the inhibitory effect of the additive on the zinc redissolution manifests itself immediately after the start of electrolysis. The inhibitor concentration of 1.0 ml L−1 results in an increase in the amount of deposited metal twice and in an increase of zinc current efficiency from 30% up to 80%.During zinc electrowinning from sulphate electrolytes containing antimony ions, a process of reverse dissolution of zinc starts soon after the introduction of the antimony into the electrolyte. Antimony is a very active impurity because of its uniform deposition on the zinc surface in the form of an electrolytic alloy. It partially interacts with hydrogen ions adsorbed onto the separate crystal faces of zinc or combines with hydrogen ions in the double layer forming a volatile hydride. A large specific surface is created on which the actual current density is very low and the local antimony–zinc galvanic pairs are numerous The effect of antimony and some additives on zinc electrowinning from industrial electrolyte has been studied by Dowfroth is strongly polarizing and decreases the current efficiency and zinc deposit quality. Dowfroth has a positive interaction with antimony such that certain combinations of these reagents maximize current efficiency and improve the deposit quality. Combination of saponin with various concentrations of Dowfroth results in a less than 1% change in current efficiency The effects of the organic additives triethylbenzylammonium chloride (TEBACl), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTABr) and tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBABr) on the electrowinning of zinc from acidic sulphate solutions were studied in the presence and absence of trace amounts of antimony (III). Compared with the traditional industrial additive, glue, the addition of TEBACl increases current efficiency, reduces power consumption and improves the surface morphology  Our previous paper The addition of Sb It is found out that EAA added to the base (pure) electrolyte at a concentration of 0.1 ml L The aim of the present study is to elucidate the influence of Sb The experiments were carried out in a three-electrode glass cell without the stirring of the electrolyte (1 L). A sheet of specpure aluminium (supplied by Johnson Matthey) with an area of 1.0 cm The studies were carried out in a cyclic potentiodynamic regime. Potential scanning at a rate of 600 mV min The base electrolyte (BE) had the following composition: 130 g L All chemicals were of analytical grade purity. The initial potential of zinc deposition ( It has been established that the current becomes constant for 1–2 min only. In this case, the change of the slope of the experimentally obtained dependence, Using scanning electron microscopy, the surface morphology of zinc deposits obtained during the 10-min deposition was studied.   The addition of Sb The addition of the EAA inhibitor to the basic electrolyte decreases the amount of the deposited zinc as a result of a rise in the potential of zinc deposition up to 1.520 V at 0.1 ml L The addition of the EAA inhibitor to the electrolyte containing Sb The dependencies of the amount of deposited zinc and current efficiency on time suggest that the process of reverse zinc dissolution in the presence of antimony ions starts from the very beginning of electrolysis. The process of reverse dissolution is confirmed by the electron micrograph of a layer formed after only 10 min of deposition The organic additive EAA polarizes the reactions of metal deposition and the obtained zinc deposit is fine-grained, smooth and dense Similar results are obtained in the presence of other impurities in the electrolyte. Thus, the EAA additive reduces the content in the zinc deposit of germanium—8 to 10 times; nickel—1.5 to 2 times; iron—1.5 times; lead—3 times; copper—7.5 times and cadmium—13.5 times Comparing these results with those reported in our previous paper (1) The dependencies of the amount of deposited zinc on time suggest that the process of reverse zinc dissolution in the presence of antimony ions (0.8 mg L (2) The dependencies of the amount of deposited zinc on time and the electron micrograph of zinc deposited from an electrolyte containing Sb (3) The organic additive hydroxyethylated-butyne-2-diol-1,4 (EAA) polarizes strongly the antimony deposition, reduces its content in the zinc deposit and as a result the process of zinc redissolution does not begin.