A synergistic solvent extraction (SSX) system consisting of Versatic 10 and LIX 63 has been developed to separate copper from iron in high chloride concentration solutions and to transfer the extracted copper to a sulphate solution for recovery by conventional electrowinning. The SSX system is able to selectively extract copper over iron and other impurity metals from chloride solutions in extraction stages. The co-extracted iron and chloride in the loaded organic solution are scrubbed in two separate scrub circuits. A spent electrolyte is used to strip the copper from the scrubbed organic solution for conventional copper electrowinning. A process flow sheet from leaching with chloride solutions to copper conventional electrowinning is proposed.
                  It is proposed that in high chloride concentration solutions, copper exists as neutral molecule of CuCl2, which forms complexes with the organic components of the SSX system via a solvating mechanism. After scrubbing the chloride from the organic system with water at an appropriate pH, the copper is proposed to be re-extracted via a cation exchange mechanism by the same organic system.Copper chloride hydrometallurgy was a hot research topic in the 1970s and 1980s due to the higher copper leaching kinetics and recovery and less environmental concern compared to smelting and leaching with other media such as sulphuric acid. However, the electrowinning of copper from chloride solutions was very problematic due to the difficulties in cell design and the handling of a copper powder product. It was also found that the commercially used aromatic hydroxyoxime extractants to extract copper from sulfate solutions, such as LIX 984N and Acorga M5640, were not suitable to extract copper from chloride solutions due to their low extraction capability and small separation factors of copper over iron. So far no solvent extraction systems are available on a commercial scale to recover copper effectively from chloride solutions and to transfer it to sulfate solutions for electrowinning. To overcome this problem, an aromatic hydroxyoxime reagent LIX64N was used to extract copper from chloride leach solutions, but failed due to its low loading capacity and the transfer of chloride to the electrolyte ( Until recently, most commercialised leaching processes for copper sulphide ores were carried out in sulphate systems. After the recovery of copper from the leach solutions, large volumes of waste solutions containing a large amount of sulphate salts are discharged, resulting in environmental pollution. To overcome this drawback, the development of leaching processes with hydrochloric acid and chloride salts has made great progress for the treatment of copper, zinc, nickel and cobalt containing ores ( A novel SSX systems has been developed to separate and recover cobalt and zinc from leach solutions ( The synthetic leach solution was prepared by dissolving AR or technical grade sulphates of copper, iron(III), aluminium and calcium chlorides in distilled water. The metal concentrations in the synthetic leach solution were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES). The composition of the resultant feed solution is shown in The reagent Versatic 10 acid (neodecanoic acid) and the diluent Shellsol D70 (100% aliphatic) were provided by Shell Chemicals Australia and LIX63 by Cognis Australia (now part of BASF). The composition of the LIX63 was reported by Cognis to be 70% active component (5,8-diethyl-7-hydroxy-6-dodecanone oxime) in a diluent. The actual concentration of the oxime in LIX63 was only 54% ( All tests were carried out in 0.5 To determine metal extraction acidity isotherms, the acidity of the aqueous solution was adjusted by adding concentrated HCl and measured by titration with standard NaOH solution. The organic solution was mixed with the synthetic solution at a particular A/O ratio and 40 The loaded organic solution and a selected scrub solution were mixed at an A/O ratio of 1:4 for iron scrubbing and 1:2 for chloride scrubbing and 40 The loaded organic solution was stripped with the aqueous solution containing 53 In With 0.1 The co-extracted iron was scrubbed with a scrub solution containing 350 The co-extracted chloride was scrubbed with water under controlled pH with 10% NaOH solution. The chloride scrubbing at pH 3.04, 3.53 and 4.03 and the chloride scrubbing pH isotherm are shown in Copper stripping kinetic tests were conducted with the scrubbed organic solution containing 3.78 With the above solvent extraction circuit, copper can be separated from iron in chloride solutions, transferred to sulphate solution and recovered as pure copper cathodes by conventional electrowinning. A proposed flowsheet is shown in This process, consisting of chloride leaching, copper solvent extraction and electrowinning, and iron hydrolysis would have the following main features: Hydrochloric acid leaching provides faster leaching kinetics and higher copper recovery compared with sulphuric acid leaching; Copper is readily separated from iron in the high chloride concentration solution by the novel SSX system; Iron is readily scrubbed from the copper-loaded SSX system with a weak acid (0.2 Chloride is scrubbed with water in a pH range of 3.5–4 and the pH is adjusted by adding ammonia solution; The ammonia is regenerated by lime boiling and recycled for pH adjustment in the chloride scrub stage; Copper is readily stripped from the loaded SSX system to obtain loaded strip liquor suitable for conventional electrowinning; Part of the raffinate of the SSX circuit is subjected to iron hydrolysis to regenerate HCl and CaCl Part of the raffinate is recycled to the leach process to form a closed circuit. It is well-known that copper and iron can form complexes with chloride ions such as CuCl When the loaded organic solution was subjected to scrubbing with water, the chloride concentration in the loaded scrub liquor was low. For example, if the above mentioned loaded organic solution was scrubbed at an A/O ratio of 1:1 and all chloride entered the aqueous solution, the maximum chloride concentration would be 8.8 A novel SSX system consisting of Versatic 10 and LIX 63 has been developed to separate copper from iron in high chloride concentration solutions and transfer the copper into sulphate solutions, thereby enabling conventional electrowinning. With the organic system consisting of 0.3 It is proposed that in high chloride concentration solutions, the copper would form a complex containing CuCl The authors would like to thank Dr Keith Barnard and Mr Yoko Pranolo for reviewing this paper and providing valuable comments. The support of the