Synchrotron radiation X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SR-XPS), scanning tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) have been used to characterize gold and silver species spontaneously deposited from aqueous HAuCl4 or AgNO3 solutions onto metal sulphides. An increase in Au 4f binding energies was found for unusually large, 5nm and larger, Au0 particles; concurrently, STS revealed a positive correlation between the current magnitude and the particle size. Possible mechanisms behind the effects were considered.Gold and silver nanoparticles (NPs) have been attracting much attention in catalysis, fabrication of nanodevices and other applications owing to their unique physical and chemical properties that depend strongly on particle size, adsorbed agents, and the nature of support In the present work, we applied synchrotron radiation X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SR-XPS), X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XANES), and tunneling microscopy and spectroscopy (STM/STS) in order to characterize gold and silver species spontaneously deposited on a series of metal sulphides from aqueous solutions under uniform conditions, and the changes of the metal sulphide substrates. The emphasis was made on peculiarities of the produced Au NPs. Single crystals of natural FeS The precipitation of gold on a metal sulphide was characterized by Au/S ratios obtained from the SR-XPS spectra ( A series of Au 4f STM images from pyrite show that along with an increase in number, gold islands grow in size from 5 to 50 Metal sulphides undergo oxidation by Au(III) complexes, altering the surface composition and morphology. S 2p spectra from the reacted samples demonstrate increased intensities at about 163.5 Tunneling current vs. voltage plots acquired above metal sulphide surfaces commonly show a conductance gap that is typical for semiconductors. The curves measured above dense films formed by Au NPs due to a large Au uptake resemble those for the bulk metal. However, the current obviously decreases for isolated Au NPs less than about 30 Essentially different behaviour was observed for silver precipitated on the metal sulphides. Ag 5d lines and Ag M The above results highlight unusual properties of Au NPs deposited on metal sulphides. Particularly, the Au 4f binding energies increase for Au NPs less than about 15–30 Some other factors may play a role too. It is known that electron density transfer between Au clusters and a support could influence on the Au 4f position This work was supported by the bilateral programme “Russian-German Laboratory at BESSY”. The authors are grateful to Prof. R. Szargan (Leipzig University) for encouragement of the research.