The procedures used for processing minerals containing metallic elements to metals of the required purity for specific applications are generally referred to as extraction metallurgy. A large number of procedures have been developed for this purpose and, at first sight, it is quite difficult to determine the optimum method of extraction of metals. A suitable guide may be the concept in the first sentence, i.e., the purity of produced metals often depends on the procedures used for processing primary and secondary raw materials. Some of the processes can be used only for producing relatively contaminated metals, whereas others are quite efficient in producing metals of almost 100% purity. Each process can be used to produce metals with a wide range of purity. To understand how a specific process may lead to the extraction of metals with the required composition, it is necessary to take into account theoretical considerations regarding the principles controlling the rate and extent of chemical reactions taking place in the process. Thermodynamics defines the final, i.e., equilibrium state of these reactions and can be used to study how the final state can be changed by changing the given conditions, such as temperature, the pressure and composition of gaseous, liquid and solid components in the given system. On the other hand, the kinetics defines the rate at which the equilibrium state is established and this also indicates the reaction time required for the realization and completion of the essential chemical reactions. The investment and production costs are a very important factor and determine the selection of the optimum process. Metals are traded on the open market and, consequently, from the commercial viewpoint it is not possible to determine the specific method of production of metals of the given composition with respect to the actual price of a specific production process. In addition, the prices are also controlled by other aspects, such as the cost of environmental protection, processing and marketing of secondary products, recycling, etc. These factors develop dynamically and in many cases it is difficult to forecast their contribution to the total price of metal, even for the near future. In any case, only the efficiently mastered theoretical fundamentals and applications of the most advanced achievements of science to the process of production of metals and also all other operations and the logistics of these processes lead to more efficient production enabling the producer to be successful in the market. Therefore, special attention is given to the search for and development of new, often unconventional methods of producing and processing metals, or combinations of these metals. An alternative method to the existing pyrometallurgical processes is the hydrometallurgical extraction of nonferrous metals. Some metals, such as uranium, zinc, gold or aluminium oxide, etc, are extracted completely or mostly by the hydrometallurgical method, whereas in other methods the application of this method is more difficult because of objective reasons. This is so in the case of copper, which is one of the most important nonferrous metals. Therefore, this book is concerned especially with the hydrometallurgical method of obtaining copper from its sulphide minerals, in particular, with one of its most important stages – leaching. The individual chapters deal in a logical manner with this method, in order to understand the entire range of the problems of leaching copper sulphide minerals. After initial introduction, subsequent chapters review the interesting sulphide minerals, present in the leaching process as the raw material, semifinished products, or the leaching product. This is followed by the description of the thermodynamics of leaching of copper sulphides from the general viewpoint and also with respect to practical application, using the potential–pH diagrams. Attention is then given to the leaching kinetics, again from the general viewpoint and with respect to specific applications in sulphide leaching. The applications and the current state of the problem of leaching copper sulphides are dealt with in subsequent sections of the book. Special attention is given to the behaviour of sulphur in the leaching process, as one of the most important and process-controlling factors. Final sections describe interesting technological procedures which were used or are being used on the pilot plant and production scale, and prospects for the future are also discussed. The book is based mainly on the fundamental and cited literature. Although basic knowledge of inorganic and physical chemistry is essential, together with the knowledge of the theory of metallurgical processes, the book also presents the main concepts to such an extent that it can be used as a textbook for students of all stages of metallurgy and related disciplines. The book is intended not only for students but also for a wide range of experts, working in the hydrometallurgy of nonferrous metals. It is constructed in such a manner as to ensure that the general conclusions may also be applied to similar processes in metallurgy or applied chemistry. The author will be delighted if this is the case.