SELFRAG AG has developed a flexible pilot scale Pre-Weakening Testing Station (PWTS) using high voltage pulses (HVP). This provides a unique opportunity to investigate the machine setting conditions on ore breakage behaviour. A joint campaign was undertaken by the Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre and SELFRAG AG to investigate the breakage behaviour of two copper–gold ores and one iron ore in the PWTS. The effects of specific energy, pulse voltage, cumulative discharges, feed particle size and ore particle breakage pattern (body breakage or surface breakage) were investigated. The investigation revealed that the mass-specific energy of HVP was the most significant factor affecting the breakage behaviour in the PWTS. This effect was compounded with the effects of ore properties and particle size. Comparison between the PWTS and a laboratory HVP machine indicates that there is considerable scope for optimisation of HVP performance based on processing zone design.Comminution remains by far the largest energy consumer in the mining industry. The high energy consumption implies both a high operational cost and a greenhouse footprint. As one of the potential technical means of reducing the energy consumption of comminution, pre-weakening of ore particles by high voltage pulse (HVP) has attracted the attention of researchers in the past few years ( HVP breakage is a comminution method that uses high voltage pulses to initiate electrical breakdown inside ore particles that are immersed in water, generating a strong tensile force to disintegrate the particles. The research found that particle strength of a number of ores can be reduced significantly by HVP treatment using a low specific energy ( The initial study of pre-weakening by HVP breakage was performed with a selFrag Lab device manufactured by SELFRAG AG based in Switzerland (  Ore particle behaviour in HVP breakage was investigated with the pilot scale PWTS machine installed in Kerzers, Switzerland. The structure of the PWTS is illustrated in The PWTS can be operated using different polarity of the discharge. Positive polarity uses the top electrode; negative uses the bottom electrode. In the tests the PWTS was set to negative polarity. This is to avoid water gaps to initiate the streamers by direct contact of material lying on the conveyor. The processing zone can be adopted by using top electrodes of different shapes (disk, knife, etc.) and sizes. Disk-shaped top electrode was used in this study. The processing zone of the PWTS is defined by the electrode gap and the distance from side guides made of insulation material. The volume of the processing zone can be adjusted by the electrode gap and the distance between the side guides. HVP breakage treatment can be conducted in both continuous mode (moving conveyor) and batch testing mode (stationary conveyor). Specifications for the PWTS are listed in The results of HVP breakage tests reported in the literature often show the mixed effects of machine-related and ore-dependent factors. A single-particle characterisation test ( For each HVP treatment, only one single particle was placed on the metal plate conveyor, directly under the top electrode and immersed in water. One single pulse was discharged to the particle in batch mode (i.e. one particle per treatment). The pulse-treated particles were classified into two groups according to breakage response: body breakage and surface breakage. If a particle loses more than 10% of its original mass subjected to a pulse loading, it is classified as body breakage. ( Samples collected from three mine sites were tested, namely Ore A, Ore B and Ore C. Ore A was collected from a gold–copper mine operation located in New South Wales, Australia. The gold–copper mineralisation occurs in quartz veins, sheeted quartz sulphide veins and as disseminations. The gold occurs mainly as free grains in quartz or on the margins of sulphide grains. The principal copper sulphide minerals are chalcopyrite and bornite. The major silicate minerals are quartz, orthoclase, hornblende, chlorite, anorthoclase, and the non-silicate minerals include magnetite, calcite and apatite. Ore B was collected from a major copper, silver and gold mine in South Australia. The deposit is an iron oxide copper gold (IOCG) style mineralisation. It consists of a breccia containing host rock clasts (dolomite, sandstone, and andesite) which are intensively hematite, chlorite and sericite altered. Major sulphide minerals are pyrite, chalcopyrite, bornite and chalcocite. Ore C is a hematite ore from a confidential project, with Fe grade of around 63.0%. It was observed that some particles were highly porous. The ore competences of the three samples were determined with a JK Rotary Breakage Tester (JKRBT, For each ore sample, particles in three narrow size fractions were tested, including 22.4–26.5 For Ore A samples, particles of each size fraction were tested with 3 voltage levels Eq. The test conditions were set to cover a wide range of pulse energy from 162 Ore B and Ore C samples were only tested at a fixed voltage of 200 Minimum electrode gaps were used in the tests and determined as 25, 35 and 45 Due to the constraint of sample availability, the actual numbers of test conditions for Ore A, Ore B and Ore C were 21, 9 and 6 respectively, including five repeated tests to determine the standard error of HVP breakage test with the PWTS. In this study, three criteria were used to describe and evaluate the ore particle breakage behaviour in the PWTS experiment: the body breakage probability, HVP product fineness and pre-weakening degree. In an ore particle subjected to pulse discharge, the breakdown channel grows preferentially along the enhanced electrical field on the boundary of minerals with different permittivities and conductivities. The body breakage and surface breakage that resulted from the HVP treatment are distinguished by the HVP breakdown channel locality in the ore particle. It was found that mineral composition played an important role in determining particle breakage behaviour (see The body breakage probability is calculated based on the mass proportion of body breakage product from the initial feed sample mass. The HVP product fineness is assessed by a fineness indicator, To determine the three criteria, the HVP products were collected for weighing, sieving and pre-weakening degree measurement. As size analysis is used on the product particles to derive the breakage behaviour criteria, it is critical to perform the size analysis of the pulse-treated particles correctly and consistently. This is described in detail below. The HVP treated particles contain cracks and microcracks. Depending on the size of the cracks/microcracks, some particles exhibit limited microcracks distributed in an intact particle matrix. Some other particles appear as discrete fragments loosely held together by their interlocking geometries. It was found that these interlocked but disconnected particles can be disintegrated even by the collisions with the sieve surface during the mechanical vibrating sieving process. In practice, these interlocking particles would be quickly degraded during transportation, and perhaps will not contribute to energy saving in the downstream comminution process. An experiment was designed to compare the size distributions of the HVP treated products by hand sieving and mechanical sieving. The testing procedures are illustrated in The hand sieving method was carried out gently to minimise the secondary breakage of the loosely held fragments. A randomly selected sub-sample of the HVP treated particles from Ore A was selected for size analysis. The hand sieved product was combined and sieved in a Rotap® mechanical vibrating sieving machine for 10 The initial hand sieving of the PWTS product has a The pre-weakening degree of pulse-treated particles is defined as the percentage change of  The parameter Eqs. The An To overcome the limitations in the existing ore breakage characterisation methods for pre-weakened particles, a Wide-size JKRBT test has been developed ( The Wide-size JKRBT test was adopted in this study, as it provides a simplified but reliable method to characterise the breakage behaviour of pulse-treated particles. Particles in the HVP product finer than 3.35 For all the ore samples used in this study, approximately 40–100% of initial feed particles were subjected to body breakage at the first pulse discharge. The number of particles remaining for the 2nd or 3rd pulse discharges was limited. Therefore the effects of specific energy and particle size on HVP breakage behaviour of the ores are discussed based on the body breakage product of the first pulse discharge in this section. The specific energy is calculated from the total generator energy input and the total particle mass in a test. As shown in It is worth noting that the electrical field strength for the coarser particles (associated with the larger electrode gaps) is smaller at the same voltage. The size effect which shows higher body breakage probability for the coarser particles seems not caused by the difference in electrical field strength. The size effect is therefore sought from the difference in ore properties. Ore A includes metalliferous minerals finely disseminated in veins, which is surrounded by gangue minerals with different permittivities. It is well-known that in general the coarser feed particles should include more veins. Attributed to the electrical breakdown channel locality influence as demonstrated in   Compared to body breakage probability, the different ores show a reversed trend in When fitting the Significant pre-weakening effects were achieved using the PWTS for Ore A and Ore B with 81.7% and 131.8% change in A different phenomenon was observed from Ore C samples. As presented in The performance of Ore C can be attributed to its composition and porous texture. To investigate the effect of voltage on HVP breakage behaviour, the experiment for Ore A was designed to make a paired comparison for the product of first pulse discharge at the same particle size and pulse energy but with different pulse voltages. There were seven pairs of datasets used for the comparison. In each pair of the data the major difference in operational variables was pulse voltage, while the other variables being kept similar. The pulse energy was adjusted (refer to The results of statistical tests suggest that the effect of pulse voltage on body breakage probability and product fineness The study suggests that ore particle breakage behaviour subjected to HVP treatment is mainly controlled by pulse energy, but the pulse voltage also exerts an influence on the breakage results. As the comparison was made on the same electrode gap for each pair, the change in pulse voltage was associated with a change in electrical field strength (data given in In the PWTS experiment, the surface breakage product of the first pulse discharge was subjected to the second pulse discharge at a similar specific energy level to the first pulse. The samples of the first and second pulse discharge products were collected and analysed separately. This data can be used to establish the effect of cumulative pulse discharge on HVP breakage behaviour. The comparisons illustrate that the second pulse discharge generated the finer body breakage product (larger In order to compare the pre-weakening degrees between body and surface breakage products, the surface breakage products of the first pulse discharge from seven tests (Ore A, 31.5–37.5 The data indicates that all body breakage products achieved a significant pre-weakening effect with a percentage change of The large variation in the pre-weakening result of the surface breakage product may be attributed to the mineral composition and texture of individual particle. If the veins containing metalliferous minerals occur on a particle surface or near the surface, they can misguide the discharge through the particle surface and restrict the energy transfer. A part of the pulse energy is lost in the water. If the metalliferous minerals occur not only on particle surface, but also inside a particle, the induced breakdown channels will create cracks/microcracks, resulting in a higher degree of pre-weakening effect. It needs to point out that the surface breakage particles can be broken by the second pulse application (refer to Section The experiment was designed to use PWTS and selFrag Lab to treat the same ore samples under the same HVP settings. The selFrag Lab used for the comparison is a laboratory scale HVP device installed at the JKMRC ( For the two pairs of Ore A samples, performance of the PWTS is significantly better than the selFrag Lab, in terms of body breakage probability and product fineness; but there is no significant difference for the pre-weakening degree of body breakage product. A similar phenomenon was also found for Ore B samples. Tests in both devices resulted in body breakage probability reaching or being very close to 100%, but the PWTS generated finer body breakage product than the selFrag Lab. The pre-weakening degrees of body breakage products generated by the two devices are similar (134 vs 132 in percentage change of For Ore C, however, the selFrag Lab outperformed the PWTS in all of the three HVP breakage behaviour indicators. This may be associated with the porous texture of Ore C. Further research is required to understand the effect of Ore C properties on HVP breakage. The differences in the breakage behaviour may be caused by the inherent processing zone differences between the two units. The PWTS uses a disk-shape top electrode, while the selFrag Lab uses a tip electrode. The PWTS has a far more homogenous electrical field on account of the plate-plate configuration. This leads to less focused streamer initiation and a larger but less intense electrical field. Compared with the Lab machine, the tip-plate configuration is more focused and energy transfer is more localised. The chance of a particle being the initiation point or at least being part of the discharge channels in the PWTS is larger. Hence the probability of body breakage should be larger. In addition, the polarity change of the electrode system would also contribute to the particle breakage behaviour. As described in Section The initial work comparing the PWTS and the selFrag Lab performance indicates that there is considerable scope for optimisation of HVP performance based on process zone design. Investigation of particle breakage behaviour of three ore samples treated with HVP in a pilot scale PWTS was conducted. The investigation reveals that the mass-specific energy of HVP is one of the most significant factors affecting the breakage behaviour in the PWTS, with the larger specific energy producing the higher body breakage probability, the finer product size distribution and the more significant pre-weakening effect. The effect of particle size on HVP breakage behaviour is ore-dependent. For a copper–gold ore with finely disseminated metalliferous minerals in veins, the larger particle size produces the higher body breakage probability and the larger change in Comparison between the PWTS and the selFrag Lab treating the same ores with the similar pulse energy indicates that there is considerable scope for optimisation of HVP performance based on processing zone design. The financial support from