The ability of sulfate-reducing bacteria to produce hydrogen sulfide and the high affinity of sulfide to react with divalent metallic cations represent an excellent option to remove heavy metals from wastewater. Different parameters have been proposed to control the hydrogen sulfide production by anaerobic bacteria, such as the organic and sulfate loading rates and the feed COD/SO4
                     2− ratio. This work relates the feed COD/SO4
                     2− ratio with the hydrogen sulfide production and dissolved lead precipitation, using ethanol as carbon and energy source in an up-flow anaerobic sludge blanket reactor. A maximum dissolved sulfide concentration of 470±7mg S/L was obtained at a feed COD/SO4
                     2− ratio of 2.5, with sulfate and ethanol conversions of approximately 94 and 87%, respectively. The lowest dissolved sulfide concentration (145±10mg S/L) was observed with a feed COD/SO4
                     2− ratio of 0.67. Substantial amounts of acetate (510–1730mg/L) were produced and accumulated in the bioreactor from ethanol oxidation. Although only incomplete oxidation of ethanol to acetate was observed, the consortium was able to remove 99% of the dissolved lead (200mg/L) with a feed COD/SO4
                     2− ratio of 1.5. It was found that the feed COD/SO4
                     2− ratio could be an adequate parameter to control the hydrogen sulfide production and the consequent precipitation of dissolved lead.Mining industry, mineral processing, industrial effluents and landfill leachate are the principal sources of wastewaters containing high dissolved metal concentration. In the last two decades, the biological sulfate reduction to hydrogen sulfide has been proposed to remove metals from this type of wastewater. This process has been widely studied for the precipitation of heavy metals such as Cu, Ni, Zn, Fe, Cd, Hg, Mn, Co and Pb Under anaerobic conditions, sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) can transform sulfate to hydrogen sulfide using simple substrates such as hydrogen, lactate, ethanol, acetate, methanol and propionate as electron donors The application of SRB-based systems to remove heavy metals from wastewater has been tested in single and two-stage configurations. In single-stage systems, biological sulfate reduction to hydrogen sulfide and metal precipitation steps occur simultaneously in the same reactor, whereas in two-stage configuration, the steps take place separately in different reactors Many studies have shown high metal removal efficiencies in single-stage systems under continuous operation Several parameters, such as the selection of the organic substrates, the feed COD/SO The aim of this work was to evaluate the feed COD/SO An UASB reactor (5 The UASB was inoculated (10%, v/v) with granular sludge obtained from the wastewater treatment pilot plant located at Metropolitan Autonomous University-Iztapalapa (Mexico City), and previously adapted to sulfate reduction with ethanol as electron donor for 3 months in a batch reactor. The composition of the mineral medium was (g/L): 2.22 NaSO To obtain the maximum hydrogen sulfide production in the continuous flow UASB reactor, different feed COD/SO To determine the acetate consumption rate, the UASB reactor was operated in batch regime with an initial acetate concentration of 500 A feed COD/SO Duplicate samples of sulfate, dissolved sulfide and dissolved lead were measured from the influent and effluent streams. Before each analysis, the samples were filtered through a 0.45 Ethanol and acetate were determined by gas chromatography (Hewlett Packard 5890, Series II, USA) after adding 50 The dissolved lead concentration was measured by atomic absorption spectrometry (SpectrAA 200-VARIAN, Australia) by direct aspiration according to the EPA-7420 method (SW-846, 1996). The oxidation–reduction potential (ORP) was measured with a platinum probe and an Ag/AgCl reference electrode (EW-27018-40, Cole Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL, USA).  The lowest hydrogen sulfide production of 145 From Molar sulfide yield from sulfate (hydrogen sulfide produced/sulfate consumed) increased at feed COD/SO On the other hand, molar sulfide yield from ethanol was around 42% and its value was independent of the feed COD/SO Ethanol removal was close to 100% at feed COD/SO Substantial concentrations of acetate (510 to 1730 The acetate accumulation in the bioreactor indicated a poor acetotrophic activity, probably due to the low concentration of this type of bacteria. Lens et al. An acetate oxidation rate of 25 Madigan et al. The incomplete oxidation of ethanol was compensated by adding an excess of ethanol (up to 1800 For lead precipitation studies, a feed COD/SO  From a mass balance, a difference not attributable to the lead precipitation was observed between the theoretical (calculated by sulfate conversion) and the measured residual dissolved sulfide ( Although the denitrification process was not evaluated in this work, its effect on dissolved sulfide consumption was estimated. As ethanol was almost completely consumed (98 Although several studies On the other hand, the excess of hydrogen sulfide must be controlled. Kolmert et al. For a given sulfate concentration in wastewater, the feed COD/SO The lead removal efficiency (>99%) observed in the present study and the performance reported in the studies mentioned above indicate that the biological sulfate reducing process to remove dissolved metals in a single stage system can be potentially used to treat wastewater from mining industry, mineral processing, industrial effluents and landfill leachate. The feed COD/SO