Herein, the phases of mixed rare earth concentrate, oxidative roasted ore, non-oxidative roasted ore, together with their leaching processes and mechanisms, were studied. XRD and SEM-EDS patterns indicate that the phases of the ore roasted in both air and argon atmospheres at 550°C for 2h are (Ce, La)OF and REPO4. Ce oxidized from trivalent to tetravalent during the roasting process, causing the lattice distance of the crystals to decrease, and the cracks on the surface of mineral to widen. Cerium extraction in the oxidative roasted ore is 3.2% at a low temperature and low acidity, which is less than 8.6% of the other rare earths. However, at 80°C, Ce extraction can reach 52% at 2min in a 3mol/L hydrochloric acid solution. Analysis of fluorine extraction and SEM-EDS analysis of the leaching residue reveal that Ce(IV) complexes with F− rapidly, and this complex can promote the leaching of total rare earths. With time, Ce(IV) is reduced to its trivalent form, while Cl− is oxidized to Cl2. F− in the solution and RE(III) generate REF3 and go into the slag, which decreases Ce extraction from 52% to 48.1% and those of other rare earths from 51% to 41%. Although the leaching rates of Ce and other rare earths in a non-oxidative roasted ore cannot reach the same level as the ore oxidative roasted at a high temperature, they are relatively high. F− extraction is slightly lower than that of the oxidative roasted ore. The kinetics of the leaching process and SEM analysis of the leaching residue also confirm this.Rare earth metals are an important strategic resource due to their unique magnetic, optical, and electrical properties ( Through the joint efforts of the authors and the dressing plant of China Northern Rare Earth (Group) Hi-Tech Co. Ltd., the RE concentrate grade has been improved to 65% (REO) over the past few years The rare earth grade of this concentrate is close to that of the bastnaesite concentrate, and large amounts of impurities and gangue can be removed. Our lab proposes a new clean metallurgical process for the treatment of mixed rare earth concentrates, the schematic for which is shown in However, the majority of cerium in bastnaesite is unavoidably oxidized from its trivalent form to its tetravalent form during the roasting process ( This paper focuses on the oxidation behavior of Ce(III). XRD was utilized to identify and compare the phase constitutions of the oxidative roasted ore and non-oxidative roasted ore. Leaching experiments on roasted ores with hydrochloric acid were carried out under different conditions. The mechanisms of leaching Ce(III) and Ce(IV) were studied, and the leaching regularities of Ce, other rare earths, and F were clarified by analyzing their extracts and the phase structures of the leaching residues. The raw materials used in this study were obtained from the Bayanobo deposit in Baotou, while the mixed rare earth concentrate was produced at the dressing plant of the Baogang Group (jointly with our lab) by flotation. The measured proportions of RECO The concentrate was roasted in a muffle furnace at 550 X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out on an X-ray diffractometer (PANalytical company, the Netherlands) to identify the phases and compositions of the roasted ore and leaching residue using a scanning speed of 0.2°/min. The amounts of rare earths and other elements in the leaching filtrate were determined using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES) with a Horiba ULTIMA ICP-AES. The microstructures and modes of occurrence of the main elements of the roasted ore were analyzed using the electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD) attachment in a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The content of Ce(IV) in the roasted ore was determined by ferrous ammonium sulfate titration ( XRD patterns of the mixed rare earth concentrate roasted in air atmosphere and argon atmosphere at 550  During the experiment, the color of the oxidative and non-oxidative roasted ore were yellow and dark gray, respectively. As indicated by the XRD patterns, the compositions of the two roasted ores were nearly identical. However, it is obvious that the particles in The effect of HCl concentration on the extractions of Ce and other rare earths was investigated at 25 It can be seen from  The effect of time on the extractions of Ce and other rare earths was studied at 2, 5, 15, 30, 45, and 60 Comparing Considering that RE in an oxidative roasted ore can be leached in a short period of time and that extraction has a decreasing trend at 80 The stability of Ce(IV) and its complex behavior in solution with F Based on the relationship between the extractions of F and Ce, it is now known that fluorine can promote the leaching of Ce(IV). This may be because the fluorine-containing phase is dissolved in the phase of cerium; this increases the reaction activity or induces changes in the structure of the phase due to the participation of oxygen during the formation of CeO The leaching of oxidative roasted ore at high temperature was actually a process of leaching the [CeF A detailed analysis on the extraction of Ce, other rare earths, and F, led to an initial understanding of the leaching mechanism in oxidative and non-oxidative roasted ores. To gain better control over the leaching process, it is important to establish a quantitative measurement for the leaching kinetics and its mechanism. The kinetics was described by a model with chemical reaction followed by diffusion. The concentration of (Ce, La)OF became negligible after the fast chemical reaction between (Ce, La)OF and HCl on the surface of the roasted ore, and the supply of HCl to (Ce, La)OF inside was constrained. The reaction rate was controlled by diffusion through an REF The extractions of Ce and other rare earth became constant except for the case of the oxidative roasted ore leached at 80  The rate constant k The experimentally determined rate constant k To further investigate the phase transformation of the oxidative roasted ore and non- oxidative roasted ore during leaching, XRD and SEM analyses of the residue leached under specified conditions (raw ore roasted at 550  Combining the studies mentioned above, it can be assumed that Ce(IV) complexed with F  XRD patterns of the products of mixed rare earth concentrate roasted in air atmosphere and argon atmosphere showed that bastnaesite in the mixed rare earth concentrate completely decomposed to (Ce, La)OF, but monazite did not decompose after being roasted. Since parts of Ce The authors gratefully acknowledge funding support from the key program of the