The biosorption abilities of Rhodococcus opacus were studied for cadmium and zinc removal for liquid aqueous streams. The influence of pH, initial metal concentration and time removal were evaluated on the biosorption studies, in a batch scale basis. The Cd2+ and Zn2+ species uptake capacity by R. opacus has been also compared using Langmuir and Freundlich models. At pH 7.0 and 26°C C, Cd2+ removal achieved a value around 60% from an initial concentration of 15ppm. On the other hand, Zn removal achieved a value around 88% from an initial concentration of 5ppm. Kinetics studies revealed that the biosorption process followed a pseudo-second order model for the two metal species (Cd2+ and Zn2+) and the kinetic constants were 3.90 and 3.37gmg−1
                     min−1, for an initial concentration of 15 and 5ppm for cadmium and zinc, respectively. The results showed that the R. opacus is a potential engineering biosorbent for environmental and extractive metallurgy sustainable applications.The production of metals in general, the industry activities as electrolytic treatment, ceramic production, fertilizer product and pigments production can create sources of heavy metal pollution. The heavy metals have high mobility in aquatic systems and may present high toxicity ( Extensive techniques have been developed for the industrial water pollution control ( On the other hand, one may observe that biosorption processes have been extensively studied in order to uptake heavy metals from several liquid effluent streams ( Some biological materials like filament fungus, bacteria, yeast, algae and humic substances have been used for metal uptake studies. These materials have different functional groups on their surface and interact with different heavy metals in solution ( The The aim of this work was to study the fundamental aspects of the biosorption of Zn Based on the previous works of The zeta-potential experiments of Single batch biosorption experiments were carried out in order to study the influence of some variables like pH and initial metal ion concentration. The obtained experimental data were evaluated and fitted using adsorption and kinetic models. Based on the previous work ( The residual concentration of Cd The zeta potential evaluations are important for biosorption studies as they can indicate the interaction between the metal species and the active site of the microorganism. The precipitation can be possible by the accumulation of the heavy metals within the diffuse part of the electrical double layer on the solid surface (  According with The biosorption metal uptake is based on the metal species interaction and the active surface sites of the microorganisms (  As it was pointed out before, in pH around 8.0, cadmium and zinc adsorptions reach the maximum value. This observation may be related to the formation of (OH)  The analogy between a Cd and Zn hydrolysis reaction and metal reaction on active sites in the Considering these reactions, the heavy metal species as S It was also observed that at acid pH values, the metal removal was reduced (19–21%). This behavior can be explained because, at these pH values, the functional groups of The equilibrium analysis uses the Langmuir and Freundlich models to understand the sorption mechanism. This mechanism establishes that the ion binding can be due to physical chemistry interactions, electrostatic attractions and/or London Van der Waals forces ( The Langmuir model considers sorption by monolayer type and supposes that all the actives sites on the sorbent surface have the same affinity by the sorbate ( The Freundlich model establishes that the sorption sites have different activities by the sorbate, the sorption is due on a heterogenic surface (  The results of The metal removal capacity can be improved by  The Freundlich behavior of the metal sorption can suggest that the cell wall of The kinetic prediction study is an important tool for the scale up projecting. The results can establish the optimal time for contaminant removing from the aquatic solution ( The kinetic biosorption for solid–liquid system can be described by the pseudo-first and pseudo-second order kinetic models. The first order equation is used to evaluate the solute sorption in liquid solution and is described by the next equation The pseudo-second order equation describes the sorption chemical mechanism on solid surfaces (chemisorption). The pseudo-second order equation is due by  The results show that the first order correlation value is lower than the pseudo-second order correlation suggesting a chemisorption behavior. These results are in accordance with similar works of The pseudo-second order model suggests that the metal sorption is the controlling step in the adsorption processes ( The isoeletric point of The The Cd and Zn uptake capacities by The authors acknowledge the financial support by CNPq, CAPES and FAPERJ.