The influence of temperature on the adsorption mechanism of anionic polyacrylamide (PAM) on the alumina surface was studied in the temperature range 15–35 °C. The structure of polymer adsorption layer was determined from spectrophotometric, surface charge and zeta potential measurements. These methods enable determination of the following parameters: adsorbed amount of polymer, surface charge density and zeta potential of Al2O3 particles in the absence and presence of PAM. The influence of carboxyl groups content in the polyacrylamide macromolecules (varying from 5 to 50%) was also examined. The obtained results indicate that temperature influences the adsorption behaviour of anionic polyacrylamide on the Al2O3 surface. Slight increase of PAM adsorbed amounts with the temperature rise was obtained for the polymer samples characterized by the higher anionic group content (20, 30 and 50%). In the case of PAM with 5% content of these groups significantly larger adsorption was observed at 25 °C. The PAM presence causes also changes in electrokinetic properties (zeta potential and surface charge density values, as well as pHpzc and pHiep positions) of the examined system in the temperature range 15–35 °C.Polymers are a large group of substances currently used in many fields of industry, technology and science. Modern tools offered by the present technique allow production, modification and processing of the polymer, obtaining the synthetic macromolecular materials such as plastics, rubber or fibers. Polymers are also used for the manufacture of adhesives and paints. They can affect the properties of the interface and therefore can be used as emulsifiers. In addition, their ability to modify surface properties of solids promoted their use in stabilization or destabilization of colloidal particles. The latter process is particularly desirable in water purification. Emulsification, stabilization or flocculation of dispersed systems are closely related to the phenomenon of adsorption The process of polymer adsorption is used in many fields. Modern and recently intensively developed tendency in research is the adsorption of macromolecules on lipid layers. This finds application in designing of biosensors, implants and new pharmaceutical formulations In such processes anionic, cationic and nonionic flocculants are widely used. One of them is polyacrylamide. Polyacrylamide (PAM) is a water-soluble polymer. It is obtained by the polymerization of acrylamide. Contrary to its monomer, it is non-toxic. It is used as a flocculant for wastewater treatment. There are also possible modifications to the PAM ionic form. The anionic polyacrylamide contains carboxyl groups which are obtained by hydrolysis of the amide groups or copolymerization process with acrylic acid monomers. On the other hand, the cationic form is obtained by copolymerization of acrylamide with cationic monomer (i.e. containing the quaternary amine group). The ionic polymers are used, among others, in recovery of metals after minerals processing The main aim of this study was to investigate the adsorption of anionic polyacrylamide on the surface of aluminum(III) oxide and determination of surface properties of the system as a function of temperature. All measurements were carried out at three temperature values: 15, 25 and 35 °C. They enabled characterization of the structure of the polymer adsorption film which determines the Al Temperature, the impact of which is the subject of the present research, is an important factor affecting the polymer adsorbed amount. Effect of temperature on the adsorption mechanism is different for various polymer/solvent/solid systems In addition, the temperature effect on the adsorption mechanism of macromolecular substances in the colloidal suspensions is challenging, because it is marginally described in the literature In the role of adsorbent γ – aluminum(III) oxide – Al Alumina was chosen for the studies because of its physicochemical properties: high surface area, minimal solubility, high thermal stability and high mechanical strength. The anionic form of polyacrylamide (PAM), manufactured by Korona was used in experiments. Four polymer samples differing in the content of carboxyl groups were applied. The anionic groups come from the hydrolysis of a number of the amide groups during the polymer preparation. These groups are a source of negative charge of the polyacrylamide chains formed as a result of dissociation process Before the experiments the stock polymer solutions were prepared. For this purpose 1 g of polymer dry weight was dissolved in doubly distilled water at approx. 45 °C. The determination of polymer solution concentrations included several stages. The first one was to weigh the each glass (three for each sample). Then onto each of them 1 cm The obtained concentrations of the stock PAM solutions are given in All measurements were carried out in the solution pH range 3–10 at three values of temperature: 15, 25 and 35 °C. NaCl (0.01 mol/dm Adsorption experiments were made by the static method in the polymer concentration range 5–120 ppm at the pH values: 3, 6 and 9 (±0,1) using 0.05 g of Al The potentiometric titrations of Al The obtained results are presented as curves of the Al To prepare the alumina suspension for the measurement of the zeta (ζ) potential, 0.03 g of Al  As can be seen in these Figures the polymer adsorption decreases with the pH rise. This trend refers to each of the four used polyelectrolytes differing in carboxyl groups content. Under given conditions of solution pH, both the polymer chain and the metal oxide surface assumed specified charge. In such a case pH affects the dissociation of the carboxyl groups (−COOH) in PAM macromolecules and the surface charge density of aluminum(III) oxide. The ionization of carboxyl groups increases rapidly above pH 4, which leads to the increase of the -COO On the other hand, the pH Smaller amounts of the adsorbed polymer at higher pH values are associated with the appearance of significant negative charge in the macromolecules. This leads to electrostatic repulsion between the chain segments leading to their expansion. At pH 6 the oxide surface is still positively charged, so under these conditions the attractive interactions between the opposite charges of the adsorbate and adsorbent are primarily responsible for polymer binding. Despite favourable electrostatic interactions the adsorption level is lower than at pH 3. This is due to the more developed conformation of polyacrylamide chains, which in this case are more parallel adsorbed to the solid surface occupying its larger area. At pH 9 both the PAM chains and oxide surface have a negative charge. The repulsive interactions between them are predominant making PAM adsorption difficult. A small adsorbed amount of polyacrylamide (eight times lower than at pH 3) is mainly a result of single hydrogen bonds formation. The obtained results indicate that the temperature rise results in PAM adsorption increase (except for PAM 11.0_5%). The biggest difference can be seen in the case of PAM 14.0_20%. This trend is obtained for each examined solution pH. The previous studies indicated that the temperature rise causes the increase of linear dimensions of macromolecules (increase of hydrodynamic radius of polymer coil) which is equivalent to their chains development At this temperature (characteristic of a given polymer-solvent system), macromolecules form statistical coils (system reaches the highest entropy). These coils have the Gaussian distribution of segments as a function of distance from the center of their mass. Additionally, their size is proportional to the square root of the monomer number in a macromolecule. For many systems (including PAM aqueous solution), the temperature increase improves the quality of most solvents. As a result, the polymer segments have a greater affinity for the solvent molecules. This leads to development of previously coiled macromolecules. A more extended conformation of PAM chain at a higher examined temperature results in formation of thicker adsorption layer composed of macromolecules expanded perpendicularly to the alumina surface. Thus, the greater number of polyacrylamide molecules can adsorb on the unit of the solid surface area. Only in the case of PAM 11.0_5% the highest adsorption level was observed at 25 °C (within the whole range of the studied pH values). In this case the polymer chains contain the smallest amount of carboxyl groups. Changes in their conformation resulting in a temperature increase is not enhanced so effectively by a large number of negatively charged carboxyl groups as is the case of other polymer samples (with a higher content of anionic groups).  The PAM adsorption is also preferably affected by the increasing content of carboxyl groups in the polymeric chain. Polyacrylamides with a higher content of –COOH groups show the higher adsorption on the Al  Based on the potentiometric data analysis, it can be concluded that the presence of polyelectrolyte affects the density of the surface charge of Al It leads to the increase in the σ On the other hand, polymeric segments containing dissociated carboxyl groups, which are not connected with the adsorbed surface and are present in the by-surface layer of the solution, cause decrease of the σ The adsorption of anionic polyacrylamide results in a slight change in the position of pH In the range of pH < pH The obtained changes in the solid surface charge density in the anionic PAM presence are the greatest at 15 Changes in the zeta potential of Al These dependencies clearly show the decrease in the ζ potential values due to the addition of the polymer. The higher the molecular weight and carboxyl groups content in the polyelectrolyte chains are, the larger reduction is observed. This is evident at both 15 and 35 The observed decrease in the zeta potential is associated with different placement of negatively charged -COO The larger the content of anionic groups of polyelectrolyte chains is, the higher reduction of the electrokinetic potential is found. This is caused by polymer chain development and accompanying increase in the number of -COO The presence of the polyelectrolyte in the system also affects the value of pH Adsorption of anionic polyacrylamide (PAM) on the surface of aluminum(III) oxide decreases with the rising pH. Small dissociation of PAM carboxyl groups at pH 3 makes that the polymer adsorption proceeds by hydrogen bonds formation and slight electrostatic attraction. Stronger attraction between the negatively charged macromolecules and the positively charged Al The presence of PAM causes the greatest changes in the surface charge density of Al The addition of polymer reduces of the ζ potential value of the solid particles compared to the system in the PAM absence. This is a result of the presence of dissociated carboxyl groups of the adsorbed polymer in the diffusion part of edl and the slipping plane shift from the solid surface The greater reduction of electrokinetic potential was obtained for the Al The study was supported by the