To evaluate the effects of residual catalyst and chain microstructural features on the thermal decomposition of poly(l-lactide/ε-caprolactone) (PLCL), poly(l-lactide) (PLLA) and poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) homopolymers and their copolymers were synthesized by ring opening polymerization (ROP) using stannous octoate (SnOct2) or bismuth (III) subsalicylate (BiSS) as catalyst. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) confirmed that ε-caprolactone repeat units are more thermally resistant than lactide units, both by comparison of the two homopolymers behavior and also by a detailed thermogravimetric analysis of PLCL copolymers of well resolved chain microstructures. It was noticed a large influence of metal-catalyzed depolymerization in all polymers, yet more significant for tin. In this regard the homopolymers having a higher residual metal content displayed onsets of thermal degradation at lower temperature values, e.g. 233 °C and 287 °C for PLLA and PCL containing ∼4500 ppm of Sn vs. 271 °C and 345 °C for PLLA and PCL containing ∼50 ppm. The type and content of the catalysts were revealed responsible of the final distribution of sequences obtained during the PLCL copolymers synthesis. 1H NMR spectroscopy revealed a higher randomness character (R→1) and shorter lactide average sequence lengths (l
                     LA) for PLCL copolymers when they were BiSS-initiated; these copolymers degraded homogeneously almost entirely in a single stage and presented higher resistance to thermal degradation. In contrast, the more blocky PLCLs, containing >250 ppm of residual Sn, were found more sensitive to thermal degradation and degraded heterogeneously presenting two different peaks in the Differential TG curve. The 1H NMR analysis of a blocky PLCL sample (66% of LA, R∼0.5 and ∼500 ppm of Sn) further demonstrated that LA-rich sequences degrade at lower temperatures and, at a later stage, those of CL. It was also proved that the mechanism of this first stage of weight loss, occurring at lower temperatures, is highly influenced by the l
                     LA, since increased rates of weight loss and heavier weight losses were associated to higher l
                     LA values.After being synthesized, biodegradable polyesters for medical applications, such as polylactide (PLA), poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL) and their copolymers, are thought to be transformed into implants or scaffolds by thermoplastic processing techniques such as injection moulding, blow moulding, thermoforming or extrusion Thermal degradation studies on PCL The factors that influence the thermal degradation of a biopolymer, apart from the thermal resistance of their building units, include molecular weight and the presence of moisture, residual and hydrolyzed monomers, oligomers and residual metals. In particular, the effect of residual metal compounds is very important. Many authors In this work several PLLA, PCLs and PLCLs were synthesized by ROP using various amounts of two different metal catalysts, SnOct Several poly(  The molecular weights of the samples were determined by GPC using a Waters 1515 GPC apparatus equipped with two Styragel columns (10 The values of residual catalyst content given in For the PLCL copolymers, proton nuclear magnetic resonance ( Thermal degradation of PLLAs, PCLs and PLCLs was studied by means of thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) into a TGA model Q50-0545 (TA Instruments). Samples of 10–15 mg were heated from room temperature to 500 °C at a heating rate (β) of 5  °C min Thermal decomposition studies on three series of polymers (PLLAs of different residual tin (Sn) content, PLLAs of different residual bismuth (Bi) content and PCLs of different residual metal content) were performed in this section.  The same trend is observed in  It is well known that PCL is more stable to the thermal degradation than PLLA. Accordingly, PCL Sn50 shows a degradation temperature for a 95% of weight loss that is 85 °C higher than the corresponding to the PLLA of equal Sn residual content (426 °C for PCL Sn50 vs. 341 °C for PLLA Sn50). In this sense, PCL Sn4500 is also more resistant to thermal decomposition than PLLA Sn4500 shown in On the other hand, PCL Bi6000, as well as PLLA Bi6000, exhibits two well-resolved peaks in the DTG curve. A weak peak, comprising a weight loss of 16.7% that can be attributed to the CL chains affected by Bi atoms, is found at 284 °C whereas the thermal degradation of CL-catalyst free chains is delayed to 377 °C emerging as a second peak at a temperature that is very close to the single decomposition peak of PCL Sn50 (388 °C). In the thermal degradation of the poly(lactide/ε-caprolactone) copolymers (PLCLs), apart from the residual catalyst influence, the lactide average sequence length ( In order to study those two stages of decomposition, a sample of PLCL 6634Sn was heated into the TGA to 325 °C (the intermediate temperature between the two peaks, in which the % weight loss is about 70%), cooled at room temperature and analyzed by On the basis of the above, it is evident that the lactide-rich sequences with poor thermal stability are degrading first. In addition, it should be reminded that the reactivity of LA monomer is higher than that of the CL when copolymerizing using SnOct Taking into account the discussed above, thermal decomposition studies on two series of copolymers (PLCLs synthesized using SnOct   As a complement of the chain microstructure discussion already done, three additional PLCLs were synthesized at 140 °C varying the SnOct  On the contrary, the other PLCLs present lower residual tin content and a more random distribution of sequences ( Finally, it could be observed that PLCL Sn50 behaves in a similar manner than the random BiSS-initiated PLCLs ( The results of this work demonstrate that adjusting the chain microstructure parameters of the PLCLs and reducing their residual metal content great improvements in thermal degradation can be obtained. As in the case of other polyesters, such as polylactide or poly(ε-caprolactone), the residual catalyst content was demonstrated to be one of the most influencing factors on the thermal degradation of poly(lactide/ε-caprolactone) copolymers (PLCLs). In addition to the accelerating effect of the residual tin or bismuth compounds on the pyrolysis of the PLCLs, ROP catalysts are the primary responsible for their distribution of sequences. The thermal decomposition of the PLCLs is strongly depended on the chain microstructure. Thus, PLCLs having higher randomness character ( The authors are thankful for funds of the