This work proposes a new approach for multichannel facies image reconstruction based on compressed sensing where the image is recovered from pixel-based measurements without the use of prior information from a training image. An 
                        
                           
                              
                                 ℓ
                              
                              
                                 1
                              
                           
                        
                        -
                        minimization
                      reconstruction algorithm is proposed, and a performance guaranteed result is adopted to evaluate its reconstruction. From this analysis, we formulate the problem of basis selection, where it is shown that for unstructured pixel-based measurements the Discrete Cosine Transform is the best choice for the problem. In the experimental side, signal-to-noise ratios and similarity perceptual indicators are used to evaluate the quality of the reconstructions, and promising reconstruction results are obtained. The potential of this new approach is demonstrated in under-sampled scenario of 2–4% of direct data, which is known to be very challenging in the absence of prior knowledge from a training image.The reconstruction of images from scarce measurements is the essence of many inverse problems in Geosciences. Direct measurements are expensive and an exhaustive analysis is out of the possibilities. In this sampling context, the conventional way to treat the lack of data in geostatistics has been by incorporating prior information of a statistical model that captures the geological structure a family of images ( This work departs from the problem of image recovery based on reproducing patterns of a training image ( In the setting of image reconstruction ( Compressed sensing (CS) has introduced a new paradigm for the classical problem of sensing and reconstruction ( The application of CS to inverse problems in geosciences is an active area of research. In particular, several contributions have been developed in the problem of subsurface flow model calibrations based on non-linear flow measurements ( For the specific context of recovering a channelized facies image from pixel-based measurements, the work of We first formulate the image reconstruction problem as an instance of a CS reconstruction and establish concrete connections with the performance guarantee result of the Applying the CS technique to the reconstruction of facies with the selected DCT basis, the regime from 1% to 10% of pixel measurements is explored. Promising results are shown even in the under-sample regime (from 2% to 4%) where the hard-data offers very limited contextual information. From these results, we can ratify that the underlying transform-based structure of channelized facies images is very rich, and that the CS offers an effective solution to recover that image from very limited and unstructured pixel-based data. Our results are evaluated in terms of concrete performances versus rate of measurements curves, which resolves the question of the critical number of measurements that is needed to achieve a given level of image reconstruction. Furthermore, a novel post-processing stage is proposed that considers averaging information across different block-by-block reconstructions and a final hard-thresholding process to pass from continuous to categorical values. This final stage is systematically evaluated and offers a relevant performance boost in the critical regime from 2% to 10% of the pixel data. Our problem is the recovery of a geological structure from the acquisition of vertical wells. More precisely, we focus on the family of 2D facies distributions over a deposit or reservoir as illustrated in The next section is devoted to provide a concise presentation of the CS approach adopted in this work, as well as its performance guarantee. With this background, in We model an image as a finite dimensional vector This theory is constructed over a sensing modality that is random. More formally, the If the rows of  This result guarantees for There are two aspects of our image reconstruction problem that we need to model to reduce it to the CS setting in Formally, let  There are two important aspects about the role of the basis Our key performance result in For a basis The focus of this section is to present the bases considered on the analysis of facies images, as well as to solve Moving to the basis selection, first When we incorporate the coherence indicator of the bases, i.e., In this section reconstruction results are presented and analyzed. The multiple point simulation algorithm As the measurements were obtained at random pixel locations with a given proportion (from 1% to 10%), this allows us to decouple the reconstruction by decomposing the image in non-overlapping square-blocks and then applying the ℓ Moving to the experimental setting, we took random pixels with different proportions in the range of 1–10% of the size of the image. From these data, we applied the block-by-block ℓ From the results illustrated in Supporting the results in From the results in Finally for the best setting (average reconstruction with hard-thresholding), As the sensing matrix In addition, we use this analysis to compare our best CS based solution, with other signal processing (interpolation) techniques. On this, we applied the classical basis pursuit (BP) algorithm ( Concerning robustness, we fix the channel images in Concerning the trend in performance presented for all the methods in This work investigates the problem of facies reconstruction from under-sampled data (the regime from 1% to 10%) without the use of a training image. This is an alternative to the way prior information has been modeled and incorporated for this recovery problem in geostatistics. A key contribution is the way in which this problem is put on the framework of compressed sensing (CS). A bridge between the well-elaborated RIPless CS theory and practical aspects of this recovery problem is provided. From this bridge, the basis selection problem is addressed where a justification that the DCT is an excellent alternative for the recovery of facies is presented. On top of that, a new inter-block averaging process and an adaptive hard-thresholding method are proposed, which offer a significant boost in performances in the regime of 1–10% of direct data. Interestingly, this approach shows that the objective of true facies reconstruction is feasible, when we have access to a critical number of measurements in the range of This CS approach offers promising new avenues for geological image reconstructions, and we believe that much work needs to be done to address the relevant scenario with less than 1% of data, where this signal processing approach begins to show clear limitations, see The work is supported by the research grant