Titanium dioxide (TiO2) is used as pigment in a wide variety of domestic and industrial applications, and is becoming an increasingly valuable nanomaterial. TiO2 is manufactured by the traditional sulfate process or high temperature chloride process. Several hydrometallurgical processes for manufacturing TiO2 have recently emerged to reduce the environmental impact of TiO2 production. A new process is reported that features alkaline roasting of titania slag (ARTS), with subsequent washing, leaching, solvent extraction, hydrolysis, and calcination stages, and implements the recycling and regeneration of alkaline and acid process streams to minimize waste generation. A virtual ARTS processing plant is described in detail and is used to conduct an LCA comparison with the sulfate, chloride, and Altairnano processes. The cumulative energy demand (CED) and total CO2 emissions for the ARTS process are 92.6 MJ/kg TiO2 and 7.47 kg CO2/kg TiO2, respectively, which compares favorably with the traditional and Altairnano processes.Titanium dioxide (TiO The sulfate process involves digesting ilmenite (45–65% TiO As the global reserves of high grade natural rutile become increasingly scarce, numerous alternative methods of producing TiO Alternatively, other investigators have used alkaline roasting to upgrade titanium slag. A new TiO The ultimate goal of the new ARTS method is to produce commercial purity TiO The objective of the present work is to calculate the cradle-to-gate energy requirements and CO This article is organized into five major sections. The second section includes a background on previous TiO Assessing the environmental impact of manufacturing any particular chemical can be complicated if the end product can be synthesized by a number of processes using a variety of feedstock materials, which proves to be the case for TiO Another complexity occurs when different different system boundaries are considered. Some reports only consider the process from the entry of the feed material to the production of the final pigment product. This boundary is referred to as “feed-to-gate.” A more comprehensive consideration includes the energy requirements for mining, transporting and preparing the raw minerals for use as a feed stock (referred to as beneficiation). This boundary is referred to as “cradle-to-gate.” LCA considers the impact of a process or product throughout its entire life cycle, and accounts for the material and energy inputs and outputs of a manufacturing process, including treatment and disposal of gaseous and liquid waste streams (referred to as emissions and effluents, respectively) ( LCA studies have been reported for the production of TiO Tioxide Industries conducted an LCA study of 6 different TiO  Relatively little information regarding the environmental and resource impact of developing TiO A procedure for conducting LCA has been described in the ISO 14044 standard, and is comprised of 4 primary steps ( The objective of this analysis is to calculate the cumulative energy demand and CO The energy required for roasting and calcination was calculated using HSC Chemistry 5.11 thermodynamic software available from Outokumpu Technologies. From this, the volume of natural gas required was calculated. The material and energy required for producing titania slag and of regenerating and recycling process reagents were found in government reports and were also included ( The electricity and natural gas inputs for the whole process were calculated by summing the requirements from each unit process. The calculations for each unit process are described in the order they are shown in The feed material for the new process is Sorelslag F The slag is roasted with NaOH at a ratio of 1:1.5, therefore 1.96 kg of anhydrous NaOH are added into the rotary kiln with 1.31 kg of slag. The temperature of the roasting kiln is maintained at 823 K. The calculations to size a rotary kiln depend on the mean residence time (MRT), the angle of repose of the material (θ), the rotation speed (n), and the inclination angle of the kiln (β) ( The energy required for the roasting operation was calculated, and the inputs and outputs are shown in Theoretically, the roasting operation will require 2.4 MJ/kg TiO After cooling, 3.03 kg of kiln discharge is washed with 6.94 kg of water in order to remove soluble impurity compounds such as Na The leaching is performed with 5 M HCl (17% HCl) at pulp density of 10%, which requires 17.9 kg of solution containing 3.02 kg of HCl. The temperature of the solution is kept above 50 °C, which is easily maintained by the recirculation of hot solution from the hydrolysis stage (90–100 °C) and the exothermic reaction of gaseous HCl being sparged into the solution. The solution will be agitated in six 68.14 m N is the number of revolutions per second and D is the diameter of the agitator blade. For a speed of 60 rpm (1 rev/sec), each agitator requires a 54.7 kW motor. After leaching the solution is passed through two drum filters driven by a 33.6 hp motor to remove the bulk of undissolved solids. The solution needs to be clarified to remove any remaining solid particulates that would form crud and pose other serious problems in the solvent extraction circuit if not removed. The solution is fed through 30.50 D × 3.70 m H clarifying thickener with a 5.6 kW motor ( The clarified leach solution (19.86 kg) is mixed with the organic extractant phase to selectively remove ferric chlorocomplexes from solution. The organic phase contains 15 vol. % tertiary amine diluted in kerosene. The loading step will require 4 mixer-settler units each with a 3.7 kW motor. The loaded organic phase is then mixed with a dilute HCl solution to reverse the loading reaction and strip the iron into the aqueous phase. The stripping is performed in 3 stages and will require 18 mixer-settler units each driven by a 3.7 kW motor. The stripped organic is sent back to the loading stage while the purified leach solution is sent to the hydrolysis step. In total, the solvent extraction operation will require 60 kW of power. The Fe in the strip solution is precipitated with residual NaOH wash solution and filtered using two 22.4 kW drum filters, treated, and sent to tailings. Following solvent extraction, 19.58 kg of purified leach solution is hydrolyzed to precipitate metatitanic acid (TiO(OH) For an efficient hydrolysis reaction, the solution needs to be heated from 308 K to 373 K, which is below the boiling point of the solution. The heat, q, required to raise the temperature of m kg of solution from 308 K to 373 K (Δ The heat capacity, C The reaction will produce 1.15 kg metatitanic acid pulp which will require filtering. The pulp and solution are fed to a 30.48 m D high-capacity thickener driven by a 5.6 kW motor where the pulp density is increased from 5.9% to 50%. The underflow of the thickener is then fed to a 3.05 m D × 7.10 m L drum filter driven by a 22.4 kW motor. The filtered solids are then rinsed with water and filtered in an additional drum filter of the same specifications. The metatitanic acid is discharged from the filters at 90% solids, with approximately 0.12 kg of entrained water, resulting in 18.30 kg total solution leaving the filter. In the hydrolysis reaction, H After being discharged from the filter, 1.27 kg of metatitanic acid and water are fed to an 2.44 m D × 48.77 m L rotary kiln for calcination. The kiln is driven by a 74.6 kW motor. The size of the calcining kiln was determined in a similar procedure as the roasting kiln. The heat required to remove the chemically bound water and transform the metatitanic acid to rutile-phase TiO After cooling, the raw TiO The final size reduction is performed by jet milling, a technique fairly common in the pigment industry. To ensure a sufficiently fine, four 1.07 m jet mills with 671.4 kW air compressors will be necessary. The milled pigment is ready for further optional inorganic or organic surface treatments to enhance durability, dispersion, gloss, or other properties. These treatments can be performed in a 1.14 m Recycling and regeneration of HCl and NaOH are critical components of the new process for both economic and environmental reasons. A portion of the decanted NaOH wash solution is concentrated and reused in the roasting process using multiple effect evaporators. Another portion is added to stripping solutions to precipitate metal impurities such as iron, which after filtration, forms a residual NaCl brine solution that serves as a feed solution for the chlor-alkali process, an electrolytic method of generating HCl and NaOH. The electrochemical half–cell reactions in the chlor-alkali process are shown in Eqs. Sodium chloride is oxidized at the anode to produce chlorine gas and sodium ions while water is reduced to form hydrogen gas and hydroxyl ions at the cathode. The resulting NaOH solution is concentrated with steam in multiple effect evaporators and is used in the roasting step. H The HCl vapor can be adsorbed by water to produce industrial grade hydrochloric acid or sparged directly into the leaching reactor to increase the HCl concentration. Make up NaCl can also be added as needed. The energy requirements for the chlor-alkali process, including the energy to operate the membrane technology chlor-alkali cells and the concentration of NaOH solution by evaporation have been reported ( Most of the titanium depleted acidic solution leaving the hydrolysis filter is recycled directed back to the leaching stage, which is able to provide 53% of the necessary acid to maintain a 17 wt % HCl concentration in the leach solution. However, the leaching operation still requires 1.41 kg of fresh HCl, which will require 1.37 kg of Cl The roasting operation will require a total of 1.96 kg of anhydrous NaOH. Most of the NaOH will be generated by the chlor-alkali process as a coproduct of Cl The primary sources of energy input for the ARTS process include natural gas and electricity; however coal and oil are also used in the slag making process. As mentioned previously, electrical power is generated from a variety of sources in the US, and the distribution of energy required to generate power from each source was considered. Based on the foregoing process calculations, the total fossil fuel and electrical power requirements of each major unit process was tabulated. The CED (in MJ/kg TiO The CO A cradle-to-gate comparison of the CED and emissions of the ARTS process can be made with sulfate, chloride, and Altairnano processes of TiO The ARTS process appears to compare favorably with most of the reported processes, with 10–15% less CED than other processes using slag. The chloride processes using slag as feed stock appear to be roughly equal although they have slightly higher CED than the chloride process using synthetic rutile. The ARTS process consumes 20% less CED than the reported embodiment of the Altairnano process, although nano-sized products typically have higher CED than traditional materials when compared on equal mass basis ( The CO A new method for producing TiO The