The effects of sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate on the flotation of spodumene were investigated by flotation tests, XPS and SEM measurments and thermodynamic analysis. A collector YOA (a mixture of 90% oleic acid and 10% dodecyl amine) was used in the flotation. It was found that sodium hydroxide showed an activation effect whereas sodium carbonate showed a depression effect on the flotation of spodumene. This difference in flotation performance was consistent with the measured contact angles of spodumene treated in sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate solutions, respectively. XPS results indicated that the pretreatment of spodumene surface by sodium hydroxide gave larger relative contents of Al and Li on spodumene surface than that of sodium carbonate, and the scanning electron microscopy images showed rougher surfaces indicating leaching of the mineral surface. The spontaneity of possible reactions associated with the surface dissolution of spodumene in alkaline solutions was also examined, and the results could largely account for the observed difference in surface dissolution of spodumene in sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate solutions.Spodumene is an important resource for extraction of lithium. Recovering spodumene from spodumene-rich ore is often achieved by flotation. The effective collectors for the spodumene flotation practice are oleic acid, oxidized paraffin soap, naphthenic acid soap and tall oil ( It is widely recognized that many minerals will dissolve in aqueous solutions, and at certain pHs, the dissolved species can undergo various reactions, such as hydrolysis, complexation, adsorption, and even surface or bulk precipitation, which can significantly affect the interfacial properties of the mineral particles and their flotation behavior ( In the present work, the effects of sodium hydroxide and sodium carbonate on surface properties and flotation behavior of spodumene were systematically studied by means of flotation tests, contact angle, XPS and SEM meassurments. The role of surface dissolution in the flotation concentration of a spodumene ore was also investigated. The results have significant implications for flotation of spodumene and similar minerals. Bulk spodumene samples were collected from Xinjiang Koktokay Rare Metal Mine, China. Then it was crushed with hammer and hand-picked to remove a small proportion of impurity minerals, ground in a porcelain mill with agate balls, and then sieved with stainless steel standard screens in deionized water to obtain the −0.104 + 0.038 mm fraction samples. These samples were then subjected to high intensity magnetic separation with field strength of 1.5 T to remove iron containing impurities, and stored in glass bottles after vacuum-drying. The analyses of XRD and chemical components on spodumene samples were also carried out, and the results showed that spodumene samples had high purity with the Li A pegmatite ore (with the Li Deionized water (resistivity > 18.2 MΩ·cm) was used throughout the experiments. Analytical sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and sodium carbonate (Na Microflotation tests for the spodumene samples were carried out using an XFGII-type self-aeration flotation machine with a 40 ml cell at room temperature. In each test, the flotation cell was loaded with 5 g of the samples and deionized water, and the pulp was then conditioned at an agitation speed of 1890 rpm for 30 min with addition of alkalis and for 3 min with addition of YOA. After the pulp conditioning, the flotation lasted for 4 min. The concentrates (froth products) and tailings (residue) were individually filtered, dried and weighed to calculate the mass recovery. For each test condition, three experimental runs were conducted and the mean value of the data was reported with the recovery deviation less than 1%. The spodumene ore was ground in a Φ200×240 mm XMB-type steel bar mill to 70% passing 0.074 mm. The pulp was then transferred to a XFD-type self-aeration flotation machine with a 1500 ml cell. Various reagents were added successively, and the pulp was conditioned for a fixed period of time before starting flotation at an agitation speed of 1900 rpm and 2.5L/min aeration rate. All the flotation tests were carried out at room temperature. The concentrates (froth products) and tailings (residue) were separately filtered, dried, weighed and analyzed (by chemical method) to determine the flotation performance. Three experimental runs were conducted for each test condition and the weighted average of the data with the deviation less than 1% was adopted. The advancing contact angles of the single spodumene sample were measured using the sessile air bubble method. A clean mineral crystal was placed in the reagent solution of YOA at room temperature. A 3S contact angle meter (GBX Company, France) was used to measure the contact angle 5 times, and the average of the data was reported. The measuring uncertainty was ±2°. Between each measurement, the crystal was cleaned with acetone first, then polished with sandpaper (abrasive size of 2.6 μm), and washed with deionized water. The spodumene samples with size fraction of −0.104 + 0.038 mm were placed in different alkaline solutions of NaOH and Na Microflotation tests for the spodumene sample were carried out using 100 mg/L YOA as collector, the dosage was selected based on the prework by us ( Certainly, the increase of alklis dosage was accompanied with the increase of pulp pH, which is also shown in It was reported that Na The effect of the stirring time (starting from addition of NaOH, see the experimental procedure illustrated in It is noteworthy that oleate is considered an important component of the collector YOA enabling the flotation of spodumene at pH > 8, where the oleate ion is the dominant species. According to Usually, the surface hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity of a mineral are responsible for the flotation behaviours of the mineral, and can be conveniently assessed by contact angle measurement. As mentioned above, the large amount of adsorption of YOA collector on spodumene should be caused by the chemisorption of YOA with surface Al sites, and it made the increase of the surface contact angle and flotation recovery of spodumene ( Generally, the dissolution of mineral surface should be accompanied with the change of surface morphology, so the surface morphology of spodumene treated in different solutions was examined by SEM, and the results are shown in In theory, the chemical formula of spodumene is Li One can see from At a given concentration, the alkalinity of the NaOH solution is stronger than the Na In NaOH solutions, the spontaneous dissolution of Li The flotation tests for spodumene and a pegmatite ore have shown that NaOH had an activation effect, but Na The authors gratefully thank the financial supports by