Carbon dots are shown to have potential applications in the areas ranging from catalysis, bioimaging, drug delivery, energy and electronics etc. Owing to its excellent fluorescence property, facile synthesis method and robust chemical inertness, it has become one of the most studied materials for this decade. In present work, hetero-atom doped carbon dots and its reduced forms were studied in detail for their optical properties. A heteroatom (nitrogen, boron, and fluorine) co-doped carbon dots (CNBF) was synthesized (using citric acid as a primitive carbon source). Further, CNBF was reduced with different concentrations of sodium borohydride (NaBH4) leading to the synthesis of rCNBF1, rCNBF2, and rCNBF3. The distinct optical characteristics of CNBF, rCNBF1, rCNBF2 and rCNBF3 were studied using different spectroscopic techniques. The quantum yield and fluorescence lifetime of the reduced forms rCNBF1, 2 and 3 were 39.14%; 41.73%; 44.61 and 13.30 nS, 13.52 nS, 14.21 nS, respectively which was higher than CNBF having a quantum yield of 35.73% and 11.98 nS. It was observed the energy bandgap of rCNBF was higher than CNBF suggesting the functional group modification due to reduction which tuned the optical behaviour. Afterward using transmission electron microscope (TEM) morphologies of CNBF and rCNBF were studied. This study opens a new avenue in designing fluorescent materials using functional group modifications having potential emerging applications.The development of highly fluorescent and robust luminescence material offers significant advantages especially in different practical applications such as displays; sensing; light emitters, solar concentrators, cellular imaging, and photodynamic therapies. [ In the present work, carbon dots were synthesized using citric acid as a sole carbon precursor and nitrogen, boron and fluorine were used as dopants to prepare CNBF. Nitrogen plays a very critical role for CDs both structurally and optically. [ Citric acid, sodium fluoride and ethylenediamine were purchased from SRL chemicals. Phenyl Boronic acid and sodium borohydride were purchased from Spectrochem. Chemicals were of analytical grade thus no further purification was needed. Throughout the experiment Deionized water (DI) was used, obtained from Sartorius Milli-Q system. The fluorescence spectra of as synthesized CNBF and rCNBF were recorded on FluoroMax spectrofluoromter. Time-correlated single photon counting from IBH corporation (Jobin Yvon Horiba) used to record fluorescence decays. Picosecond-pulsed diode lasers were used as an excitation source. IBH DAS 6.0 software was used to measure lifetime decay data using the iterative reconvoluation method. The decay values were fitted with bi-exponential function. CNBF was prepared from the one-step hydrothermal method. Briefly, 1 gram of citric acid was dissolved in 20 mL DI water. Further, phenyl boronic acid (0.08 M), sodium fluoride (0.4 M) and ethylene diamine (EDA) (5 mL) were mixed in citric acid solution. The resulting mixture was hydrothermally treated at 180 °C for 16 h. The resultant solution was centrifuged (10000 rpm; 10 min) and dialyzed with dialysis bag (cut off molecular weight 500 Da, 24 h) against DI water to remove large particles. The obtained brown sticky product (CNBF) was lyophilized and resuspended in DI water. The rCNBF were prepared based on the previous report. [ The calculation of the fluorescence quantum yields (Ф) of CNBF and rCNBF was performed as per procedure suggested in “Guide to Recording Fluorescence Quantum Yields" by HORIBA Jobin Yvon IBH Ltd. and also to the published procedure”. [ Here Ф is the quantum yield of the fluorophore. A The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) were measured using cyclic voltammetry performed on AutoLab PGSTAT 204 N of CNBF and rCNBF. The scanning was performed in the range (-1.5 V to 2 V) with the scan rate of 0.05 Vs Nitrogen, boron and fluorine co-doped C-dots (CNBF) were prepared hydrothermally using citric acid as sole carbon precursor. The as-synthesized CNBF was reduced to rCNBF using NaBH The absorption and emission behaviour of CNBF and rCNBF was studied using The excitation spectra show blue shift with reduction, the excitation peak for CNBF was found to be at 380 nm while a 20 nm blue shift is observed for rCNBF with excitation peak at 360 nm. Interestingly, both CNBF and rCNBF exhibited emission peak at 440 nm ( As seen in The fluorescence lifetime of CNBF, rCNBF1, rCNBF2 and rCNBF3 were measured with TCSPC. The CNBF was excited at 380 nm whereas rCNBF1, rCNBF2 and rCNBF3 were excited at 360 nm and emission was recorded at 440 nm. The data was fitted and summarized in The time resolved fluorescence profile of CNBF, rCNBF1, rCNBF2 and rCNBF3 at several representative wavelengths (400 nm, 420 nm, 440 nm, 460 nm, 480 nm, 500 nm) is shown in Fig. S4-S6. The increase in emissive wavelength results in the decrease of decay time for CNBF while the rCNBF shows weaker dependence on the probe wavelength ( The τ It has been reported that due to surface modification, intrinsic state emission plays a very critical role in fluorescence behaviour. CDs have functional groups such as carbonyl, amide and epoxy moieties present on it. These functional group after reduction gets transformed to –OH groups. [ The hydrothermal synthesis process of CDs starts with the carbonization of citric acid. [ The functional groups present on CDs surface significantly influence its fluorescence behaviour. [ The heteroatom doped carbon dot was prepared (CNBF) via the hydrothermal method. Further, the optical characteristics of CNBF were tuned by varying the concentration of NaBH On behalf of the authors, I hereby confirm that there are no known conflicts of interest associated with this publication. We also confirm that our work is original and has neither been published elsewhere nor is currently under consideration for publication in any other place. The authors report no declarations of interest. P.T. is thankful to MHRD and N.K. is thankful to UGC, New Delhi for their fellowship. S.M.M. thanks CSIR (project number 01 (2935)/18/EMR-II) and IIT Indore for funding. Authors are thankful to Prof. Anindya Dutta for providing TCSPC facility, Mr. Praveen Kumar for bandgap measurement, Mr. Aanand Abhinav for XPS and FTIR measurement, SAIF IIT Bombay for TEM measurement and SIC, IIT Indore for characterization facilities. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following are Supplementary data to this article: