The mechanism of composite additive in promoting reduction of copper slag was revealed. In this paper, the kinetic study of direct reduction of copper slag (CS) was studied by isothermal method, and the phase transformation and growth behaviors of metallic iron particles during reduction process were clarified by X-ray diffraction, Scanning Electron Microscopy, and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy analyses. The results indicated that the apparent activation energy of reduction reactions of iron oxides within CS sample was decreased from 71.27 KJ/mol to 49.86 KJ/mol with the addition of 15% composite additive, and the mean particle size of metallic iron particles increased from 9.2 μm to 35.2 μm. The composite additive can promote the reduction of iron minerals and induce the adequate growth of metallic iron particles, which is beneficial for iron and copper recovery in magnetite separation process.It is estimated that approximately 2–3 tons of copper slag (CS) is generated from per ton of copper production depending on the properties of copper concentrates and operating conditions in the pyrometallurgical process [ The treatment and disposal of CS has been a huge challenge for the copper industry, due to large quantities and many hazardous metals contained in it, such as Cu, Pb, Zn [ In our previous work of coal-based direct reduction-magnetic separation to upgrade the CS, the iron concentrate, assaying 90.68% Fe For the present investigation, the copper slag (CS) sample was collected from Tongling Non-ferrous Metals Group Holding Co., Ltd (Tongling city, Anhui province, China). The CS sample was analyzed by using X-ray fluorescence (XRF) and the result is summarized in  The soft coal was used as reductant agent for carbothermal reduction purpose which has been collected from Shanxi province. The main chemical composition of coal ash and the proximate and fusibility analysis of soft coal were determined by the standard proximate analysis method, and the results are shown in Limestone containing 60.38% of CaO and 37.47% of loss of ignition (LOI) was used as flux in this work to adjust the binary basicity (mass ratio of CaO/SiO The composite additive mainly containing hematite (16.38%), magnetite (41.45%) and some sodium humate (42.17%) was produced by Central South University, which is in a form of powder with over 90% passing 0.074 mm. The experimental procedure mainly includes: (1) mixing the CS with a certain amount of composite additive and limestone, (2) pelletizing of mixture, (3) preheating of dried pellets, (4) reduction of preheated pellets. The detail technology flowsheet can be seen in our previous paper [ The isothermal reduction kinetic and the reduction roasting tests of CS were carried out in a muffle furnace (model: KSY-12-18), as can be seen in First, about 60 g the preheated pellets covered with the required amount of coal (C/Fe mass ratio was 2) were loaded into alumina crucible. The purpose of using this excess coal in this alumina crucible was to maintain reducing atmosphere in which the pellets were to be reduced. When the temperature of the MoSi After that, the reduction degrees (R) of iron were calculated according to Eq. Other samples were charged to phase analysis by XRD and microstructure analysis by SEM-EDS. The composition of phases in the samples was investigated using X-ray diffractometer (XRD, RIGAKU, D/Max-2500). Microstructures of reduced pellets were performed by Leica DMLP optical microscopy, FEI Quata-200 scanning electron microscope and EDAX32 genesis spectrometer. SEM images were recorded in backscatter electron modes operating in low vacuum mode at 0.5 Torr and 20 keV. The image J software was used to measure the size of iron particles. In this study, the mechanism of composite additive in promoting reduction of CS was revealed from two aspects: comparison of reduction kinetics of preheated pellets with or without composite additive in the coal-based reduction process, iron particle growth behaviors of preheated pellets with various dosages of composite additive. Isothermal kinetic studies on the reduction of iron oxide ores have attracted a lot of attention by many researchers. In the study, the reduction mechanism of CS pellets has been carried out at four temperatures of 950 °C, 1000 °C, 1050 °C and 1100 °C for 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 60, 80, 100 and 120 min by the analysis of kinetic data. As a typical heterogeneous reaction, in which kinetics can be described as the following equation: The common isothermal kinetic models were tested with experimental data and are summarized in Reduction degrees of iron oxides are shown in To identify the kinetic model and the rate controlling steps in the reduction process of CS pellets, kinetics models in  In addition, according to the slope of the line of lnk versus 1/T (as seen in Combined with kinetic study above, it is inferred that at incubation period, the iron oxides in the CS pellets reduced to metallic iron was mainly hematite (Fe The generated CO gas would diffuse into inner of the CS pellets to further participate in the reduction of other iron oxides located inside the ore. Unfortunately, the CS was characterized by the fine size and dense structure, resulting in the difficulty of CO diffusion. However, the composite additive contained some sodium humate, which not only had a role as a kind of binder in the pelletizing process, but also had positive influence on the reduction of iron oxides. The previous studies pointed out the solid solution of alkali metal (such as Li+, Na+, K+) ion in wüsitite results in lattice distortion and structure defects of wüsitite and thus the more microporous would be generated, which is beneficial for diffusion of reduction gas to reaction interface [ XRD patterns of reduced pellets with or without composite additive are shown in Generally, analysis of XRD assumes that the ratio of the peak heights in the XRD patterns is proportional to the mineral content, and that, for the same mineral, the variation in the diffraction intensity can approximately reflect the change in its content [ The microstructure of reduced pellets with different dosages of composite additive is shown in The process of the particle growth could be divided into two stages: nucleation stage and crystal growth stage. In the first stage, the metallic iron particle nucleation formed, which need to gain energy to overcome the potential barrier of nucleation. The composite additive, containing the hematite and magnetite, was very easily and preferentially to be reduced to metallic iron compared with original CS samples, which could play a role of nucleating agent in this process. Thus, the nucleation method of metallic iron in this system was changed from the homogeneous nucleation to the heterogeneous nucleation [ In second stage, the driving force to promote crystal growth is the principle of minimum free energy and larger grain size tending to decrease surface free energy. The nucleating particles, generated on surface of the composite additive, strongly absorb around fine particles by interfacial tension and thus induce the growth of the iron particles. As a result, tiny iron particles decreased and disappeared, while large particles reunited and grew up. Generally, the larger size of the minerals responds very superiorly to sufficient liberation in milling process and subsequent physical separation. Therefore, the composite additive essentially played a role of nucleating agent during direct reduction, which can significantly promote nucleation, improve migration of metallic ferrous grains, facilitate the growth and coalescence of particles, effectively enhance the iron grains liberation in grinding, upgrading the iron degree and iron recovery in magnetic separation process.  Furthermore, the iron and copper content of different micro-zones randomly selected in the slag was detected by EDS point analysis, and the results are displayed in The distribution characteristics of iron, copper, silica, aluminum and calcium elements in the reduced pellets with 15% composite additive can be further revealed from  Reduction behaviors of the CS pellets were investigated under isothermal conditions, and the growth characteristics of the iron particles as well as main elements distribution behaviors were explored to disclose the mechanism of composite additive in promoting reduction of copper slag to produce directly reduced iron for weathering resistant steel. The following conclusions can be drawn as follows: Reduction of iron oxide within CS was controlled by Three-dimensional diffusion (Jander equation). The composite additive could reduce the active energy of reduction and thus accelerate the reaction rate. The activation energies for the iron oxides reduction of the CS sample without composite additive was 71.27 KJ/mol, while with 15% additive, the apparent activation energy was reduced to 49.86 KJ/mol. The composite additive played a role of nucleating agent during direct reduction, which can significantly facilitate growth and coalescence of metallic iron particles. With the addition of composite additive, the mean particle size of metallic iron was increased from 9.2 μm to 35.2 μm. The authors wish to express their thanks to the