Deposit in the grate-kiln process is a well-known problem for iron ore pellet production. In this study, the deposits in a coal-fired grate-kiln plant for hematite pellet production were characterized to reveal their formation mechanisms. Scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) and X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) analysis demonstrated that the main phase of the deposits was hematite with minor proportions of magnesioferrite, hedenbergite, quartz and anorthite. Comparisons of key elemental ratios showed that the silicate phases in the deposits mainly originated from the coal ash and partly from the pellet powder. The primary form of deposits formed in the grate and feeding area in the kiln was the liquid solidification. The hematite particles could be reduced to FeO by unburnt carbon from the uncompleted coal combustion, and then the sufficient liquids for deposit formation were generated with the presence of FeO. The primary manner to form the deposits near the burner zone in the rotary kiln was the hematite crystallization and diffusion, while the liquid phases played a secondary role in the deposit formation. The generated FeO caused by unburnt coal residue not only contributed to the formation of liquid phases at low-temperature parts but also was beneficial to the combination of solid particles at high-temperature parts in the grate and kiln.Deposit phenomenon is frequently found in many grate-kiln plants for iron ore pellets production, which seriously causes decline of pellet quality and decrease of production efficiency. It is essential to reveal deposit formation mechanism and take some practical measures to mitigate these occurrences. Iron and steel are indispensable for economy development. Iron ore pellet is one of the important raw materials for ironmaking [ Several investigations [ In this study, the deposit samples removed from a coal-fired grate-kiln plant were characterized with an aim to reveal the deposit formation mechanisms. One sample in the grate and seven samples in the kiln were studied by chemical analysis, SEM-EDS and XRD techniques to investigate the chemical compositions, microstructures, elemental distributions and phase compositions of the deposits. The liquid phase amounts of the silicate phases in the different deposit samples were predicted by FactSage® 7.1 software. Finally, the primary formation and solidification mechanisms of the deposits at the low-temperature parts and higher temperature parts in the grate and kiln were discussed and summarized. Our findings will provide a better understanding of deposit formation in coal-fired grate-kiln plant for iron ore pellet production. This production system mainly contains three subsystems: the grate, the rotary kiln and the cooler. In the study, the grate has a length of 56 m and width of 4.5 m. There are three zones in the grate for different purposes, including drying zone, preheating zone I and preheating zone II. As the iron concentrate is hematite, thus a higher preheating temperature is required for its solidification. The length of the preheating zone II is 21 m, and its temperature for preheating pellets is approximately 1100 °C. The green pellets are dried and preheated in the grate; then the preheated pellets are transferred from the grate to the rotary kiln through a chute. The pellets are heated and sintered when they roll and move through the rotary kiln. The diameter of the rotary kiln is 6.1 m, and its length is 40 m. The required roasting temperature in the rotary kiln is about 1280 °C, while the outlet part (close to the burner) has a higher temperature, but the feeding zone (inlet part) may have a lower temperature because this area is far from the coal burner. As illustrated in In this study, the deposit samples were collected from the grate and kiln. As shown in The preheated pellets and pulverized coal were provided by an iron ore pellet plant in China. The preheated pellets were collected from the end of the traveling grate after the green pellets were dried and preheated. The chemical compositions of the preheated pellet powder and coal ash are shown in The chemical compositions of the preheated pellet, coal ash and deposits samples were determined by chemical analysis methods, [ The chemical compositions of the deposit samples are listed in The microstructures of the deposit samples were illustrated in Microstructural interface between the deposit and refractory brick in the kiln is shown in The phase evaluation and elemental distribution of the deposit samples in the grate and kiln were determined by SEM-EDS techniques. As shown in The deposit samples K1, K2 and K3 have similar compositions and microstructures. In addition, The compositions of the mineral phases of the representative deposit samples were determined by X-ray diffraction (XRD) technique. The samples K2 and K7 in the kiln and G1 in the grate were chosen as the representative samples to be investigated. As illustrated in This study deals with the characterization of the deposition materials in a coal-fired grate-kiln plant for hematite pellet production. Significant differences in the microstructures and phase compositions of the deposit samples were observed in the deposits with the different sampled locations in the grate and rotary kiln. It is clear that the hematite grains mainly bond together in the K1 to K3 samples, whereas the most of the hematite grains were independent and bond by silicate phases in the K6, K7, and G1 samples. According to the chemical compositions of the deposit samples, it can be seen that the iron ore pellet was the main contributor to the deposit formation, but the residue after coal combustion also played a significant role on the deposit formation. The silicate phases in the deposits could be seen as the bonding phases that contributed to the solidification of deposits. The key elemental ratios of the preheated pellet, coal ash, deposit samples and silicate phases of the deposits were calculated from the chemical compositions and SEM-EDS results in order to reveal the elements distribution behaviors of the deposits in the grate and kiln. As shown in In this study, the silicate phases in most of the deposits were acted as bonding phase to bond the solid particles together. The liquid phases in the deposits are crucial to the deposit formation. It is therefore essential to investigate the liquid behaviors of the silicate phases in the deposit samples. As shown in In addition, the amounts of liquid phases of the silicate phases in the deposits at the preheating and roasting temperatures were calculated using FactSage 7.1, and the results are shown in As we know, even tiny proportions of liquid on the surface of particles affects the interparticle forces by its effect of reducing the interparticle distance and the smoothing effect it has on surface imperfections [ Furthermore, it is well accepted that the combustion efficiency of pulverized coal is extremely difficult to achieve 100% [ Besides, according to the differences of chemical compositions and microstructures of the deposit samples, the formation mechanism of the deposits samples K1 to K3 deposits is different from that of deposit formation at low temperatures. As illustrated in Previous investigation [ In conclusion, our findings showed that the primary formation mechanisms of deposits in different locations of a coal-fired grate-kiln plant were different. The primarily donated proportion of liquid phase and solid phase at different temperature condition was also different. Moreover, both the liquid solidification and diffusion of solid phase contributed to the deposit formation, but the primary manners to form the deposits in the low and high-temperature parts in the grate and kiln were different. Briefly, the primary form of deposit solidification was liquid phase mainly originated from coal ash at low-temperature parts, while diffusion of the solid phase is the main manner at high-temperature parts. The generated FeO caused by unburnt coal residue not only contributed to the formation of the liquid phase at the low-temperature part but also was beneficial to the combination of the solid particle at the high-temperature part. Furthermore, according to the observation of the on-site deposits in the grate and kiln, it was observed that the thickness of deposits in the kiln increased from K1 to K7 and the deposit in the grate formed more quickly than that in the kiln. This phenomenon could be explained by the different deposit mechanisms. The deposit rate controlled by the liquid-solid impaction was quicker than that by the solid-solid impaction. Finally, several measures were suggested to mitigate the deposits formed in the grate-kiln plant, such as reducing the preheating and roasting temperatures by pretreating the iron ore concentrate and reducing the coal size to increase its combustion efficiency. Our findings provide the better understanding for the deposit formation in the grate-kiln process for iron ore pellet production, which also can help the producers to take some practical measures to mitigate this problem and increase the production efficiency and economic benefits. The deposit samples from a coal fried grate-kiln plant for iron ore pellets production were characterized using SEM-EDS, XRD techniques and FactSage software to reveal the deposit formation mechanism in the grate and rotary kiln. The deposits mainly originated from the preheated pellet powder and a small part of origination was the coal ash. The mineral phases in the deposits were mainly hematite with minor proportions of magnesioferrite, hedenbergite, quartz and anorthite. The silicate phases in the deposits mainly originated from coal ash and a small part was from the preheated pellet powder. The primary contributor of deposit solidification at the low temperatures parts was the silicate phases which mainly originated from coal ash, then the unburned carbon from coal reduced hematite particles to FeO and promoted the generation of liquid phases during the deposit formation and the liquid phases adhered the hematite particles together. The primary manner to form the deposits was crystallization and diffusion of the solid phase (Fe The generated FeO caused by unburnt coal residue not only contributed to the formation of the liquid phases at the low-temperature part but also was beneficial to the combination of the solid particle at the high-temperature parts.