Dynamic loading events in the longwall faces under slopes in the Shendong Coalfield, China, seriously limit the safety and efficiency of mining. The slope characteristics, such as direction, height, and angle, determine the load type and the stability of the voussoir beam structure (VBS) formed by fractured blocks of the primary key stratum (PKS). Whether or not dynamic loading events will occur can be directly determined based on the presence or absence of a stable VBS in the PKS. Based on this relationship, six structural mechanical VBS models for different load distributions were established and then the effects of the slope direction, height, and angle on the stability of VBS was analysed. Changes of load type intensified the compression force between the hinged blocks. When the compression force between blocks exceeded the strength of the rock, VBS instability and dynamic loading events occurred. The compression force in the VBS increased with increasing slope angle and height when the slope directions were similar, becoming more pronounced for mining under the uphill sections of the slopes. Therefore, a method of determining the critical slope parameter values indicating a risk of dynamic loading was proposed, enabling such slopes to be recognised in advance. Measures such as slope top cutting or backfilling can then be applied to prevent potential dynamic loading accidents. This study can provide guidelines for safe mining under geological conditions involving widespread slopes and gullies.During underground coal resource exploration, surface topography significantly affects mining activities. This relationship is reflected in various engineering problems, such as valley closure, Existing research on slopes has been focused primarily on slope design optimisation, Xu et al. statistically analysed dynamic loading accidents cases for multiple longwall coal mining faces under a slope in Shendong Coalfield. One significant means of solving the problem of stratum behaviour in stopes is to study the movement laws of the overlying strata. Researchers have established numerous stratum movement models for investigating stratum behaviours in the stopes. These models include the compression arch hypothesis, In this study, we established six structural mechanical models of VBSs with different overlying load distributions. The models were developed based on comprehensive consideration of the effects of slopes on VBS load distributions. Additionally, we analysed the rules associated with the effects of different load distributions on VBS stability. We thereby revealed the mechanisms of dynamic loading in working faces where the primary key stratum remains intact and developed a method of determining the critical values of characteristic slope parameters that lead to dynamic loading accidents in working faces under slopes. The results of this research could play an important role in guiding safe and high-efficiency mining under geological conditions involving widespread slopes and gullies. The No.21304 working face is located in the Huojitu colliery of the Shendong Coalfield, China, and is deployed in the No.2 coal seam. The coal seam dip angle is 0°–5°, and the burial depth is 120 m, with an average mining height of 4.5 m. The width of the No.21304 working face is 240 m, and the setting load of the supports on the working faces is 8638 kN. The average mining height of the No.1 coal seam (located above the No.2 coal seam) is 3.1 m, and the distance between the two coal seams is 25 m. As of May 2008, the No.1 coal seam had been fully mined out. The uniform advancing speed of the No.21304 working face is about 6.0 m/d, i.e., the advancing speed per production shift is 0.375 m/h. The geologic column and the locations of the PKS and SKS (see the section entitled “Key stratum theory”) in the overlying strata can be seen in The No.52304 working face is located in the Daliuta colliery of the Shendong Coalfield, China, and is deployed in No.5 coal seam. The coal seam dip angle is 1°–3°, the burial depth is 145–222 m, the width is 300 m, whereas the setting load of the supports in the working faces is 16,800 kN. The No.52304 working face is located below the goafs of the No.22306 working face and the No.22307 working face, which are deployed in No.2 coal seam. According to the previous research findings, After coal seams are mined, the overlying strata break and move. These changes result in certain stratum behaviours in stopes. Therefore, the key to controlling stratum behaviours in stopes is to master the breakage and movement rules of the overlying strata. As early as 1956, Mohr found that there is a time lag between the beginning of mining and the onset of surface subsidence. Based on this phenomenon, Mohr proposed the “compression arch structure” and described its evolution process with the advancing of the working face, The VBS concept was first proposed by Evans. As shown in According to key stratum theory, the PKS has a controlling effect on the overlying strata and even the surface, thus, the strata up to the surface break and move simultaneously when the PKS breaks and moves. Hence, topographic undulation on the ground causes changes in the overlying load distribution above the PKS, with this effect being more significant in the shallow buried coal seam mining of the Shendong Coalfield. Additionally, the load distribution of VBS formed by the broken blocks of PKS is closely related to the characteristics of the slope direction, height, and angle. Clearly, the overlying VBS load distribution varies depending on the slope height and angle. Because of the controlling effects of PKS on the surface, the fracture interval on the surface can be regarded as the PKS breaking interval in shallow coal seam mining. In the mechanical model in VBS instability usually results in dynamic loading events in the working face. First, Based on these methods, equilibrium analysis was conducted for Blocks B and C, the stresses on which are shown in According to previous research fundings, There are two types of VBS instability: slide instability and rotational distortion instability. Because the contact face of the fractured blocks is in the corner area of the blocks, the ratio of corner area strength to uniaxial compression strength, Using Eq. From Eqs. It can be concluded that the VBS in PKS can prevent slide instability but not rotational distortion instability. Hence, contact point A would be crushed and Block B thereby fails to hinge with Block A, which remains unbroken, as shown in There are six types of load distributions of the VBS in the PKS. Firstly, because of differences in mining direction, there are two types of slope directions: (1) uphill slope sections, where the normal slope line along the horizontal is in the opposite direction to the mining direction, as shown in According to the methods described above, the horizontal compression and shear force expressions for the different overlying load distribution types in The field measurements in the No.52304 working face revealed that dynamic loading events only occurred under slope No. 1, but not under slopes No. 2 and 3. The question whether it is possible that the VBS in PKS was stable during the No.52304 working face mining under slopes No. 2 and 3 is then raised. For the No.52304 working face mining under slope No. 2, For the No.52304 working face mining under slope No. 3, Based on the above analysis, it can be conclude that the VBS in PKS can simultaneously prevent sliding and rotational distortion instability for No.52304 working face mining under slopes No. 2 and 3. This is the reason why dynamic loading events occurred only under slope No. 1, but not under slopes No. 2 and 3. The effects of horizontal compression and shear force on VBS stability are of great importance. Furthermore, it is necessary to consider the rules governing the effects of the slope direction, height, and angle on horizontal compression and shear force. Based on the geological conditions of the No.52304 working face, the horizontal compression and shear force in the uphill and downhill sections are calculated using Eqs. (A.4)–(A.7), under different slope types presented in According to Section A critical research question is how to determine the critical values of the slope height and angle that may result in dynamic loading events in working face. If these questions can be answered, it would be possible to identify dangerous slopes, which would be very beneficial for the safety mining under them. Therefore, in this section, we propose a method of determining the critical values of the slope height and slope angle. In this method, three steps included are shown below and the parameters of No.52304 working face are used as examples. Step 1: Insert all parameters into Eqs. (A.4) – (A.7), so that, by using Eqs (A.8) – (A.13), horizontal compression force and shear force denoted by slope height and slope angle, which are considered as unknown quantities, can be obtained; Step 2: Insert Eqs (A.8) – (A.13) into Eq. Step 3: Solve the Eqs (A.14) – (A.19) obtained in (b), and the critical values of slope height and slope angle causing dynamic loading events in the working face can be obtained. The critical curve of the slope height and slope angle can then be obtained by fitting these critical values as shown in As shown in Using this method, the critical values of the slope parameters that would lead to dynamic loading events in mining face can be obtained in advance. Based on these results, the likelihood of dynamic loading events occurring during the mining under certain slopes can be determined. Note that while the No.52304 working face was used as an example in this manuscript, this research method can be successfully generalized. For other coal mining faces under slopes, it is only necessary to substitute the parameters describing the relevant geological conditions for the parameters in this section. The gravitational planar stress model frame was used in this study to simulate the instability of VBS induced by different slope heights and angles. The dimensions of the model were 130 cm × 15 cm. In the material mix for each rock layer, sand was used as the aggregate, while plaster and calcium carbonate were used as cements. A layer of mica was placed in the interfaces between the strata to simulate stratification, and the thickness of the soft rock strata was 1–2 cm. Three groups of similar simulation experiments were performed. The slope angles were 30°, 60°, and 60°, with corresponding slope heights of 30, 20, and 45 cm, respectively. Mining was executed in the same manner in all the simulations, involving excavation in steps of 2.5 cm. The simulation was imaged after each excavation to compare the strata breakage and movement before and after the excavation. The actual model and the mixing ratios that were used are shown in    The results of simulation experiments show that the greater the slope height and the slope angle, the greater the horizontal compression force, and the possibility of the hinge point to be crushed is greatly increased. The increase of the slope height is more detrimental to the stability of the VBS compared with that of angle. This is also consistent with the theoretical analysis results. This study investigates VBSs formed by fractured blocks of the PKS in the longwall faces under slopes in the Shendong Coalfield, China. Six structural mechanical VBS models for different load distributions were established and the effects of the slope direction, height, and angle on the stability of VBS were analysed. Based on the findings of the study, the following conclusions are drawn: Dynamic loading events in mining faces under slopes are typical surface topography problems affecting stratum behaviours in stopes. The incidents have seriously threatened the safety of underground personnel and coal mine operation. The fundamental reason behind this is the fact that the slope changes the overlying load distribution types of the VBS and causes its instability. To further reveal the influence of slope parameters, i.e., slope aspect, slope height, and slope angle on the stability of VBS, six mechanical models of VBSs for different load distributions were established. The horizontal compression force, shear force and rock compressive strength are the key parameters that determine the stability of VBS. Based on these six mechanical models, the influence law of slope aspect, height and angle on horizontal compression force and shear force is investigated. The greater the slope height and angle, the greater the horizontal compression and shear force in the VBS. Compared with the increase of the slope angle, that of slope height is more detrimental to the stability, and this effect is more obvious on the uphill section than downhill section. This has also been verified by physical simulation and field measurements of the No.52304 working face. The results reasonably explain why the dynamic loading occurred on slope 1 of the No.52304 working face and did not occur on slopes 2 and 3. The method of determining the critical values of slope parameters to ascertain whether dynamic loading events would occur in coal mining faces under slopes was proposed. Under the condition of No.52304 working face, both the critical curve of uphill and downhill sections, as The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Financial support from the The overlying load distribution of VBS in PKS changes because of existing ground slopes and causes the horizontal compression and shear force in the VBS to vary, thereby affecting VBS stability in PKS. In the section entitled “Mechanical analysis of VBS under the influence of slopes,” two simplifications were made in the procedure for solving for the horizontal compression and shear force: (1) the contact length of fractured blocks in the VBS was simplified as Contact length of the hinged blocks in a VBS The contact length of the fractured blocks in a VBS has been observed to be fundamentally indeterminate. For example, Evans revealed that the ratio of the contact length to the fractured block thickness in a VBS was equal to 0.5. In the VBS model in this paper, we provided a more specific method of calculating the contact length. Rectangle A′B′C′D′ represents the status of Block B before rotation, while rectangle A″B″C″D″ represents the status of Block B after rotation. Because blocks were pressed against the left and right sides of Block B, the contact lengths of the two sides were simplified as equivalent, as shown in Horizontal compression at the contact face The stress distributions acting at the contact face of a VBS were assumed to be triangular by Diederichs and Kaiser, However, most rock uniaxial compression tests indicate that the maximum elastic strain is no more than 1% for the thick and hard rock strata in KSs, such as sandstone. Combining Eqs. Taking the geologic conditions of No.52304 working face as an example, with Key equations in the text  