The effectiveness of various acid mist suppression techniques has been analysed in the present work. The two important factors that influenced the performance of a floating barrier were its coverage of the solution's surface area and its height above the solution line. When comparing single layered floating barriers, spheres reduced acid mist the most due to their higher buoyancy and higher coverage of the solution surface. In general, barriers made of high density polyethylene were 3.4% more effective in reducing acid mist than those made of polypropylene due to their lower density which enabled them to be more buoyant in the solution and intercept acid mist more effectively.
                  Acid mist was reduced noticeably with the addition of FC-1100 (a chemical reagent widely used to suppress acid mist) to the solution up to 30ppm. Further addition of FC-1100 made much less difference in the suppression of acid mist. When FC-1100 was used in combination with floating barriers (such as spheres), the reduction in acid mist improved by an average of 29% in comparison to the use of FC-1100 alone.Electrowinning is the final stage of extracting copper, zinc, nickel and many other non-ferrous metals from their ore. As part of the electrowinning process, large volumes of oxygen gas in the form of micro-bubbles are generated at the lead anodes ( In many of the electrowinning tankhouses, plastic balls or beads are employed to reduce the formation of acid mist in the tankhouse. About 63% of the electrowinning plants worldwide use plastic balls, 23% use beads, and 36% use a chemical suppressant (such as FC-1100, Dowfax and Quillaja) to reduce acid mist ( These floating objects are good mist suppressors only in thick layers ( Despite the wide spread use of these floating barriers, their effectiveness has not been quantified and documented. In this paper, the performance of different floating barriers in reducing acid mist has been quantified and the reasons for their differences discussed. In addition, the effects of the barrier's material type (high density polyethylene versus polypropylene) and the electrical current density on the operation of the floating barriers have also been investigated. A chemical reagent known as FC-1100 (Fluorad™ manufactured by 3M) is also widely used in electrowinning tankhouses to suppress acid mist. No publications could be found, except for the brochures supplied by the manufacturer of FC-1100, that quantifies the effectiveness of this reagent in comparison to other mist suppression techniques. In this paper, we have not only examined the effect of FC-1100 concentration on acid mist, but have also quantified its effectiveness when used in combination with other acid mist reduction techniques. The copper electrowinning process was essentially replicated in a clear acrylic bench-scale tank ( Acid mist was captured by nitro cellulose filters (HAWP04700 by Millipore) with a pore size of 0.45 Clear flexible PVC sheets were used as curtains to isolate the atmosphere above the cell from the outside disturbances. The PVC curtains were open from the bottom allowing the ambient air to flow through freely and preventing pressure drop above the cell. The main purpose of PVC curtains was to prevent hazardous acid mist from dispersing throughout the lab. In addition, PVC curtains eliminated the effect of uncontrolled external factors such as the air flow from the laboratory's air conditioning system leading to more repeatable results. Floating barriers and chemical reagents are commonly used in the industry to reduce acid mist. In this study, the performances of four different floating barriers and one chemical reagent (FC-1100) were quantified and compared. The floating barriers were utilized to study the effect of a barrier shape and also material type on acid mist reduction. Material type and dimensions of each barrier are shown in To examine the effect of current density on the performance of these floating barriers, two different current densities of 200 The chemical reagent (FC-1100) was tested at various concentrations ranging from 3 The acid mist sampling rate (i.e. air flow rate through filters) was set at 3.0 The primary goal of the present work was to compare the effectiveness of various acid mist reduction techniques. In total, 105 tests were conducted to investigate the effect of barrier shape and material, current density, and FC-1100 on the amount of airborne acid-containing droplets (i.e. acid mist). The effect of a barrier was calculated by averaging the test results from different current densities and material types. As can be seen in Based on the ANOVA analysis, the difference made in the amount of acid mist was statistically significant for all barriers in comparison to the control test with no barriers (based on the 95% confidence interval). Moreover, the reduction in acid mist by spheres was also considered significantly different from that by beads. Based on the observed results, it was hypothesized that the exposed area of the free surface of the solution could be the reason for the differences observed in the acid mist amounts when using different barriers. To examine this hypothesis, the portion of the solution surface covered by a barrier (i.e. surface coverage) was calculated for each type of barrier. ImageJ, an open source image analysis software, was used to analyse images taken from the top of the cell to estimate the surface coverage. For example, the total free surface of the solution between the two electrodes was 4197 Surface coverage and acid mist reduction exhibited a linear relationship except when beads were used ( Results in To test this, the total volume of a barrier floating above the free surface of the solution was calculated by using top view and side view images of each floating barrier. This calculated volume was then plotted alongside the percentage of acid mist reduction for each barrier ( It can be seen that the effectiveness of a barrier in reducing acid mist was closely related to the total volume of a barrier above the free surface of the solution. In other words, the thickness of a barrier and its surface coverage were two important factors in determining its ability to prevent acid mist. Multiple layers of a floating barrier are often used in the industry to improve the suppression of acid mist. The change in acid mist suppression power is clearly demonstrated in Spheres, discs and beads were available in polypropylene (PP) and high density polyethylene (HDPE). All the 6 different barriers were examined to observe the effect of material type ( The relative difference in reducing acid mist due to material type was about 4% for spheres and discs. The buoyancy of a floating barrier and its coverage of the free surface of the solution were two important characteristics in the reduction of acid mist, as established in Beads, in contrast to spheres and discs, made of PP reduced 13% more acid mist than those made of HDPE. Closer examination of the shape and size of beads revealed that PP beads were on average 1.5 Based on Faraday's law, the total volume of oxygen gas liberated during electrolysis is directly related to the amount of electrical current flowing through the anode. On the other hand, current density has a negligible effect on the detachment size of bubbles (  A series of tests were conducted to determine the effect of FC-1100 concentration on acid mist reduction. The reduction percentage in acid mist in addition to the actual amounts of captured acid mist is shown in The decrease in the amount of acid mist with increased FC-1100 was noticeably high up to 30 The Occupational Safety & Health Administration (OSHA) and American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH) both recommend a Permissible Exposure Limit (PEL) of 1 In the electrowinning tankhouses, typically 2-3 layers of balls are applied for effective acid mist reduction. A set of experiments were conducted to examine the improvement in mist reduction when 3 layers of spheres utilized at various FC-1100 concentrations. The results are demonstrated in  The effectiveness of a floating barrier in reducing acid mist was strongly influenced by two parameters: its coverage of the free surface area of the solution, and its height above the solution line. When comparing one layer of a floating barrier, spheres performed the best (62% acid mist reduction) followed by discs (49%) and bio balls (48%). Beads provided the lowest reduction in acid mist (30%). Overall, barriers made of high density polyethylene (HDPE) were 3.4% more effective in reducing acid mist than those made of polypropylene (PP). It was hypothesized that the lower density of HDPE enabled HDPE barriers to be more buoyant in the solution resulting in more effective coverage and interception of acid drops and preventing them from becoming airborne. The amount of acid mist was increased by 59%, on average, when current density was increased from 200 to 400 A m Acid mist was reduced noticeably with the addition of FC-1100 to the solution up to 30 The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of Xstrata Technology. We also would like to thank Icon Plastic who supplied the spheres, discs, and beads at no cost to us.