The paper describes a new, powerful, patented piece of sonic equipment that operates in the low sonic frequency range, at 104Hz, with nominal power of 75kW. It has been tested for both physical and chemical sonic effects. A large-scale industrial application is described — the conditioning and pacification of ash from utility coal combustion by fluidized bed combustion. A variety of additional applications is suggested, most of which have been briefly tested.The purpose in developing the technology was to make available powerful, low frequency sonic energy — distinct from, but an alternative to, ultrasound — with most of the same processing capabilities. The driver for the largest unit constructed to date is a solid steel cylinder 35 The force actually bends the bar through an arc of 12 The next smaller unit, the 20 Electrical power in North America is 65% produced from coal combustion: a similar ratio exists around the world. A highly efficient and minimally polluting method is FBC: gravel-sized coal and limestone are tumbled and burned in an upwelling air stream; this gives 6% better energy production; sulphur is captured at source into the lime (CaO) to yield anhydrite; minimum NO There is, however, a problem: the ash resulting from FBC is reactive and a problem to dispose of in a secure landfill site. The best current method of hydration (wetting) of FBC ash reaches only 40% completion, called ash conditioning in the industry. At the disposal site it takes up to 3 The ARC process will condition and pacify the ash in a very short time, rendering it non-toxic and stable. Part of it can then be used to replace the limestone feed to the furnace to a calculated maximum of 25%. The remaining output may be used to make cement-based products or can be safely used in landfill. The process was developed by CETC (Canada Energy Technology Centre) and was first tested in their laboratories in Ottawa. It was later tested using the ARC 75 The results of the testing can be summarized as follows 96% conditioning of fly ash is achieved in 1 100% pacification of fly ash is achieved in 5 a substantial portion of hydrated bed ash can be recirculated to the furnace; there is a reduction of CO Current testing is being carried out for a utility that produces 1000 Low frequency sonic energy is a platform technology; it has a wide range of possible uses. Examples include the following. Physical effects: fine grinding of ores, pigments, fillers; deagglomeration of clays; emulsification. High shear mixing: extreme turbulence can be used to mix, shear macromolecules (e.g. polymers), enhance solvolysis, leaching and surface cleaning. Sonochemistry: accelerates chemical reactions by mass transfer and cavitation. (1) Chemical destruction of PCB in oil through the use of sodium (Na) dispersion. Low frequency sonic energy can make it less expensive and faster. (2) Mineral extraction: finer grinding of ores often permits greater mineral extraction. (3) Soil remediation: deagglomeration of clays allows access to bound contaminants. (4) Wastewater treatment: slurrying of contents and enhanced oxygenation lead to faster biological treatment. (5) Destruction of halogenated organics and other industrial pollutants by sonic-enhanced oxidation. This has an effect like supercritical water oxidation, but is calculated to be more economical. (6) Sonic-enhanced oxidation has been tested in dye destruction. It has also been tested in the treatment of various organochlorides and organic contaminants. More details of such applications have been given elsewhere ARC Sonics has developed a new sonic technology, employing low frequencies, between 100 and 500