During the last decade, semi-finish-grinding plants have been used more and more for the energy efficient grinding of high-quality cement. In 1999, it was found that by decreasing the ball charge filling ratio it was possible to lower the specific energy demand for grinding significantly.
                  It was obvious, too, that the L/D ratio influences the specific energy demand and the mill throughput as well. Therefore, a huge test program was carried with a semi-industrial ball mill, which was operated in closed circuit. The mass-specific surface area of the two feed materials (intermediate product) used were quite typical for industrial semi-finish grinding plants. The values were 2200 and 3000 cm2/g according to Blaine. The product finenesses were 3000 and 3800 cm2/g, respectively. The L/D ratio of the ball mill was varied in four steps of 1.75, 2.1, 2.79 and 3.49, and the ball charge filling ratio was varied in three steps of 15%, 20% and 25%. The experiments clearly indicated that the optimal L/D ratio and the optimal ball charge filling ratio are different for each feed fineness.
                  The influence of the ball charge grading on the specific energy demand, characterised by the average ball diameter, was tested by means of a discontinuous laboratory ball mill. The results showed that by using a finer ball grading the specific energy demand could be lowered considerably.
                  The obtained results can be explained well by theoretical considerations regarding the ruling stress intensity and the number of stress events. The stress intensity expressed as the power input per ball is dependent on the ball diameter to the third power and only slightly dependent on the inner diameter of the mill. The number of stresses can be characterised by the average retention time of the ground material inside the mill if the ball charge grading remains unchanged. The optimal retention time depends not only on the feed material and the desired comminution result but also on the ball charge filling ratio and particularly on the L/D ratio. On the basis of the present results and considerations, a specific optimisation of ball mills in semi-finish-grinding plants can be done.During the last decade, semi-finish-grinding plants have been used more and more for the energy efficient grinding of high-quality cement. Recent research work has shown that the operational performance of the ball mill, which is situated downstream of the high-pressure grinding roll separator cycle can be improved significantly. The results of extensive investigations carried out on industrial semi-finish-grinding plants indicated that the specific power consumption of the ball mill could be decreased by about 20% when lowering the ball charge filling ratio from about 30% to about 20%. However, the throughput is decreased also by about 20% ( Furthermore, it has shown that a L/D ratio of about 3.0, which is a quite common value for cement mills, might be to high for a ball mill in a Combi-grinding plant. This was proven by the fact that there was no grinding progress observed in the last third of the total grinding path length. This finding was not effected by different ball charge filling ratios and different mill throughput mass flows. Quite typical are the results shown in The ball charge filling ratio and the L/D ratio are influencing the specific power consumption and the throughput simultaneously. Furthermore, the absolute fineness of the ball charge and the ball charge grading are important factors for the optimal operation of a ball mill. Systematic investigations, which are necessary for quantifying the different influences, cannot be executed in industrial plants. Therefore, the test runs were carried out in the R&D facilities of the Polysius AG. The specific power consumption is, as already said, influenced by the L/D ratio and the ball charge filling ratio of a ball mill. The investigations known from the literature were carried out with two compartment cement mills in the 1980s ( The specific power consumption during this tests had a broad optimum in the range of 26% ball charge filling ratio. The optimal L/D ratio range is quite broad again with the minimum in the range of 3.2. For one compartment mills, this optimum should be less due to the lack of the first compartment used for coarse grinding. The optimal ball charge filling ratio for Combi-ball mills is supposed to be less too. The flow-sheet of the semi-industrial plant is shown in The ball mill is equipped with a classifying lining with a conical undulated shape. The absolute lifting height is quite similar to an industrial used liner plate. The discharge diaphragm is of the slotted type. The ball charge grading used during most of the test runs was an industrial standard grading with balls between 12 and 20 mm. The average ball diameter was 15.8 mm; the average ball weight was 15.3 g/piece. For the experiments in which a finer ball grading was used a bored discharge diaphragm (bore hole diameter: 4 mm) was built in. The air velocity in the free mill cross-section was adjusted to 0.5 m/s. The mill speed was kept constant at 37.4 rpm, which relates to a relative mill speed of 75%. The function of the classifying liners were examined several times. The grading was very good in all cases. The desired product fineness was adjusted by varying the circumferential speed of the rotor cage. The circulation factor was limited to 3.0. The two feed materials which were used in the test runs were produced with a high-pressure grinding roll which was operated in closed circuit with a static separator. The feeds had finenesses of about 2200 and 3000 cm The feed were ground to product finenesses of 3000 and 3800 cm The test results are plotted in For the fine feed, there is no clear dependence of the L/D ratio and the throughput. The throughput remains nearly constant between L/D=2.1–2.7. A ball charge filling ratio of 25% increases the throughput only by about 4% compared to a filling ratio of 20% and 10% at 15% filling ratio. The optimal L/D ratio regarding the spec. power consumption is situated in the range of 2.0–2.4. In contradiction to the coarse feed, a lower ball charge filling ratio of about 18% showed to be advantageous. For an industrial application, one has to decide what should be the optimisation target: minimum spec. power consumption or maximum throughput. For determining the comminution progress along the grinding path, the mill was crash-stopped during several test runs. Samples were taken in distances of 40–50 cm along the whole grinding path length. The particle size distribution of these samples were analyzed by means of a laser diffraction spectrometer. The parameters of the RRSB-function ( The RRSB-slope n of the “meter” samples is plotted as a function of the grinding path length in It can be summarised that for ball mills in Combi-grinding plants the optimal L/D ratio is clearly below 3.0. For coarse feed material about 2.7 seems to be appropriate and about 2.3 for finer feed. Recommendations made by It is useful to analyse the obtained results theoretically to develop procedures for the target oriented mill optimisation. The comminution process in ball mills is controlled by how often a particle of the material to be ground is stressed (number of stresses) and with which intensity the particle is stressed (stress intensity). The comminution progress or result—characterised, e.g., by the newly produced surface area—remains constant if the number of stress events (SN) and the stress intensity (SI) are unchanged ( One can calculate The stress intensity SI here defined as the average energy, which is transferred to the material by each ball, should be proportional to the power input per ball The power absorption of industrial ball mills at Polysius has been determined for decades with an empirical equation originally developed by Blanc ( Beside the mill inside diameter For a constant ball diameter The combination of Eqs. The principal relationships can be seen from Eq. The second part of Eq. Eq. The ball diameter, which is able to comminuting a particle of defined size, can be calculated according to For cement clinker This well-known but often neglected facts were investigated regarding the comminution of intermediate product in Combi-grinding plants. For that purpose, tests were carried out with a discontinuous laboratory ball mill. This mill at the Polysius R&D centre is used for grindability testing mainly. Seventeen different ball gradings were tested. The lab-mill (∅ 0.75×0.45 m, ball charge filling ratio 10%, relative mill speed 0.88) were fed with clinker meal with a Blaine surface area of 2700 cm The figure contains the mass-specific power consumption in relationship to the average ball diameter of the different ball gradings. It can be seen that the power consumption decreases with decreasing ball diameter. The potential savings are increasing with increasing product fineness. It can be concluded that the finer the desired product is the finer the used ball grading should be. Polydisperse ball gradings showed to be slightly more efficient compared to monodisperse gradings with the same average ball diameter. A direct transfer of this results to industrial ball mills, which are operated continuously, however, is not possible. This is caused by the fact that in continuous mills the material to be ground has to be conveyed through the ball charge. Very fine balls with diameters <8 mm tend to swim up. Furthermore, with finer balls, the tendency of the material to form agglomerates, which stick to the mill liners increases. Fine balls with a low weight do not have enough energy to clean the liners from that agglomerates. This is a limitation for the use of very fine balls. But it is possible to suppress the agglomeration by an increased addition of grinding aid. The results obtained with the semi-industrial ball mill (see On the basis of the results and considerations presented in this paper, a target-oriented optimisation of ball mills in Combi-grinding plants is possible. The obtained results can be explained well by theoretical considerations regarding the ruling stress intensity and the number of stress events. The stress intensity expressed as the power input per ball is dependent on the ball diameter to the third power and only slightly dependent on the inner diameter of the mill. The number of stresses can be characterised by the average retention time of the ground material inside the mill if the ball charge grading remains unchanged. The optimal retention time depends not only on the feed material and the desired comminution result but also on the ball charge filling ratio and particularly on the L/D ratio. The influence of the factors ball charge filling ratio and L/D ratio on the retention time of the material to be ground has to be investigated in detail. Furthermore, the extension of the test regarding the influence of the mill speed on the retention time is necessary.