Cu-SSZ-13 is a highly active catalyst to remove NOx in the emission of diesel-powered engine. However, the enhancement of its stability in high-temperature (HT) hydrothermal conditions is a well-known challenge in application. This work presents a simple strategy to significantly improve its hydrothermal stability under HT hydrothermal condition by mechanically mixing another CHA type zeolite, Cu-SAPO-34. Both the two zeolites are synthesized via one-pot method, mixed in different ratios, and treated in 10% H2O/air at 750 °C for 16 h. The mixed samples are characterized before and after the hydrothermal treatment, and tested in NH3-SCR from 150 to 550 °C. The results show the activity of the hydrothermally treated catalysts increases with the increase of the amount of Cu-SAPO-34 up to 50 wt% in the mixed sample. The hydrothermal stability of Cu-SSZ-13 is obviously enhanced by mixing with Cu-SAPO-34. The dealumination is suppressed during the hydrothermal treatment; the framework and the isolated Cu2+ sites are largely maintained in Cu-SSZ-13. This is attributed to the interaction between the two CHA zeolites during the hydrothermal treatment. We propose the delivery of extra-framework P species from Cu-SAPO-34 to Cu-SSZ-13 is critical to enhance the HT hydrothermal stability.NO Cu-SSZ-13 is generally considered as one of the most stable zeolites to dealumination and thus has high hydrothermal stability [ Cu-SAPO-34, another type of CHA zeolite, shows much better HT hydrothermal stability than Cu-SSZ-13 [ It is interesting to examine the possibility of using Cu-SAPO-34 as the origin of phosphorus to improve the hydrothermal stability of Cu-SSZ-13. Herein, we prepared a number of mechanically mixed Cu-SSZ-13/Cu-SAPO-34 catalyst samples. The results reveal that the hydrothermal stability of the composite is significantly improved through a synergistic effect. The underlying mechanism of enhanced hydrothermal stability of Cu-SSZ-13 is proposed. The raw materials were CuSO The Cu-SSZ-13 catalyst was synthesized with a “one-pot” method adapted from literature [ The Cu-SAPO-34 catalyst was also synthesized with the “one-pot” method as described in our recent work [ The fresh Cu-SSZ-13 and Cu-SAPO-34 powders were mixed mechanically with a mortar and pestle with the weight ratios of 9:1, 7:3, and 5:5, respectively. The single component and mixed samples were hydrothermally treated in 10 vol% H The NH The crystal structures of the samples were examined with X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku) using monochromatic Cu K The specific surface area and pore volume of the catalysts were measured with the N H Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) experiment was carried out on the JES-FA200 X-band spectrometer, with a microwave power of 1 mW and a modulation frequency of 100 kHz. All samples were dried at 110 °C for 3 h before EPR test. The samples were put in the liquid nitrogen condition to freeze Cu(II) ions during the test.  NH After the hydrothermal treatment at 750 °C, the activity of the pure Cu-SSZ-13 decreases significantly as shown in As a reference, the aged-SSZ and aged-SAPO samples are mixed mechanically with a weight ratio of 1:1 and tested. The sample is denoted as 5aged-SSZ/5aged-SAPO. The result is illustrated in  The surface area and the pore volume of the zeolites are determined by N  The chemical contents remain constant before and after the hydrothermal treatment at 750 °C, according to the ICP-OES results (  The peak at -27 ppm (framework P) becomes broader for the aged-5SSZ-5SAPO sample after the hydrothermal treatment, while the peak at -17 ppm disappears. This indicates that the extra-framework P atoms are partly transformed into another type of framework P-Al species, rather than Al(PO) EPR is employed to determine the existence of isolated Cu H After the hydrothermal treatment ( A large amount of isolated Cu The HT hydrothermal stability of Cu-SSZ-13 and Cu-SAPO-34, both prepared with one-pot method, and the mechanically mixed samples of the two zeolites were investigated. The results show that the hydrothermal stability of the composite samples is significantly improved compared to that of the single component catalyst samples. The existence of Cu-SAPO-34 closely together with Cu-SSZ-13 is beneficial for the retaining of the framework of Cu-SSZ-13 during HT hydrothermal treatment owing to the suppressing of dealumination of SSZ-13. We propose that the extra-framework P atoms in SAPO-34 migrate and fill the Al sites in the fragmentary SSZ-13 framework, retarding the further breakage of the Si-O-Al links during the hydrothermal treatment. The intact framework of the aged-5SSZ-5SAPO sample provides enough sites for isolated Cu This work was supported in part by the