Boron separation from metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si) is still a puzzle for metallurgical route. A purification method to MG-Si using a synthetic CaO-CaCl2 slag (no SiO2 addition) treatment combined with an Ar-O2-H2O gas blowing technique was studied. The mechanism of boron separation from silicon using the synthetic CaO-CaCl2 slag treatment and the Ar-O2-H2O gas blowing was analyzed and elaborated. The results showed that the intermediate product SiO2, generated by the O2 gas blowing, was combined into silicate with CaO slag reagent. Boron in silicon can be separated by both gaseous borides HBO, BOCl and borate CaO·B2O3. It was found that the boron separation can be further improved by separating soluble boron in the refined silicon using the acid leaching treatment. The total separation efficiency of boron in MG-Si reached 94.5% using the combined slag treatment and gas blowing refining technique followed an acid leaching treatment to the refined silicon.Greenhouse gases are produced by the excessive use of fossil fuels, which are the cause of global warming The production of solar grade silicon by the metallurgical method mainly includes hydrometallurgy Although the separation efficiency of boron is relatively noticeable by slag treatment or gas refining, they still face some difficulties in meeting the demands of solar grade silicon for solar energy utilization. Researches had shown that the gaseous borides or liquid boron oxides are the most important forms of separating boron from silicon. In this paper, a chlorinated slag reagent of CaO-CaCl The MG-Si with a boron concentration of 22 ppmw was used as the raw material in this study. It was firstly ground into a powder with particle size of 80–200 After the refining experiment was finished, the corundum tube was pulled out from the surface of silicon melt. Simultaneously, the water vapor and the oxygen were turned off but the Ar gas was still continuously blown into the furnace as a protective gas. After the furnace was cooled down to the room temperature, Ar gas was turned off and the refined sample was taken out of the furnace. SAMICK SK-25 type diamond cutting was used to cut the corundum crucible. After polishing the sample, the morphology of the sample before and after refining was observed and analyzed by a scanning electron microscopy (SEM, FEI QUANTA200). The distribution of impurity elements in silicon before and after refining was also probed using an electron probe micro analyzer (EPMA, JXA-8230). At the same time, an Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic Emission Spectrometry (ICP-AES, Optima 8000) was used to measure the concentration of boron in silicon and in slag, respectively. In addition, the phase composition in slag was probed by X-ray diffraction instrument (XRD, BrukerD4). In order to further separate the residual soluble boron in refined silicon, the refined silicon (No. sample 2 in The boron separation from MG-Si using the chlorinated slag reagent of CaO-CaCl A small amount of addition of CaCl A part of silicon is oxidized to SiO SiO The schematic diagram of boron separation mechanism is represented in As seen from The evolution of impurity distribution in refined silicon (No. sample 2 in In order to study the change of synthetic slag after refining, the slag sample No. 2 (no SiO Inevitably, the oxidation of Si will lead to the loss of silicon. The production of MG-Si has showed that the silicon loss is only about 3–5% using an oxygen blowing refining. In this study, the oxidized product SiO  Effect of mass ratio of CaO to CaCl The mixed Ar-O It can be obviously seen from Wang et al. Effect of mass ratio of slag to silicon on boron separation. During the experiment, keeping the flow ratio of Ar:O Effect of refining time on boron separation. The refining temperature was kept at 1823 It is found that the alone CaO-CaCl Effect of acid leaching on boron separation. The refined silicon sample of No. 2 was ground into a powder and then exposed to a mixed HF-HCl-H The separation of boron from molten silicon using both chlorinated synthetic CaO-CaCl This work was financially supported by the