Europium separation from a middle rare earth concentrate has been achieved successfully by using the combined chemical reduction–precipitation technique. The separation method depends on the reduction of europium by metallic zinc to its bivalent oxidation state followed by selective precipitation of the sparingly soluble europium (II) sulphate, while leaving the other rare earth sulphates in solution. This process consists of two steps; the first is reduction, which involves passing europium (III) chloride solution through a column packed with zinc particles. The other step involves the precipitation of the produced europium (II) chloride using a sulphate salt under inert atmosphere. Variables such as column dimensions, acidity, europium concentration in feed solution, contact time, ageing time, and concentration of the precipitating agent, have been evaluated with a pure europium synthetic solution. Based on the obtained results, a separation process was suggested for the separation of europium from a middle rare earth concentrate extracted from an Egyptian beach sand monazite. The result of this working-up is a europium yield of about 91% of the amount employed with a purity of about 97%.Europium oxide has gained recently considerable technical and commercial interest. Europium is very difficult to isolate and is separated from monazite ore found in India, Brazil, Australia and Africa, bastnasite ore found in China and North America and the ionic clays of Southern China, all of which contain slight amounts of europium. Difficulty in separation and rarity make europium one of the most expensive rare earth elements, though it is used in many common consumer goods. Europium is utilized primarily for its unique luminescent behavior. Excitation of the europium atom by absorption of ultra violet radiation can result in specific energy level transitions within the atom creating an emission of visible radiation. The discovery in 1964 of a europium–yttrium based red phosphor for the production of the cathode ray tube of commercial TV sets represented a major technological breakthrough and a turning point for the rare earth industry ( Europium has found its greatest use as a phosphor activator and is widely used in europium-activated yttrium compounds to produce red color in television, computer monitor and LED displays. This application accounts for the vast majority of Europium consumption worldwide. Europium is also used to dope plastics in lasers. All or most of the europium separation methods make use of the fact that; europium is unique among the rare earth elements in being most easily reduced to a stable bivalent state. The compounds of the latter state show actually a different behavior from those of the trivalent rare earths. On the other hand, the most important significant property of europium in the bivalent state is that, it becomes quite similar to group IIA elements in chemical properties ( Once reduction is achieved, separation of europium (II) from the remaining trivalent rare earths can be done by precipitation of its sparingly soluble sulphate, which resembles those of barium and strontium. Saturated aqueous solutions at 298 °K contain about (6.7 Several techniques have been used for the separation of europium from other rare earth elements. Chemical reduction using zinc ( The separation of europium using the combined chemical reduction-ion exchange methods have been employed extensively to obtain pure europium oxide ( Application of the combined chemical reduction-solvent extraction techniques have been widely investigated for the separation of europium ( Two different techniques could be employed to bring about the reduction–precipitation process using zinc namely; in situ-zinc and zinc column methods. In the in situ-zinc process, the reduction and precipitation steps are carried out in the same vessel, while in zinc column, the reduction and precipitation processes are arranged to be made separately. In a previous work ( The proposed separation process suffers from a significant shortcoming, which lies in the contamination of the raffinate containing Sm and Gd with a large proportion of dissolved zinc. The reason for this contamination is attributed to the dissolution of zinc during both the reduction and precipitation step because of its reaction with the hydrochloric and sulphuric acid respectively. This work focuses on solving this problem by avoiding the acid–Zn metal contact by placing Zn metal in a specific designed column. This is the other worked technique for carrying out the separation process in which the reduction process occurs by the passage in a zinc column, wherein its outlet is dipped in a precipitation kettle. This configuration guarantees the occurring of the precipitation reaction without any contact between the reductant and precipitating agent. Unless otherwise stated, all reagents were of analytical reagent grade and all solutions were prepared in calibrated flasks with double distilled water. Pure Eu (III) synthetic solutions were prepared by dissolving europium oxide (99.9 wt.% Eu The reduction reaction was carried out in a glass column, 60 cm long and 1.2 cm wide internal containing 200 g of 20–30 mesh granular zinc (Zinc Reductor). The outlet of the reductor is dipped into the precipitation flask. The precipitation reaction was carried out in a 250 mL diameter, filtering flask. It has one outlet for the exit of inert gas and two inlets for entrance of the reduced europium solution, and inert gas respectively. Nitrogen gas was sparged into the flask through a Teflon tube. The set-up is illustrated in In each experiment, the europium solution, under specified concentration and acidity, was added to the column at a constant flow rate. After completion, the column was washed with 100 mL of 0.01 mol/L HCl for the entire removal of europium and soluble zinc. Both the precipitation and wash solution were collected into the Buchner flask, containing the sulphate solution, where the precipitation of europium sulphate took place. The flask was maintained under N For the natural solutions, about 1 g of the natural middle rare earth concentrate containing 2.5% Nd, 10.13% Sm, 11.35% Eu, 2.6% Gd, and 2.7 wt.%. Tb was dissolved in the least amount of hot concentrated (1:1) hydrochloric acid, and then, boiled and stirred well until clear solution is obtained. The reduction–precipitation procedure was carried out as previously described. The precipitated europium (II) sulphate was allowed to settle, and the residual europium content in the supernatant solution was determined spectrophotometrically by Arzenazo(III) method ( The recovery of europium by the combined reduction–precipitation technique comprises two phenomena, namely, the reduction of Eu (III) to Eu (II) by metallic zinc, followed by precipitation of Eu (II) as europium (II) sulphate in an inert atmosphere. This can be demonstrated by the reduction potential associated with Eq. Europium reduction and precipitation is carried out in an inert atmosphere, since Eu (II) is easily oxidized by oxygen as shown in Eq. The precipitation of Eu (II)with sulphuric acid is indicated by Eqs. Many trials have been made in order to get the best column dimensions that are capable of providing a simple, efficient, easy handled and economic configuration. Three different glass columns of different lengths and diameter were investigated. The first with a length of 60 cm and a diameter of 1.2 cm. The second, possesses a length of 100 cm and its diameter is 2 cm. The third one has a diameter of 1.6 cm and a length of 120 cm. Another column, made of PVC, was tried. It has a length of 60 cm and a large diameter of 2.5 cm. The separation efficiencies of these columns were comparable to each other. The glass column with a length of 60 cm and a diameter of about 1.2 cm gives higher separation efficiency as compared to the others. Previous authors have used different column characteristics in their work. It must be mentioned here that, the choice of the appropriate column dimensions is directly related to the employed flow rate and to the europium concentration in the feed solution besides any impurities that may be encountered. The acidity of the europium feed solution is one of the most important factors that directly affects the reduction–precipitation efficiency. Different europium solutions having pH values of 1.0, 2.0, 2.5, 3.0, 3.5, and 4.0 were utilized as the feed solution to inspect the effect of pH on the separation efficiency. The percent recoveries for each solution were represented graphically in It is clear from Eq.   These results obtained by Morais and Ciminelli may be attributed to the low acidity of the feed solution, which determines the final pH in the reduction column and therefore zinc solubility. Upon working with pure zinc, they reported that, a dark layer was formed on zinc surface, which in turn reduce its efficiency after a number of cycles. This layer was identified by X-ray as a mixture of ZnO and Zn(OH) From the experimental results obtained and the above discussion, we can conclude that, a feed europium solution having a pH value 2.5–3.0 is very satisfactory to be used in the reduction–precipitation process. It was noticed that, the percent europium recovery becomes nearly independent of pH values higher than 3. In addition, feed solutions having pH values higher than 3 suffer from the low solubility of europium and rare earth oxides. In the early work employed by The europium concentration in feed solution plays an important role in increasing the recovery of europium (II) sulphate. The results shown in   This situation is not present in this work since the prepared middle rare earth concentrate has a much lower rare earth concentration. A study for the effect of contact time between europium solution and zinc was necessary to account for applicability of the proposed separation process on industrial scale. The obtained results in It is clear from It should be pointed out here that, the selection of an adequate flow rate is deeply reliant on the column dimensions and europium concentration in the feed solution. The effect of sulphuric acid concentration on the reduction–precipitation process was evaluated by changing the acid concentration in the precipitation vessel from 0.25 to 5 mol/L. The volume was set at 20 mL, the minimum to cover inert gas inlet. The europium feed solution (100 mL) had a pH of 3 and a europium content of 0.1 g. Reduction–precipitation experiments were carried out using a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min and precipitation time of 1 h. The results were represented graphically in The results shown in As a result, we can make use of the experimental results discussed and evaluated in the pervious work (  Another important parameter that directly affects the europium recovery is the aging or precipitation time. The effect of precipitation time was investigated utilizing a 100 mL solution of 0.1 g europium. The pH of the feed solution was 3.0 and the reduction was carried out using a flow rate of 1.5 mL/min. The precipitation time was varied from 30 min to 300 min. Generally, it is can be observed from  It should be mentioned that, the precipitation time depends mainly on the concentration and type of the other rare earth elements that may accompany europium in feed solutions. According to Based on the research results above, a separation process was suggested for the separation of europium from a middle rare earth concentrate containing 2.5% Nd, 10.13% Sm, 11.35% Eu, 2.6% Gd, and 2.7 wt.% Tb. Reduction–precipitation method: column zinc method Column dimensions: 60 cm in length and 1.2 cm in diameter Reductant: zinc metal its particle size is 20–30 mesh Europium feed concentration: as concentrated as possible pH of feed solution: 2.5–3.0 Precipitating agent: sulphuric acid Sulphuric acid concentration: 3.0 mol/L Aging time: 2 h Non-oxidizing gas: nitrogen Flow rate: 1.5 mL/min.  The result of this flowsheet is a europium yield of about 91% of the amount employed with a purity of about 97% in a single run. A comparison with the results obtained in case of in-situ zinc reduction technique (purity of 92% and 95% recovery and in the second reduction–precipitation run the purity was increased to 97% with a final recovery of 91%) indicates that, zinc column method gives more pure compounds. In addition, the zinc column method guarantees the occurrence of the precipitation reaction without any contact between the reductant and precipitating agent which in turn decrease the dissolved zinc amount and produce less zinc contaminated products. Europium separation efficiency using the zinc column method was found to be affected by column dimensions, acidity, europium concentration in feed solution, contact time, ageing time, and concentration of the precipitating agent. These parameters have been studied and evaluated with a pure europium synthetic solution. The effective conditions were: column dimensions: 60 cm in length and 1.2 cm in diameter; europium feed concentration: as concentrated as possible; pH of feed solution: 2.5–3.0; precipitating agent: 3.0 mol/L sulphuric acid or to a final molar ratio SO Based on the research results above, a separation process was suggested and applied with success for the separation of europium from a middle rare earth concentrate containing 10–15% Eu of the total REEs contents. The result of this working-up is a europium yield of about 91% of the amount employed with a purity of about 97%. The zinc column method was found to be favorable over the in-situ zinc method owing to its simplicity and lower dissolution of zinc reductant during the reduction–precipitation process.