Surface modification of magnesium alloys by Plasma Electrolytic Oxidation (PEO) method can be a great help for the development of degradable implants in clinical applications. In this study, the aim was to investigate the effect of changing Na2SiO3·9H2O concentration (5, 10, and 15 g L
                     −1) in a bath containing Ca2H4P2O4, Na3PO4.12H2O, NaF, and KOH compounds at pH = 12 and a conductivity of 20 mS/cm. Coating characterization was performed by Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM), Energy-Dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX), X-ray Diffraction (XRD), nanoindentation, Electrochemical Impedance Spectroscopy (EIS), Fourier Transform-Infrared Spectroscopy (FTIR), and immersion in Simulated Body Fluid (SBF). The formed bioactive ceramic coating contains bioelements from the electrolyte, including Ca, P, Si, F, and Na. And, as Na2SiO3·9H2O concentration increases, it also silicon, sodium, and oxygen values in the coating, and reduces magnesium and phosphor values. Pore density decreases in the coatings by an increase in Na2SiO3·9H2O concentration. The optimum bioactive ceramic coating considering hardness and corrosion resistance contains 10 g L−1 of Na2SiO3·9H2O. The optimized bioactive ceramic coating has the ability to form carbonate hydroxyapatite after immersion in SBF at 37 °C for one and four days.During recent years, magnesium and its alloys have attracted a lot of attention and interest of many researchers in medical industries due to their unique characteristics such as biocompatibility and degradability [ The poor corrosion resistance of magnesium alloys, which finally results in missing mechanical strength, has considerably reduced the number of its clinical applications [ Several electrolytes have been investigated in PEO coating process on magnesium alloys. Usually the process has been done in electrolytes containing potassium hydroxide with various additives such as (SiO The goal of this study is to synthesize an optimum coating considering hardness, corrosion resistance, and biocompatibility, by the use of PEO method on AZ31 alloy through changing Na Samples of AZ31 magnesium alloy were cut into a rectangular shape of 30 mm × 15 mm×1.2 mm. The chemical composition of the magnesium-alloy substrate is shown in Prior to PEO treatment, all of the samples were ground with SiC abrasive paper to achieve a mirror like surface and remove contaminants. Then, samples were cleaned with acetone and distilled water, and then they were dried in the air before the plasma electrolytic oxidation test. PEO treatment was performed by 30 kW DC power supply. The AZ31 rectangular samples were used as anodes (the working electrodes) and the porous cylinder of 316-stainless steel was the cathode (counter electrode). Selection of porous cylinder was for improving electrolyte rotation and contact with sample in order to maintain the process temperature during PEO. The electrolyte was continuously cooled by pumping. This process was applied to magnesium alloy at 350 V for 10 min at room temperature. Finally, coated samples were rinsed with deionized water and dried in warm air. Schematic of PEO set up is presented in Three types of samples, namely Si5, Si10, and Si15, were prepared separately with different electrolyte concentrations. The coating phase analysis was carried out By grazing incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD) using an EQuinox 3000 (INEL, France) apparatus working at 40 kV and 30 mA with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5417 Å) in the 2θ range of 10 –80° and 0.03° step per second. Studies of surface morphology, cross-sectional microstructure and composition of PEO coatings were carried out by Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, TESCAN Mira3, Czech Republic) with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS: Oxford instruments). The images obtained by FESEM were evaluated using ImageJ software. The average coating thickness and pore density were measured and the obtained results are taken from three to five FESEM images from each concentration. The Electrochemical test was performed in a three-electrode cell with an Autolab device and by the use of Nova 2.1 analyzing software. Prepared samples had an immersed area of 1 cm It should be noticed that all of the electrochemical corrosion tests have been carried out in SBF solution at 37 °C. In order to fix the potential for EIS tests, samples were immersed in SBF solution for 12 h. Then they were OCP tested for 10 min. The results are the potentials to become fixed in Si5, Si10, Si15, and AZ31 magnesium sample at respectively -1.54, -1.54, -1.55, and -1.67 V. In order to make sure about the electrochemical corrosion-test results, all of the tests were repeated three times. The Mechanical property of coating was investigated by nanoindentation measurement (Tribocope system, Hysitron Inc. USA), equipped with a cube-corner type indenter tip, for hardness and Elastic modulus determination. The Elastic modulus and hardness values were derived from the load-displacement curves using Oliver and Pharr method [ SBF ion concentrations are listed in A typical current density/ voltage plot during the PEO coating process has been presented in Step I: by increasing voltage during the primary stages of the process, current density rapidly increases. This increase in density is accompanied by magnesium dissolution of the substrate and gas release, which is similar to anodizing process. Step II: Then, current density starts to decrease and discharge is observed on the substrate. The reason for this decrease in current density can be the preliminary formation of oxide on magnesium surface (MgO), which results in resistance against current flux. When voltage reaches 350 V, current density increases again. This is when strong arcs are formed on the surface which gradually increase layer thickness and produce a high volume of oxygen gas and result in the formation of volcanic pores around arcs. Step III: These strong arcs result in localized melting and ionization of electrolyte components in such a way that anions move towards the substrate by diffusion as cations are mainly controlled by diffusion. In this stage, the coating does not solely consist of magnesium oxide, but it also consists of electrolyte components. Afterwards, current density gradually decreases along with time increase and arc decrease and gas formation on the film surface. In this state, current density reduction is due to the formation of a compact layer on the surface. Step IV: current density is reduced and reaches a constant value and the arcs are rarely observed on the surface [ FESEM as well as EDX analysis results related to Si5, Si10, and Si15 samples are presented in EDX-analysis results of coatings in It can be observed in FESEM images of  At the same time, it can be found according to the morphology of cross-sectional coatings that the internal porosities are mainly attributed to the rapid cooling of reaction products and blocking of discharge channels which are due to the entrapment of gas bubbles inside the growing oxide [ Pore density and coating thickness were obtained by ImageJ software as in   MgSiO The Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy has been used for evaluation of the electrochemical behavior for three coated samples and the alloyed magnesium. The fitted and experimental plots are presented in EIS behavior is highly affected by PEO process parameters such as electrolyte type, electrolyte concentration, time, voltage and current. Corrosion degree varies and depends on how large the capacitor loop is [    H value is equal to 2.77, 4.79, 3.42, and 1.16 in GPa for Si5, Si10, and Si15, and AZ31 alloy respectively. It can be observed that after PEO, the nano-hardness value has increased due to the formation of the ceramic coating on the AZ31 alloy surface. Therefore, it can be found that the increase in Na Combination of FESEM, nanoindentation, and EIS results shows the fact that Si10 coating benefits from better conditions than the other samples. That is why Si10 sample was immersion tested. The sample was maintained for 1 and 4 days in SBF solution in an incubator at 37 °C. FTIR spectroscopy on Si10 coating after 4 days immersion in SBF solution is shown in Therefore, considering the surface morphology and test results of FTIR after immersion, fine particles can be considered as carbonate hydroxyapatite nuclei on the surface. When apatite nucleation takes plays, they automatically grow as Ca and P ions are consumed in the solution. Therefore, considering FTIR results, it can be shown that the deposition of carbonate hydroxyapatite is taken place in a similar way to the bone tissue on Si10 coating surface. Immersion test shows that the PEO coating has good corrosion resistance and bioresistance. Bioactive ceramic coatings were developed by PEO method on an AZ31 magnesium with various Na The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.