Active ultrasonic monitoring in rock joints and gouge materials has the potential to detect the signatures of shear failure for a wide range of sliding modes, from slow and stable movements to fast and unstable sliding. While these collected measurements currently are being used to identify the seismic precursors to shear failure in rock joints and gouge materials, the underlying physical processes and contact scale mechanisms that control the changes in ultrasonic wave attributes are still poorly understood. To address this knowledge gap, this paper aims to investigate the relationship between the variations in ultrasonic wave attributes and the underlying particle scale mechanisms during both compression and shearing. Our double direct shear experiments were coupled with ultrasonic wave propagation measurements on granular quartz gouges, in which the gouge layers were sheared under different sliding velocities and constant normal stress conditions. Simultaneously, ultrasonic waveforms were continuously recorded during shearing with a fast data acquisition system and three pairs of ultrasonic wave transducers embedded at the two sides of the gouge layers. Different particle comminution mechanisms were observed from the non-uniform distribution of normal and shear stresses through the changes in ultrasonic transmissivity and scanning electron microscope (SEM) images. Our results show that the signatures of the geometry- and time-dependent variations of the inter-particle contact quality and pore volume changes with sliding velocity and slip accumulation were clearly captured from the variations in the transmitted wave amplitude and the dominant frequency, respectively. In addition, we found that variations in dominant frequency corresponded to dilation and compaction of the granular gouge layer during compression as well as stable and unstable sliding. Our results therefore confirmed that non-destructive acoustic techniques are capable of capturing a variety of micromechanical processes during fault gouge deformation and may prove useful in natural settings.The widespread devastating impacts of earthquakes on society and human life have motivated many researchers to focus on the mechanisms of the origin of fault movements in order to better understand earthquake nucleation. Tectonic faults are generally filled with a thin layer of gouge material, which has an important role in sliding stability and accommodating shear displacement (e.g. The frictional stability in granular materials has been interpreted through either the concept of the interaction between the rheological fault critical stiffness and surrounding elastic stiffness ( Geophysical methods, such as ultrasonic wave monitoring, have proven to be successful for remotely detecting and illuminating the micro-mechanisms occurring within the gouge layer during compression and frictional sliding ( Porosity and particle shapes were originally considered as the parameters controlling the dilative or contractive behavior of the gouge layers during both stable sliding and stick-slip cycles ( In this paper, we investigated the correlation between the micromechanical deformation and ultrasonic attributes in the granular quartz gouge layers during compression and shearing. We utilized a double direct shear device and a fast ultrasonic wave propagation system to monitor, remotely and non-destructively, the local changes in the gouge layers at different locations. Three different ultrasonic transducers were utilized in this setup to evaluate the impact of non-uniform distribution of normal and shear stresses on the gouge fabric evolution. The gouge layers were sheared under different values of normal stresses and slip velocities in order to explore variation in the ultrasonic wave attributes for a wide range of sliding modes. We identified different comminution mechanisms along the fault surface that were promoting different acoustic transmissivity and found that the amplitude and frequency of the transmitted ultrasonic waves can provide valuable insights into the deformation processes in the granular soil layers. Double direct shear experiments were performed on gouge layers composed of granular quartz material known as Ottawa sand, which was acquired from US Silica Company. Ottawa sand F75 was selected because it was widely used in previous laboratory studies (e.g. Specimens were prepared using oven-dried quartz particles mixed with de-aired water to achieve the water content of 10% which was selected experimentally to obtain uniform and homogenous specimens with repeatable mechanical and ultrasonic behaviors. To produce specimens with uniform moisture content, the moist material was kept in a sealed plastic bag for 24 h. Thereafter, 6 mm thick gouge layers were prepared using two 10 cm × 10 cm (i.e. nominal contact area) stainless steel forcing blocks. A leveling lab-jack and four plastic bars were used to control the specimen height and construct the specimen with the desired initial porosity ( The surfaces of the forcing blocks were grooved in a triangular pattern 0.5 mm deep with 1.5 mm spacing to minimize particle slippage at the boundaries and to localize shearing within the gouge layer. Cellophane tape was applied around the forcing blocks to prevent loss of material and moisture after the specimen was prepared. In addition to the cellophane tape, two stiff plastic plates were screwed to the sides of the forcing blocks to prevent any side extrusion of material during shearing, which was utilized successfully in similar studies (e.g. The experimental setup consisted of a horizontal loading frame that applied the normal stress, an assembly of transducer holder plates to place the ultrasonic transducers, a fast data acquisition system to record shear waveforms, and an automated vertical loading piston that applied forces and induced shear displacement within the gouge layers (acquisition frequency of 100 Hz). Normal stress was applied on the specimen using a flat jack connected to an automated servo-controlled hydraulic pump that was capable of applying normal stress up to 30 MPa. The schematic configuration of the double direct shear device and the ultrasonic transducers are shown in A fast ultrasonic wave propagation system was used to monitor the gouge layers during application of compressive and shear loadings. In this setup, two arrays, each including three transducers, were used to record the shear waveforms. A 12.7 mm cylindrical contact transducers (Olympus V103) with a central frequency of 1 MHz was used. An Olympus pulser-receiver (Panametric 5077PR) was used to generate signals with amplitude of 300 V at a repetition rate of 5 kHz. The waveforms were digitized with a National Instruments digitizer with a sampling rate of 100 million samples per second. To reduce the noise effect and increase the signal-to-noise ratio, 20 signals were averaged and stacked for each transducer recording. All averaged and stacked transmitted waveforms for all the transducers were recorded every 0.5 s with a fast LabVIEW data acquisition system. The location of the ultrasonic transducers and their labels are shown in We used the same ultrasonic monitoring technique throughout different stages in the experiments to investigate the link between the changes in the ultrasonic wave attributes and the occurrence of inter-particle mechanisms. The waveforms were continuously recorded for three transducers during the initial compression stage as well as the shear deformation. The main focus of our study was to detect the variation of the transmitted amplitude and the dominant frequency of the shear waves traveling through the granular materials. The maximum peak-to-peak amplitude was determined as the sum of the maximum and minimum values in the received waveform in the time domain. For dominant frequency determination, the time domain wavelet needed to be transferred into its frequency domain components. However, in granular materials such as quartz sand, only the portion of the waveform immediately following the arrival of the wave needed to be considered to evaluate the changes in dominant frequency ( We applied a 5.12 μs taper to the original waveform and then performed the fast Fourier transform (FFT) on the tapered waveforms. The FFT yielded the wave spectra for the range of frequencies, from which we selected the frequency corresponding to the peak spectral amplitude as the dominant frequency. The obtained wave spectra for the waveforms shown in We performed two types of double direct shear experiments to investigate the frictional micro-mechanisms in granular quartz gouge in different modes of sliding. Ultrasonic measurements were carried out during all the experiments to explore the link between the ultrasonic wave attributes and the frictional mechanisms. The first set of experiments included double direct shear tests on the granular quartz layers under constant normal stress and constant load point velocity to study the occurrence of particle scale mechanisms during unstable sliding with different sliding velocities. The second set of experiments involved a series of velocity step tests on granular quartz layers using the double direct shear device at four different normal stresses of 15 MPa, 20 MPa, 25 MPa and 30 MPa ( All the experiments were initiated by applying the desired level of normal stress, which was kept constant throughout the test. At the compression stage, the normal stress was increased at a constant rate of 0.2 MPa/s as previously practiced by After each experiment, using the SEM and sieve analysis, the material under each ultrasonic transducer was carefully collected so as to observe and quantify the amount of particle comminution and the developed structure. All the experiments were conducted at room temperature and humidity. Each experiment was repeated at least twice to assure that repeatable results were obtained. The macroscale compression and shear deformations in granular assemblies are the result of grain movement at the particle scale, which are accompanied with frequent cycles of formation and breakage of the contact networks and force chains ( During compression, the normal stress applied on the specimen increased linearly from the preloaded value to the desired normal stress defined for each experiment at the rate of 0.2 MPa/s. Simultaneously, the ultrasonic waveforms traveling through the materials were recorded at a frequency of 1 Hz. Our results from experiment VS-30 are shown in As observed in The trends observed for the evolution of dominant frequency were different from those for the transmitted amplitude. The dominant frequency increased significantly at the early stage of compression in contrast to the transmitted amplitude and then followed an increasing trend at a decreasing rate. The variation of dominant frequency followed a trend more similar to the deformation in the granular layer than to the normal stress. This was also observed as the normal stress became constant at 30 MPa, where no noticeable change was observed in the rate of dominant frequency evolution. In order to understand the evolution of the elastic properties of the granular quartz gouge material with shear displacement, double direct shear experiments were conducted under different normal stresses and sliding velocities. During the direct shear experiments, we continuously monitored the variations of shear stress and layer thickness due to shear displacement as well as the waveforms transmitting through the gouge layer. The evolutions of shear stress and shear displacement with time are shown in In the direct shear experiments, it was difficult to continuously measure porosity variations due to the geometrical thinning phenomenon and mass loss. Geometrical thinning due to mass loss evolves with increases in layer thickness and accumulation of shear displacement in direct shear experiments. The traditional method to evaluate geometrical thinning assumes a triangular shape for the mass loss; however, The results of our ultrasonic measurements from representative double direct shear experiment (M20-10) on granular quartz gouge are shown in We observed that the absolute values of the transmitted amplitude and dominant frequency were higher for the transducers located closer to the center. Based on the results observed in the previous section and also in similar studies ( The transmitted amplitude obtained from transducer 1S increased by about 20% during the initial loading, up to the steady state condition ( The dominant frequency values for transducer 1S slowly and continuously increased by about 30% throughout the experiment. Similar to the variation of amplitude, the dominant frequency variations for transducers 2S and 3S were not identical to that for transducer 1S. For these transducers, in the initial part of loading ( The higher ultrasonic transmissivity in the central area can be seen in The results obtained from experiments VS-25 and M20-10 are respectively presented in The shear data for the gouge layer in the unstable sliding mode are shown in The results presented in The porosity changes in the gouge layers, either compaction or dilation, can influence frictional behavior ( For the velocity step from 5 μm/s to 1 μm/s ( The cyclic trends observed during unstable sliding were also observed in the dominant frequency values obtained from all the transducers. Based on the porosity changes, different phases were observed for dominant frequency. After the peak shear stress, the gouge layer porosity gradually decreased and reached the minimum value in that specific stick-slip cycle. During this phase ( Our experimental results demonstrated that the comminution intensity was not uniform along the surface and was generally higher for the central areas. The particle comminution in granular materials is one of the main mechanisms that control the shear strength, hydraulic conductivity, and the sliding stability in rock joints and tectonic faults with granular filling materials (  Our SEM images showed the changes in the shape and structure of the gouge layer at three different locations under the ultrasonic transducers. A significant reduction in particle size was clearly shown in the gouge layer; however, the amount of comminution and the developed structure type were different. The particles in the central area (transducers 3S, The particle size distribution of the gouge layer for the areas under different transducers also supports the SEM image observations (see Differences in the developed structures in gouge material along the surface are known to affect the acoustic transmissivity of the material and wave transmission significantly. Our analysis of ultrasonic wave attributes during compression and shearing showed that the results obtained from different transducers do not always follow similar trends. During compression, we observed that the amount of evolution and subsequently the absolute values of the ultrasonic elastic energy transmitted through the gouge layer were higher for the center of the layer. Similar observations were made during shearing, except during the initial part, where the amplitude and dominant frequency decreased slightly due to the disturbance of the gouge structure developed during compression. The transmission of ultrasonic waves through granular materials is well known to be dependent on the state of the contact between particles, which is a function of several factors including the contact force, area, and stiffness. Recent numerical simulations of granular assemblies considering the particle crushing process suggest that the changes in the mechanical properties of granular assemblies can be described with the changes in the particle coordination number, which is the average number of contact points for each particle (e.g. Variation in the quality and quantity of the contacts in granular materials is one of the main parameters directly linked to the behavior of granular materials ( Experimental results reported by Our results for the variation of transmitted amplitude with the evolution of normal stress for different sliding velocities indicate a nonlinear trend, as shown in The nonlinearity of the amplitude variations observed in In addition to the quality of the inter-particle contact points, frictional strength and stability are also inter-related with dilation and compaction in the granular gouge layers ( During the initial compression stage, our results show that the dominant frequency increased at a decreasing rate with normal stress. Similar to the amplitude variations, the external force and porosity are the two main factors that significantly affect the dominant frequency values. We normalized the variation of dominant frequency with normal stress in order to better evaluate the relation between porosity and dominant frequency. Similarly, the porosity values were normalized with respect to their corresponding normal stress to solely examine the link between gouge structure and dominant frequency. During stick-slip cycles, a combination of compaction and dilation with a net amount of compaction occurs ( We monitored the variation of layer porosity and the corresponding changes in dominant frequency for different experiments to examine whether the consistency observed in Our observations provided insights into the variations of ultrasonic wave amplitude and dominant frequency in different modes of sliding of granular quartz gouges. The transmitted amplitude was shown to be dependent on multiple factors in granular materials such as normal stress, sliding velocity, porosity, and particle comminution mechanisms. We observed an opposite trend between the sliding velocity and transmitted amplitude which could provide information about the contact area variation during shearing. However, since porosity changes are associated with shearing in granular materials, the interpretation of the changes in ultrasonic amplitude should be conducted carefully to distinguish between the types of particle scale mechanisms and porosity variations. This is particularly the case because transmitted amplitude and porosity have a nonlinear correlation. Dominant frequency in our experiments was found to be a good measure to qualitatively monitor the changes in porosity and structure of granular materials. Although our observations were made based on laboratory experiments on standard materials, the microscale mechanisms involved in laboratory and natural faults would share similar fundamental characteristics. Hence, our findings afford possible new avenues in application of ultrasonic waves to better monitor the frictional mechanisms and the changes in characteristics of tectonic faults. Our observations indicate additional potentials for individualizing different mechanisms through the simultaneous analysis of ultrasonic wave amplitude and frequency. The findings could also improve the methodologies for detecting seismic precursor prior to shear failure in tectonic faults and landslides. However, additional field scale studies are required to better understand the impact of scale difference between laboratory and natural faults. The results presented in this paper provided insights into the changes in the ultrasonic wave attributes that correspond with particle scale mechanisms during compression and shearing of granular materials under a wide range of external stresses and sliding modes. We monitored the gouge layer itself as well as the changes in the transmitted amplitude and dominant frequency of the ultrasonic waves at different locations while the gouge layers were being subjected to compressive and shear loads. We observed that non-uniformity along the fault could have promoted different comminution mechanisms and ultrasonic transmissivity values. Throughout the stable sliding phase, the variation of the transmitted amplitude was observed as opposite to the sliding velocity, and the rates of changes in the dominant frequency and layer porosity were closely related. During unstable sliding, the ultrasonic wave attributes followed the same cyclic behavior as that of shear stress. Similar to the observations during stable sliding mode, we found that variation of the sliding velocity was closely linked to changes in transmitted amplitude, which was due to the inter-relation between the transmitted amplitude, inter-particle contact properties, and sliding velocity. However, the occurrence of different comminution mechanisms due to the non-uniform distribution of normal and shear stresses may have resulted in various general trends in transmitted amplitude and dominant frequency evolutions throughout our experiments. Our results also suggested that the ultrasonic wave transmission frequency through granular materials may be a function of the inter-particle pore volume, and hence the dominant frequency could be a valuable measure for assessing the porosity changes within the granular gouge layers. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge the supports provided by the