The redox potential (Eh) is a key parameter for controlling the release of elements from solid materials. Nevertheless, this parameter is seldom taken into account during risk assessment studies within any regulatory framework. We studied the incidence of redox changes to the solid materials using two batch procedures: i) a gradient of redox conditions obtained using sodium ascorbate solutions at various concentrations; ii) N2 bubbling in water. These experiments were performed on two Mn-rich slag samples coming from a pyrometallurgical plant that recycles alkaline batteries. Both samples differed slightly in their chemical composition and solid characterization (i.e. presence of Mn oxide) and presented different behaviours. The present study focused on the release of the main slag elements (i.e. Mn and Si) chosen as indicators of the dissolution of primary silicate phases. Solid phase analyses (SEM-EDS and XRD) were coupled with the monitoring of elements in leachates in order to understand their behaviour and the mechanisms involved. The results indicated that the solid composition plays an important role in the release mechanisms. The presence of Mn oxide enhanced the mobilization of Mn in the greatest reducing conditions (−320 ± 5 mV/SHE), to the extent that 42% of the total Mn was leached. This demonstrated the significance in studying the solid phases (using SEM-EDS and XRD) before and after any leaching experiment. From a laboratory practice point of view, it was easier to use sodium ascorbate and allowed, in our case, greater reducing conditions to be reached.Slags constitute a by-product from pyrometallurgy arising from (i) the concentration of impurities in molten metals and (ii) the oxidation of metals on their contact surface by air. The liquid hot slags are separated from the molten metals, and then cooled to ambient temperature. Significant volumes of slags are produced yearly throughout the world, either from ferrous or non-ferrous metallurgy production. In 2008, the world production of ferrous slag was approximately 240–290 Mt and the output of steel slag represented about 115–170 Mt (data from Slags are either dumped or reused as a secondary material in order to preserve natural resources and their after-life is an important economical and ecological concern. In Europe, around 50% of steel slags are reused in road construction and only 11% are dumped ( It is difficult to impose and control reducing conditions. The influence of the redox potential on element release has been studied from soil suspensions, using reducing reagents such as sodium ascorbate ( The present study focused on an Mn-rich slag originating from a pyrometallurgical process that recycles alkaline batteries to produce ferromanganese alloy. Each year, this plant produced around 2500 t of Mn-rich slag. The two representative samples studied here differed in their chemical and mineralogical composition. It is most likely that different cooling conditions led to the crystallization of different mineral phases. For example, the presence of manganosite (MnO) was observed in only one of the two samples. In addition, their manganese content varied from 380 to 500 g/kg. They were submitted to various redox conditions through the use of two methods: (i) the addition of sodium ascorbate solution at various concentrations (from 0 to 1 mol/L) to obtain a large range of redox conditions ( Solid phase characterization is essential in understanding the slag behaviour in relation to its mineralogical composition. X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) and Scanning Electron Microscopy with an X-ray microanalysis (SEM-EDS) were performed before and after leaching experiments. The observation of the dissolved solid phases during leaching experiments was done to differentiate and to understand the release mechanisms occurring in both cases. Solid and leachate analyses were completed with Visual MINTEQ calculations allowing the theoretical precipitation of new solid phases to be assessed, without considering the kinetic aspect. All chemicals were of analytical grade. Solutions were prepared in high-purity de-ionized water (HPW) (Milli-Q system: resistivity 18.2 MΩ cm, TOC ≤10 μg/L). All glassware and containers were chemically decontaminated in 10% (v/v) nitric acid beforehand. Two samples of slag produced during a pyrometallurgical process that recycles alkaline batteries were studied. Both samples (S1 and S2) were selected because of their representation of the total amount of battery slag available (50 and 30% respectively). The slags were produced in block form and were manually crushed to obtain a particle size <1 mm, in order to carry out leaching tests. After crushing, the total chemical composition of each sample was performed by ACME Analytical Laboratories ltd (Vancouver, Canada). Major elements were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy after a lithium metaborate/tetraborate fusion and nitric acid digestion. Trace elements were determined by Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry after an The main mineralogical phases were determined by XRD (Siemens D5000 diffractometer: Cu Kα, 40 kV, 40 mA) on powder samples performed in triplicate at room temperature (20 ± 2 °C). Samples were step-scanned at 0.4 2θ/min. The identification of solid phases was performed using XPert HighScore software (PANalytical). Morphology and chemical analyses of mineralogical phases were done by Scanning Electron Microscopy (Philips XL 30) coupled with an EDS system (accelerating voltage = 20 kV; SERMIEL, Université de Limoges, France); more than fifty SEM-EDS analyses were performed for each sample studied. Electronic microprobe analyses (CAMPARIS, Université de Paris, France) were also performed with two different programs (major elements: 15 kV, 10 nA, spotsize: 1 μm The methodology was adapted from the one previously described for soil samples ( A kinetic study was performed beforehand for each slag sample in order to determine the contact time needed to reach stabilized pH, Eh and amounts of elements in the suspensions. Three conditions (HPW, 0.02 mol/L and 1 mol/L sodium ascorbate solutions) were tested in triplicate. Aliquots of the suspensions were taken at various times; pH and Eh were monitored every 24 or 48 h. The optimum contact time was fixed at 30 days due to the results of the kinetic study. The experiment was adapted from Each experiment was at least duplicated and each analysis was performed in triplicate. The results are given in terms of ‘mean value ± deviation to the mean value’. The pH was monitored using a Crison GLP 22 pH-meter equipped with a combined electrode 52 21 calibrated with two buffers (pH 4.01 and 7.00 at 20 °C). Redox potential was monitored using a Crison 52 62 millivoltmeter equipped with an indicating platinum electrode combined with a Ag/AgCl/KCl 3 mol/L reference electrode calibrated with ZoBell’s solutions. In order to facilitate the comparison with previous studies, the measured values of redox potential were converted into Eh values (standard hydrogen potential scale) by adding 210 mV in each Eh determination. Before analysis each sample was filtered (0.2 μm Sartorius cellulose acetate filters), acidified at pH 2 (HNO In order to assume the theoretical precipitation of new solid phases, saturation indexes (SI) were calculated with Visual MINTEQ version 2.60 ( The chemical analyses showed that Mn and Si are the major constituents of the two slag samples ( The total chemical analyses ( Even though all of these elements were monitored during the experiments, the present study was primarily devoted to the behaviour of the major constituents of the slag samples.  Concerning S1, the introduction of sodium ascorbate induced a decrease in pH. The pH of the suspensions was close to the original pH value of sodium ascorbate solutions. In this case, the reagent imposed its pH (after 30 days, in HPW pH = 9.7 ± 0.7 whereas in 1 mol/L sodium ascorbate solution pH = 6.1 ± 0.3). Nevertheless, Eh values were similar in HPW and in 0.02 mol/L; this concentration did not seem to be sufficient in changing redox conditions. As concerns the kinetic study, the 1 mol/L experiment did not present variations according to time. On the contrary, in HPW, pH decreased with the contact time but increased in 0.02 mol/L. This result demonstrated that sodium ascorbate was consumed by the slag. S2 seemed to have a stronger buffer capacity and no significant variations were observed as a function of the contact time. Indeed, the pH obtained in the presence of ascorbate solutions was more alkaline than the results obtained for S1. Moreover, in 1 mol/L, the pH was close to the one obtained in HPW whereas the Eh values presented greater reducing conditions. According to these observations, it was confirmed, as expected, that the simultaneous pH and Eh influence on the release of the slag constituents had to be considered.  In the presence of 0.02 mol/L sodium ascorbate, the release of Mn was higher than in HPW ( In the case of the sample S1, the release of Mn increased for the first 15 days (up to 6.1 ± 0.7% mobilized) and thereafter became stable taking the measurement uncertainties into account. For S2, the release of Mn was greater, reaching 44.9 ± 0.4% after 15 days; after which, the Mn leached amount decreased. At the end of the experiment (30 days), the release of Mn was similar for both samples in HPW and for 0.02 mol/L ascorbate. The Eh conditions were close but pH was more acidic in 0.02 mol/L ascorbate than in HPW ( For Si, leached amounts in 1 mol/L ascorbate were lower than for Mn (maximum values were observed after 16 days, for S1: 1.5 ± 0.1%; for S2: 0.6 ± 0.1%). S1 led to a higher release of Si for all of the conditions studied. Although Si and Mn belong to the same solid phases, their release was non-stoichiometric. The difference between both elements could be explained by a difference in the reaction mechanisms. Indeed, With respect to other major elements (detailed data in According to the Visual MINTEQ calculations, variations observed during kinetic experiments could be explained by the possible precipitation of new solid phases. Focusing on Mn, Concerning Al, the difference in the observed behaviour compared to K, could be explained by the precipitation of diaspore (AlOOH), which could occur throughout the experiments regardless of the conditions applied and the sample studied. Al solubilisation would be governed by the dissolution of aluminosilicate phases and the simultaneous precipitation of diaspore (data not shown). In order to reach a “pseudo-equilibrium” for ME mobilization as well as for pH and Eh conditions, a contact time of 30 days was chosen for the redox experiments.  For the S1 sample, pH decreased with increasing sodium ascorbate concentration, and it remained stable (6.0 ± 0.5) above 0.075 mol/L. This value was close to the pH of the pure ascorbate solution. In the case of S2, pH values showed a great variation between 0.08 and 0.085 mol/L (ΔpH ≈ 1); before and after this pH-edge, pH values remained stable at 8.5 ± 0.1 and 9.6 ± 0.2 respectively. The Eh behaved similarly. An Eh-edge was observed for both samples, between 0.05 and 0.08 mol/L for S1 and 0.075 and 0.1 mol/L for S2. For the lowest ascorbate concentrations, Eh values were similar and remained stable regardless of the sample studied. At higher concentrations, the behaviour of the two samples differed. Sample S1 presented Eh values which increased again and remained stable, while the Eh values of S2 continued to decrease leading to greater reducing conditions. The two samples differed from the pH ranges where the Eh-edge appeared (ΔpH = 1.5–2). For higher concentrations, samples differed in both Eh values (ΔEh = 300 mV) and pH values (ΔpH = 3–3.5). The element mobilization according to redox potential showed the important role of solid phases in the slag samples: both of our samples presented different solid phase compositions and behaved differently when submitted to the same sodium ascorbate concentration. Manganese release was similar (4% of the total Mn) for both samples at sodium ascorbate concentrations lower than 0.05 mol/L. Nevertheless, the release of Mn from S1 varied between 2 and 6% regardless of the concentration. Variations were also observed for Ca, Mg and Si, in similar proportions (from 1 to 6% of the total amount). This result indicated that the primary phases were dissolved during the leaching experiments but a significant effect due to Eh conditions was not observed. In the pH range observed, the decrease of pH leads to weak variations for Mn, Ca and Mg solubilisation as shown in a previous study ( According to these results, the presence of manganosite resulted in a greater Mn mobilization. In associating the leaching results with the SEM-EDS investigations, tephroite seemed to be more sensitive to reducing conditions than bustamite, leucite and kalsilite. Indeed, alteration features were not observed on aluminosilicate phases and on bustamite ( While Si was present in both solid phases, its behaviour could not be correlated with other elements. Nevertheless, its behaviour was more similar to Mn than to Ca ( Although Fe, Cu, Ni and Zn were not homogeneously present, their release has to be taken into account. Nevertheless, it could not be related to the behaviour of the major constituents of the slag. Their release induced by redox conditions was not negligible according to the leached amounts obtained ( As was performed during ascorbate experiments, pH, Eh and elements leached amounts were monitored for 30 days. The Mn release level from S1 remained stable throughout the experiment. For S2, the increase in the leached amount was observed between 10 and 14 days, after which the release of Mn remained stable and twice as great as for S1. This could be related to the redox conditions, which were more reducing for S2. Contrary to the results obtained in the presence of sodium ascorbate, the Si behaviour was similar to that of Mn: the leached amount remained stable for S1 whereas an increase was observed for S2, between 10 and 17 days. Similar results were observed for other major elements ( The aim of this study was to induce various redox conditions by two techniques. First, experiments in HPW with and without N Another comparison was performed, based on Eh values obtained at the end of the contact time (30 days) for each experiment. For S1, N Both methods could induce different dissolution mechanisms. In this study, three kinds of dissolution mechanisms could occur. First, the dissolution could be induced by the pH conditions. Indeed, silicate dissolution mechanisms are close to those of oxides: the protonation or deprotonation of the surface sites can accelerate the dissolution rates leading to the release of major elements ( But this process can take a long time: in our case, a contact time of 30 days could be too short to demonstrate the dissolution of the main phases. After the addition of sodium ascorbate as a reducing reagent, dissolution resulted from the sorption of the reagent on the solid surface. The complex formed led to the release of reaction products such as major elements. Then, the surface structure is reconstituted and the dissolution can continue to proceed as long as conditions are maintained, for example with an excess of reductant. Dissolution rates are proportional to the surface complex concentration ( Because of the metallic particles heterogeneity, if any comparison between the release of corresponding elements (Fe, Cu, Ni, Zn) from the two samples should be made, the proportion and the associated weight of metallic particles should be similar for both slag samples. It was difficult to collect these data, because the biggest particles were removed after crushing, and it was difficult to access the microscopic ones. Thus it was difficult (if not impossible) to evaluate and to quantify the potential risk of release of these elements, even though one exists. The comparison of both methods to impose reducing conditions showed that the use of a reducing reagent, here a sodium ascorbate solution, was easier to perform (from a laboratory practice point of view) and led to a better repeatability of the experiments than N This work was financially supported by the “  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at