γ-nano-Al2O3 was used for the separation and enrichment of iridium (Ir(IV)) ions from an aqueous solution. A systematic study of the adsorption process was performed by varying pH, sorbent amount, sorption time and temperature. The adsorption efficiency could reach 99% at pH 3.0, suggesting that nano-Al2O3 is an excellent sorbent for iridium ions. The sorbed iridium ions can be desorbed with 2.0mol·L−1 HNO3. Iridium adsorption reaction was found to be fast, and equilibrium was attained within 3.0min following the pseudo-second-order model with observed rate constants (k
                     2) of 19.26–37.93mg·mg−1·min−1 (at varied temperatures). The overall rate process appeared to be influenced by both intraparticle diffusion and boundary layer diffusion, but mainly governed by intraparticle diffusion. The sorption data could be well interpreted by the Langmuir model with the maximum adsorption capacity of 2.10mg·g−1 (293K) of iridium on nano-Al2O3. The mean energy of adsorption was calculated to be 2.60kJ·mol−1 (293K) from the Dubinin–Radushkevich (D–R) adsorption isotherm. Moreover, the thermodynamic parameters showed the endothermic and spontaneous nature of the adsorption process. The investigation of adsorption selectivity showed that nano-Al2O3 could adsorb 99% of Ir(IV) ions in the presence of Cu(II), Ni(II), Cd(II), Zn(II), Co(II), Fe(III) and Pb(II).Iridium is known to be very rare in the earth, only 9 Solid-phase extraction has achieved widespread use because of its simple procedure, higher preconcentration factor, rapid phase separation and combination with different detection techniques. However, the literature studies on the adsorption efficiency of sorbents for Ir(IV) are very limited. Interest is increasing on nano-particles as sorbent for separation of trace elements owing to its effectiveness ( In this paper, nano-Al A Thermo X Series Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS) (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) was used for the determination of Ir(IV) and other metal ions. A KQ-100 Controllable Serial-Ultrasonics apparatus (Kunshan apparatus company, China) was applied to disperse γ-nano-Al Nano-Al A standard stock solution of iridium (1000 All reagents, including hydrochloric acid, phosphoric acid, sodium chloride, nitric acid, and ethanol were of analytical reagent grade and purchased from Shanghai Xinzhong Chemical Reagent Co., China. Deionized water was used throughout the experiments. The other stock solutions of various metal ions (mmol·L The adsorption experiments were carried out in a series of 50 The adsorbed iridium was desorbed from solid phase into aqueous medium by 2.0 The adsorption percentage (Ads. %) and adsorption capacity ( The selective adsorptions of Ir(IV) were conducted using a multi-component solution containing Pb(II), Cu(II), Zn(II), Ni(II), Co(II), Fe(III), Cd(II) and Rh (III) respectively prepared from metal salts. The complex solution consisted of 5 The adsorption selectivity coefficient is defined as follows ( where the index Kinetic experiments were carried out using a series of 50 Adsorption isotherm experiments were carried out with initial concentrations of Ir(IV) varying between 0.5 and 20.0 Five sorbents (listed in Transition electron microscopy (TEM) was used to investigate the crystal structure of nano-Al A N The XRD patterns of nano-Al The FT‐IR spectra of nano-Al We applied 10 In this study, knowledge of pH was important because pH of the solution influences not only the distribution of active sites on the surface of γ-nano-Al The values of zeta potential of nano-Al At pH For iridium, when pH is below 1.0, Ir(IV) exists as [IrCl At pH In pH In order to attain the optimal amount of nano-Al Desorption efficiency of Ir(IV) was studied by the batch method using various concentrations of HCl, HNO Also nano-Al The kinetics of the sorption of Ir(IV) onto nano-Al In order to investigate the adsorption process of Ir(IV) on γ-nano-Al The pseudo-first-order equation is given as ( The pseudo-second-order model is represented as ( The batch kinetic data were fitted to both the first-pseudo and second-pseudo order model. Both models adequately described the kinetic data at 95% confidence level. The results of the kinetic parameters for Ir(IV) adsorption are listed in The second-order rate constants were used to calculate the initial sorption rate The values of Furthermore, it was possible to calculate the activation energy ( The rate-controlling step in ion exchange or adsorption is usually either liquid film diffusion or inter-particle diffusion. In order to ascertain the rate-controlling step, the following equations were applied to the adsorption kinetic data ( For film diffusion: For intra-particle diffusion Adsorption kinetic data were further processed to confirm whether intra-particle diffusion is the rate limiting step and to find out the rate determining parameters for intra-particle diffusion. For such purpose the Weber–Morris equation was as follows: In Adsorption isotherms describe how solutes interact with sorbents. The equilibrium adsorption of Ir(IV) on γ-nano-Al The Langmuir model is often used to describe an equilibrium sorption isotherm: Furthermore, the widely used empirical Freundlich equation based on sorption on a heterogeneous surface is given by: The Langmuir and Freundlich isothermal constants were determined from the plots of The obtained isothermal constants and the correlation coefficients are presented in The maximum adsorption capacity of Ir(IV) ions on γ-nano-Al The essential feature of a Langmuir isotherm can be expressed in terms of a dimensionless constant separation factor or equilibrium parameter Finally, the D–R ( The values of adsorption energy were also given in The sorption behaviors of different concentrations Ir(IV) onto nano-Al The values of ∆ The values of ∆ A series of representative metal ion systems were chosen to investigate the adsorption selectivity of γ-nano-Al γ-nano-Al The results suggested that the adsorption process for nano-Al In summary, nano-Al This project was supported by the