In the present investigation, an attempt has been made to study the effect of reducing agents (coke, Non-coking coal, Char, Charcoal, etc.) on the reduction behaviour of double-layered pellets consisting of a core of iron ore and reducing agent mixture within a shell of iron ore. The reduction tests were conducted under isothermal condition in the temperature range 1000–1200°C. The variables (parameters) studied were the reduction temperature, carbon/iron oxide ratio of the core, and reduction time. The experiments were statistically designed such that the effect of each variable and interactional effect of each variable can be quantitatively assessed and compared. The results show highest degree of reduction with non-coking coal followed by charcoal, char, coke-fines. Among these three parameters, reduction time has the strongest effect when charcoal and non-coking coal are used as reducing agents, whereas in the case of coke and char, reduction temperature has the strongest effect. C:Fe2O3 ratio of core has the least effect in all four types of carbonaceous core double-layered pellets.Double-layered pellets consist of a core of iron ore and carbonaceous material (Coke, Non-coking coal, Charcoal, Char, etc.) mixture encased in a shell of iron ore. After firing, the double-layered pellet becomes a pre-reduced pellet consisting of a metallised core encased in a partially reduced iron oxide shell. This type of pellet is obtained by single stage firing where sintering of fine particles, as well as pre-reduction, takes place. The technique consists of preparing a small pellet from a mixture of iron oxide and reducing agent and coating of iron ore to the surface. After induration in air, such a double-layered pellet yields a double-layered/composite pre-reduced pellet ( The shell of a double-layered pre-reduced pellet acts as a weather protective shield and hence, the weather resistance of the pellet is higher than that of a conventional pre-reduced pellet. The production cost of these pellets is lower due to the single stage firing, whereas in normal practice, pellet firing and reduction are carried out in two stages. Other advantages are the use of iron ore fines, coke/non-coking coal/charcoal/char fines, elimination of reoxidation problem of sponge iron, good crushing strength, high bulk density, and lower swelling index ( Considering the advantages associated with double-layered pellets, the present investigation has been undertaken. The statistical method has been used for experimental design to know the effect of each variable and quantitative assessment of their interactional effect. The reject of sponge iron feed — 6 mm iron ore was collected from Tensa iron ore mines and heated to eliminate free and combined moisture. Iron ore assayed 61.3% Fe, 3% Al Coke fines were collected from Lodna coke oven plant and non-coking coal sample was collected from Raniganj of the Eastern coalfield area. Char was produced from non-coking coal obtained from the Raniganj area of Eastern coalfield and charcoal was produced in the laboratory from wood. The proximate analysis of reducing agents are given in First, iron ore fines were mixed thoroughly with different carbonaceous material separately in different proportions ranging from C:Fe To study the reduction behaviour of double-layered pellets with different carbonaceous material core pellets, a series of experiment have been conducted under isothermal condition. For these tests, three pellets of each type of reducing agent core of known weight were placed in a platinum crucible. The crucibles were kept inside the furnace at a desired temperature (1000°C, 1100°C, and 1200°C) for a desired time (20, 30, and 40 min for coke, non-coking coal, and char types reducing agents core pellets and 10, 20, and 30 min for charcoal core pellet) and then taken out from the furnace. The pellets were cooled and their weight losses were recorded. The weight loss in the pellet was due to loss of carbon, removal of oxygen from iron ore, and expulsion of volatile matter. The double-layered pellet produced under isothermal condition was subjected to carbon analysis for estimation of unused carbon in the pellet. From these values, the degree of reduction, The weight of oxygen removed at different time intervals was calculated by the weight loss method. Oxygen removed=Total weight loss in the pellet−(Weight of carbon+weight of volatile matter removed). The analysis of residual carbon was carried out by a Strohlein apparatus. The use of statistical design of experiments is advantageous in obtaining optimum conditions in a relatively small number of experiments. From the design matrix, a regression equation is obtained that highlights the effect of individual variables and their relative importance in the process. The interactional effect of each variable for all four types of reducing agents can be known and compared which is not possible in classical experiments. In the present investigation, a simple factorial design of experiment has been used where two level of all the variables are taken in all the four sets of experiments ( To study the reduction behaviour of double-layered pellets, a series of experiments have been conducted. The variable parameters and their range selected have been presented in The design matrix and results showing the degree of reduction are shown in The regression equation for the matrix is represented as: The regression equation for calculating the degree of reduction for coke, non-coking coal, char, and charcoal becomes as follows: Where, The relationships between coded and actual value for coke/iron oxide, non-coking coal/iron oxide, and char/iron oxide double-layered pellets are given as: The relationships between coded and actual value for charcoal/iron oxide double-layered pellets are given as: Random experiments were carried out to test all the above four regression equations for their validity. The conditions were fixed at the base level, i.e., Three identical tests were conducted for all the four types of pellets and all the three trials gave identical degree of reduction, 47%, 46%, and 48% for coke/iron oxide, 61%, 62%, and 61% for non-coking coal/iron oxide, 47%, 48%, and 48% for char/iron oxide and 54%, 53%, and 53% for charcoal/iron oxide double-layered pellets. By substituting the value of The effect of individual variables and interactional effects can be estimated from the regression Thus, the final regression equation for coke, non-coking coal, char, and charcoal double-layered pellets obtained are as follows: Fisher's  When a double-layered pellet containing coke, non-coking coal, char or charcoal and iron ore mixtures encased in a shell of iron ore is heated, the shell hinders gas passing from pellet out. The reduction starts taking place at the surface of the core or on the core–shell interface. The shell of a double-layered pellet behaves as a porous container inside which reducing atmosphere mostly prevails. Reaction between iron oxide and solid carbon takes place inside the shell and the product CO and CO A higher degree of reduction is obtained at higher temperature for all the four reducing agents because of a faster rate of heat transfer as well as a faster rate of reduction. At higher temperatures, the rate of formation of carbon monoxide gas is higher because of its endothermic nature. This also is a reason for the faster rate of reduction at higher temperature. At lower temperature, the heat flux is not sufficient to grant an appreciable rate of carbon gasification reaction. Hence, the rate of reduction at lower temperature is low for all the four cases ( For physical testing, like shatter index, abrasion index, dust index, crushing strength, apparent porosity, etc., pellets (C:Fe The coke/iron oxide, char/iron oxide, and charcoal/iron oxide double-layered pellets obtained after firing exhibited good physical properties. The double-layered/composite pre-reduced pellets using coke/char/charcoal as reducing agents did not show any sign of disintegration but non-coking coal double-layered pellet disintegrated during firing because of higher volatile matter content. From the present investigation, the following conclusions can be drawn. (1) With an increase in reduction time, the degree of reduction of iron ore increases to a certain level and with further increase in reduction time, either it becomes constant or it starts decreasing. This trend is followed for all temperatures and all the C:Fe (2) As temperature increases from 1000°C to 1200°C, the degree of reduction of iron ore increases. (3) As the C:Fe (4) Non-coking coal and charcoal yield a higher degree of reduction than char and coke. In the case of charcoal, reduction rate is the highest. (5) The regression equation for calculating the degree of reduction for coke, non-coking coal, char, and charcoal are as follows: (6) Among the three parameters, the reduction time has the strongest effect when charcoal and non-coking coal are used as reducing agents. Whereas, in the case of coke and char, the reduction temperature has the strongest effect. C:Fe (7) Coke, char, and charcoal can be used as effective reducing agents for production of double-layered/composite pre-reduced pellet under isothermal conditions without pellet disintegration. But in the case of non-coking coal, disintegration takes place due to expulsion of volatile matter.