A study of the effect of different variables (inoculation, pulp density, [Ag], nutrient medium, pH and [Fe3+]) on the silver-catalyzed bioleaching of a low-grade copper sulfide ore has been carried out in shake flasks. Chalcopyrite was the dominant copper mineral in the ore. Preliminary tests showed that addition of other ions (Sb, Bi, Co, Mn, Ni and Sn) did not enhance the copper dissolution rate. Conversely, an inoculation with mesophilic microorganisms and the addition of silver had a markedly catalytic effect on the extraction of copper. The kinetics of the silver-catalyzed chalcopyritic ore bioleaching was greatly affected by pulp density and silver concentration. Small amounts of silver (14.7 g Ag/kg Cu) dramatically accelerated the copper dissolution process while large amounts (294.12 g Ag/kg Cu) had an inhibitory effect. The copper dissolution rate was slightly affected in the range of pH between 1.2 and 2.5 but was significantly slower at pH 3.0. The effect of [Fe3+] in the presence of silver was studied both in abiotic and biotic conditions. High ferric iron concentrations in abiotic tests recovered similar copper amounts (∼95%) to those obtained without or with low [Fe3+] in the presence of bacteria. The leaching of copper from the low-grade copper ore can be very effectively enhanced with silver and mesophilic microorganisms. For that system, the onset of oxidizing conditions starts at an Eh value slightly higher than 650 mV. Above that critical value of potential the copper dissolution rate slows down. This also corresponds with the completion of the leaching process. As the potential rises past 650 mV, the copper extraction reaches a plateau.The spectacular rise in copper prices, at present above US $3/lb, makes the exploitation of copper reserves around the world very attractive. The rapid development of plant operations to meet this increasing demand must however be done in an environmentally responsible manner with due consideration to avoid air, water and landfill pollutions to the greatest extent possible. Currently, around 20–25% of the primary world copper production is derived from hydrometallurgical plants where the dominant process is copper leach–SX–EW. In Chile, the largest copper-producing country in the world, hydrometallurgical processing accounted for 35% in 2002 ( Copper, a typical chalcophilic element, is found in nature as sulfides orebodies. Chalcopyrite, the most important primary source of copper metal, accounts for approximately 70% of the world's known copper reserves ( In response to the wide variety of copper raw materials around the world, new leaching processes have been developed to achieve the highest efficiency. Recently, several authors have overviewed the various alternative hydrometallurgical technologies developed to extract copper from chalcopyrite ores: atmospheric chemical (chloride or sulfate) and biological leaching and pressure sulfate leaching ( Moreover, copper extraction from low-grade chalcopyritic ores requires simple and economically feasible methods. In this sense, the change in copper ore quantities and qualities may act as the driving force for both the development of new technologies and the improvement of existing ones. One of the most promising strategies developed to optimise copper dissolution from low-grade ores has been the utilization of acidophilic microorganisms as biological catalysts. As early as 1922, Rudolfs and Helbronner advanced the hypothesis that bacterial leaching could be an option to extract metals economically from low-grade sulfide minerals (Rudolfs and Helbronner, Bioleaching is probably the most widely studied method for the treatment of low-grade copper ores in the mining industry. The economic feasibility of in-situ and heap leaching of copper sulfide ores coupled with microbial activity has received much attention over time ( Nevertheless, in the treatment of lohw-grade copper sulfides low extractions and slow kinetics remain as the main drawbacks of these processes as they operate at low temperatures. The leaching of copper in dumps or heaps from sulfidic ores is often slow and far from complete. This is especially true to chalcopyrite oxidation where extractions much less than 50% are observed even after many years of leaching. Unlike copper oxides, the leaching of sulfide ores in sulfuric acid media is ineffective and requires the presence of an oxidizing agent. It is well known that the copper dissolution from chalcopyrite takes place through an electrochemical reaction which is greatly affected by the semiconducting properties of the surface in contact with the leaching medium. Although different oxidizing chemicals have been proposed for the leaching of chalcopyrite, ferric ion is by far the most widely-used oxidant in acid medium ( Since the pioneering work of However, ferric sulfate, unlike ferric chloride, is not a very effective lixiviant for the dissolution of copper from chalcopyrite. Both chemical and bacterial leaching of chalcopyrite in acid ferric sulfate displays parabolic kinetics due to the formation of a thickening film that prevents further reaction between the leach solution and the chalcopyrite surface. Although complete oxidation of chalcopyrite can be represented by the following reactions: Additionally, the bioleaching of chalcopyrite with ferric sulfate is a relatively slow process compared to secondary copper sulfides ( As the ferric ion concentration in the medium increases (reaction However, different studies have shown that chalcopyrite dissolution at low temperature is highly dependent on Eh, with better copper extraction rates at low than at high redox potentials ( The two main theories proposed assume the formation of a very thin solid product (< In addition, there is still another theory on chalcopyrite passivation that deals with the formation of a protective layer of iron-hydroxide precipitates jarosite-type (reaction In seeking solutions to overcome chalcopyrite passivation in acidic ferric sulfate solutions, several processes have been considered for the removal of the passivating layer: a) the increase of temperature, b) the use of Fe- and S-oxidizing microorganisms and/or c) the addition of different catalytic ions. Apparently, the increase of copper dissolution rate in these processes is due to a change in the morphology of the solid products formed on the chalcopyrite surface. On the one hand, the joint action of the two first options have found a potential application in the bioleaching process which combined high temperatures with the use of acidophilic thermophilic archaebacteria (mainly On the other hand, the joint action of options In the present investigation, the leaching of low-grade copper ores using chemical (silver ions) and biological (mesophilic microorganisms) catalysts has been explored in three different systems: shake flasks, stirred tanks and column reactors. Further insights on the silver-catalyzed chalcopyrite process will be given in part II and part III, with especial emphasis on literature works on stirred tanks and column reactors. A low-grade copper ore from San Manuel mine (Tucson, Arizona) was used. The ore was supplied by Magma Copper Company (taken over by BHP in the late 1990's) and corresponded to the porphyry Lower Kalamazoo orebody, named lower K-ore, with an average copper composition of 0.62% concentrated almost entirely into the sulfide fraction. The following chemical analysis of the as-received ore was obtained: 0.68% Cu, 0.012% acid-soluble Cu, 3.50% Fe, 3.11% S and 84.50% of acid insoluble. Acid-soluble copper was determined in quadruplicate following the AP-101G analytical procedure from Magma Copper Co. X-ray diffraction analysis of the ore showed the presence of quartz and silicates as the main components and chalcopyrite, pyrite and galena as minor phases. The as-received ore was initially screened through − All bioleaching tests were inoculated with active maintenance cultures of Two different mesophilic cultures were subcultivated: in the absence and in the presence of silver as Ag In order to reproduce the data, the same bacterial culture was used as inoculum in the study of each variable. Bioleaching experiments were carried out in 250 mL bottom-baffled Erlenmeyer flasks incubated at a constant temperature of 35 °C in an orbital shaker agitating at 215 rpm. Each flask contained 75 mL of 1/10 0K medium, 8 g of low-grade copper ore (10% pulp density, unless otherwise stated) and the corresponding additives (metal ions, halides and ferric sulfate) according to each case. After 1 day of chemical conditioning, the pH of the leach suspensions was adjusted to 2.0 and 5 mL of an active microbial culture, previously adapted to the conditions used, was added. Abiotic control tests received 5 mL of 2 g/L thymol in methanol instead of the inoculum. The redox potential was measured using a Pt combination redox electrode with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. pH was monitored using a gel-filled combination pH probe with a Ag/AgCl reference electrode. Water lost by evaporation was compensated by adding deionized water. Periodically, pH was readjusted to 2.0 with 6M H A series of preliminary experiments were carried out previously to test the silver-catalyzed bioleaching process. These tests were focused on the use of different catalytic ions and the use of halides as possible complexing agents for them. Different authors have proposed the addition of foreign ions (Ag, Bi, Sn, Co, etc.) to speed up the dissolution of copper from chalcopyrite-containing ores ( The catalysis of the low-grade copper ore was tested with six different metal ions (Ag, Sb, Bi, Co, Mn, Ni and Sn). Ions were added as soluble solid compounds (Ag Except for silver, the presence of other metal cations apparently did not modify the chemistry of the chalcopyrite dissolution process since the enhancement of copper extraction was negligible compared with the biotic control test ( The differences observed in copper extraction seem to be related to the different evolution of the redox potential when silver is present ( The effect of chloride ions on the chalcopyrite dissolution in acidic solutions has been studied in chemical ( A comparative study of the effect of the addition of halides (chloride and bromide) in the uncatalyzed chalcopyrite bioleaching was carried out. NaCl and KBr salts were used to supply chloride and bromide ions to the diluted nutrient medium. Copper extractions with halides were low (< The redox potential of the solution was clearly affected by the presence of halides ( Final metal extractions and Fe/Cu and S(H Based on the preliminary tests, a new series of tests were conducted in order to understand the chemistry of the silver-catalyzed bioleaching of the low-grade copper ore under study. In all cases silver was added as Ag This variable was studied both in the uncatalyzed and catalyzed-silver bioleaching process. In the uncatalyzed processes poor copper and iron recoveries were obtained with a slight effect of inoculation ( In the catalyzed processes the effect of silver on the copper extraction was markedly affected by inoculation ( As shown in This variable was studied in the range between 2.5 and 15% using 294.1 g Ag/ kg Cu. The availability of solid substrate can have an important effect on the bioleaching process. As shown in The long lag phase observed in these experiments, approximately 10 days, would be related to the toxic effect exerted by the relative high amount of silver used. In fact, the analyses of silver in solution (results not shown) indicated that the removal of silver from the solution was related to the disappearance of the toxic effect of this element during the lag phase. Of course, this induction phase can be shortened by culture adaptation or by using a lower amount of catalysts as will be shown in later tests. The iron was dissolved to a lesser extent in tests with pulp densities higher than 5% ( As in the former experiment, with different pulp densities there was an effect of silver on the onset of oxidizing conditions. The redox potential of the solution was controlled by pulp density until maximum copper dissolution rates were reached, indicating that a similar mechanism must be taking place in all tests (  The preliminary study on the catalytic effect of different ions demonstrated that the copper extraction from the low-grade copper ore tested was only accelerated in the case of silver. In the previous experiment, a silver concentration of 294.1 g/kg Cu was used. However, for economic reasons, the minimum silver concentration for effective catalysis should be used. The catalytic effect of silver was tested in the range between 14.7 and 294.1 g Ag/kg Cu. The results show that smaller additions of silver dissolve higher amounts of copper and with faster kinetics ( The effect of silver concentration on the final metal extractions is shown in Based on these results, it is clear that silver creates the necessary conditions for a rapid dissolution of chalcopyrite. Considering a random distribution of chalcopyrite in the lower K-ore, the addition of silver must be very effective as to cover all the chalcopyrite surfaces. The pH plays an important role in bioleaching processes in two ways: affecting the chemistry of reactions and establishing the ranges of predominance of different microorganisms. A range of pH between 3.0 and 1.2 was studied. All experiments were carried out with a silver concentration of 14.7 g Ag/kg Cu and inoculated with a bacterial inoculum adapted to the same amount of silver ion. The copper dissolution rate was markedly affected at pH 3.0, with little influence in the range between 1.2 and 2.5 and an optimum pH between 1.5 and 2.0 ( Iron, however, was dissolved in higher amounts at lower pH ( Silver in solution was only detected in the experiment at pH 3.0 (results not shown). For the other pH, silver remained precipitated practically during all the experiment. That fact could be responsible for the low redox potentials recorded during the test at high pH unlike the high values recorded in the rest of tests ( X-ray diffraction analyses (results not shown) carried out on the residues did not show appreciable differences in chemical composition, all peaks corresponding to the unreacted material (mainly silicoaluminates and quartz). The effect of pH on the final metal extractions is shown in The standard nutrient solution reported in the literature to grow acidophilic Fe- and S-oxidizing bacterial cultures, the so-called 9K medium, contains different mineral salts necessary for the metabolic process and Fe In practical situations, some of these salts are not required because some essential elements are present in the mineral matrix. Therefore, the examination of the chemical composition of the solution in bioleaching processes may be important to ensure the presence of the necessary nutrients. Four Fe All experiments except that with deionized water had a similar behaviour for copper extraction ( The effect of nutrient medium composition on the final metal extractions is shown in This study was carried out in a range of [Fe The amount of copper dissolved chemically in the presence of silver ions depended on [Fe In the presence of bacteria, the results at high [Fe Iron was extracted more readily from chalcopyrite at low ferric concentrations both in uninoculated and inoculated experiments ( The effect of ferric concentration on the final metal extractions in abiotic and biotic experiments is shown in Several conclusions can be drawn from this study: The preliminary studies showed that, of the different metal cations tested, silver was the only effective catalyst on the copper bioleaching of a low-grade chalcopyritic ore. Furthermore, in the absence of silver coper dissolution was not enhanced by the addition of halides (Cl Silver concentration is a key factor in the copper dissolution from low-grade ores. There is an optimum silver concentration at which copper is preferentially extracted from chalcopyrite. Small amounts of silver catalyze the process whereas high silver concentrations diminish the copper extraction. pH and nutrient medium composition had a marked influence on the copper bioleaching. At pH ~ An increase of ferric ion concentration negatively affects the silver-catalyzed bioleaching but the effect is markedly positive on the silver-catalyzed chemical leaching of the low-grade ore tested. The experiments have demonstrated that for the tests with silver the onset of oxidizing conditions occurs at an Eh value slightly higher than 650 mV. When that critical value of potential is surpassed the copper dissolution rate slows down. The Fe/Cu molar ratio decreases and, therefore, the selectivity of the silver-catalyzed process increases with: inoculation and low silver concentrations.