We analysed registry-based data on 14,915 patients treated for pertrochanteric fracture obtained from the Finnish Health Care Register during the years 1999–2009. Data on the comorbidities, residential status and deaths of the cohort were extracted from several Finnish registries using patients’ unique personal identification numbers. The use of intramedullary implants increased substantially during the study period. One-year mortality was slightly higher in the patients treated with intramedullary implant (26.6% vs. 24.9%; P
                     =0.011). In the first year after the fracture, there were more new operations on hip and thigh in patients treated with an intramedullary implant (11.1% vs. 8.9%; P
                     <0.0001). Similarly, there were more new subtrochanteric and diaphyseal fractures of the femur in patients treated with intramedullary implants (3.2% vs. 1.05%; P
                     <0.0001). Our findings suggest that more expensive intramedullary implants do not lead to better clinical outcomes than extramedullary implants for the treatment of pertrochanteric fractures.Pertrochanteric fractures (AO/OTA 31-A) are treated operatively, and osteosynthesis is the treatment of choice in most circumstances. A sliding hip screw attached to a trochanteric side plate (extramedullary implant) is known to be a reliable and safe implant for these fractures. The aim of this study was to study the registry data from Finland with regard to trends in implant use, costs of treatment, complications and treatment results. The data were extracted from the PERFECT (PERFormance, Effectiveness and Cost of Treatment Episodes) hip fracture database. Primary outcomes used in this study were total mortality, numbers of new operations (including the operations for contralateral side) with the code NF*** (including codes NFB**, NFW**, NFJ52-NFJ99, NFS10 and NFS99) and new treatment periods with the diagnostic codes S72.2–S72.3 (possibly implicating an iatrogenic femoral shaft fracture), T81.0, T81.4 or T84* (implicating surgery or implant-related complications) within a year from the index procedure. The diagnostic and procedural codes are explained in Primary outcomes were compared between the intramedullary and extramedullary groups using Cox's regression analysis with 1-year follow-up. The differences in distributions of observed covariates between the groups were adjusted using propensity score weighting. Temporal trends in outcomes were calculated by sliding a 3-year window over time, and re-estimating the propensity scores and Cox's model for each 3-year cohort defined in this way. During the years 1999–2009, there were 9510 pertrochanteric fractures (S72.1) treated with an extramedullary implant and 5405 patients treated with an intramedullary implant. There was a clear increase in the use of intramedullary nails over time (304/year to 893/year), with a simultaneous decrease in the number of extramedullary implants (951/year to 512/year) ( The crude proportion of patients waiting for operative treatment for more than 2 days was similar between the groups ( New subtrochanteric and diaphyseal fractures (including also fractures on the contralateral side) of the femur were relatively more common in patients treated with intramedullary implants, even after adjustment for background characteristics (3.2% vs. 1.1%, The risk of complications (diagnostic codes T81.0, T81.4 or T84*) was similar in both groups when all years were analysed ( The number of new operations on hip or thigh (with a code NF***) within 1 year of the index procedure was higher in the intramedullary group ( The adjusted overall 1-year mortality after pertrochanteric fracture was higher in the group that received an intramedullary implant ( In our registry-based study, we found that the use of intramedullary implants for the treatment of pertrochanteric fractures has increased substantially, finally surpassing the use of extramedullary implants in Finland in the year 2008. The change that occurred was not supported by the evidence over that time. Prospective studies, database studies, systematic reviews and meta-analyses (including the most recent Cochrane review) during the same time period have recommended the use of extramedullary implants in the treatment of these fractures. So-called new generation trochanteric nails were introduced in Finland during 2005 and 2006. An increase in the use of these implants has occurred very rapidly ( Our data suggest a learning-curve effect associated with the introduction of new-generation intramedullary implants. The increase in the number of implant-related mechanical complications increased in 2006, and then decreased. We think this represents a learning-curve effect, when nails were introduced to surgeons formerly accustomed to extramedullary implants. It has been estimated that new operative techniques require 20–25 operations, or 6 months of learning time. Also in our study, the number of postoperative infections increased after the introduction of the new generation of implants ( The use of intramedullary implants has been shown to be associated with more frequent complications, of which iatrogenic intra- and postoperative femoral shaft fractures are well known. Although all the patients in our study sample had been treated for a pertrochanteric fracture (S72.1), there may be dissimilarities in their fractures. The ICD-10 code S72.1 includes different pertrochanteric fracture patterns, with varying degrees of comminution, and also intertrochanteric (or reverse oblique) fractures (AO/OTA 31–A3). However, intramedullary implants did not offer benefit over extramedullary implants in a study about the treatment of more comminuted AO/OTA 31-A2 fractures. Our study was not designed to detect differences in the functional outcome of patients. In a recent prospective study by Parker et al., There were more patients with cancer in the group that received an intramedullary implant. However, patients with a pathologic fracture usually are coded with a diagnostic code for the malignancy, not with a diagnostic code for pertrochanteric fracture. Further, pathologic fractures are more common in the subtrochanteric area than in the pertrochanteric area. For these reasons, we assume that the small amount of pathologic fractures is not a significant explaining factor between the groups regarding the complications after treatment. Interestingly, we were able to show that the overall mortality was higher in patients who received an intramedullary implant. The reason for this remains unknown. The difference observed persisted after regression analysis and adjustment for known risk factors, including cancer. This is in contrast to results by Radcliff et al., Registry-based studies have their limitations. Although the accuracy of recorded diagnostic and procedural codes for hip fracture treatment in the Finnish register data is known to be good, The advantage of registry studies is that they yield information about what is happening in ‘real life’. The large numbers of patients in registry studies is also an advantage compared to prospective trials. Randomised controlled trials, considered as ‘the best evidence’, have their limitations as well. Trials often have strict inclusion criteria, patients may be operated on by a surgeon dedicated to a specific procedure and the interventions are usually more standardised than in real clinical situations. Intramedullary implants are more expensive than traditional extramedullary implants. This difference in price was reflected in our study. A similar difference in the cost of treatment was noted by Rogmark et al. in their report of Swedish register data concerning the treatment of proximal femoral fractures. Based on the current data, we conclude that there has been a major change in the treatment of pertrochanteric fractures in Finland during the course of the study period. Costs of care are higher when using intramedullary implants, and their introduction is associated with a learning-curve phenomenon. Based on our data, the increased use of intramedullary implants has not led to fewer re-operations or complications on a national level. We declare that we do not have any conflicts of interest.