Poor cycle performance and low coulombic efficiency are bottleneck problems that hinder the further development of lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries. In this study, vapor silica-supported S is prepared by using a facile impregnation method and applied as cathode for Li–S batteries. Results indicate that approximately 43.7% of S is loaded into polyporous vapor silica. The prepared material also displays excellent electrochemical performance. After 200 cycles at a current density of 1000 mA·g−1, a capacity of 710 mAh·g−1 with a reversible capacity retention rate of 85% with coulombic efficiency of 100% is obtained. At a large current density of 2000 mA·g−1, the capacity of 605 mAh·g−1 is maintained after 300 cycles. This material contributes impressive surface-controlled pseudocapacity and high Li ion diffusion coefficient, which helps obtain high capacity and good rate performance during cycles. These results suggest that the prepared vapor silica-supported S can meet the needs of next-generation long-life Li–S batteries.Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries using S as a positive electrode material have high theoretical specific capacity and energy density, reaching 1675 mAh·g Two major efforts are made to the Li–S battery system to solve the aforementioned bottleneck issues. The first one is the modification of the S electrode by exploring various novel carrier materials with good conductivity (e.g., porous carbon matrixes and conducting polymers) Vapor silica is one of the most important ultra-fine inorganic materials. Such material has been widely used as a carrier in the field of catalyst and biomedicine due to its several advantages, such as porosity, inertion, strong loading capacity, and natural hydrophilicity Highly purified S As shown in An electrochemical test was conducted by assembling a coin-type 2016 half-cell. The active material, carboxymethyl cellulose, and super P were mixed at a weight ratio of 7:1.5:1.5 with deionized water as solvent to prepare the electrodes. The mixture was stirred for 12 h, uniformly painted on the surface of Al foil, and dried at 70 °C for 12 h in a vacuum oven to obtain the electrodes. The mass loading of the active materials was approximately 0.8–1.1 mg·cm The structures of the prepared SAS and S The pore volume and size distribution of vapor silica were characterized by BET measurement. The large pore volume of 0.78 cc·g Several XPS tests were conducted to detect the elemental composition and valence state of the atom in samples. Si2p, S2p, and O1s of SAS and S2p of S were displayed in the full survey spectra of the samples ( SEM and TEM were conducted to characterize the SAS morphologies in detail. As shown SEM and TEM were used to observe the morphologies of the S samples. As shown in  Charge and discharge tests at current densities of 1000 mA·g The CV curves of the SAS and S electrodes at a scan rate of 1 mV·s An in-depth kinetic analysis was performed by CV between 1.8 V and 3.0 V at various scan rates from 1 mV·s EIS was measured at a frequency range of 10 In this study, spherical vapor silica was prepared as a carrier loading 43.7% wt% of S with an average volume size of 40 μm by using a facile impregnation method and used as a cathode material for Li–S batteries. The SAS electrode displayed an excellent 100% coulombic efficiency after 200 cycles, a high initial discharge capacity of 840 mAh·g The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. This work was financially supported by Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: