Terrorist attacks using improvised explosive devices on reinforced concrete buildings create a rapid release of energy in the form of a shock wave. Most casualties and injuries resulting from such an attack are not caused by the blast itself, but rather by the disintegration and fragmentation of the RC member due to concrete spallation on the opposite side of the member and which is propelled at high velocities depending on the size of the fragments. Therefore, it is important to analyze the size distributions of the concrete fragments from spallation. In this paper, two RC specimens were tested under explosive loading in a blast chamber: the first, a reinforced concrete (RC) specimen; and the second, an identical RC specimen retrofitted with 6 near surface mounted (NSM) carbon fibre reinforced polymer (CFRP) plates on both the top and bottom faces. Both specimens were subjected to the equivalent 2.1kg of TNT at a standoff distance of 0.6m, resulting in significant scabbing of the concrete. All fragments resulting from the blast tests were collected and analyzed. A sieve analysis was carried out to investigate the size distributions of the fragments from the two specimens. It was found that the fragment size followed both a Weibull distribution and a Rosin–Rammler–Sperling–Bennet (RRSB) distribution. The distribution of the fragment shape factor was also studied. The fragment shape factors were distributed according to the lognormal distribution. Furthermore, the influence of fragment size distribution on energy density dissipation was evaluated.When an explosion is very close to a concrete member, a concrete material behaviour known as scabbing will occur although the concrete member itself may not suffer general failure. Explosion-related injuries and casualties may not result from the blast itself, but rather by the debris discharged from concrete scabbing at high velocities. Blast-induced scabbing of the concrete occurs on the opposite side of the member to the detonation. When the initial compressive shock wave generated by the blast passes through the concrete member and is reflected off the free surface, the shock wave is converted into a tensile wave, resulting in high levels of cracking in the concrete due to its low tensile strength. As the concrete member starts to deflect rapidly, it causes a high-speed discharge of concrete which can become projectile threats to life safety and equipment located on the opposite side of the concrete member, depending on the size of the fragments. Thus, investigation of the size distribution of fragments produced from concrete scabbing due to airblast loads and its effect on dissipated energy density plays an important role in the analysis of fragment threats to life safety and equipment. However, little information is currently available on the fragments size distribution and energy dissipation through fragmentation from RC specimens under scabbing. Both experimental and numerical studies have been conducted to investigate scabbing of RC members due to airblast loads In this paper, two RC specimens were tested under explosive loading in a blast chamber. The first specimen was an RC slab, while the other was retrofitted with 6 NSM FRP strips on both the top and bottom faces. The specimens were subjected to airblast loads consisting of the equivalent of 2.1 Two reinforced concrete slab specimens were constructed with the dimensions 1300  The complete samples of fragments for both the retrofitted and unretrofitted specimens were sieved in the laboratory as shown in The interpretation of fragment samples of brittle materials generated from impact, spallation and dynamic fragmentation process is of particular interest. Several equations have been developed to describe the fragments mathematically If the analysis is only focused on the fine portion of the grain sample ( Then Eq. The complete samples of fragments can also be characterized by a Rosin–Rammler–Sperling–Bennet (RRSB) grain-size distribution It should be noted that the Weibull distribution is usually used to present the size distribution of fragments produced by impact and blast loads The fragment shape is estimated by a shape factor which is the ratio of fragment length over its width. The length and width of 200 fragments from each specimen were analyzed by optical microscopy as the fragment lay in its most stable position As shown in It is proposed that energy dissipated through the spallation of concrete can be analyzed as part of the total energy absorbed by the specimen. Momber Due to 2 Assuming that fragment size Blast testing has been carried out to derive fragment size distribution and fragment shape factor distribution for the unretrofitted and retrofitted RC slabs. By using the method of statistical analysis, it was found that fragment sizes for the unretrofitted and retrofitted RC slabs obey the Weibull distribution, and fragment shape factors obey lognormal distributions. Further to this, it is proposed that energy dissipated through the spallation of concrete can be quantified by the ratio of the total surface area