This investigation had been conducted to determine the influence of residual stresses on the abrasive wear resistance of HVOF thermal spray WC–17wt.% Co coatings, as well as to derive stress relaxation after cutting by wire electric discharge machining (EDM). The abrasive wear properties of the coatings were characterised using an ASTM-G65 three body abrasive wear machine with silica sand as the abrasive. The residual stress was measured by means of X-ray diffraction techniques, on the coated samples before and after the abrasive wear tests. Compressive residual stresses were observed in the surface layer of the large coated samples. However, stress relaxation results after cutting into small sizes were distinctly different. There was strong correlation between residual stresses in the surface layer and abrasive wear resistance, as well as yield strength of a material.The choice of a metal substrate for thermal spraying needs adequate attention in the industrial world. Previous studies based on global characterisation ability of substrate material to support the coating. plasticity during grit-blasting prior to thermal spraying to attain a critical surface roughness, to provide mechanical interlock as well as increased contact area. higher coefficients of thermal expansion than the coating material to generate a limited degree of compressive residual stress in the coating. An important step to know the particular substrate for a particular engineering application is to understand more precisely how the microstructure of the coating affects the coating properties. Cermet thermal spray coatings are widely used in industry due to their characteristics such as resistance to abrasion, erosion, high temperature and corrosive atmospheres Recently A major factor influencing the fracture and spalling in thermal spray coating is the residual stress profile between the coating and the substrate material X-ray diffraction was used to determine the residual stress in this work. This technique was chosen because of the following reasons It is non destructive, and the same specimens can be used for other investigations, or repeated measurements can be performed. It is phase distinctive, and capable of stress investigation in each phase. It has a moderate restriction on specimen dimensions and shape, therefore, it can be used for measurements on different specimen sizes and components. The residual stress investigation of this research work had been reported elsewhere The principles governing the 2D detectors had been intensively discussed elsewhere Residual stress magnitudes are determined through measurement of changes in the material lattice spacing, Using the Bragg equation: The strain is obtained as the change in This predicts a linear variation of strain or interplanar spacing variation with sin where σ A graph of The slope m, is given by: The parameters − A 2xxx Aluminium alloy, 304 Commercially available WC–17 Residual stress measurements taken on coating surface were done on an X-ray analyser with Co-Kα radiation, using the sin The wear analysis was done using three abrasive wear tests on a ASTM-G65 dry sand rubber wheel apparatus. An applied load of 25 The wear damage of the coating surface was further studied by atomic force microscopy (AFM) using a Veeco Dimension 3100 and XRD for qualitative analysis. While the state of abrasive silica sand after post wear test was subsequently investigated using sieves analysis method. The starting powder morphology and its cross-sectional part are shown in To understand the influences of residual stress on the abrasive wear resistance, the residual stress was determined at three different positions on large coated sample (typical sample used for wear test analysis elsewhere  The residual stress measured on the worn surfaces of the abrasive coated samples reported elsewhere XRD pattern of the worn coating surface are shown in The AFM three dimensional views of the worn surfaces of WC–17Co coatings were shown in  In order to investigate the effect of stress relaxation in the coating. The large coated sample cut by EDM were re-examined by X-ray diffraction. The residual stress determined under the assumption of planar stress conditions after cutting by wire EDM is shown in The morphology of the dried starting powder ( The experimental results of the residual stresses found on the large as-sprayed coated samples ( porosity; irregular distribution of powder resulting from spray kinetic different grain size distribution; shape of the coated samples; In addition, the rate of cooling can significantly influence the residual stress or strain profile in the coating, which was not considered here, because the cooling rates were assumed to be same. The average residual stress (i.e. total) on the large coated substrate samples are given in Many factors such as thermal history and deposition parameters make it increasingly difficult to compare results of coating from other sources It is thought that differences in the employed techniques might contribute to the low values. Clyne et al. Limitation of the range of φ, since large values would require the incidence X-ray beam to penetrate appreciable thicknesses of coating and/or substrate. The penetration depth of X-ray diffraction is proportional to the surface roughness of as-sprayed coating only, as well as Error from variation in stress levels. However, the greater penetration of neutrons offers several advantages: Surface effects, such as deformation due to grinding or polishing, or oxidation are avoided: Complete rotation of the sample is achieved, giving more thorough sampling. In general, the difference between the residual stress values observed and those in the literature depend not only on the technique and deposition parameters, but also on the method employed for deposition, which can have new phases, resulting in residual stresses as the volume changes due to different coefficients of thermal expansion There was a concern that the stresses were too small to have real effect on the abrasion resistance and coating properties, although In order to investigate the influence of residual stresses on abrasive wear resistance of the WC–Co coating, it is better to understand the source of residual stresses in the abrasive wear measurement. It is thought that the residual stresses in the wear process comes from two main sources In order to fully understand the stress state condition of the worn coating surface after abrasive wear test, it is better to investigate the state of residual stresses after the wear measurement (i.e. most abraded part of the sample). The XRD analyses of the worn coating surfaces ( Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was used to obtained more details about the wear mechanisms, as its give qualitative information on the binder and carbide elimination. Inspection of these images (see The particle size distribution of the abrasive silica sand used was further studies by Mabotja Some understanding of the stress relaxation may be gained by cutting the material into small sizes. After cutting the samples to promote stress relaxation by EDM ( It is thought that thermal treatment may affect the stress state of the coating The following conclusions were drawn based from the determination of residual stress of WC–7Co thermally sprayed onto different metal substrates. The surface residual stresses determined by X-ray diffraction are compressive and could be due to differences in coefficient of thermal expansion and cooling rate. After cutting into small specimens via wire EDM, the stress relaxation effect was high on coated brass, but much less on the other samples. There was correlation between residual stresses, abrasive wear and coating properties. While AFM gives more details information of the damage produced on worn coating surface. The authors wish to acknowledge the financial and technical support received from the