Modified silica polyamine composites (SPC) made from silanized amorphous nano-porous silica gel and polyamines have been used for the selective removal and recovery of oxyanions of heavy metals such as As and Se in the presence of excess sulfate. The SPCs were functionalized with phosphorus acid using the Mannich reaction, resulting in a phosphonic acid modified composite (BPAP) on which Zr(IV) was immobilized by complexation to the phosphonic acid group. Tungstate and molybdate anions strongly adsorbed on the ZrBPAP composite over a broad pH range of 2–10. The sorption mechanism is believed to be a complexation between the tungstate and/or molybdate and Zr(IV) immobilized-phosphonic acid complex of BPAP. However, complete regeneration of the composite was not successful. A second composite modeled after polymer based adsorbents containing tetraalkyl ammonium groups was synthesized by exhaustive alkylation of the poly(allylamine) composite, BP-1. This composite, BPQAM, composite shows a higher selectivity for tungstate over molybdate at a pH of 6 (WO4
                     2−/MoO4
                     2− =3/1). Using 2MH2SO4 as the strip solution provided selectivity for molybdate (~90% purity). The significance of the observed selectivity is discussed in terms of the chemical properties of the oxyanion and the nature of the interactions with the immobilized metal site. Attempts to separate molybdate from nickel and vanadium using solution concentrations modeled after a contaminated creek in Western Australia are also reported. The use of ZrBPAP and the aminoacetate modified SPC, WP2, resulted in the efficient separation of molybdate but the separation of the nickel from vanadium proved more difficult.Oxyanions of the metals W, Mo, Cr, V, Se and As can be frequently found as trace contaminant species in various waste streams, accompanied by large amounts of more common anions (carbonates, chlorides, nitrates, phosphates and sulfates). These oxyanions have considerable commercial value as a result of their various industrial applications and some present significant environmental challenges because of their toxicity towards living organisms ( The removal and recovery of oxyanions of chromium, tungsten, molybdenum, vanadium, selenium and arsenic from other heavy metal contaminants have been investigated extensively using a variety of techniques. Removal of Cr(VI) has been evaluated using anion exchange materials and alginate gels ( We recently reported the application of these composites to the selective extraction of arsenate from large excesses of sulfate using zirconium immobilized on an amino-phosphonic acid modified SPC (ZrBPAP, Silica gel (267A° pore diameter, 2.82 Infrared characterization of modified composites was carried out with a Thermo-nicolet Nexus 670 FT-IR spectrophotometer as KBr pellets. Elemental analyses (carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, chloride,) were conducted by Galbraith Laboratories, Knoxville, TN, USA. Batch capacity experiments were conducted in a Precision Scientific 360 shaker bath (Precision Scientific, Inc., Chicago, IL). Dynamic column experiments were conducted with a 5 10 pH profiles were performed on molybdate, and tungstate ions via equilibrium batch tests. The pH of the challenge solutions was adjusted with hydrochloric acid. Molybdenum, and tungsten concentrations in challenge solutions were 1.0 Molybdenum and tungsten breakthrough experiments and subsequent stripping were carried out by packing a 5 Errors in samples analyzed by elemental analysis were 0.3% (provided by Galbraith Laboratories, Inc.). The relative standard deviation between the triplicates for the samples analyzed by the FAA Spectrometer and the ICPAES was used as an error, respectively. In most cases the errors were ≤ The detailed characterization of BPAP and ZrBPAP has been previously reported ( Equilibrium batch capacities for molybdate and tungstate oxyanions were determined using ZrBPAP and BPQAM composites over the pH range 2–10 (  As mentioned previously, the separation of molybdenum and tungsten has been a problem for a long time. From the batch capacity (  tungsten concentration in feed solution; molybdenum concentration in feed solution; tungsten concentration at breakthrough; molybdenum concentration at breakthrough. To overcome this problem a different strip solution was tried and a new breakthrough was performed using a fresh 5 The selectivity of different SPC for solutions containing both cationic and anionic metal species was tested on metal concentrations profiling a mine waste creek (Julia Creek) in Western Australia. Abundances and mineralogical residences were determined for a comprehensive range of trace elements in Julia Creek samples. Many trace elements were well above their normal abundances. Of these elements, vanadium and molybdenum are potentially useful by-products, whereas arsenic, selenium, cadmium, thallium, and uranium are of possible environmental and/or occupational health concern. It is the abnormally large concentrations of nickel and molybdenum that were targeted for extraction and possible recovery. Recently, there has been an extraordinary increase in demand for technologies directed towards the extraction of nickel and cobalt from various types of ores ( In our prior work we developed, an SPC that was very selective copper over any other transition metal, as well as alkali and alkaline earth metals, at low pH. We therefore did our experiments on a synthetic solution containing the other three desired metals (Mo, Ni, V) that was prepared in the laboratory. The metal concentrations in the feed solution were scaled to those in actual Julia Creek samples: 30 Based on the batch experiments a sequential dynamic breakthrough test was run on the Julia Creek mock solution using the composite sequence: ZrBPAP at pH The first breakthrough at pH To overcome the poor stripping of molybdenum using 2 ZrBPAP and BPQA showed significant sorption capacities for molybdenum and tungsten oxyanions over a broad pH range of 2–10. ZrBPAP also showed selective removal of molybdenum at pH We gratefully acknowledge the