In the Tulenovo oil deposit, Northeastern Bulgaria, waters contaminated with crude oil and toxic heavy metals (Cd, Cu, Pb, Mn, Fe) were treated by a passive system of the type of the constructed wetlands. The waters had a pH of about 5.3–6.8 and contained about 2–10 mg/l oil. The concentrations of heavy metals exceeded by two to eight times the relevant permissible levels for waters intended for use in the agriculture and/or industry. The flow rate varied in the range of about 0.1–0.5 l/s. The wetland covered an area of about 200 m2 and was about 35–40 cm deep. The wetland contained abundant water and emergent vegetation and a varied microflora. Typha latifolia, Typha angustifolia, Phragmites communis, Scirpus lacustris, Juncus spp. and different algae were the main plant species in the wetland. The microflora consisted of different heterotrophic and autotrophic microorganisms, including different oil-degrading bacteria and fungi. The oil content of the waters after treatment was decreased to less than 0.2 mg/l, and the concentrations of heavy metals were decreased below the relevant permissible levels. The removal of the oil was connected with its degradation by the indigenous microflora. The removal of the toxic heavy metals was connected mainly with the processes of microbial dissimilatory sulphate reduction and biosorption.In the Tulenovo oil deposit, located in Northeastern Bulgaria, near the Black Sea coast, oil is recovered through numerous wells which produce fountains of fluid containing brine and oil. The oil content in the fluid recovered from the different wells varies in the range of about 0.1–0.5%. The oil is heavy, rich in asphalthene-resinous substances and with a high viscosity. The total ion concentration in the brine is about 2–4 g/l and the pH is in the range of 6.8–7.7. The main components in the brine are sulphates, chlorides, sodium and magnesium ions but some toxic heavy metals such as cadmium, copper, lead, manganese and iron are present in concentrations which in some cases are higher than the relevant permissible levels for waters intended for use in agriculture and or industry. The fluid from each well is collected in an individual vessel where the oil is separated from the brine as a result of their different specific gravities. The aqueous phase is removed by siphon from the relevant vessel and runs into the sea. In most cases, a portion of the oil escapes together with the water from the vessels. Several ponds having a surface of about 10–30 m In 1996, a very efficient clean-up of waters contaminated with oil and toxic heavy metals was carried out by means of a natural wetland located in the deposit The wetland was constructed on a site located near the seacoast. This area is underlain by intrusives consisting of dense diorite and gabbro that weather near the surface to grus. The thickness of the grus zone varies from 1 to 3 m. A reddish brown soil of about 50 cm thickness has developed at the surface. The ground-water level is located generally about 2 m below the surface. The gradient of the ground water is generally directed towards the Black Sea. These waters are characterized by a pH about the neutral point and a relatively low mineralisation. The filtration properties of the intrusive rocks are very low. The filtration coefficient is approximately 7×10 The constructed wetland covered a ground surface of about 200 m The wetland was characterized by an abundant microflora consisting of different heterotrophic and autotrophic microorganisms, including different oil-degrading bacteria and fungi Preliminary experiments under laboratory conditions revealed that the rate of oil degradation carried out by the indigenous microflora was not very high. For that reason, the wetland was inoculated with a mixed laboratory-bred culture consisting of several very active oil-degrading microorganisms (related to the genera The waters treated in the wetland were mixtures consisting of brine from the vessels for oil separation, brine from the ponds for oil retention, and surface waters from some natural wetlands in the area and rainwater. Data about the composition of these waters are shown in The quality of the wetland influents and effluents was monitored at least twice per month in the period August 1997–April 1999. The parameters measured in situ included: pH, Eh, dissolved oxygen, total dissolved solids, and temperature. Elemental analysis was done by atomic absorption spectrophotometry and induced coupled plasma spectrophotometry in the laboratory. The hydrocarbons were determined by direct extraction from the relevant water sample with 1,1,2-trichlorotrifluoroethane and IR determination. The isolation, identification and enumeration of microorganisms were carried out by methods described elsewhere It was found that the oil content in the wetland effluents during the warmer months of the year ( from April to October) was decreased to less than 0.2 mg/l The removal of the oil was connected with its microbial degradation. It was found that the oil hydrocarbons were more easily degraded, once they had partitioned into the water phase. The paraffines and naphthenes were much more easily degraded than the other hydrocarbons. The low molecular polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) were more easily degraded than the high molecular PAHs. The methylated and heterocyclic PAHs were degraded to the same extent as the relevant PAHs of the same size. The number of oil-degrading microorganisms exceeded 10 The removal of heavy metals from the polluted waters was also very efficient The sulphate reducing bacteria were a quite numerous and diverse population in the anoxic zone of the wetland The removal of manganese was connected with the microbial oxidation of the bivalent manganese to the tetravalent state. The Mn It was found that portions of the heavy metals were removed by their sorption on the plant and microbial biomass and on the clay minerals in the wetland. The contents of such metals in the main plant species present in the wetland were much higher than those in the relevant species grown in natural wetlands non-polluted with the above-mentioned metals Fine soil particles suspended in the waters were precipitated by some microorganisms as a result of typical agglomeration processes carried out by means of secreted metabolites (mainly polysaccharides). The growth and activity of the biomass in the wetland was enhanced by periodical additions of nutrients (mainly sources of nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium). The removal of pollutants during the cold winter months (from December to February), when the temperatures were often below 2–3°C, was also efficient but longer residence times were needed. The results obtained during this study showed that the treatment of waters polluted with crude oil and toxic metals can be efficiently carried out by means of a constructed wetland with a proper size and design and located in regions with suitable geological and hydrogeological conditions. A part of this work was carried out by funds provided by the National Science Fund (Research Contract Nos. TH-803/98, V-RP-TH-9/99 and MO-X-09/96).