The extraction equilibria of Cu(II) from HCl and HCl-KCl solutions at different ionic strengths (0.05–0.50 mol/L) by LIX 84 in toluene is reported. Copper speciation in the aqueous solutions has been previously calculated using the Specific Interaction Theory (SIT) for the calculation of the activity coefficients. The effect of the concentrations of extractant, H+ and Cl− has been examined. Graphical and numerical treatments of the experimental extraction data indicate the extraction of a single complex of stoichiometry CuL2, HL being 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime, the active component of LIX 84. EPR measurements of the organic extracts have confirmed the proposed stoichiometry. The copper extraction constant values at 0.05, 0.10, 0.25 and 0.50 mol/L HCl and at 0.50 mol/L (H+,K+)Cl
                        −
                      have been determined and successfully correlated with the ionic strength based on the previously developed aqueous phase chemical model. The value of the copper extraction constant at infinite dilution is also reported.β-hydroxyoxime extractants (aldoximes and ketoximes) have been extensively studied for copper recovery from acidic solutions ( On the other hand, the effect of the ionic strength on the extraction of copper by several hydroxyoxime type extractants such as 2-hydroxy-5-nonylbenzophenone oxime, 5-nonylsalicylaldoxime and 5-dodecylsalicylaldoxime has been satisfactorily explained. In contrast, little is known about its effect on the extraction of the metal by 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime. A mathematical model has also been reported to explain the extraction of copper by Acorga M5640 (5-nonylsalicylaldoxime) with the aim of covering a wide copper and extractant concentration range ( As far as 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime is concerned, only the extraction of copper from aqueous solutions containing copper sulphate by LIX 84 in tetradecane has been modelled ( Taking into account the absence of experimental data on equilibrium constants for the extraction of copper from acidic chloride media by 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime, the aim of the present work is the modelling of the solvent extraction of Cu(II) from acidic chloride solutions at different ionic strengths by LIX 84 dissolved in toluene. On one hand, the equilibrium extraction data at the different ionic strengths will be treated by graphical and numerical procedures in order to obtain the stoichiometry of the extracted complexes and their extraction constant values. On the other hand, the extraction equilibrium constant values will be correlated taking into account the specific interaction theory (SIT) ( LIX 84 was received from Cognis (now Basf) and was used without further purification. Organic solutions of the extractant in toluene (Merck) were prepared at different concentrations ranging from 0.02 to 0.27 mol/L 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime (HL). The purity of the extractant was determined by voltammetric and chromatographic measurements. The reagent was found to contain 49.8% of 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime ( Vapor pressure osmometry was used to determine the aggregation of the components of LIX 84 in toluene. It was found that 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime (HL) and the modifier nonylphenol (NP) dimerize in toluene and also interact to give a 1:1 adduct ( The extraction experiments were carried out by shaking equal volumes of aqueous and organic solutions in special stoppered tubes for 60 min, although it was previously checked that a 10 min shaking time was enough to achieve equilibrium conditions. After phase separation by centrifugation (Eppendorf 5804 high-speed centrifuge), copper concentration in both phases was measured by atomic absorption spectroscopy (Perkin Elmer Aanalyst 100). The copper content in the organic phase was measured after stripping the metal from the organic phases into 5.0 mol/L HCl for 1 h. It was checked that the mass balance of copper was fulfilled within ±2.7%. Organic copper extracts were analyzed by Electronic Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR). A Bruker ESP300 spectrometer operating at X band and equipped with standard Oxford low temperature devices was used to record the EPR solution spectra. The magnetic field was calibrated by a NMR probe and the frequency inside the cavities was determined with a Hewlett-Packard 5352B microwave frequency counter. In aqueous solutions containing Cu In the present work several aqueous HCl-KCl solutions at variable ionic strength (0.05–0.5 mol/L) have been used in the extraction experiments. The equilibrium constants at each ionic strength will be obtained by means of the calculation of the activity coefficients (  Taking into account that the ionic strength of the different aqueous solutions is low, the Specific Interaction Theory (SIT) ( where According to the SIT theory, the activity coefficients of copper, chloride and hydrogen ions can be expressed as: The values of the parameters The SIT equation for the complex CuCl the interaction coefficient In the case of the neutral CuCl where Finally, SIT equations for the negative chlorocomplexes given by Eq.   The extraction of copper from aqueous acidic chloride solutions by LIX 84 dissolved in toluene, can be described by the following general reaction: where HL stands for 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime, the active component of LIX 84. The stoichiometric equilibrium constant for On the other hand, the distribution ratio of Cu(II) can be expressed as: where The  Assuming the extraction of a single mononuclear complex, the copper distribution ratio at constant ionic strength would only depend on the pH and the free extractant concentration. As a result, Eq. Free HL concentration can be calculated through the extractant mass balance, which accounts for the dimer (HL) Due to the high ratio On the other hand, free nonylphenol (NP) concentration can be determined by taking into account the mass balance for NP, that can be expressed as: The combination of Eqs.  It can be seen that the monomer of the oxime is the dominant species in the concentration range studied. However, the contribution of the dimer is also important and, moreover, that of the adduct cannot be neglected. At the lowest extractant concentration used (0.020 mol/L), 90.4% of the extractant exists as a monomer, 8.6% as a dimer and 1.0% as an adduct. However, at the highest extractant concentration (0.27 mol/L), only 53.8% of the oxime is present in the monomeric form, the contribution of the dimer being as high as 41.0% and that of the adduct 5.2%. It is clear from According to Eq. Moreover, the effect of H The origin ordinates (log k´ A plot of log The numerical treatment of the distribution data was carried out using the computer program Letagrop-Distr ( where The program requires data at constant ionic strength. Thus, the whole experimental data cannot be introduced in the input, since it would be necessary to consider the variation of the equilibrium constants with the ionic strength. For this reason, the series of extraction data obtained at each hydrochloric acid concentration were treated separately. The series at constant 0.50 mol/L ionic strength in (H  The accuracy of the fittings can be clearly appreciated in Electronic paramagnetic resonance spectroscopy (EPR) measurements were carried out to confirm the extraction of the complex CuL The two bands between 3185 and 3400 gauss are split into 5 narrow bands, attributed to the superhyperfine structure produced by the coupling of the copper electronic spin with the nuclear spin of the nitrogen atom ( The values of the isotropic giromagnetic tensor and those of the coupling constants at 298 K were are: Once the stoichiometric equilibrium constants are known, the next step is to correlate them as a function of the ionic strength. As described above the extraction of Cu(II) takes place by the following reaction: whose extraction constant at infinite dilution is: where {} represents the activity of each species in solution. Assuming an ideal behaviour in the organic phase, the relationship between the stoichiometric ( where the activity coefficients of copper and hydrogen ions, previously calculated through the SIT theory, have been taken from where  agrees well with the reported value for the β-hydroxyoxime LIX 65 N (2-hydroxy-5-nonylbenzophenone oxime) ( The extraction of Cu(II) from acidic chloride solutions by LIX 84 in toluene, is explained through the formation of the chelate CuL The aqueous solutions have been modelled using the specific interaction theory, SIT (