Objective
                  The aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of a lipid-enriched diet on body composition and on main regulatory hormones of food intake (insulin, adiponectin, leptin, ghrelin).
               
                  Method
                  Two groups of 16 rats, 35 days old, weighing 80±6 g, were constituted. One group (S) was given a standard diet during 10 weeks and served as control. The second group (L) was given a lipidic-enriched diet (containing: G: 41.5, L: 38.5, P: 20% calorie). Food and water were given “ad libitum”.
               
                  Results
                  Total food intake, body weight, skeletal area and lean body mass of rats eating lipid-enriched diet were lowered (6694±178 vs. 8160±184 kcal, P
                     =0.01; 431±38 vs. 468±25 g, P
                     =0.003; 72.19±0.96 vs. 76.07±1.31 cm2, P
                     =0.03; 369±18 vs. 409±23 g, P
                     =0.0006), fat mass difference was not statistically significant (82.5±17 vs. 80±17 g, P
                     =0.7). Blood ghrelin, adiponectin levels were lowered (1517±224 vs. 1915±579 pg/ml, P
                     =0.03; 10±3 vs. 19±3 μg/ml, P
                     =0.003) whereas insulin and leptin were unchanged (1.8±1.5 vs. 2.6±1.4 ng/ml, P
                     =0.1; 16±11 vs. 13±10 ng/ml, P
                     =0.4).
               
                  Conclusion
                  A period of high fat diet in growing rats leads to a hypophagia, resulting in a lower lean body mass development. Some regulatory hormones of food intake did not change, while others significantly decreased, notably ghrelin being possible causal factor of the observed hypophagia linked to high fat diet.Nutritional factors have a critical influence on the development of networks involved in metabolic disorders. High fat diet consumption is the main technique currently used to obtain obesity or overweight in adult rat. In rats submitted to high fat diets, the evolution of body composition during growth period depends on many factors: age, initial body weight, strain, fat source…etc. In rats of different ages, the oldest high fat diet rats showed a considerably higher fat proportion (compared with less old low fat diet rats) associated with a corresponding reduced body water content and an approximately identical body protein concentration Generally, animals given high fat diets display a reduced lean body mass Energy homeostasis results from the balance between food intake and energy expenditure. Regulation of food intake is a complex mechanism involving peripheral signals addressing the central nervous system. Among these signals, ghrelin, insulin, leptin, adiponectin play a key role. Ghrelin is an acylated 28 amino acid peptide Insulin is secreted in response to blood glucose concentrations increases. It also acts as long-term signal of food intake at peripheral level Leptin is a peptide released from fat cells into the circulation; it provides information on the availability of fat stores to the hypothalamus and acts as an afferent long-term satiety signal regulating appetite and energy expenditure in both rodents and humans Adiponectin, an adipocytokin produced by adipose tissue is not directly involved in food intake regulation process, but it acts by decreasing insulin resistance, reinforcing insulin action (by improving its sensitivity) Hormones influence energy homeostasis and nutrients in turn influence hormone levels. Therefore the aim of this study was to investigate the evolution of body composition and the behavior of hormones involved in food intake in response to a high fat diet in growing rats. This experiment was done in accordance with current legislation on animal experiments in France and was agreed by the local committee of ethics. Thirty-two Wistar male rats (35 days old, weighing 80 Sixteen rats (L) were given a lipid enriched diet made of a mixture of 75 grams of laboratory chow (UAR A04, Villemoisson-sur-Orge, France) of known composition (72.2 Animals were weighed daily for a permanent follow-up of body weight. Food intake was assessed by differential weighing daily for each group of four rats and totalized over the 10 weeks. Fat mass (FM) and lean body mass (LBM) were assessed under chloral anesthesia by dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) using a Hologic QDR 4500A (version 11.2.5) densitometer calibrated for small animals Rats were sacrificed 2 days after the end of the protocol between 08:00 and 10:00 h (post absorptive state), blood was collected following decapitation. Plasma was kept at –25 °C till the assay. Hormones concentrations were analyzed in rat serum following manufacturer's recommendations. Adiponectin was measured by using a commercially available adiponectin ELISA kits (BioCat, Germany). The lowest limit of the sensitivity of the assay was 15.6 pg/ml; the intra-assay and inter-assay coefficients of variation were 1.9% and 7.5%, respectively. Insulin and leptin were measured by ELISA kits (Linco Research, USA) with a minimum detection limit of 1 ng/ml; intra- and inter-assay variations were 1% and 7%, and 2% and 3%, respectively. Plasma ghrelin concentration was measured according to manufacturer's recommendations by homologous radioimmunoassay (Linco Research, USA). The minimum detectable amount for ghrelin was 10 pg per tube, intra- and inter-assay variations values were 3% and 16%, respectively. All data are reported as the mean Lipid-enriched diet rats had lower body weight (431 Total food intake of L rats throughout the protocol was lower than that of S (6694±178 vs. 8160±184 kcal, –18%); their protein and carbohydrate intakes were less important (–293 and –3113 kcal) whereas lipid intake was higher (+1949 kcal) ( We note that although the difference of food intake (g/day per rat) is evident from the first week, it became really significant only from the fourth week ( When expressed as energy value (kcal/day per rat), L rats consumed more than S at the beginning of protocol; from the first to the fourth week the energy intakes were almost identical and presented a tendency to be lower in L than in S from the 4th to the 10th week, ( Fat mass was not different between L and S rats (82.5 Hormonal concentrations are presented in Insulin and leptin remain unchanged (1.8 There was a positive correlation between leptin and fat mass ( The objective of this study was to investigate the body composition and responses of some regulatory hormones, insulin, adiponectin, ghrelin and leptin to a lipid-enriched diet in growing rats. First of all, we observed significant growth retardation in L versus S rats. The lipid-enriched diet induced hypoghrelinemia and hypoadiponectinemia insulin and leptin levels did not change. There is of course a close relationship between final body weight and total food intake, but the deleterious effect of the lipid-enriched diet goes beyond this simple weight deficit since it impacts the body composition ( The main question arising from these data concerns the reason why the lipid-enriched diet has an inhibiting effect on food intake, knowing that in such a study, rats given low-fat foods eat the greatest quantity of food but those fed high-fat foods have the highest energy intake In an attempt to explain this hypophagia occurring after a long period of hyperlipidic diet, we assayed ghrelin, leptin and insulin, signals known to affect food intake and adiponectin. In our study, hyperlipidic diet was associated with ghrelin decreased levels; it is in agreement with other results An increase of insulin may lead to a drop in ghrelin level As mentioned above, leptin levels were not different between the two groups, which excludes it for hypoghrelinemia although such an effect of leptin was previously reported in Leptin levels were quite similar in the two groups, excluding any role of this hormone in the different food intakes. In fact, leptin levels presented as expected a close correlation with the fat mass ( Insulin showed a tendency only to be lower (not significant) in L than in S, probably in relation to lower amounts of protein and carbohydrates intakes. Whatever, in this case, insulin did not influence food intake. Adiponectin was negatively correlated with fat mass (