This study was aimed at investigating the effects of flow distribution on a constructed subsurface horizontal flow wetland of 26m length, 4m width and one percent bed dip. Inlet configurations were selected as a variable parameter. Three different inlet flow configurations including midpoint–midpoint (A), corner–midpoint (B) and uniform–midpoint (C), with the same fixed outlet configurations, were studied. The combined use of tracer and numerical modeling for the evaluation of hydraulic characteristics of constructed wetlands in the horizontal subsurface flow system was presented. The mean retention time for each configuration was found to be 4.53, 3.24 and 4.65 days, respectively. According to tracer breakthrough curve, the effective volumes for configurations A and C were 87.5%, as compared to 62.1% for the configuration B. Retention distribution curves were useful in assessing the internal dispersion and hydraulic parameters to interpret the short-circuiting flow for each configuration setup. Finally, the best configuration of inlet–outlet layout to improve the performance of effluent treatment based on both numerical simulations and physical experiments was found to be the uniform–midpoint by all performance criteria and this was followed by midpoint–midpoint as the second best one.Constructed wetlands (CWs) are engineered systems that are low-cost in construction, operation and maintenance, used as eco-technological biological wastewater treatment technology, have an excellent pollutant removal performance, and enjoy lower energy consumption. These systems are designed to mimic processes found in natural wetland ecosystems for the treatment of wastewater. Horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetlands (HSSF CW) have long been applied to improve water or wastewater quality ( Constructed wetlands can diminish the contaminant concentrations through complex physical, chemical, and biological mechanisms that may take place by water, substrate, plants, and microorganisms interactions. Removal mechanisms of constructed wetlands are extremely relevant to wastewater constituents. Physical procedures are mainly filtration by the substrate layer, plant–root zone, and sedimentation. The main chemical reactions consist of chemical precipitation, adsorption, cation exchange, and oxidation/reduction reactions. It is widely acknowledged that biochemical reactions attributed to bacterial communities (biofilms) play the most important role in pollutant transformation in aerobic and anaerobic conditions ( The hydraulic retention time (HRT), which is considered as a critical parameter in designing constructed wetlands, is the average time for water moving from the inlet to the outlet. In fact, HRT is the needed time for treating pollutants. A tracer study is the most applicable approach to obtain valuable information about internal hydraulic parameters in a constructed wetland which is the interaction of hydraulic behavior and removal efficiency. A tracer test is a method to measure the residence time distribution (RTD) directly. Hydrodynamics of constructed wetlands and streamlines could be investigated by the tracer to determine the direction and velocity of water movement ( The three most popular choices for tracers are ionic compounds such as bromide or chloride, isotopes, and dyes. In comparison, dyes have the advantages of low detection limits, high accuracy, zero natural background, and relatively low cost. There are some common dyes to select as a tracer, such as Rhodamine, Uranine and Eosine, with a given concentration within a short time. These tracers can return more than 95% of the injected amount in submerged aquatic vegetation-dominated mesocosms ( Previous studies on wetland systems have focused on trying to comprehend the processes leading to the removal of pollutants. Research on flow hydraulics through the porous media of constructed wetlands has concentrated primarily on the assessment of relationships and interactions between microbial communities, plants and the reduction of pollutants in the system ( Research has shown that hydraulic performance can be enhanced by appropriately managing flow distribution at the inlet and the outlet. Hence, the objective of this study was to provide information about the internal hydraulic behavior of HSSF CWs by imparting a different hydraulic flow distribution with the aid of 3D numerical simulation and tracer study. This study evaluated the impact of the configuration of inlet and outlet on the hydrodynamic behavior in HSSF CWs. The experiment was conducted using tracer tests which provided the retention time distribution (RTD) employed to compute integral parameters such as the plug flow ratio, dead volume and hydraulic efficiency. The aim of present study was to analyze wetland internal processes depicting how flow distribution affected hydraulic behavior by using 3 different input flow layouts. The wetland system studied in current research was located in the suburb of Isfahan city, central Iran. The treatment system consisted of a horizontal subsurface flow in a constructed wetland having an aspect ratio of 6.5 and the bed slope of one percent. The flow in the wetland was isolated with a synthetic polyethylene liner laid on bed and border walls. The geometry of this system, which was 4 This system was fed with secondary effluent from the Isfahan North Wastewater Treatment Plant. Despite its dependence on local conditions, the average influent rate was 6.5 As briefly described above, the substrate plays a key role in the removal of pollutants in subsurface CWs and porous media characteristics can strongly influence internal hydraulic streamlines. Although different grain sizes were recommended for substrate of CWs, some researchers showed that fine gravels were more effective in pollutant removal than coarse gravels ( The system's hydraulic condition was fully saturated. In general, the fluid is initially turbulent along the inlet of the system and consequently, high dispersion and molecular diffusion are observed. In order to get rapid normalized velocity and avoid clogging, one meter after the inlet and one last meter toward the outlet were filled by coarse gravel (12–25 As noted by Three configuration designations were midpoint–midpoint (A), corner–midpoint (B), and uniform–midpoint (C) in the same wetland for three periods. The outlet was fixed in all configurations. Also, plant coverage was similar in all cases. The water distribution system consisted of an inlet with a longitudinally drilled PVC tube (the single inlet at the configuration of midpoint–midpoint and corner–midpoint) placed on the upper side of the HSSF CWs and a single outlet fixed at midpoint, and placed at the bottom of the opposite side of the system ( There were 27 standpipe slotted piezometers to measure static pressures by measuring the height to which a column of the water rises against gravity at specific point. Therefore, measuring water levels were complied with use of an electric tape. Finally, a measurement correction was made for the measured depth to get final pressure head. The piezometers in the wetland cell were installed in 9 triple rows along the longitudinal direction of the wetland. To monitor high dispersion near the inlet more closely, more than 40 percent of the piezometers were located at this vicinity ( Na-fluorescein (Uranine) was selected as the water tracing dye to determine the HRT and the hydraulic patterns of the HSSF CW's system. Uranine, which has a color in the aqueous solution that varies from green to orange as a function of the concentration and shows brilliant fluorescent qualities, has a molecular formula of C The tracer concentration was measured by the Synergy™ H1 multi-mode microplate reader (BioTek Instruments, Inc). The lowest detection limit in this instrument was 0.25 To interpret the tracer's data, measuring flow rate at the inlet and the outlet was necessary to evaluate the amount of recovered tracer at the outlet. The wastewater was carried through an earth canal next to the system and was pumped to a distribution system. The feeding regime was designed to lead wastewater into the HSSF CW in an approximate constant flow rate by a calibrated orifice of 1.5 To compute the hydraulic parameters and depict the hydraulic patterns, studying the pattern of discharge flow or hydraulic residence time distributions (RTD) obtained from tracer experiments was necessary ( Residence time distribution assumes that all water molecules that are in a flowing system with one inlet and outlet will have various residence times as water enters and leaves the system. These times will vary around a mean value. As the flow becomes more like plug flow, the mean value will approach the theoretical retention time The hydrodynamic characteristics can be represented by the hydraulic efficiency of the wetland, as proposed by Another key factor for showing hydraulic behavior has been identified as hydraulic short-circuiting ( Short-circuiting is a common problem in which some constituents enter the system and leave before the necessary treatment time. Multiple flow paths could be manipulated by the hydraulic loading rate defined as The 3D model presented, which was built on the Comsol Multiphysics platform, was implemented for fluid flow to show internal hydraulic patterns in HSSF CWs. It was widely used for the continuous flow in designed treatment systems. Hence, the hydraulic model used the Darcy equations to simulate a stationary water flow through the bed. The simulations were verified by using real data obtained from the existing constructed wetland. Four parameters, including hydraulic conductivity ( To visualize internal hydraulic conditions and assess the type of flow, displaying the hydraulic load or pressure throughout the system was performed for each configuration of the inlet and the outlet. It was mostly used to show the difference of hydraulic behavior among three different cases. Influence of flow distribution on the hydraulic efficiency, plug flow and dead volume in a horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetland has been evaluated by considering 3 different inlet positions. Appropriate positioning of the inlet and less importantly, the outlet could to some extent mitigate the dominant effect of short-circuiting. The results of the measured RTD curve ( The retention time distribution curve showed that the tracer concentration would rise rapidly to reach a peak and then gradually fall into initial concentration as the tracer was washed out. There was an obvious difference between the three graphs through the main peak of the tracer concentration. The main peak value of tracer concentration in both configurations A and C occurred on the fifth day. As shown clearly, this time occurred on the third day in the configuration B. This was because the rapid increase of the tracer to the peak concentration in the configuration B was due to having high short-circuiting at the corner of the wetland. Observation has revealed that the value of There was a big difference of mean hydraulic retention times between the configuration B and configurations A and C. A marked reduction of the mean hydraulic retention time was observed to be equal to 32 The present study focused on the hydrodynamic behavior of horizontal subsurface flow constructed wetlands for the secondary treatment of domestic wastewater and hydraulic parameters like hydraulic efficiency, effective volume and short-circuiting were assessed and are presented in Short-circuiting, which occurs when a large portion of water traveling through a system exits well before the residence time, decreases the performance of constructed treatment wetlands. In cases A and C, which had high S values (i.e., small short-circuiting effects), high flow uniformity and hydraulic efficiency, which are extremely relevant to their structure, were exerted. Case B, which had the worst configuration of inlet, resulted in the lowest hydraulic efficiency and effective volume at the same conditions, showing not using all capacity of the constructed wetland. It is shown that the dead volume ratio in the configuration B is larger than other configurations due to high short-circuiting. The percentages of plug flow or effective volume in cases A and C were equal to each other (around 87.5%), showing that the dead volume was equal to 12.5% for these cases, as compared to 38% in the configuration B. There was a significant difference between configurations A and C and B in hydraulic efficiency, signifying the low performance existing in the configuration B. Also, the HLR may influence the dispersion in a constructed wetland and studies have shown when HLR is high, required treatment cannot be seen normally (  The new implementation of HSSF CWs in the Comsol Multiphysics platform enabled us to simulate the internal hydraulic behavior of the constructed wetland ( The magnitude of the pressure computed by model is presented in the unit of pa (N/m There was a strong association between tracer experiments and simulation works. The results showed that midpoint–midpoint and uniform–midpoint could achieve the best Knowing that plug flow, with less pronounced dispersion, dead volume areas and short-circuiting effects is the type of system behavior that is desirable to optimize treatment in subsurface flow constructed wetlands ( Flow through corner inlet setup generally increases the transverse cross-section available for fluid flow, thus decreasing the linear velocity of the fluid. Consequently, the use of configuration B had the opposite effects to the configurations A and C, leading to decreased dispersion, which was noted by simulation results. Although configuration B provided lower dispersion, that was not enough to obtain more plug flow because of increasing the effect of short-circuiting and farther difference between mean retention time and the theoretical retention time. The hydraulic performance of the inlet and the outlet configurations from all aspects described in The influence of inlet positions on the plug flow and dead volume ratios in a HSSF CW discussed were found to be representative of conditions observed for systems operated under similar hydraulic conditions. Other design parameters such as aspect ratio, size of the porous media and hydraulic loading rate can improve the hydraulic behavior of HSSF CW systems by imparting a hydraulic flow behavior that approaches that of an ideal flow system. Furthermore, the performance of a HSSF CW can be enhanced by modifying such parameters. It is anticipated that the effects of dead volume, short-circuiting and dispersion observed in this study may be dampened by increasing loading rates or aspect ratio. Nevertheless, the improvement of the hydraulic behavior of the system with changing in inlet flow configuration could likely be attributed to larger mean HRT and smaller short-circuiting effect. Therefore, uniform configuration of the inlet and outlet would maximize plug flow ratio to improve the hydraulic behavior of the system. The outcome of this study in designing HSSF CW would aim to find an optimum point that would increase effective volume area for contact time and growth, while minimizing short-circuiting effects ( This paper investigated the hydraulic performance and short-circuiting effects on water flow due to three different inlet patterns (i.e. midpoint, corner, and uniform) in horizontal subsurface flow wetlands based on dye tracer measurements and numerical modeling. It was shown that the position of inlet and outlet flow passages had significant effects on hydraulic characteristics and subsequent treatment efficiency of the wetland and so, it could be considered as an important parameter in this regard. Also, in this study, the numerical modeling results were used to investigate the effects of different inflow designs on hydraulic behavior. The results showed that the uniform inlet could provide the highest hydraulic efficiency (i.e. longest hydraulic retention time, HRT), in comparison to other two setups. In terms of hydraulic retention time, which was considered as a key parameter, the uniform–midpoint (4.65 days), midpoint–midpoint (4.53 days) and corner–midpoint (3.24 days) were ranked in order, respectively. The performance of the three different layouts was also investigated in terms of hydraulic parameters. The proper configuration of inlet and outlet improved the hydraulic efficiency in terms of short-circuiting and effective volume. Short-circuiting was influenced by lower hydraulic retention time, leading to inadequate treatment. Uniform–midpoint and midpoint–midpoint yielded the best effective volume of 87.5%, as compared to 62.1% for the corner–midpoint. It was demonstrated that these two cases increased dispersion and used the whole capacity of the constructed wetland for the treatment process. The most important result of this paper was the evaluation of internal hydraulic pattern thorough the wetland, something not investigated well in previous research works. Based on the simulation results obtained using different HSSF CWs, the spatial pressure distribution in wetland cells was depicted. Finally, it can be concluded that the best configuration of inlet-outlet layout based on both numerical simulations and physical experiments is uniform–midpoint. Meanwhile, midpoint–midpoint is preferable to corner–corner by all performance criteria. None declared. Authors state that the research was conducted according to ethical standards. The authors wish to thank Mr. Christoph Weidner, who is a research associate at Federal Institute for Geosciences and Natural Resources (Hannover area, Germany), for providing technical guidance and sharing original literature sources. None.