Activated quartz and hematite tracers between 1180 and 1700μm in diameter were tracked in two sections of the first two turns of a spiral concentrator to ascertain information on valuable and gangue particle motion. The tracking took place while the tracer was flowing in a 20% solids by mass iron ore slurry. The direct activation of mineral particles, combined with the use of an adjustable height circular assembly of modular positron emission particle tracking detectors, has made this tracking possible. The tracer particle trajectories and speeds are presented in this paper. An early separation into two streams (concentrate or loss to tailings) can be seen for certain runs of the hematite tracers. Tracers speeds and radial position from the centre of the spiral give more details about the presence of the slurry film’s secondary flow in the middle zone of the spiral trough. Particle inward and outward migration speed in this secondary circulation is presented. The speed of this migration is approximately 0.12m/s inward and 0.15m/s outward for the set-up used.Spiral concentrators are gravity concentration devices used mostly in mineral sand, coal and iron ore beneficiation. A typical unit is composed of a profiled channel, placed helicoidally around a central structural post. The important geometric parameters of a spiral concentrator are the pitch, diameter, number of turns and trough profile. The particle size processed is typically below 3000 Many different trough geometries exist, and the effect of certain features on mineral recovery has been well established. For example, a large diameter, low pitch and high number of turns will provide better separation of fines due to the lower turbulence in the slurry film ( Investigations into these many parameters is a long and arduous task, especially when one considers the many different ore types, particle shapes and size distributions. Today, most parameter optimisation is realised by experimental test campaigns targeting a specific ore and specific spiral design ( Recent advances in numerical simulation of particle–fluid flows have led to the potential enabling of more virtual experimentations by the use of different technique, including computational fluid dynamics and discrete element method ( The aim of this paper is to provide information about particle trajectories and speeds recorded following PEPT tracking of tracers in the first two turns of a spiral concentrator processing an iron ore slurry. This information is necessary for validation of future particle–fluid flow simulations ( Positron emission particle tracking was developed to investigate dense and opaque processing systems ( In this work, a modular assembly of scintillation crystals was positioned around the spiral set-up to detect decay associated γ-rays ( The technique relies on the transparency of the system to γ-rays, hence opaque and dense mixtures such as mineral slurries can be investigated. This technique can provide location rates of the order of 1 The ore used was an iron ore from ArcelorMittal Exploitation Minière Mount-Wright Mine in Canada’s Labrador Trough. The ore was comprised mostly of quartz (SiO The spiral separator used is shown in An assembly of six double ECAT951 detector modules ( The two minerals tracked were quartz (S.G.: 2.65) and hematite (S.G.: 5.26). The activations were conducted in a 35 A tracking algorithm was used to remove LoR which were corrupt, and to triangulate the tracer locations over time (   Some variation at the end of slice B is caused by the flow being non completely stabilised circularly, but the radial migration is stabilised at the end of slice D as shown by A surprising behaviour is the split of the hematite tracer passes in two groups, one close to the centre (as expected) the other at the outside of the trough. A close look at the initial radial position of the tracer when entering slice B shows how it seems to affect the recovery of the hematite particle. If it enters in the outer zone, the tracer remains in the high speed turbulent flow up until the end of slice D (assuming continuity between the two slices). The issue of some large, dense particle losses to tailing has been previously reported to different extents (  Flow speed measurement found in literature are for water only ( Positron emission particle tracking was used to measure the speed of dense (hematite) and light (quartz) mineral particles flowing in the first two turns of a spiral concentrator. The analysis leads towards the following conclusions: the absolute speed of particles (size −1700 The authors are grateful for the financial support of COREM and The