 Fracture dislocations of the proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joint that are unstable and in which the volar lip (buttress) of the middle phalanx base cannot be salvaged or reconstructed with other means. Volar plate arthroplasty can be used for acute or chronic cases, but ideally the articular surface of the head of the proximal phalanx is preserved.  Acute injuries will present with tenderness and swelling of the digit. Range of motion (ROM) will be limited. Chronic injuries may present with stiffness and pain, often following what was believed to be a trivial “finger jam” injury (  Plain radiographs in three views (posteroanterior, oblique, and lateral) should be obtained. A properly aligned lateral view is especially important for identifying any subluxation ( In cases with subtle subluxation, the middle phalanx shifts relatively dorsal to normal joint alignment, and a “V sign” can be seen at the dorsal side of the joint, highlighting the incongruity of the joint surfaces (  The volar plate is firmly attached at its distal edge to the volar lip of the middle phalanx. Its proximal attachments (checkrein ligaments) are ordinarily loose and flimsy in the nonpathologic state. These attachments allow the volar plate free excursion with flexion of the joint, but effectively prevent hyperextension ( When the comminution of the middle phalanx volar lip involves more than 40% of the articular surface, the PIP joint generally becomes unstable due to loss of the collateral ligament and the volar plate stabilizers (  A The skin flap with subcutaneous tissue is elevated and the radial and ulnar neurovascular structures are identified and protected. The sheath from the A2 to A4 pulley is exposed, incised, and reflected as a rectangular flap. The volar plate is exposed by retracting the flexor tendons (see  Longitudinal incisions are made along radial and ulnar edges of the volar plate, which is separated from the collateral ligaments, elevating it as a proximally based flap. Distally, the volar plate may already be avulsed with the fracture fragment(s). If not, a transverse incision is made at the most distal aspect of the volar plate, detaching it from the base of the middle phalanx ( Wide exposure of the joint is needed for this operation (“shotgun” exposure). The collateral ligaments are identified and released distally from the middle phalanx in a stepwise fashion, checking periodically to see if enough has been released to open the joint fully. By hyperextending almost 180 degrees, the whole joint surface can be exposed ( The volar plate flap should be designed with adequate width to provide stability to the reconstruction. Also, it needs to be designed with symmetry between the radial and ulnar sides of the flap to avoid an angular deformity.  Loose fracture fragments, including those attached to the distal volar plate, are excised. The damaged, volar portion of the middle phalanx base is shaped into a smooth, symmetric surface that is to be “resurfaced” by the volar plate. The depth of the step-off between the healthy dorsal articular surface and this reshaped volar portion of the middle phalanx base should be equal to the thickness of the volar plate ( The base of the middle phalanx must be prepared in a symmetric fashion to avoid any angular or rotational deformity in the final reconstruction.  A 3-0 or 4-0 nonabsorbable suture is placed in the volar plate flap using a locking, grasping suture pattern such as a Bunnell stitch or Krackow stitch ( The sutures are passed through the base of the middle phalanx using Keith needles or a similar method ( The needles should be inserted so that the volar plate is correctly brought into the resurfaced area, abutting the residual healthy articular surface, so that a smooth articular contour is achieved. The needles should be directed toward the dorsum of the finger, where the suture can be tightened, pulling the volar plate into the articular defect ( The joint reduction and ROM are assessed under direct vision and radiographic guidance, and the sutures are tied over a button or over the periosteum to avoid skin troubles (  If the PIP joint cannot reach full extension after insertion of the volar plate, the volar plate should be mobilized further by partial, step-wise release of the checkrein ligaments until full extension is possible. If lateral instability is identified, the lateral sides of the volar plate may be sutured to the adjacent collateral ligaments to improve lateral stability. When the sutures are tied over the periosteum, be mindful to avoid entrapping any portion of the extensor mechanism.  Congruent reduction and stability through the entire ROM is confirmed under fluoroscopic imaging ( The tourniquet is deflated, hemostasis is achieved, and skin is closed ( Transarticular pinning of the PIP joint in slight flexion for 3 weeks is advised to maintain accurate reduction during the early healing period. Alternatively, an articulated PIP external fixator or extension block pinning can be used.  The PIP joint fixation is continued for 3 weeks after surgery. In the cases using extension block pinning, passive flexion is begun within a week. Active flexion and extension is started after wire removal, and an extension block splint is used from 3 to 6 weeks. The pullout suture is removed after 6 weeks in cases where a button is used. Dynamic splinting can be used after 6 weeks to help achieve full extension. Gradual improvements in ROM may be seen even up to 1 year after surgery. 