Website users often experience several difficulties while trying to access or navigate a website. This is mostly due to their inability to familiarize themselves with the structures in the website or as a result of complex procedures which prevent them from reaching their goals. It is therefore, important to develop a methodology or guidance technique for assisting website users to achieve their goals. A type of expert system that provides the needed guidance necessary in order to achieve these goals was proposed in this paper. A sample website was initially designed, and the analysis of website menu structure was conducted. The rules to find the optimal path are established based on the Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules (GOMS) model by considering individual preferences on input devices. Derivatives of the GOMS model such as the Cognitive Perceptual Model GOMS, Natural GOMS Language, GOMS Language and GOMS Language Evaluation and Analysis were reviewed. The Card, Moran and Newell (CMN) GOMS technique was selected as the primary inference engine of the proposed expert system. This was primarily based on the highly efficient and exemplary capability of the CMN-GOMS to predict both operator sequence and execution time. The expert system was finally constructed from the result of the acquired knowledge base and other applicable rules.With the increasing trend in internet technology, compared to the last couple of years, more business-oriented internet users are now performing several tasks through e-commerce systems such as e-shopping, e-trading, e-banking, and so on. Unfortunately, some websites are poorly designed, thereby, making it difficult for most users to easily access or navigate the websites. Some other troubling issues have also been traced to software firewall, disabled cookies, or the use of outdated version of internet browsers. Users tend to be often confronted with the difficulties of achieving their goals because of unfamiliar structures of websites or complex procedures, which often prevent them from achieving their specific goals. This means it will be necessary to provide additional guidance to the users so as to enable them achieve their goals more efficiently. This study therefore, proposes the following objectives.    At the beginning of the study, a sample website was developed in order to define the expert system. Then, the hierarchical task analysis (HTA) for that website was conducted and the menu tree structure was made. This initial process was used for the examination of the possible methods or paths (the initial stage to the final stage) to achieve given task goals. The rules needed for finding the optimal methods or procedures to reach the users’ goals were then provided using Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection (GOMS) model. The analytic hierarchy process (AHP) algorithm was then selected for considering individual preferences on input devices, since some users may prefer to utilize the mouse as an input device, but others may like to use the keyboard more often for shorter paths and time in completing their goals. Also, the traditional GOMS model was used to establish and estimate usability in a view of “time to complete the tasks”. GOMS could be described as a method for the effective relation of a task and the user’s knowledge of how to perform the task. This could be in terms of A hierarchy is an organization of elements that, according to prerequisite relationships, describes the path of experiences a learner should take to achieve any single behavior that appears higher in the hierarchy ( Menu tree structure shows classification of menus in a hierarchy through some techniques. In this study, menu tree structure was used for the basis of finding the optimal paths to the tasks. When a collection of items grows and becomes difficult to maintain under intellectual control, designers can form categories of similar items, creating a menu tree structure ( The GOMS model is useful for the analysis of the knowledge of how to do a task in terms of Goals, Operators, Methods, and Selection rules. Goals are what the user intends to accomplish; operator are actions performed in service of a goal; methods are sequences of operators and sub-goal invocations that accomplish a goal; and selection rules are necessary to represent the user’s knowledge of which method should be applied when there are more than one method to accomplish a goal. There are four variants of GOMS: the simplest version presented by Another GOMS technique, commonly used when tasks are broken down to the perceptual or motor levels is the Cognitive Perceptual Model (CPM) GOMS. Using this technique, the user joins the tasks together serially, and then checks to determine if there are any overlapping actions. The user then attempts to perform these tasks in parallel. The major benefit of the CPM-GOMS model is that overlapping tasks could be detected and made to happen in parallel as very efficient chunks of activities. Also, using the CPM-GOMS technique, the estimated completion times are generally faster when compared to the other GOMS techniques which often allocate so much time to the “prepare for action” type operations ( The Natural GOMS Language, technique was originally developed by The GOMS Language (GOMSL) is the formalized and executable version of the Natural GOMS Language (NGOMSL). On the other hand, the GOMS Language Evaluation and ANalysis (GLEAN) method is a simplified version of the Executive Process-Interactive Control (EPIC) simulation system. The EPIC system was developed by The CMN-GOMS is the original formulation proposed by Card, Moran and Newell Originally created by In this paper, the CMN-GOMS technique was used as the primary inference engine of the expert system. The justification for the use of CMN-GOMS is based on its ability of providing guidance to the user on how to formulate selection rules. Also, the CMN-GOMS model makes up for the limitations of the ordinary GOMS model due to its efficiency in estimating the load placed on the user by the task. Based on these advantages, the CMN-GOMS model was selected as the inference engine of the expert system used in the analysis in this paper. The CMN-GOMS demonstrates how to express a goal and sub-goals in a hierarchy, methods and operators, and how to formulate selection rules. It should be noted that CMN-GOMS is developed based on a strict task-goal hierarchy. In the CMN-GOMS, methods are represented in an informal program format that can include sub-methods and conditionals. A CMN-GOMS model, given a particular task situation, can thus predict both operator sequence and execution time as shown in The main input devices to explore the webpage are a mouse and a key-board. Some users have preference on a mouse rather than a key-board, but some prefer to use a key-board with which they use a shortcut key or search various words or text. This is often directly related to the individual preference. In our project, the preference weight will be applied to the GOMS model to provide the rule based expert system, and the preferences on input device will be measured based on the concept of the analytic hierarchy process. In this part, AHP will be briefly introduced and the methodology to measure the preference on input device will be explained.  Paired comparison judgments in AHP are expressed by a fundamental (1–9) scale which was proposed by The full procedures of AHP are following. Firstly, in the establishment of structural hierarchies, hierarchy is the structural skeleton in AHP method. The structure is composed by the main objective, criteria and alternatives. The number of hierarchies depends on the complexity of the problem analyzed. Additionally, there should not be too many elements in a hierarchy ( The next step is the derivation of the eigenvector and maximum eigenvalue. The significance of the eigenvector derived from the above comparison matrix is the degree of relative importance amongst the elements. At the same time, the maximum eigenvalue can be derived. This value can be used to determine the strength of consistency amongst comparisons, and can be used as a reference index to screen information. The final step is to test the likelihood or accuracy of the judgment of the decision-maker. This is known as the decision-making consistency. The consistency of the decision-maker is tested by the use of the comparison matrix. To determine the consistency of the decision-maker, assume that matrix To obtain the weight, the following Eq. Satty has proven that For each comparison matrix, a corresponding average value of the consistency index random index (R.I) shown in If the consistency ratio is less than 0.1, then the evaluation within the matrix is acceptable ( The preference weight could be assigned based on the user’s simple pair-wise rating using 1–9 scale which was proposed by The sample website which provides information related to golf: general information about golf, introduction of golf products, advices for playing golf, etc. The menus of this website were made and indexed through clustering technique and interviewing users. Also, this provides some shortcuts for frequently-used menus or categories. Refer to the attached files. In this study, two task scenarios will used to show the implementation of our expert system: (1) Find Callaway White Hot 2-Ball Putters and (2) get some basic tips about putting. The menu tree structure of the sample website was made based on hierarchical task analysis (HTA).  The menu tree structure and the connections among the nodes will be used as the knowledge base of the expert system. The rules are established based on GOMS model considering preferences on input devices. These rules are used as the inference engine of the expert system to provide the guidance for the optimal path to a task. There are several effective paths and numerous possible paths in completing a task. Each path, referred as to method in GOMS model, entails a different series of operators: K, T, P, B, BB, H, M, and R operators. That is, each path requires different time to completing a task. Also, individual’s preference can be considered on input devices (mouse and keyboard). The expert system asks a user to rate his/her preference on mouse or keyboard, and gives a penalty to the operators related to his/her less-preferred input device. For example, the user who rates keyboard as an input device more highly than mouse will feel inconvenient in conducting the operators related to mouse. In this sense, the expert system gives a penalty (weight) to these operators and this causes time to complete a task to increase. The preference weight is calculated based on the user’s input data such as preferred device and score. If one choose mouse and assign four points, the preference weight on mouse and keyboard are 0.8, 0.2, respectively. In general, the weight of the preferred device is defined by The predicted execution time considering user’s preference on input devices is shown in Eq. The basic required time (TB) is the time required basically when not considering user’s preference on input devices. Then the expert system could finally find the optimal paths among several paths, based on this predicted execution time to complete the task. This is related to the “selection rule” in GOMS model. Applying the rules is shown below in more detail through two sample tasks. In this case, three possible paths to each task are considered among numerous methods, and R operator, the system’s response time, is assumed to be 0.1. Sample task 1 – Find Callaway White Hot 2-Ball Putters. The three possible paths to the sample task 1 (Find Callaway White Hot 2-Ball Putters) is shown in  Sample task 2 – get some basic tips about putting. The three possible paths to the sample task 2 (get some basic tips about putting) is shown in  The expert system that was used to provide the optimal paths to the task goals was constructed based on GOMS modeling. This was achieved by the considering individual’s preference on input devices. However, there are some limitations or problems to be solved in applying this expert system to various situations or fields. The expert system provides the optimal path to the goal based on the GOMS model considering user’s preference on input devices. This system is applied to the sample website about Golf. The sample program execution manual which could be used in this application is shown in the Appendix. Initially, the expert system consists of two kinds of input data. One is preference on input device and the other is task goal. In order to receive the former input data, a user selects the preferred input device either mouse or keyboard, and then assigns the preferred score with 1–9 scales. For the later input data, the user’s goal will be searched, and matched goal which is provided in the webpage will be displayed. The user finally selects his or her goals. Based on input data, the constructed system displays the optimal path to reach the user’s goal such as It should be noted that the traditional GOMS model exhibits some inherent limitations in both language and structure, which often restrict its extensive application. In most situations, the GOMS model can only look at procedures, while cognitive models are neglected. This does not provide enough procedures for performing effective task analysis. In situations where more detailed levels of analysis the cognitive activities become more important, the Card, Moran and Newell (CNN) GOMS model is utilized. In this paper, the CMN-GOMS technique is used as the primary inference engine of the expert system. The CMN-GOMS model makes up for the limitations of the ordinary GOMS model, since it puts the cognitive time in “verify” operators at the end of sub-procedures. Based on this advantage of the CMN-GOMS model, the cognitive activities and time could be expressed more exactly (the operators related to the cognitive activity were categorized and analyzed more in detail). However, future considerations to this study could include the validation of the efficiency of the CMN-GOMS model in estimating the load placed on the user by the task. It will be of importance to know how accurately the CMN-GOMS technique predicts any time saving or deficit after the implementation of the proposed expert system. Also, the GOMS model only looks at skilled (error-free) behavior. The GOMS model cannot effectively address the “search through a problem space”. The expert system provides the advice of the optimal paths to reach the goals in a view of “expert”, not “novice”. Users tend to become skilled in their use and would still prefer more efficient methods of accomplishing their routine tasks. However, such thought can be a limitation of applying this expert system. Thus, the development of the expert system from the viewpoint of the novice user is required by considering their behavioral patterns. CMN-COMS model used in the expert system treated the actions as serial (no parallel processing). That is, it considers only sequential tasks, and it may be inadequate for distributed applications. However, users’ behaviors in a website are often parallel. Users often click the button, retrieving their short-term memory simultaneously. CMN-GOMS model cannot capture such situations. To solve this problem, a modified CPM-GOM model that allows human parallel information processing will be needed in the future. In this research, the GOMS model considered the user’s preference on input devices additionally. This consideration affected the predicted time to complete a task by adding penalty-related time. It should be noted that this technique still needs to be validated or modified to be applied to general situations. Also, the expert system used in the analysis did not adequately capture the menu structure or the time estimates automatically. Further efforts will be made to ensure that the expert system contains such the automatic capture of the menu structure using a specified function or technique. This expert system could be modified to provide the direct link to the page that the user wants. It would also be important to show a series of steps which are needed to reach the task goal and let the user follow each of them, in terms of learning or training. In other areas of application, the step sequences may be very important. For example, the development of a step sequence in the manufacturing decision procedure or delivery orders.  Before starting the expert system application Start your web server Copy all the files in ROOT folder in the CD Paste the files into the ROOT folder in your web server Execute expert_1.htm (ex. Usage of the expert system Select the preferred input device either mouse or keyboard Assign the preferred score with 1–9 scales Just select the number in th combo box Scale 1 is equal preference, 9 is extremely high preference Type your search keyword, and click Search Keyword is limited to ‘callaway’ and ‘putting’ The displayed goal depends on your search keyword and select your goal among the listed by combo box, and click If you want to reset or go back to the initial page, click  Out screen shows the optimal path to reach your goal If you want to find another goal or return initial page, click the link Do you want another goal…?  The preference weight is calculated based on the user’s input data such as preferred device and score. If one choose mouse and assign four points, the preference weight on mouse and keyboard are 0.8, 0.2, respectively. In general, the weight of the preferred device is defined by In our algorithm, if a user prefers mouse to keyboard, time penalty would be assigned to the keyboard actions. On the other hand, if the user prefers the keyboard, then time penalty would be assigned to the mouse actions. Note that the time penalty could be assigned by the difference in the weight of each device.