Background
                  The aim of this study was to determine the lateral ulnar collateral ligament (LUCL) injury associated with isolated radial head fracture (RHF) and the relationship of the ligament injury with the displacement of the fragment—loss of contact—in unstable displaced partial articular RHF in individuals without any history of ulnohumeral dislocation.
               
                  Methods
                  We retrospectively identified 131 consecutive patients who underwent open reduction and internal fixation of isolated closed Mason type II RHF performed at our institution. We identified 3 subsets by the pattern of RHF and the position of the unstable fragment (anterior or posterior) relative to the capitulum humeri: displaced stable (group I), displaced anterior unstable (group II), and displaced posterior unstable (group III). Standard radiographs were obtained preoperatively and postoperatively. The pattern of lateral collateral ligament avulsion and its distribution were inferred from intraoperative records.
               
                  Results
                  Preoperative radiographs of the 131 patients showed 101 nonseparated fractures (77%, group I) and 30 unstable fractures (23%). Anterior displacement of the fragment was found in 18 elbows (14%, group II) and posterior displacement in 12 (9%, group III). LUCL avulsion was found in 18 of 30 unstable RHFs (60%) and in 1 of 60 stable RHFs (1.6%).
               
                  Conclusion
                  RHF is a complex fracture often associated with soft tissue lesions. It is important to determine which structures need to be repaired to avoid complications that could lead to elbow instability. The RHF pattern and classification as stable or unstable can help the surgeon in the identification and treatment of LUCL lesions.Radial head fractures (RHFs) constitute 1.5%-4% of all fractures of the human body and account for approximately 33% of adult elbow fractures; they mainly involve active individuals between 20 and 60 years of age. In the setting of posterolateral rotatory instability (PLRI) of the elbow with displaced RHF and complete avulsion of the lateral collateral ligament (LCL), a direct repair of the avulsed lateral ligaments is recommended; medial collateral ligament repair is less commonly required if intraoperative dynamic testing has excluded medial instability. The aim of this study was to determine the LCL injury associated with isolated RHF and the relationship of ligament injury with the dislocation of the fragment in unstable type II partial articular RHF in individuals without any history of traumatic elbow instability. From January 2007 to December 2017, we retrospectively identified 131 consecutive patients (131 elbows) who underwent open reduction and internal fixation of isolated closed Mason type II RHF performed at our institution. No history of elbow dislocation was reported, and no clinical or radiographic signs of dislocation were described. Fractures were classified according to Mason Demographic data of the study population are described in ( All operations were performed under local anesthesia with the patient in the supine position and with a sterile tourniquet at the arm root. Before any procedure, lateral elbow stability was assessed with the pivot shift test. In case of complete avulsion, the LUCL was detached from the lateral condyle, and the joint line between the capitulum and the radial head was open. The radial collateral ligament and coronoid process were found intact. The injured LUCL was fixed on the lateral surface of the humeral condyle with high-resistance bone suture (No. 2 FiberWire [Arthrex, Naples, FL, USA]). The pivot shift test was performed once again at the end of each procedure to confirm lateral elbow stability. The wound was closed in layers and the arm immobilized in a hinged brace for 3 weeks. We hypothesized that LUCL avulsion was a result of an occult elbow dislocation following high-energy trauma that produced 2 patterns of RHF: Posterior displacement of the radial head fragment ( Anterior displacement of the radial head fragment ( In these 2 models of dislocation, the elbow follows stage 1 (LCL injury) and stage 2 (partial or perched dislocation) of PLRI with partial or complete involvement of the anterior and posterior capsule or common extensor tendon origin. Descriptive statistics (absolute and percentage frequency, mean, median, standard deviation, and range) for each group were calculated for all variables. The possible association between preoperative pattern of displaced RHF and qualitative variables (age, sex, dominance, side, and body mass index) was evaluated with the analysis of variance and χ The association between preoperative pattern of RHF and operative findings of LUCL tear were analyzed with Pearson χ Age, sex, side, dominance, and body mass index were not associated with the pattern of fragment displacement and LUCL tear. Preoperative radiographs of the 131 included elbows with type II RHF showed 101 stable fractures (77%, group I) and 30 unstable fractures (23%); anterior displacement of the fragment was found in 18 elbows (14%, group II) and posterior displacement in 12 (9%, group III; A significant association was found between unstable RHFs and LUCL avulsion ( Treatment and classification of type II RHF are still controversial, especially for the partial articular 2-part fractures assessed in this study. Intraoperative findings of this study also suggest that if there is a posterior or anterior displacement of the radial head fragment with an elbow dislocation, an associated complete avulsion of the lateral elbow ligament should be suspected. The limited evidence of LUCL avulsion in the group with displaced nonseparated RHF makes us think that the high energy of the trauma produces an elbow dislocation and secondary LUCL complete avulsion. More than 70% of RHFs were stable, thus supporting this hypothesis. Displacement of RHF contributes to elbow instability, and biomechanical studies demonstrated that even an isolated RHF, with a preserved medial collateral ligament complex, can induce up to 30% loss of elbow resistance. Unstable RHFs were associated with complete avulsion of the LUCL, particularly in the group with posterior displacement of the fragment. Intraoperative findings prompt us to propose a cadaveric model of lateral ligament injury demonstrating that when the radial head is posteriorly dislocated, the displaced fragment can follow the torn LUCL posteriorly (posterior displacement model); alternatively, when it remains anteriorly dislocated, it is less commonly associated with partial or total LUCL tear (anterior displacement model). It is reasonable to assume that the force of the trauma may affect the pattern of radial head displacement and the type of fragment dislocation ( Itamura et al This is the first study in the literature to suggest that the position of the radial head fragment can advocate for unknown injury of the LCL, especially in patients in whom an elbow dislocation is not clinically or radiologically marked. This study poses several limitations. It is a retrospective design, with a small sample of the subset with unstable RHF. Only of a specific pattern of RHF (ie, displaced 2-part articular) was assessed, and only the elbows with displaced unstable fractures were assessed with CT scan. Prospective studies with large populations may help address the treatment of displaced articular 2-part RHFs and associated LCL avulsion as well as their relationship to elbow subluxation. RHF is a complex fracture that is often associated with soft tissue lesions. Before any procedure is performed, it is important to determine which structures need to be repaired to avoid complications that could lead to elbow instability. Preoperative radiographs or CT scan may determine which RHFs are likely to be associated with another lesion. This study demonstrates that type II unstable RHFs, with posteriorly displaced fragment, were associated with a torn LUCL, whereas in only one-third of the fractures with anterior displacement of the fragment was the LUCL torn. Because of the constraints of time and the means to perform magnetic resonance imaging, RHF pattern and classification as stable or unstable provide a reliable preoperative estimation of the status of the LUCL in an acute setting. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.