An electrochemical route to this oxidative precipitation was studied wherein a rare earth chloride solution is subjected to electrolysis enabling the separation of cerium as ceric hydroxide. A rotating cathode was used to avoid formation of hydroxide scale on the cathode surface. The electrolytic and solution parameters were optimized in laboratory scale and bench scale cells. The process occurred at a current efficiency of 60% with an energy consumption of 3.5 kWh/kg of CeO2. The purity of the product was >95%.Due to its specific functional applications, cerium is the most important element of the rare earths. Conventionally, cerium is separated as Ce(IV) hydroxide by oxidative precipitation with sodium hypochlorite after the thorium hydroxide separation stage. Electrolytic separation of cerium hydroxide from mixed nitrate ( Indirect electrochemical oxidation with in situ generated hypochlorite has been found to be a most convenient method for the conversion of Cr(III) to Cr(VI) and extraction from chromium-containing solid phases ( Apart from the above, the electrolysis of solutions containing metallic ions that precipitates hydroxides is difficult since a coating of a metallic hydroxide forms on the cathode and hinders the electrolytic process. This has been observed in alkaline metal chloride electrolysis and was overcome by employing a rotating cathode ( The electrochemical cell ( Electrical connection to the cathode was through mercury contained in a cup attached to the top end of the rotating shaft driven by a 0.5-hp motor. Regulated direct current was supplied from a rectifier [Aplab, Model L3220-S (20A, 15V)]. The mixed rare earth chloride used in this study was supplied by Indian Rare Earths, Udyogamandal, India. The composition of the rare earth chloride and the distribution of the different rare earths in the mixed chloride are shown in  The product obtained at higher chloride concentration had to be scraped from the cathode surface and is of lower purity due to Ce(III) hydroxide formed by the reduction of Ce(IV) hydroxide. At lower concentrations, it is probable that Ce(III) hydroxide itself gets precipitated with the product. But lower concentrations can lead to high cell voltages. The pH of the electrolyte plays an important role in determining the efficiency, as can be seen from Reactions Chlorine evolution is a facile reaction, and an anode current density has only the effect of suppressing the competing oxygen evolution reaction during chloride electrolysis. The rate of evolution of oxygen is higher when the chloride concentration decreases below 1 M in the case of sodium chloride electrolysis. As the chloride concentration is much higher in the present instance, the anode current density used in all these experiments was 500 A/m The effect of cathode current density on the formation of ceric hydroxide is presented in The deposition of the ceric hydroxide layer and its tendency to reduce to Ce(III) have been found to be minimized when a rotating cathode is employed. This is due to the distribution of the hydroxide formed at the cathode and decrease in the pH at the cathode surface. The precipitation pH of cerium is about 7.0–7.2 ( The data obtained from the laboratory scale experiments were confirmed by scaling up the cell capacity to 15 A. A stainless steel tank [0.35 (L)×0.25 (b)×0.25 m (h)] was fitted with a PVC cover having suitable holes to introduce anode, cathode, thermometer and the electrolyte and acted as the cell. The anode was again a cylindrical titanium mesh [0.15 (dia)×0.25 m (h)] coated with noble metal oxides (RuO The electrochemical separation of cerium from mixed rare earths was studied both in laboratory and bench scale cells. A rotating cathode is essential to avoid precipitation of the hydroxide on the cathode surface. Under appropriate conditions, it is possible to achieve current efficiencies as high as 60% at an energy consumption of about 3.5 kWh/kg of CeO The authors wish to express their sincere gratitude to Prof. A.K. Shukla, Director, Central Electrochemical Research Institute, Karaikudi-630 006, for his permission to publish the paper. Thanks are also due to Sri. N.S. Narayanan, CGM, and Dr. V.R. Nayar, DGM, Indian Rare Earths Limited, Udyogamandal 683 501, for their enthusiastic encouragement, supply of raw material and also analytical support during the course of the study.