The field trials of a prompt gamma neutron activation (PGNAA) spectrometric logging method and instrumentation (SIROLOG) for copper grade estimation in production holes of a porphyry type copper ore mine, Chuquicamata in Chile, are described. Examples of data analysis, calibration procedures and copper grade profiles are provided. The field tests have proved the suitability of the PGNAA logging system for in situ quality control of copper ore.There are relatively few papers presenting the results of the application of prompt gamma neutron activation (PGNAA) borehole logging for in situ estimation of copper grade ( In general, timely information about copper grade (obtained in blast holes) would improve almost every stage of copper mining and mineral processing. In the early stages of mining and during mineral processing, knowledge of the copper grade and information on the various impurities present in the ore are fundamental to the optimum exploitation of the ore deposit. Grade control in blast holes is usually conducted by sampling cuttings deposited on the surface in the form of a cone around the perimeter of the blast hole to obtain borehole geochemistry data. It is important to recognise that there are critical differences between geophysical borehole logging data (for example, PGNAA data) and borehole geochemistry data. Both methods have advantages and disadvantages and in many cases provide complementary information in a particular application. One important issue to consider is the direct comparison of assay and geophysical data, particularly when attempting to develop geophysically derived grade calibrations based on known assay data. The following points should be considered: Borehole geochemistry is generated from sampling and analysing the drill cuttings obtained during the drilling process. In contrast, nuclear borehole geophysical methods use the drill hole for access but collect information about the ore/rock surrounding the borehole. Strictly speaking the techniques are not directly comparable because the measurements are made on different ore/rock material. However, in deposits where there is a relatively small ‘nugget effect’, the difference in chemical composition between material removed from the drill hole and material immediately adjacent to the drill hole (spatial distribution of ore grade) would be expected to be minimal. Borehole geochemical techniques generally comprise two basic steps—a sampling component and an analytical component. There are errors in both steps; however, substantially greater error is associated with sampling. The ore/rock cuttings generated from a single blast hole can easily exceed 1000 CCHEN, CODELCO and IM2 with the assistance of IAEA and CSIRO, Exploration and Mining have designed and implemented a project with the main objective of developing a geophysical method for use in blast hole logging for real-time in situ estimation of copper grade. PGNAA logging was selected to be tested with and fulfill the above objective. The PGNAA technique possesses good depth penetration into the rock and instruments based on the PGNAA technique are successfully implemented in the coal, iron ore and cement industries. The neutron-gamma reactions produced by thermal neutrons result in gamma-rays specific to the chemical elements found in the ore. Copper, iron and silicon (the main constituents of the ore) have relatively large thermal neutron-capture cross-sections and produce identifiable gamma rays that can be used to determine their respective concentrations in the ore. It is estimated that CSIRO's SIROLOG PGNAA probe samples the ore/rock mass adjacent to a drill hole out to approximately 0.5 The main components of the logging system are presented in Laboratory tests were carried out to assess the feasibility of the application of the PGNAA method and logging instrumentation for copper grade estimation in large diameter blast holes. The laboratory tests were conducted at CCHEN laboratory using three large geophysical models (shown in High-energy sections of the recorded spectra are presented in Over 50 blast holes were sampled and subsequently logged during the field trials. The blast holes were selected to provide a wide range of copper grade variation for the calibration of the logging system. A special sampling procedure, applying Chuquicamata mine protocols and devices, was conducted. In this procedure, four sample increments (designated CA1, CA2, CB1 and CB2) from four wedge-type samplers were collected. Two of these samplers are shown in The two homogenised samples were chemically analysed in the mine laboratory for copper grade and also for a number of other elements, including Fe, S, Si and Al. There was no observed correlation between Cu concentrations and concentrations of Fe, Si, Al or S. The results of chemical assays for the two-sample streams correlate very well with each other, as shown in Geophysical logging operations followed the sampling. The entire lengths of blast holes (∼15–30  The first step in data handling is to match the ‘geophysical’ depth interval with that of the sampling interval. Usually, a 15  Next, the geophysical data are integrated to match the depth intervals of assay data being used to create the calibration model, for example, an assay interval from 0.5 The various interactions of fast and thermal neutrons with the nuclei of the elements present in copper ore result in a large background spectrum relative to the size of the signal resulting from neutron-gamma reactions involving Cu and Fe nuclei. Thus, background removal ( All RAT and ROI selected for a given model form a subset of spectral variables. A large number of spectral variables were defined. The numerical values of these spectral variables were established using software. All of the ROI and RAT set up for the estimation of copper grade were then modelled using regression analysis to evaluate the best fit that could be obtained for that parameter. Only the variables having sound physical meaning and relatively low cross correlation were considered for further use. An equation based on the optimum correlation of two variables was chosen as the calibration equation. The calibration equation is The variables applied in this equation are: RAT 5 represents the area under the 7.63 and 7.65 RAT 3 represents the area under the Fe-only peaks at 5.92 and 6.02 Both spectral variables (RAT 3 and RAT 5) have a physical meaning since the second variable (RAT 3, with a negative coefficient) provides a correction to a joint copper and iron response obtained from the first variable (RAT 5). The normalisation to the H-peak is necessary to correct for neutron flux variations. As the BGO detector-collected spectra have not featured well-defined Cu peaks there was a need to apply RAT based on ROI encompassing Fe 7.63 and 7.65 This calibration procedure was intended to strip out the iron response from the combined copper and iron spectral window. Gamma radiation originating from inelastic neutron scattering, prompt gamma capture and delayed gamma activation of other common elements present in copper ore do not affect the high-energy spectral windows (ROI) used in the calibration equation, with the exception of Al prompt gamma radiation. However, due to the very narrow range of Al content variations in Chuquicamata copper ore, this did not affect adversely copper grade estimations.  The standard deviation of the regression between the values of % Cu-geophysics and % Cu-geochemical, should not solely be interpreted as the error in the PGNAA logging derived prediction. There are two major contributions to the total error of regression: (1) the geostatistical variation error between the sample taken from the inside of the hole and the volume outside the hole which corresponds to that sample (ore heterogeneity); and (2), the sampling error. The drill cuttings from each hole were manually sampled and the samples subsequently chemically analysed by instrumental laboratory assay methods. The sampling error depends on both the sample-collecting error and the error of instrumental chemical analysis. The error of instrumental chemical analysis of geochemical samples is very small, in comparison to the sample-collecting error, and thus, can be neglected. The standard deviation for the PGNAA logging-derived predictions can be assessed when The obtained calibration is valid for porphyry type of copper ore and for copper grade determination in 300 To assess the precision of PGNAA logging for estimation of copper grade, reproducibility tests were performed in a number of blast holes. The trials were mainly focused on the calibration of geophysical logs for estimating the copper grade of the entire blast hole interval. However, the logging system collected data at 10  Copper grade estimates profiles can be particularly useful for the mine staff when the quality of ore varies significantly with depth, as in the example shown in  The field tests performed in a large number of production blast holes at Chuquicamata mine have proved the suitability of the PGNAA logging system for in situ quality control of copper ore. The excellent reproducibility of the logging data indicates the good precision of the PGNAA logging instrumentation. In addition to providing copper grades on a per-hole basis, PGNAA logging can also deliver additional information on grade changes down-hole, as well as grade values for discrete sample intervals, for example, every 2 For certain applications, SIROLOG PGNAA logging has the capacity to deliver timely and cost effective results that can be integrated into the existing mine database. Validation tests performed in a large number of blast holes should establish the accuracy of copper grade predictions and the limitations of this technique.