Seven case studies are presented to exemplify the valuable information that liberation analysis can provide. The cases cover application of liberation analysis to industrial minerals and base metal sulphide minerals. Liberation analysis provides information that cannot be obtained by other analytical techniques. The cost of liberation analysis is negligible when it is considered that the data obtained often allows performing modification to plant operations that have a large positive impact.The advent of affordable computers in the 1970s enabled the development of systems for the automatic determination of mineral quantities. The advent of computers also provided the required speed for quantitative determination of mineral liberation, which basically involves the measurement of the mineral composition of the particles. A review of the capabilities of early image analyzers is given in Very early on the development of systems for quantitative mineralogy, it was realized ( Nowadays there are several commercially available systems, e.g. the QEM-SCAN and the MLA, to perform modal analysis and liberation analysis applied to mineral processing. The QEM The first system employed at CANMET (Canada), reported by In the late 1990s, the JKRMC (Julius Kruttschnitt Mineral Research Centre, Australia) developed the Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA) ( When the particles in the sample cover a broad and relatively coarse size range, e.g. 300 to 45 μm (48 to 325 mesh), it is preferable to first produce size fractions from the sample, measure the liberation in each size fraction and then reconstruct the liberation for the whole sample. Mineral liberation can be measured by image analysis using either a linear intercept or an area method. Liberation by linear measurements has a higher stereological error than liberation by area measurements. It must be noted that the measured liberation is a lower dimensional projection of the true volumetric liberation, known as one-dimensional for liberation measured by linear intercepts, and as two-dimensional liberation when measured by an area method. Dr. Peter King has made important contributions both in the fields of liberation prediction and the stereological transformation of liberation measurements, commonly known as “stereological correction”. He has been publishing papers over a long period of time, indicating a dedication to continuously improving the accuracy of stereological methods. His latest contribution for stereological correction of liberation measurements is based on entropy regularization ( Other researchers also describe various methods to correct the apparent liberation and to produce three-dimensional liberation ( It is still often considered by many that liberation analysis studies are long and costly. However, the cost of liberation analysis is moderate when considering the positive economic impact, possibly in the range of millions of dollars, resulting from the modification of plant operations. The following is a set of seven case studies that exemplify the valuable information that liberation analysis can provide. In each case, correction procedures were applied to the liberation data to eliminate particles significantly smaller than the analyzed size fraction ( A set of samples was obtained from the fluorite concentrator of St. Lawrence Fluorspar. The objective was to assess the performance of the concentrator. In general, concentrators of industrial minerals are operated using rich feeds, and the strategy is to obtain a high grade concentrate by sacrificing the recovery. For simplicity only a summary of the results for the samples of the feed, the final concentrate and the final tails are presented.  It should be taken into consideration that only particles with a high degree of liberation, of at least 90% fluorite, should pass to the final concentrate. This would fulfill the general operational strategy of producing a high concentrate grade by sacrificing on the recovery, i.e. particles containing less than 90% fluorite should be rejected from the concentrate. Thus, in this case, liberated particles should be defined as those having a composition of > The feed contains ∼ Similar size distributions of the liberated fluorite particles were found in the concentrate and in the tailings. This would suggest two aspects: (a) the minerals in this ore grind similarly; (b) the liberated fluorite particles in the tails were lost not because they were too fine or too coarse. The loss of liberated fluorite particles was simply because the flotation cleaning circuit was not operated efficiently. This liberation analysis showed that the concentrator was sacrificing too much on the recovery. The liberated fluorite particles in the tails could be pulled further into the concentrate without reducing its grade. A recommendation was made to reduce the froth depth in the flotation cleaning circuit, which allowed an increase in the recovery of liberated fluorite while still maintaining a high concentrate grade. A suite of samples from five potential ore bodies was studied to evaluate the production of wollastonite concentrates. Due to the high costs of testing in pilot plants, laboratory tests are commonly performed to evaluate potential ore bodies. As part of these evaluation studies, a quantitative mineralogical characterization was performed to help determine the best potential ore.    The system at CANMET is based on a full-fledged image analyzer, thus it is straightforward to measure features other than mineral quantities and liberation. In the case of wollastonite, the quality of the concentrate is not only a function of its purity but also of the dimensions of the wollastonite plates, long plates are more desirable than short plates.  A study was undertaken to evaluate the metallurgical performance of a graphite concentration plant.  In the case of graphite, it is required to obtain products of high purity, thus particles with more than 90% graphite should be recovered to the concentrate of the rougher concentrate, and this class of particles will be simply referred to as liberated graphite. Based on these findings, improvements were made to the rougher circuit to increase the recovery of the liberated coarse graphite. The improvements consisted of adding a small bank of conventional flotation cells in front of the rougher column circuit. Thus, the rougher concentrate was produced jointly by the conventional flotation cells and by the columns. One of the largest copper concentrators of the world processes ∼ A quantitative mineralogical study by image analysis was performed as part of a project to implement flotation columns in a cleaning circuit. Many samples from several circuit configurations were studied. However, this paper covers only some selected results. The image analysis on the final copper concentrate from the plant (feed to the flotation column tests) determined that it contained ∼ The liberation for chalcopyrite and the liberation for the secondary copper minerals were determined. In image analysis it is very easy to combine the data from each mineral species. Thus, the liberation for all the grouped copper minerals was also measured. This was done because the objective of this plant is to produce a copper concentrate. In addition the liberation for pyrite was also measured. For simplicity, the liberation data were sorted into three classes. The first class consisted of particles with more than 90% of the mineral of interest, i.e. liberated particles. The second class consisted of particles with 50% to 89% of the mineral of interest, i.e. middling particles. The third class consisted of particles with less than 50% of interest. The liberation analysis ( The quantitative mineralogy by image analysis indicated that it was necessary to operate the flotation plant using pyrite depressants to obtain a cleaner copper concentrate and avoid subsequent problems in the smelter plant. An investigation was conducted as part of a study to implement a copper cleaner column flotation circuit (   A copper and zinc concentrator experienced a serious lack of selectivity when processing ore from a specific part of the mine. It was required to determine the cause of this problem. The possible cause could be any or a combination of the following: A change in the grain size of the copper or zinc minerals resulting in lack of liberation. Very significant proportion of chalcopyrite disease. Very significant proportion of secondary copper minerals resulting in a premature activation of the sphalerite. Samples were taken of all the streams of the plant operating in two situations; the first one, operating with the “normal” ore when no Cu–Zn selectivity problems occur; and the second when the concentrator was processing with the problem ore. A quantitative mineralogical study by image analysis was performed with all the samples. The results are briefly explained here. It was found that, effectively, this ore has sphalerite with chalcopyrite disease.    The quantitative mineralogical characterization determined that the source of the lack of Cu–Zn selectivity was due to the presence of small quantities of secondary copper minerals resulting in an undesirable activation of sphalerite. This initiated a study focused on the control of reagents addition to minimize the premature and undesirable activation of sphalerite in the copper circuit. The Brunswick concentrator (Canada) has a throughput of ∼  For this case, the liberation analysis data was grouped into three classes. The CuPb circuit in this plant is a rougher flotation. For a rougher circuit, the liberated class can be considered to include particles with more that 75% of the mineral of interest. The other two classes consisted of particle compositions between 25% and 75% and less than 25% of the mineral of interest. In the CuPb circuit, sphalerite and pyrite are undesired minerals, and should not report to the concentrate. If sphalerite and pyrite would be in the concentrate mostly as middling particles (25–75%) then finer grinding would help. However, liberation analysis clearly indicates that this is not the case, since most of the sphalerite and pyrite reported in the concentrate of the CuPb circuit is liberated. Thus the selectivity problem in the CuPb circuit is not due to a lack of liberation but to incomplete depression of pyrite and sphalerite. Further grinding would just increase the processing costs without reducing the problems of the lack of selectivity in the CuPb circuit. The reason for the deportment of pyrite and sphalerite to the CuPb concentrate was found, through another study, to be the undesired activation of these minerals by Pb ions. Liberation analysis is a very useful tool in mineralogy when applied to mineral processing. Liberation analysis provides information that cannot be obtained by other analytical techniques. The cost of liberation analysis is negligible when it is considered that the data obtained often allows performing modifications to plant operations that have a positive economic impact of millions of dollars.