Purpose
                  Current lithotriptors use a dry treatment head that must be coupled to the patient with gel or oil. We determined how the quality of coupling affects stone breakage under conditions that simulated patient treatment.
               
                  Materials and Methods
                  Experiments were performed with a Dornier® DoLi-50 electromagnetic lithotriptor. The test tank had a clear Mylar® membrane for coupling with the treatment head water cushion. Thus, air pockets trapped at the coupling interface could be photographed for quantitation. Coupling efficiency was assessed using a fiberoptic hydrophone and different coupling regimes were tested for the effect on gypsum stone breakage.
               
                  Results
                  The quality of coupling was variable with air pockets covering 1.5% to 19% of the coupling area, resulting in a mean decrease in shock wave amplitude of approximately 20%. Breaking and reestablishing contact, as when a patient is repositioned during treatment, decreased acoustic pressure almost 32%, representing a 57% decrease in acoustic energy transmission. Stone breakage was also decreased when air was trapped in coupling and only 2% coverage by air pockets decreased stone breakage by 20% to 40%.
               
                  Conclusions
                  These in vitro results suggest that coupling in lithotripsy can pose a significant barrier to the transmission of shock wave energy to the patient. Stone breakage was sensitive to air pockets at the coupling interface. Recoupling was particularly disruptive, suggesting that repositioning the patient could substantially degrade coupling quality. It seems reasonable that variability in the quality of coupling could contribute to variability in clinical outcomes.An important advance in the evolution of lithotripsy was the introduction of the dry treatment head. This eliminated the need to immerse the patient in a water bath, as was done with the Dornier® HM3, and it paved the way for the development of transportable lithotriptors. The change to dry head technology was rapid and it was embraced by the major manufacturers, such that all lithotriptors currently in production regardless of the mode of SW generation, ie electromagnetic, electrohydraulic or piezoelectric, use a dry treatment head. Recent reports suggest that newer generation lithotriptors may not be as effective as the HM3. In the current in vitro study we investigated the occurrence of air pockets trapped at the coupling interface of a dry head lithotriptor and the effect of these air pockets on SW transmission and stone comminution. Findings showed that even under controlled conditions coupling quality is highly variable and interface disruption by uncoupling and recoupling can decrease lithotriptor pulse energy by as much as 50%. This suggests that the conventional coupling interface in dry head lithotripsy is prone to failure and imperfections in coupling can significantly decrease SW transmission and hinder stone breakage effectiveness. Studies were performed using a Dornier® DoLi-50 electromagnetic lithotriptor. The DoLi-50 has 6 power levels and experiments were performed at power level 3 and a rate of 60 SWs per minute. Water pressure in the lithotriptor flexible coupling cushion is adjustable and all experiments were performed at coupling setting 3. A test system was assembled to simulate coupling of the treatment head to the body wall, consisting of an acrylic water tank (height 40 cm × width 50 cm × average depth 52 cm) with an acoustic window covered by a sheet of 0.13 mm Mylar® ( The occurrence of air pockets at the coupling surface was recorded and quantitated. To quantitate air pockets digital images of the coupling interface were recorded from a set vantage point at the rear of the tank, always under the same conditions of incident lighting. Images were post-processed using Adobe® Photoshop® and air pocket surface area was determined using ImageJ ( The test tank was filled with tap water degassed overnight with a pinhole degasser. An FOPH-500 fiberoptic hydrophone (University of Stuttgart, Stuttgart, Germany) Simultaneous with acoustic measurements, coupling efficiency was assessed by measuring gypsum stone comminution. During coupling, air pockets became trapped between the treatment head water cushion and the test tank Mylar® membrane. These pockets could be removed manually by pulling a thin strip of latex cut from a surgical glove across the interface. We used coupling with manual removal of air pockets as a baseline condition (air-free) for comparison with other coupling regimes. Compared to the air-free condition the transmission of acoustic pressure was decreased under routine single coupling as well as when the water cushion was coupled, pulled back from the test tank and then recoupled (mean ± SD 44 ± 2, 35 ± 2 and 30 ± 2 MPa, respectively, The decrease in energy delivery to the focal zone caused by air trapped at the coupling interface also decreased SW efficiency for stone breakage. To assess whether air pockets at the coupling interface might be an artifact of the test system an apparatus was constructed, so that a water cushion from the DoLi-50 lithotriptor could be brought into contact with skin and the coupling surface could be visualized. The rubber boot that forms the cushion was filled with water and clamped to the closed end of a cylindrical container, allowing visual access of the coupling interface from the open end of the cylinder. The cylinder was mounted at a 45-degree angle beneath one of us lying on the treatment table. Gel was applied to the cushion and the volunteer was brought into contact using the motor controls of the table. These results suggest that the coupling interface in dry head lithotriptors is imperfect. Even under controlled conditions air pockets were trapped at the interface. These air pockets interfered with acoustic transmission and interference was substantial. The coupling scenarios that we used were intended to simulate conditions that might be encountered during patient handling. That is, we tested the effect of establishing coupling and then breaking contact and recoupling. It was surprising how much interference there was with simple coupling compared to when air pockets were removed manually from the field. Pulse amplitude was measurably decreased in the presence of air at the coupling interface and the effect on stone breakage was dramatic. Decoupling and recoupling was particularly disruptive. This suggests the possibility that in the clinical setting repositioning the patient without first repeating the preparation for coupling could substantially degrade SW energy transmission to the patient. These data also show that consistency in coupling was hard to achieve, that is the quality of coupling from attempt to attempt showed significant variability. For example, the area of visible air pockets created during single coupling was 1.5% to 19.1%, leading to a stone breakage efficiency of approximately 80% to less than 10%. Such variability in tests under controlled conditions suggests that variability in coupling could contribute to variability in clinical outcomes. Variability in coupling may also be a potential safety concern. For example, if the routine coupling regimen used at a given practice tended to create many air pockets, it might become standard procedure to use the lithotriptor at increased power to achieve good stone breakage. In that setting high variability could mean that patients who happened to be coupled to the lithotriptor with fewer air pockets would receive a higher dose of SW energy actually delivered to the kidneys, increasing the possibility of renal injury. Various mediums, such as petroleum jelly, anesthetic cream, lubricating jelly, ultrasonography gel and castor oil, have been used as coupling agents. The in vitro study by Cartledge et al indicated that the type of coupling agent can have a significant effect on model stone breakage. With this in vitro test system we were able to correlate stone breakage and pulse amplitude with the surface area of air pockets at the coupling interface because the interface was visible. This is not the case for lithotripsy in patients and one never knows when bubbles are present. It would be valuable to have a way to make this assessment. Some lithotriptors are now equipped with b-mode ultrasound aligned along the acoustic axis. It should be feasible to use this targeting feature to assess coupling quality. It will have to be determined what represents poor coupling but our in vitro tests suggest that air pocket coverage of only 15% of the field decreases the acoustic energy transmission by almost 60% ( The quality of coupling is a potentially significant variable in SW lithotripsy. Poor coupling decreases the effectiveness of stone breakage, requiring that more SWs must be delivered to achieve complete comminution. Coupling quality is highly variable from attempt to attempt, which could contribute to variability in clinical outcomes. Inadequate coupling and variability in the quality of coupling likely lead to treating patients with more SWs than are necessary. For these reasons additional research should be performed to find ways to assess coupling quality during lithotripsy and improve the consistency of coupling regimens. The DoLi-50 lithotriptor was provided by American Kidney Stone Management, Columbus, Ohio.