In mineral processing, the recovery and/or concentration of the value components cannot occur in one operational stage, necessitating the use of separation circuits. The component to be separated is usually distributed at different concentrations and different particle sizes, resulting in different levels of recovery in terms of the particle size and concentration. Typically, more than one value component must be selectively removed by exploiting the differences in the components' floatability at different values of the pH, pulp potential and particle size. Several methods for the design of these circuits are available in the literature, but comparatively few articles present circuit analysis tools.
                  In this work, global sensitivity analysis was used to analyze and design separation circuits. The effect of each stage on the general circuit was studied and the relationships between the recovery at each stage and the global recovery of the circuit were identified. The effects of uncertainties in the kinetic constants, the residence time and the number of cells were also analyzed. The Sobol' and Morris methods were applied using the software SimLab 2.2. The advantages and disadvantages of each method are discussed and the two methods are compared with local methods (which were previously published by the authors); application of the two methods to the design of mineral separation processes is also discussed. These considerations are illustrated by a case study.Mineral processing comprises many unit operations, such as gravity concentration, magnetic concentration and flotation, which are all aimed at extracting valuable material from ores. Usually, the process operation conditions are defined to control the balance between a high recovery of the desired metal and a high grade value of the metal in the product outflow ( A designer initially solves a synthesis problem (for any process) by trial and error. There are many arrangements of a concentration circuit that correspond to an acceptable trial and error solution: many of these arrangements can be incorrect, ineffective or highly expensive, which is shown when feedback on an existing process becomes available. Concentration circuits commonly evolve over time, solving some existing problems, while creating new ones ( Several methods for the design of these circuits have been presented in the literature: these methods aim to obtain a systematic procedure to replace the trial-and-error method, which is time-consuming and requires much experimentation. Among the methods developed are those that use heuristics to develop a feasible design or improve an existing design ( Floating is difficult to model and ore characteristics change with mine operation. Currently, there is no theoretical model that can predict the floatability of different species of a mineral, so that experimentation is necessary to develop models that can be used to design these systems. However, these experimentally-based models have a limited range of application depending on the experimental conditions and the number of experiments. The compositions and mineralogical species change with mine operation, which in turn affects the floatability behavior and undermines the model validity. Thus, there are at least two sources of uncertainty: the model and the ore characteristics. Sensitivity analysis (SA) can be employed to address uncertainties in the model and the application scenarios, thereby facilitating the evaluation of process structures and operational behavior. This work aims to show how a global SA can be used in the analysis, design and retrofit of concentration circuits. This work is expected to complement current design techniques, whether trial-and-error methods, heuristics or optimization. The Sobol' and Morris methods were used in this study. The Sobol' method ( The Morris method ( A large (absolute) value for the central tendency shows that an input has an important overall influence on the output (i.e., the input has a significant total effect), while a large value of the spread indicates that either an input has a non-linear effect on the output or that an input is interacting with other inputs (which corresponds to higher order effects). The more significant parameters are therefore those located in the upper right quadrant of a μ (strength) versus σ (spread) plot, where both sensitivity measures are high. The analysis was run using SimLab 2.2. First, the Sobol' SA method is applied to two concentration circuits. The output was the global recovery and the stage recoveries were the input parameters. Next, the Morris and Sobol' SA methods were applied to a flotation circuit. The output was the global recovery and the residence time, the kinetic constants and the number of cells in each flotation stage were the input parameters. The Morris indices (the mean μ and the standard deviation σ of the ratios of the output changes to the parameter variations) and the Sobol' total effect index (which corresponds to the total contribution of a given parameter to the output variation) were used as sensitivity metrics in both examples. The parameters used for the Sobol' method were 8,192 executions with interactions and the parameters used for the Morris method were a seed of 1,000,000, 70 executions, and eight levels.  The two circuits exhibited different behavior. In circuit A, Ro recovery significantly affected all the species (i.e., all the stage recovery values), so that the Ro recovery was ranked first. In circuit B, the Ro recovery had a negligible effect on all the species (i.e., all the stage recovery values) and the Ro recovery was ranked third. The effect of Cl recovery decreased as the floatability of the species increased, whereas the opposite effect was observed for the effect of Sc recovery for both circuits. This simple example demonstrated that effect of the stage recovery on the global recovery was different for each circuit and that these stage recovery values needed to be tuned to the circuit structure. The second example was flotation circuit A (see Beta distribution functions were used to represent the kinetic coefficients and the residence time, whereas a discrete distribution function was used for the number of cells. Using these distribution functions, the mean Ro, Cl and Sc recoveries were calculated to be 0.74, 0.72, and 0.85, respectively, for the high recovery species and 0.39, 0.48, and 0.61, respectively, for the medium recovery species. The standard deviation was 0.04 for all the distribution functions.  The Morris analysis showed the highest σ values for the Ro number of cells for both species and the Ro residence time for the medium recovery species. The Ro number of cells and the Ro residence time thus emerged as the most influential parameters because of their interactions with the other parameters and/or non-linear effects. This information could be used to design or retrofit a process flow sheet and a flotation circuit, in particular. Suppose we wished to decrease the global recovery of the medium recovery species without decreasing the global recovery of the high recovery species. The Morris and Sobol' methods showed that the parameters with highest impact were the number of cells. The number of cells at the rougher stage had a high impact on the global recovery of both species, so that modifying this parameter would affect both species. However, the number of cells at the cleaner stage had a high impact on the medium recovery species and a low impact on the high recovery species (see The sensitivity of the global recovery to stage recoveries was studied for two concentration circuits. The results showed that the effect of Ro recovery was almost constant for each circuit, but had different levels of importance for each circuit. The effect of Cl recovery was important for the low flotation species and decreased as the Cl recovery increased. Opposite behavior was observed for the effect of the Sc recovery. The study of a flotation circuit showed that the number of cells had a high effect on the global recovery compared to the effects of the kinetic coefficients and the residence time. This example showed that global sensitivity analysis can be useful for retrofitting concentration plants. The Sobol´method is a standard SA method: the Morris method may provide a suitable alternative to the Sobol' method. In this work, similar results were obtained from the Morris method and the Sobol' method: however, further analysis is required to confirm the equivalence of the two methods. Financial support from CONICYT (Fondecyt 1120794), CICITEM (R10C1004) and the Antofagasta Regional Government is gratefully acknowledged.