Ocean acidification and warming is widely reported to affect the ability of marine bivalves to calcify, but little is known about the underlying mechanisms. In particular, the response of their calcifying fluid carbonate chemistry to changing seawater carbonate chemistry remains poorly understood. The present study deciphers sources of the dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in the calcifying fluid of the blue mussel (Mytilus edulis) reared at two pH (8.1 and 7.7) and temperature (16 and 22 °C) levels for five weeks. Stable carbon isotopic ratios of seawater DIC, mussel soft tissues and shells were measured to determine the relative contribution of seawater DIC and metabolically generated carbon to the internal calcifying DIC pool. At pH 8.1, the percentage of seawater DIC synthesized into shell carbonate decreases slightly from 83.8% to 80.3% as temperature increases from 16 to 22 °C. Under acidified conditions, estimates of percent seawater DIC incorporation decreases clearly to 65.6% at 16 °C and to 62.3% at 22 °C, respectively. These findings indicate that ongoing ocean acidification and warming may interfere with the calcification physiology of M. edulis through interfering with its ability to efficiently extract seawater DIC to the calcifying front.Approximately 40% of anthropogenically-derived carbon dioxide (CO To accurately predict how marine bivalves respond in the context of global climate change, it is imperative to elucidate the driving mechanisms of widely observed reductions in both shell calcification and growth (for a detailed review, see Despite previous advances in understanding the combined effects of ocean acidification and warming on molluscan shell formation, a substantial gap in our knowledge remains about sources of dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) in the EPS used for calcification. Such information is of paramount importance for advancing the currently proposed, albeit hotly debated, hypotheses, i.e., the omega or proton myth. The omega hypothesis proposes the sensitivity of molluscan calcification to the calcium carbonate saturation state (e.g., Recent works, however, have demonstrated that shell carbonate is synthesized not only from seawater DIC but also metabolically generated CO The present study aims to investigate whether, and to what extent, carbon sources of shell carbonate diversify in the face of experimental scenarios of ocean acidification and warming. The blue mussel, Specimens of adult To evaluate the combined effects of ocean warming and acidification, four identical recirculating systems, which correspond to the combinations of seawater temperature (16 and 22 °C) and pH (7.7 and 8.1), were established, as schematically illustrated in To identify the newly deposited shell portion during the experiment, mussels were immersed to calcein (150 mg L Six mussels from each treatment (i.e., two mussels from each replicate for each treatment) were randomly selected for isotopic analysis. Each specimen was carefully dissected using a plastic scalpel, and the soft tissue and shell were rinsed with tap water and dried at 50 °C for 48 h in an oven. Whole soft tissue was subsequently homogenized. The right valve of each shell was mounted on a Plexiglass cube with a quick-drying EpoFix plastic welder, and to prevent shell breakage, the axis of maximum growth was coated with a layer of JB KWIK epoxy resin ( Approximately 1–2 mg soft tissue powder was weighted into a tin capsule, packed and measured with a Thermo Quest Delta plus XL isotope ratio mass spectrometer (IRMS) coupled to a Flash 1112 elemental analyzer (EA). Water samples (10 mL) were acidified with 200 μL concentrated orthophosphoric acid overnight and then measured with the IRMS. Repeated analysis of several standard materials obtained a precision better than 0.2‰. Measured carbon isotopic ratios were calculated against the Vienna Peedee Belemnite (VPDB) and expressed in the standard delta (δ) notation in per mil (‰). Approximately 40–100 μg shell carbonate powder was weighted into a glass vial, dissolved with concentrated phosphoric acid at 72 °C for 2 h in He-flushed borosilicate exetainers. The liberated CO The δ Experimental data were statistically analyzed using the software SPSS (version of 19.0). Prior to analysis, the normality of data and homogeneity of variance were examined using the Shapiro-Wilk's test and Levene's Irrespective of temperature, which did not significantly affect the δ As shown in The present study demonstrates that up to 83.8% of As seawater temperature increases from 16 to 22 °C, irrespective of pH, the contribution of seawater DIC to Exposure of In summary, the present study for the first time demonstrates increases in the contribution of metabolic carbon to the DIC pool at the calcifying front in the face of seawater acidification and warming. Metabolically generated CO We gratefully acknowledge Xian Xu and Hongmei Yuan (