In terms of volume, the ornamental stone extraction industry represents a great waste source. For example, in the marble industry, waste can represent as much as 80–90% of the total extracted soil and stone. In order to use the material resulting from stone cutting, three concrete families were produced to be tested for their durability capacity: the first one contains no superplasticizer, the second one a current plasticizer made with a mixture of organic polymers (SP1) and the third a high-performance superplasticizer, made with a combination of modified polycarboxylates in an aqueous solution (SP2). In each concrete family, four substitution ratios were used representing, by cement volume, 0%, 5%, 10% and 20% of marble sludge.
                  During the experimental campaign, the aggregates were characterized in terms of water absorption and particle density, size grading, loose bulk density and voids content, Los Angeles wear, and shape index. The tests performed to characterize the marble sludge were sieve analysis, Blaine’s specific surface, particles density and mineralogical and chemical compositions. The mixes produced were characterized in terms of workability and bulk density in the fresh state. In the hardened state, compressive strength, water absorption by capillarity and immersion, carbonation, chloride penetration and shrinkage were assessed.
                  This research showed that the durability characteristics of concrete get worse as cement content increases and marble sludge content increases. However, for the 5% and 10% incorporation ratios, these losses were insignificant. Superplasticizers’ incorporation was beneficial to concrete’s performance. In particular, the high-performance superplasticizer led to results in the concrete with less 20% cement content similar to those of the reference concrete without admixtures.In order to meet its needs, Humanity has been exploiting the world’s natural resources in an exhaustive and sometimes exaggerated way. This over exploitation of resources is due to many factors, such as population growth, technological innovations, industrialization and the wish to reach a better life quality. As a consequence, the concept of sustainability emerged, defined as a balance between the consumption and the guarantee of a good life style for future generations. According to the European Commission The literature suggests that marble waste can be used in concrete. Binici et al. The lack of literature regarding this kind of test on concrete containing very fine aggregates led to this study. In Portugal, this subject has not been the object of study and, acknowledging that the marble industry is one of the biggest in the ornamental stones’ industry, as referred by the Portuguese General Direction of Energy and Geology, the search for ways of re-using this kind of waste is a priority. Part of the innovation of this research lies in the fact that the marble waste sludge’s size analysis showed that they do not provide the intended filler effect, therefore losing part of its compacting potential. This is due to the fact that these aggregates were obtained through wire saw cutting, which leads to aggregates of bigger size than other methods. Also the use of superplasticizers combined with this type of aggregates represents an innovative approach on this matter. This study completes that of Rodrigues et al. Although the research made on this subject is not very extensive, some works were reviewed and are synthetized in this section. Concerning the marble waste’s aggregates properties, Aruntas et al. Hebhoub et al. Regarding concrete’s bulk density, André et al. Binici et al. Topçu et al. Vijayalakshmi et al. Yague et al. Binici et al. Çelik et al. Sumer The materials used to produce the twelve concrete mixes were: Limestone gravel, supplied by Cimpor; River sand, supplied by Grupo Soarvamil; Marble sludge supplied by Solubema; CEM II 42,5R A-L cement, supplied by SECIL cement works in Outão, Setúbal; Tap water. Based on NP EN 206-1 Exposure class: various; Maximum aggregate size: 22.4 Manufacturing site: laboratory; Production control type: good; Admixtures: Sikament 400 Plus and SikaPlast 898. The standard concrete mix was designed using Faury’s reference curves. For the other mixes, cement content was gradually reduced by replacing it with dry marble sludge, in volumetric ratios of 0%, 5%, 10% and 20%. The superplasticizers were used at a content of 1% by cement weight. The natural aggregates were characterized by the following tests, according to the standards mentioned: Grading size analysis: NP EN 933-1 Particles density and water absorption: NP EN 1097-6 Loose bulk density and voids content: NP EN 1097-3 Los Angeles abrasion: NP EN 1097-2 Shape index: NP EN 933-4 The marble sludge was tested in the National Laboratory of Civil Engineering (LNEC). The tests were performed according to the following standards: Blaine’s specific surface and particles density: NP EN 196-6 Sieve analysis: EN 933-10 Loose bulk density: NP EN 1097-3 Mineralogical composition: LNEC E 403 Chemical composition: NP EN 196-2 The tests on fresh concrete were conducted according to the following standards: Slump test by Abrams cone: NP EN 12350-2 Bulk density: NP EN 12350-6 The tests to characterize hardened concrete were conducted according to the following standards: Compressive strength: NP EN 12390-3 Water absorption by capillary action: LNEC E-393 Water absorption by immersion: LNEC E-394 Chloride penetration: LNEC E-463 Carbonation: LNEC E-391 Drying shrinkage: LNEC E-398 The compressive strength test used a total of 11 150 The water absorption by capillary action test used four 250 The water absorption by immersion test used four 100 A total of six cylinders with a height of 50 A total of 12 cylinders with a height of 40 The drying shrinkage test used two 500 The results of the tests performed on the natural aggregates are given in The results of the tests performed on the marble sludge are given in  In this study, the w/c ratio was adjusted in order to keep the Abrams cone test results within the limits stipulated (125  The density of fresh concrete, right after the mixes production, is shown in  The compressive strength decreases in all families when cement content decreases by incorporating marble sludge. Mixes B0,20, B1,20 and B2,20 showed a decrease of 33.9%, 29.9% and 30.0%, respectively, relative to the respective control mixes. However, for families B0 and B2, the substitution ratio of 5% only represented a decrease of 7.1% and 0.6%, respectively. The incorporation of superplasticizers led to an increase in compressive strength and its effectiveness was not affected by the decrease of cement content. The results obtained for water absorption and height by capillary action at 72  Topçu et al.  The chloride migration coefficient at 91    The aim of this study was to evaluate the durability performance of structural concrete containing very fine aggregates of marble stone-cutting sludge. With the experimental campaign, the following conclusions were established: The fineness of the marble sludge used in our study is not as low as that of the ones used by other authors, due to the cutting tool used in the quarry where the sludge was collected; however, this is an innovative aspect of our study; The w/c ratio was indifferent to the cement content reduction by using marble sludge instead in families B0 (no admixtures) and B1 (with a current plasticizer SP1), whereas in family B2 (with a high-performance superplasticizer SP2) this ratio increased slightly for higher substitution ratios; The concrete density decreased as the substitution ratios increased, due to the fact that the marble sludge has a lower bulk density than cement; The compressive strength generally decreased as the substitution ratio rose; however, for substitutions up to 10%, this decrease was not significant and the use of superplasticizers enhanced this property by a maximum of 32.7%; An increasing substitution ratio enhanced the water absorption by capillary action, but the 5% replacement ratio in families B1 and B2 only raised this property by 0.8% and 9.3%, respectively; The reduction of cement content by using marble sludge instead had no significant influence on the water absorption by immersion of families B0 and B2; in concrete family B1, this property increased slightly and in a linear trend; the use of admixtures always decreased this property and, in the B2 family, their effectiveness was not affected; The chloride migration coefficient rose as the substitution ratio increased, due to the higher porosity in the mixes where cement content was reduced and marble sludge content increased; another explanation is the lower aluminium oxide in marble sludge compared to cement, decreasing the concrete’s capacity to block the chloride penetration; superplasticizers were beneficial in all cases and did not lose their effectiveness due to this substitution; The carbonation increased with the substitution studied for all concrete families; the use of superplasticizers allowed decreasing the values of this property and SP2 did not lose its effectiveness when cement content was reduced and marble sludge content increased; Concrete’s drying shrinkage was practically indifferent to cement’s content reduction by using marble sludge instead; when SP1 was used, this property slightly increased compared to concrete without admixtures and, when SP2 was used, it did not affect the drying shrinkage significantly. As a general conclusion, it can be said that the reduction of cement content by using marble sludge instead affected most of concrete’s durability properties. However, for 5% replacement ratio, the decrease in durability capacity was not significant. Additionally, the use of superplasticizers allowed this reduction to be compensated, representing a good measure to offset these effects.