Grinding mill circuits are hard to control due to poor plant models, large external disturbances, uncertainties from internal couplings, and process variables that are difficult to measure. This paper proposes a novel fractional order disturbance observer (FO-DOB) for a run-of-mine (ROM) ore milling circuit. A fractional order low pass filter (Q-filer) is used in the DOB to offer an additional degree of freedom in tuning for set-point tracking performance and disturbance rejection performance. Another disturbance observer is introduced in which a Bode ideal cut-off (BICO) filter is used for the Q-filter. A full non-linear plant model is used for evaluation of the performance gained over the ubiquitous PI controller. The simulation results show that the FO-DOB and BICO-DOB schemes are useful additional tools for ROM ore milling circuit control implementations.Milling ore down to a fine product is usually the first step in any metallurgical extraction process ROM ore milling circuits are generally difficult to control due to the presence of strong external disturbances, poor plant models, and process variables that are difficult to measure Disturbance observer (DOB) based control helps to compensate for model-plant mismatch and external disturbances, both of which are common in ROM ore milling circuit control. A DOB has already been applied to a grinding mill circuit A brief process description is provided here, similar to that given in Gold-bearing ore is fed to the milling circuit at about 100 The feed to the mill (see The controlled variables in the milling circuit are the product particle size (PSE), the fraction of the mill volume filled with material (LOAD), and the volume of slurry in the sump (SLEV). The manipulated variables are the feed-rate of solids into the mill (MFS), the feed-rate of water into the mill (MIW), the feed-rate of steel balls into the mill (MFB), the flow-rate of water into the sump (SFW), and the flow-rate of slurry into the cyclone (CFF). The operating point of the milling circuit variables and constraints on these variables are based on The milling circuit model consists of separate modules for the feeder, mill, sump and hydrocyclone. The model uses five states, namely water, rocks, solids, fines, and steel balls to describe the flow of material through the milling circuit. All the equations that constitute the non-linear model are based on these material classifications. A full description of these equations can be found in The main sources of non-linearity in the process are the breakage functions that describe how material change state inside the mill. The amount of fines produced in the mill is expressed as Two important parameters to note in the non-linear model is the fraction of rocks in the feed ore ( Both of these parameters, Model based milling circuit controllers, such as linear model predictive control, and common PI(D) tuning rules require a linearized plant model. Such a linear model of the plant is obtained through applying a standard system identification (SID) procedure as described by  In  The model does not contain reference to the manipulated variables MIW and MFB. In this study the value of MFB is kept constant at its nominal value of 2 The linearized plant model Decentralized PI control is implemented on the ROM ore milling circuit of Decentralized PID control is the most common approach to feedback control in multi-variable mineral processing plants In this study the manipulated variables are paired with the controlled variables as CFF The IMC-based controller settings, as used here, explicitly specifies a PI(D) controller through analytic tuning relations such that the closed-loop response takes the form of a low-pass filter These parameters are applicable to the parallel form of representing a PI controller. Disturbance observers have several attractive features. In the absence of large modelling errors, DOBs allow independent tuning of disturbance rejection and command following characteristics. Furthermore, compared to integral action, disturbances observers are more flexible as they allow for the selection of the order, relative degree, and the bandwidth of the low-pass filter known as the disturbance observer filter or the As pointed out in A DOB in a process control context can be found in The layout of a conventional disturbance observer in a control loop is presented The The inverse of the nominal plant model (  Secondly the layout of the DOB is modified such that the inverse of the minimum-phase component of the plant is cascaded with the These modifications do imply that only The design of the DOB is independent of the design of the controller and thus the same PI controller as discussed in  It is shown in The concept of a FO-DOB was first proposed in The two tuning parameters in the DOB To determine the optimal filter order, disturbances were introduced into the system and set-point changes were made in the presence of model-plant mismatch. The simulation conditions are as described in The feed variations in the run-of-mine ore can introduce other forms of disturbances as well, such as those that arise from pile formation and reclaiming procedures that result in material segregation. Such drifting disturbances are however easier to deal with by the DOB than the step disturbances used in this study. From In order to determine the filter order that achieves the best combined performance the objective function Setting Calculating Bode introduced the ideal cut-off filter in It is notable from Details of how the BICO filter may be implemented are given in For the BICO filter the two tuning parameters are The PI controller discussed in External disturbance rejection is very important in run-of-mine ore milling as a consistent product should be passed to the downstream process while parameters in the milling circuit change continuously. Firstly a change is made in the fraction of rocks in the ore entering the mill ( The ISE as well as the percentage deviation from the nominal value for all 4 control schemes are shown in Next a change is made in the amount of energy needed for a ton of fines produced ( It is clear from The set-point tracking capability of each controller in the presence of model-plant mismatch is presented here. Model-plant mismatch is a common occurrence on a run-of-mine ore milling circuit Some of the uncertainties present in actual milling models have been quantified in The parameters whose values are changed are A step change is then made in the set-point for the PSE from 80% to 79%. The results are shown in It is clear from The addition of the integer order DOB results in a substantial decrease in the ISE values shown in Using a disturbance observer, it is not only possible to attenuate the external disturbances in a grinding mill circuit, but also reduce the effect of model-plant mismatch as well as uncertainties from internal couplings. This paper contributes a novel fractional order disturbance observer (FO-DOB) for a run-of-mine (ROM) ore milling circuit where a fractional order low pass filter ( A novel disturbance observer implemented with a BICO low-pass filter is also introduced. The simulation results show that the BICO-DOB gives relatively good performance under the circumstances tested here. It gives the best set-point tracking of all the implementations tested, as well as maintaining good disturbance rejection capabilities. Dr. Y.Q. Chen would like to thank the University of Pretoria for partly hosting his sabbatical semester with the University of Pretoria's Department of Electrical, Electronic and Computer Engineering. The implementation of a fractional order low-pass filter (FO-LPF) and its use in control is presented in In order to be able to implement a fractional order filter for which the order is larger than 1, the FO-LPF in the form of The relative degree of the IRID representation of the BICO filter is 0. Due to this fact the BICO filter should be cascaded with an low-pass filter of order 2 such that the transfer function Code for an impulse response invariant discretization implementation for the BICO filter (similar to that shown in