The effective removal of alkali in the alumina-extracted reside (AER) obtained by extracting alumina from high-alumina fly ash is the premise for realizing the utilization of the silicon component in the fly ash. Sodium was removed from the AER by a decomposition reaction. The effects of the particle size and reactant coating on the decomposition reaction of AER were studied, and the results showed that by decreasing the particle size, the decomposition reaction rate of AER could be enhanced obviously and the Na2O content of the products could be decreased effectively. In addition, the process and mechanism of the decomposition reaction of AER and the reaction kinetics were investigated. The results revealed that the decomposition reaction of AER started from the outer surface of the AER particles. The reaction kinetics corresponded with shrinking unreacted core models. Furthermore, the decomposition reaction rate of AER could be enhanced obviously by decreasing the particle size because the effect of product layer diffusion was weakened when the particle size of AER was decreased.High-alumina fly ash is a type of fly ash collected from coal-fired power plants. Its alumina content is 35–50%. The annual output of high-alumina fly ash in Inner Mongolia and Shanxi Province, China, is ∼50 million tons In these processes, alumina-extracted residue (AER) is usually considered hazardous industrial waste because it is highly alkaline and has a negative effect on agricultural land and groundwater if it is used directly Thilo first synthesized NaCaHSiO Recently, Zhang et al. According to the reaction equations, the decomposition reaction of NaCaHSiO Therefore, in this study, the effects of the particle size of the AER and the products of the decomposition reaction of AER that coated the reactants were studied in detail. The aim of doing so was to remove sodium from the AER effectively and to understand the process and mechanism of the decomposition reaction of the AER. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)-backscattered electron imaging, which could clearly identify the different phases of the specimen The AER obtained by extracting alumina from the high-alumina fly ash used in the experiments was generated by a hydrothermal process The decomposition experiments of the AER were performed in a 500-mL stirred high-temperature autoclave fitted with an external heater and an internal cooling system. An automatic proportional–integral–derivative control system was used to manage the heating rate, agitation, and temperature of the autoclave. Before the decomposition experiments, the AER was smashed using a high-speed universal pulverizer (FW177 type, Beijing Ever Light Medical Equipment Company Ltd., China) and sieved using several standard test sieves with different pore diameters on an electric mechanical sieve shaker (GS-86 type, Shangyu Gauze Screen Factory, Zhejiang, China) to obtain two main size fractions of 50–74 and 0–50 The obtained samples were subjected to XRD (X’Pert Pro MPD, Panalytical Company; 40 For backscattered electron imaging, the samples were impregnated with epoxy resin in a plastic ring tube; dried at room temperature for 24  The main chemical components of the products of AER-1#(a) and AER-2#(b) at various reaction times are shown in To understand the process and mechanism of the decomposition reaction of AER, the morphological changes and component changes inside the particles of the products at various reaction times were investigated via SEM, SEM-backscattered electron imaging, and EDX.   The SEM images show the morphological changes in the products at various reaction times and the reaction process that started from the surface of the AER particles. The components and phases changes in the AER particles were studied by SEM-backscattered electron imaging and EDX.   The characteristic of the shrinking unreacted core model is that the reaction starts from the outer surface of the reactant particles, and the reacting interface gradually transfers from outside to inside. Therefore, the size of the inner core of the reactants gradually decreases and the thickness of the outer surface coated layer of the products gradually increases; the process is presumed to be pseudo-steady The general expression of the uncatalyzed reaction between the liquid and the solid phases is as follows: Spherical particles were assumed, and the Na When the reaction is under product layer diffusion control, The effects of the particle size and the coating that the reactants are coated with on the decomposition reaction rate of the AER obtained by extracting alumina from high-alumina fly ash by an alkali hydrothermal process were investigated. By decreasing the particle size, the decomposition reaction rate of AER can be enhanced obviously, and the Na Furthermore, the results of the kinetic study show that the decomposition reaction of AER-1#, whose particle size is larger, is under product layer diffusion control, and the decomposition reaction of AER-2#, whose particle size is smaller, is under chemical reaction control. Therefore, by decreasing the particle size, the decomposition reaction rate of AER can be enhanced obviously and Na We acknowledge the financial support from the National Key Basic Research Program (973 Program, 2013CB632601), the National Key Technology R&D Program (2012BAF03B01) and the cooperation with Hangzhou Jinjiang Group (KFA2013-124).