Rare earth elements (REEs) have an ever-increasing variety of applications in modern technology. In the present work, the possibility of extraction of rare earth elements cerium (Ce), lanthanum (La), neodymium (Nd) and thorium (Th) from a monazite concentrate containing 25% rare earth elements' oxide was investigated. In this regard, the acidic digestion and leaching step, and their effective parameters were studied in detail using design of experiment (DOE) which hadn't been investigated before. The optimum conditions for the performed experiments in acidic digestion step were: temperature of 225°C, time of 3.5h and sulfuric acid to concentrate weight ratio (L/S) of 2.5. Using these conditions, the recovery of 92.34%, 91.44%, 92.1% and 88.94% were obtained for cerium, lanthanum, neodymium and thorium, respectively. In leaching step, the optimum conditions were: temperature of 75°C, time of 15h and water to digested mass weight ratio of 7.5. Using these conditions, recovery of 88.47%, 89.45%, 87.35% and 82.19% were obtained for rare earth elements cerium, lanthanum, neodymium and thorium, respectively. In precipitation step, rare earths' oxalates were precipitated from the leach liquor using oxalic acid. Then, the precipitate was calcined in a furnace at 800°C for 1h and finally, a mixture of rare earth elements' oxides with a purity of about 84% was obtained.Nowadays, the rare earth elements' (REEs) applications in industry; such as, permanent magnets, superconductors, glass polishing, and lasers ( There are different ways to separate the lanthanides from each other in solutions: chemical separation, fractional crystallization, ion-exchange and solvent extraction. Among them only solvent extraction is used on a commercial scale. In all of these methods, a digestion and leaching process should be done in advance. These two steps are very important because they control the concentration of REEs in the obtained liquor, which is used for the separation/purification process. The digestion process is performed in two main paths: acidic with sulfuric acid and basic with sodium hydroxide ( Monazite lattice is made of strong bonds between REEs and oxygen and therefore, they are not soluble in water. In acidic digestion process, these strong bindings are broken and soluble REEs' sulfates are formed. The following reactions occur during the digestion process ( The reactions show that the dry gray digested mass is mainly consisted of sulfate salts of REEs and Th. In the leaching step, the REES sulfates are dissolved in water; however, some of the impurities and unreacted monazite which consists of REEs phosphates and also insoluble compounds which were produced in the digestion process such as thorium pyrophosphate remain as a precipitate. The following reactions occur in the leaching step ( Studies about the solvent extraction of REEs have been extensively carried out ( The aim of present research is to investigate the optimum conditions of digestion and leaching of the solid residue from digestion process of the monazite concentrate using design of experiment. The parameters evaluated for optimum conditions of both digestion and leaching were time, temperature and liquid to solid ratio (L/S). To separate rare earths from the leach liquor, precipitation was performed by means of oxalic acid. Finally, a mixture of rare earth elements' oxides was acquired. The monazite concentrate sample was provided kindly by the Geological Survey of Iran. The feed of the monazite concentrate was from monazite placer deposits in Marvast, Yazd (central Iran). Microscopic studies showed that the monazite concentrate accumulates in the fine size fraction (<  In order to investigate the optimum conditions of digestion step, certain amount of sulfuric acid was heated in a Pyrex beaker on a heater. After reaching the required temperature (based on the designed conditions in Certain amount of the monazite concentrate was digested under the obtained optimum conditions of the digestion step. In the next step, the optimum conditions for leaching of this digested mass were investigated. Deionized water was used in all the leaching experiments. The leaching experiments were performed in a batch Pyrex reactor. A hot-plate equipped with a magnetic stirrer was used to agitate the suspension at a predetermined temperature. Five grams of the digested mass (produced in the digestion stage) was transferred into specific amount of deionized water based on the designed conditions in To precipitate the rare earth elements' oxalate, oxalic acid 10% was used. The ratio of oxalic acid to leach liquor was 1:1 and the leaching time was 30 Monazite concentrate chemical analysis was performed using inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES (Varian-735-ES, Australia)) and X-ray fluorescence (Philips PW240, Netherland). Microscopic analysis of polished and thin sections were also performed (MEIGI, Japan). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern was obtained with a D4-Bruker X-ray diffractometer (Germany) using copper (λ The monazite concentrate was divided into homogeneous, small size fractions using a riffle separator. The sample was wet screened to produce three size fractions of − The design of experiment method was used to study the effect of different parameters: time, temperature and liquid to solid (L/S) ratio on the digestion process of the concentrate and leaching recovery of Th, Ce, La and Nd from the digested mass. The independent variables A, B and C represent temperature (°C), time (hr) and L/S ratio, respectively. The range of parameters studied for digestion process was: digestion time ( In order to determine effects of the independent variables on the digestion and leaching process a Taguchi design consisting of 9 runs was performed. The magnitude of the interaction between the independent variables and the response was obtained via the ANOVA statistical technique. This statistical tool is required to test the significance and adequacy of the model. The mean squares (MS) are obtained as: MS  Microscopic analysis of the polished and thin sections confirmed the existence of liberated grains of hematite, gray monazite and rarely magnetite and quartz. The identification basis of hematite, monazite and quartz is shown in The results of the ANOVA test for Th, Ce, La and Nd were performed by DX7 program. The main effects of the variables were calculated at the 95% confidence level. Using the experimental results, analysis of variance and fitting, the linear response models were determined by ANOVA. The models for Ce, La and Nd recovery are given below: It should be mentioned that the effects of parameters on both digestion and leaching processes are the same for Ce, La and Nd, as discussed in As shown in There are some reasons for the negative effect of temperature on digestion process. First, at temperatures higher than 200  In these experiments, a different trend was investigated for longer digestion times (>  According to The results of the ANOVA test for Th, Ce, La and Nd were performed by DX7 program. The main effects of the variables were calculated at the 95% confidence level. Using the experimental results, analysis of variance and fitting, the 2Fi response models were determined by ANOVA. The models for Ce, La, Nd and Th recovery are given below:   According to  High temperature has two effects, first, it provides the activation energy of the reaction and facilitates the leaching reaction. Second, as mentioned before (see  According to Chemical precipitation by oxalic acid was used to separate the REEs from the leach liquor. Adding oxalic acid to the leach liquor containing rare earth ions (RE), produces a white RE oxalate precipitate according to the following reaction:   A Monazite concentrate containing 14.16% Ce, 6.48% La and 6% Nd was digested by sulfuric acid to increase the solubility of Ce, La and Nd. Effect of the digestion and leaching parameters: time, temperature and L/S ratio in REEs recovery were investigated for the first time using Taguchi method. In digestion process, increasing temperature from 200 to 250 Increasing the digestion time from 1 to 3.5 The optimum condition for the digestion process was temperature of 225 In the leaching process, time and L/S ratio had positive effects on the recovery of Ce, La and Nd. Temperature had a negative effect on the recovery of Ce, La and Nd but a positive effect on the recovery of Th. The interaction between temperature and time and also temperature and L/S showed a positive effect on the leaching process. The optimum leaching condition was found to be leaching time of 15 The grade of the primary concentrate (containing 25% REO) was increased ca. 3.36 times and ca. 59% of the impurities were removed to produce a REE concentrate containing 84% REO. The authors wish to express their gratitude to The Geological Survey of Iran for providing the Monazite concentrate. Many thanks are also extended to Ms. Aazam Kavusi from The Geological Survey of Iran for her kind efforts in analyzing the ICP samples throughout the project.