Assessment of the restoration of load-bearing function is the central goal in the study of fracture healing process. During the fracture healing, two critical aspects affect its analysis: (1) material properties of the callus components, and (2) the spatio-temporal architecture of the callus with respect to cartilage and new bone formation. In this study, an inverse problem methodology is used which takes into account both features and yields material property estimates that can analyze the healing changes. Six stabilized fractured mouse tibias are obtained at two time points during the most active phase of the healing process, respectively 10 days (n=3), and 14 days (n=3) after fracture. Under the same displacement conditions, the inverse procedure estimations of the callus material properties are generated and compared to other fracture healing metrics. The FEA estimated property is the only metric shown to be statistically significant (p=0.0194) in detecting the changes in the stiffness that occur during the healing time points. In addition, simulation studies regarding sensitivity to initial guess and noise are presented; as well as the influence of callus architecture on the FEA estimated material property metric. The finite element model inverse analysis developed can be used to determine the effects of genetics or therapeutic manipulations on fracture healing in rodents.Approximately 10−20% of the 6.2 million annual bone fractures result in non-unions, causing significant morbidity and mortality ( Assessment of fracture healing has relied on histological, imaging, and biomechanical testing (BMT) ( Some studies have explored coupling μCT imaging with finite element analysis (FEA) to predict the mechanical behavior based on geometrical information. In particular, studies have evaluated μCT attenuation to stiffness value transformations to provide material properties and found empirical power law relationships between modulus and bone mineral content assessed by μCT attenuation/density ( In our studies, rather than using a μCT-to-stiffness empirical relationship, we have used an elastographic approach to directly generate values for mechanical parameters. Our approach combines an inverse finite element model of the subject's cartilage/bone geometry (μCT/histological imaging data), data acquired from BMT, and numerical optimization techniques to characterize the callus mechanical properties. This approach does not require calibration per system but rather is an active reconstruction parameter that can be measured experimentally. The concept of an ‘inverse’ FE analysis method to determine the mechanical parameters to monitor the progression of fibrogenic diseases has been demonstrated. These techniques are more widely referred to as elastography ( An inverse FEA procedure was developed to determine the stiffness of the callus based on μCT imaging and BMT data. As summarized in The boundary conditions for the model were chosen to reflect the BMT protocol, in which the top boundary is prescribed a fixed upward normal displacement with no lateral displacement (Dirichlet boundary conditions). The bottom surface was also fixed in both the normal and lateral direction. The remaining boundary conditions for the sides of the model were stress free. The displacement criteria selected for each sample was based on the individual force/displacement curve obtained from BMT. A series of four displacements were taken along the curve at 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% of the linear elastic limit to reproduce the linear portion of the curve. As pointed out in Female FVB-NJ mice (Jackson Laboratories) 8−12 weeks old were anesthetized using isofluorane to provide deep anesthesia. Pin-stabilized mid-diaphyseal tibia fractures were generated by insertion of a 0.25 μCT scans were performed using a Scanco μCT 40 scanner (Scanco Medical) and were obtained at 55 Fractured tibia ends were embedded into a polymethylmethacrylate cast using custom designed testing fixtures, leaving the fracture callus exposed. Specimens were kept fully hydrated with PBS during the entire testing procedure. The fixtures were loaded into an Enduratec Electroforce 3100 mechanical tester (Bose, Enduratec Systems Group) and tested in tension at a fixed displacement rate of 0.25 Subject-specific FE models were generated for 6 tibias (three each at 10 and 14 days post-fracture). After using the imaging protocol above, μCT image sets were semi-automatically segmented and boundary descriptions (as described by 3D points and 3D triangular patches) were generated through the use of a marching cubes algorithm in a commercially available image analysis software (Analyze, AnalyzeDirect) for both the entire bone/callus and solely the cortical bone. Boundary descriptions of each were then used to create a heterogeneous FE tetrahedral mesh consisting of two properties (i.e. cortical bone and other material) using custom-built mesh generation methods ( Values of Poisson's ratio were assumed for all tissue types (0.3 for bone and 0.45 for callus) based on the literature ( A cylinder mesh with three layers was created to simulate a simplified appearance of a bone fracture callus, as seen in In a separate simulation study, two meshes created from μCT imaging of a representative post-fracture day 10 and 14 tibia were used as realistic geometries for further simulation analyses. To examine the effect of mineralization compositional differences in the callus on the estimated lumped elastic modulus parameter, meshes at the two time points (representing two different phases of mineralization) were used to estimate the combined callus modulus. The callus material in the mesh was subdivided into new bone and soft tissue portions and assigned separate Young's modulus values of 10 and 0.1 Day 10 and 14 post-fracture tibias were subjected to the material property estimation analysis, whereby force versus displacement curves obtained from the mechanical tests were used in conjunction with the meshes generated from μCT scans to determine callus material properties. In addition, the following metrics were analyzed: (1) ultimate load, (2) toughness, (3) apparent stiffness, (3) normalized apparent stiffness, (4) total bone volume, and (5) total callus volume. More details are reported in the Data are expressed as mean±SD. Statistical analyses were performed using unpaired Student's To validate the FEA model, the simulation cylinder mesh was compared against an analytic calculation. The model was prescribed fixed displacement of 0.5% strain and the average normal surface force was calculated from the forward FEA model as described in the Methods. The average surface normal forces were calculated as 45.0347 and 47.1050 To determine the sensitivity of the material property estimation method, the forward FEA model was run as described in the Methods to generate model-calculated average surface normal forces at 4 strain increments (0.5, 1.0, 1.5, and 2.0 percent strain). These results were then used as the “experimental force transducer” input along with multiple random initial guesses for the callus material property. The material property estimation was executed with varying initial guesses to determine the accuracy of the model to converge on the known material property given a random initial material property guess. As shown in Representative callus meshes from 10 and 14 days post-fracture were used in simulations in which the callus was subdivided into new bone and soft tissue with modulus values as described in the Methods. The forward model was used to determine boundary normal surface forces for displacements of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, and 0.4 Representative μCT reconstructions, corresponding meshes, and cross-sections of the meshes for both 10-day and 14-day groups are shown in In this study we have developed an inverse FEA procedure to determine the elastic modulus in mouse tibia fracture callus based on μCT/histological threshold data and data acquired from tensile BMT analyses. The FEA showed: (1) less than 5% error compared to the analytic calculations; (2) a sensitivity of material property estimation within 1.74% maximal error; (3) to be appropriately sensitive in estimating the modulus changes expected during two distinct time points of the fracture healing process. The healing length of the stabilized mouse tibia fracture model is ∼28 days ( Through simulation studies, the inverse FEA approach developed in this work is shown to accurately calculate surface normal forces and to converge on a preset modulus value using random initial guess in the presence of transducer noise. Through ex vivo specimen analysis, the approach was able to detect a difference in the callus material modulus of ∼4 fold from post-fracture day 10 to day 14. Taken together with the simulation analysis of callus meshes with both new bone and cartilaginous tissue material components, these data suggest that between 10 and 14 days post-fracture, there is a significant change in material composition (new bone volume fraction) that results in stiffness increase. In future studies, the inverse FEA approach will allow for establishing the temporal pattern of material property changes throughout the entire course of the healing process in normal and genetically/therapeutically manipulated fracture calluses. In our model we have only incorporated the linear component of the force/displacement curves, but fracture healing can also be characterized by both geometrical and material nonlinearities. We recognize that our model in lacking the nonlinear component has some limitations, however, as depicted in This work was supported by a   Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 