Graphene is a flexible and transparent conductor which can be used in varied material-apparatus applications, counting solar cells, phones, touch panels, and light-emitting diodes (LED). In the current experiment, Graphene preparation by Top-down method and stability of Graphene-Water nanofluid studied. Then, as the main aim, thermal conductivity (TC) of few-layered Graphene measured and numerically modeled. To analysis Microstructural observation and Phase study of nanoparticles, XRD, DLS, FTIR, FESEM-EDX, and TEM applied. Also, to read the stability of nanofluid, UV–Vis, Zeta-potential and DSC-TG applied. The range of Thermal conductivity test for mass fraction was 1.0–4.5 mg/ml, and for temperature was 25–50 °C. More than three months for nanofluid stability confirmed by stability tests. More ever, the thermal stability test for 1.0 mg/ml nanofluid confirmed its operational temperature range up to 1000 °C. Thermal conductivity enhancement (TCE) of 31.08%, measured at 4.5 mg/ml mass fraction at 50 °C temperature. To compute nanofluid's TC, the numerical study by new correlation (including 2.19% utmost deviation) and an Artificial neural network with R2 = 0.999 modeled. As a result, Graphene-Water nanofluid is stable, and in thermal systems, it has agreeable heat transfer potential.X-ray diffraction dynamic light scattering Fourier transform infrared transmission electron microscopy Ultraviolet–visible spectroscopy analysis differential scanning calorimetry Thermogravimetric analysis Base Fluid Nanofluid Experimental Nanoparticles Ratio Graphene, one of the two-dimensional materials, is a monolayer formation of graphite, which is displayed in Nanofluids, introduced by Choi in 1995 [ Different carbon-based nanomaterial's thermal properties studied, such as graphene nanosheets (2D) and carbon nanotubes fibers (1D). Practical heat transfer operating fluid, such as graphene nanofluids are certainly beneficial in cooling hydrogen-engines [ For using nanofluids in industrial applications, more research on different aspects that have not been revealed up to now are required. The neural network, which recently used in transformers heat analysis, is one of the new subjects of recent studies. It can model complicated patterns by using basic calculations and highly reduce the experiment costs. Y. Xu et al. [ In this study, by the “Top-down method”, Graphene has been produced. The aim of using this method was to produce monolayer Graphene that is required for thermal conductivity measurements. Then, Graphene/Water nanofluid at mass fractions up to 4.5 mg/ml is prepared [ Graphite (FG) -from Kara-Pajuhesh Amirkabir, Iran- and Other materials, prepared with great purity. Also, the thermophysical features of Basefluid and NPs are displayed in Graphene (G) made by Top-down method [ To measure a nanofluid's thermophysical properties, preparation is the main phase. First, by dispersion of various amounts of Graphene (as nanoparticle) into 100 cc of deionized water (as basefluid), different percentages of nanofluid obtained. Then, to make a suitable dispersion of Graphene, pH-meter, magnetic-stirring, and sonication is employed. For this aim and also to break agglomerations between nanoparticles, after 1-h magnetic stirring, ½-hour ultrasonic processor 400 W/24 kHz used for suspensions with mass fractions of 1.0, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5 mg/ml ( KD2 Pro thermal feature analyzer, which apply the hot-wire method with a 7–10% error, is used to test TC of nanofluid [ TC is Knf, and for basefluid, TC is Kbf, “ XRD spectra in Size distribution is a crucial factor to define nanoparticles [ FG and G structure alongside functional groups studied by FTIR spectroscopy analysis. A wide peak from 2995 to 3660 cm By Top-down method from Flake Graphite (FG), Graphene is made. FG powder and G sheets micrographs showed in Because of the smaller de-Broglie electrons wavelength, compare to light-microscopes, Transmission-electron-microscopes are able of imaging at a significantly higher resolution. ZP data is employed. Each range of ZP in mV has a meaning, for example: ±0–10, unstable, ±10–20, rather stable, ±20–30, quite stable, and ˃ ± 30, stable [ UV–Vis cite to absorption spectroscopy or reflectance spectroscopy in part of the ultraviolet and the full, abutting visible spectral zones [ Thermal stability can verify the industrial operational range of nanofluid, measured for G-Water [ KD2-Pro thermal analyzer was calibrated before the experiments with glycerin. The measurement error of device accepted at G-Water TC measured at ranges of 25, 30, 35, 40, 45 and 50 °C, also, at ranges of 1.0, 1.5, 2.5, 3.5, and 4.5 mg/ml mass fractions [ For nanofluid 1.0 mg/ml, TC increased 0.066 W/m.k (0.629 to 0.695 from 25 °C to 50 °C); For nanofluid 4.5 mg/ml, TC increased 0.139 W/m.k (0.696 to 0.835 from 25 °C to 50 °C); This means when mass fraction increased 4.5 times, TC increased 2.1 times [ Temperature increase, cause an interaction increases between the nanoparticles. Also, the term “Brownian motion” cites to growth in the amount of suspended nanoparticles by mass fraction increase, which leads to a raise in surface to volume ratio [ Via curve-fitting-technique on 3D empirical data of TCR, an appropriate correlation presented with punctuality of almost R Novel Eq. In A linear fit can determine the slope line of each curve fit, presented in Deviation margin, that certifies the offered method, is defined as: That Exp and Pred are empirical and predicted outputs, individually.   For the forecast of G-Water, an Artificial Neural Network (ANN) model is employed [  In this paper, by using Top-down method, few-layered Graphene (G) produced from Flake Graphite (FG) [ In this study, in a view of the preparing process and also chemical structure of NP, a steady and homogeneous nanofluid has been made. After adding G, TC of basefluid enhanced and also, lifted with a rise in mass fraction and temperature. Max. TCE for G-Water nanofluid (produced with Top-down method) is 31.08% at temperature 50 °C and mass fraction 4.5 mg/ml. This study presented a correlation with a R-Squared (deviation) of around 0.99. So, it can calculate the TC of G-Water in research with a specific domain of temperature and mass fraction. There is no conflict of interest.