A compensation approach based on the on-machine measurement was developed for the grinding of tungsten carbide aspheric moulds. In this approach, the on-machine measurement was employed to eliminate the profile error caused by the re-installation of the workpiece. A new method was proposed to reconstruct the actual ground profile based on the measured profile data. The overall profile error after grinding was obtained by subtracting the target profile from the actual ground profile along normal direction and was then used to generate a new tool path for compensation grinding. The experimental results showed that after three compensation grinding cycles the aspheric surface had a profile accuracy of 177nm (in PV) with a roughness of 1.7nm (in R
                     
                        a
                     ). The on-machine measurement was in excellent agreement with the off-machine measurement by commercially available profilometers.profile error data obtained from the on-machine measurement radius of the sapphire probe arbitrary point on the target profile  arbitrary design point on the target profile or corresponding point of actual residual error along distance from the design point distance from point normal residual error at point actual contact point between the workpiece surface and the probe center point of measuring probe actual path of the probe center actual ground profile normal vector of a point on the curve included angle between the vector normal vector at point included angle between the vector intersection point of ideal reference center of the grinding wheel compensated reference center of the grinding wheel or tool path center point of the arc nose of the grinding wheel radius of the arc nose of the grinding wheel distance between the ideal wheel center vector of longitudinal axis of the grinding wheel The development of advanced electronic and optoelectronic devices highly demands for optical components with planer, spherical, aspheric and free-form surfaces of high profile accuracy and excellent surface finish. As a consequence, great research efforts To achieve high profile accuracy of an aspheric surface in an UPG process has always been challenging as many factors can affect the profile error. Major error sources in an UPG process that affect the profile accuracy of a ground surface include tool and workpiece setting error, tool path error, machine positioning error, wheel dimensional and profile errors Previously studies The grinding of aspheric moulds was performed on a 4-axis ultra-precision machine tool (NACHI, ASP005P), as shown in An on-machine measurement system is installed on the The grinding protocol is shown in The profile error, When using the probe to measure the ground profile, an error is induced because the radius of the probe affects the contact point. The conventional method uses Δ As shown in The actual ground profile, where, As discussed in The actual residual error along the normal direction obtained using the above-mentioned method is shown in To generate the new tool path for next grinding cycle, the relationship of the coordinates between the grinding point and the reference center of the cylindrical grinding wheel employed must be first determined. As described in Substituting Grinding experiments were performed to verify the accuracy and efficiency of the compensation method developed. In the grinding experiment, a concave aspheric mould was fabricated using the protocol shown in  To evaluate the accuracy of the on-machine measurement, the profile error of the ground aspheric mould was also measured using the two off-machine profilometers. A compensation approach was successfully developed for the ultra-precision grinding of tungsten carbide aspheric moulds based on the on-machine measurement. For the improvement of compensation efficiency, the measured profile data was used to reconstruct the actual ground profile and the residual profile error for compensation was obtained by subtracting the target profile from the actual ground profile along normal direction. The new tool path for the next grinding cycle was generated based on the computed residual error. The approach was evaluated by the grinding test. The experimental results demonstrated that the aspheric surface had a significantly high profile accuracy of 177 This research is sponsored by the