Igneous enclaves, chilled bodies of magma with compositions contrasting with those of their hosts, have long been recognized in felsic plutonic rocks. Similar enclaves occur in felsic pyroclastic rocks despite the apparent difficulty of their survival of the explosive eruption process without fragmentation. The occurrence of andesitic ignimbrites with textural evidence of generation by mechanical mixing of felsic and mafic ash indicates that in some instances basaltic enclaves in felsic magmas that erupted explosively do indeed undergo fragmentation and homogenization with their host. Two exposures of rhyolitic ignimbrite that hosts basaltic enclaves, and of andesitic ignimbrite, in coastal Maine demonstrate the set of conditions necessary for survival of basaltic enclaves during catastrophic explosive eruptions. Relatively lower viscosity of basaltic enclaves compared to the rhyolitic host magma permits vesicle networks to develop as volatiles exsolve from the melt and form bubbles. The vesicle networks provide sufficient permeability for exsolving gases to escape the basaltic magma bodies, hence sparing the basaltic enclaves from fragmentation. If adequate permeability for volatile escape does not develop, the expanding bubbles are trapped within the basaltic enclave and ultimately, with depressurization during rise of the magma to the surface, cause fragmentation of the basaltic magma. In this case, the basaltic ash and the host rhyolitic ash homogenize, producing a hybrid ignimbrite, while the surrounding viscous rhyolitic magma behaves typically, with a small volume of the rhyolitic magma retaining its coherence as pumice bodies while most of the magma fragments shortly after vesiculation to become ash. These observations suggest a distinction between the voluminous andesites associated with subduction zones, for which attainment of intermediate composition occurred as a result of petrologic processes unique to subduction zones, and hybrid andesitic ignimbrites, which are spatially associated with bimodal magmatic systems in a variety of tectonic settings and are the result of mechanical mixing of ash during pyroclastic flow.Volcanic rocks bearing evidence of magma mingling prior to eruption are most commonly lava flows, rather than pyroclastic rocks. In lava flows, two typical features are taken to indicate that the flow represents an extrusion of magma involving mingling of contrasting compositions. First, enclaves have been identified and described in non-explosive lava flows (e.g. The problem addressed in this paper is the significance of droplet-shaped basaltic enclaves (SiO The mechanical problems associated with preservation of basaltic enclaves during pyroclastic eruption and transport are formidable. Pyroclastic rocks are fragmental rocks. Magma undergoes fragmentation during explosive volcanic eruptions. Several models have been put forth to describe the magma fragmentation process ( It is difficult to explain the survival, without fragmentation, of bodies of basaltic magma immersed in rhyolitic magma itself destined to become rhyolitic ash. The vesiculation, eruption, and transport processes are violent; expansion of gases is perhaps the major factor in the fragmentation of magma and its conversion to ash and pumice. Catastrophic expansion of volatiles and the turbulence it generates may even cause the fragmentation of phenocrysts when magma is entrapped as melt inclusions in phenocrysts ( Basaltic enclaves of sharply contrasting style are preserved in the Cranberry Island series and the Isle au Haut series of the coastal Maine magmatic province ( Assembly of the coastal lithotectonic belt involved transport of crustal blocks along major orogen-parallel strike–slip faults, contemporaneous with accretion ( The prevalence of bimodal magmatism around 420 Ma in coastal Maine and New Brunswick and the geochemical characteristics of both the mafic and the felsic rocks produced at that time have led several workers ( The thesis that basaltic magmatic enclaves in felsic magmas can be coherently preserved during pyroclastic eruptions is based empirically on the presence of basaltic enclaves in rhyolitic ignimbrites preserved in several locations. In coastal Maine, many well-exposed plutons host spectacular swarms and layers of chilled basaltic enclaves ( Basaltic enclaves in the rhyolitic ignimbrites of the Cranberry Island series (421 Ma) are non-vesicular, and range in size from approximately 1 cm to more than a meter in diameter. They have a microcrystalline groundmass consisting of plagioclase, epidote, and chlorite, with sparse phenocrysts of plagioclase feldspar. They are commonly oblate, with their maximum dimension parallel to the plane of volcanic bedding of the host ignimbrite. Some enclaves have thin (several mm) fine grained margins interpreted as chilled margins ( The deposition of F6 immediately preceded the first eruption of dominantly mafic material, the basaltic tuffs of M1 ( F5 is approximately 120 m thick. It consists of an aphanitic red matrix of andesite composition ( Whether large or small, both individual basaltic enclaves and swarms of basaltic enclaves in F5 are surrounded by white rhyolitic envelopes. The segregations of rhyolitic ignimbrite that host sprays of small basaltic inclusions are suggested to represent rhyolitic magma that contained droplets of basaltic magma prior to eruption. Outcrop textures suggest that these composite enclaves were mechanically dispersed, and droplet like fragments of the two phases became entrained in the pink ignimbrite. The basaltic inclusions are spherical to ellipsoidal with a present mineral assemblage of hornblende and/or epidote and minor plagioclase. The surrounding white envelopes are quartz- and plagioclase-rich, and are typically aligned with their long axes subparallel to bedding ( The plutonic rocks of Mount Desert Island, approximately 10 km north of the exposures of the Cranberry Island series, have been suggested, on the basis of composition, location, and age, to be the remains of the magma chamber that produced the volcanic deposits of the Cranberry Island Series ( Basaltic enclaves in ignimbrites of the Isle au Haut volcanic series (424 Ma; Several workers have quantified, in increasing detail, the behavior of magma in volcanic conduits (e.g. Experimental work of The depth at which magma vesiculates and the depth at which it undergoes fragmentation critically depend on the initial volatile concentration of the magma. The weight fraction of water that can be dissolved in magma ( If Under volcanic conditions, gases are treated as perfect, and Then the density of the magma and gas mixture is given by the sum of the mass fraction of each phase in the mixture, divided by the density of each ( The time scale over which the magma passes from below the exsolution surface, through the fragmentation surface, and to the vent is important in terms of evaluating the possibility that enclave magma has adequate opportunity to develop a permeability network that would permit degassing. The initial terminal velocity, before exsolution occurs, is given by: We suggest that the andesitic ignimbrite (F5) of the Cranberry Island volcanic series is a mechanical hybrid of rhyolitic ignimbrite and basaltic enclaves hosted by the ignimbrite, and that hybridization occurred during and shortly after the fragmentation of the rhyolitic magma. As described above, the most compelling evidence that the andesite is a hybrid is the macroscopic occurrences of end-member materials incompletely mixed, within the andesite. The equations that describe vesiculation and fragmentation of magma, summarized in the previous section, have been applied to a hypothetical bimodal magmatic system in which the felsic end-member is a high-silica rhyolite with the properties of the Bishop Tuff magma ( These constraints indicate that basaltic magma droplets would undergo vesiculation at a much shallower depth (460 m) than their rhyolitic host (2970 m), and that fragmentation as a result of void fraction reaching 0.77 due to bubble expansion would occur at approximately 363 m in the rhyolite and at 165 m in the basaltic enclaves ( The behavior of bubbles is key to understanding the occurrence of basaltic enclaves that clearly did not undergo fragmentation in the conduit, both in the Cranberry Island and Isle au Haut series. Basaltic enclaves from the rhyolitic ignimbrite of Isle au Haut have a high vesicle abundance (∼ If low volatile concentration allowed basaltic enclaves to avoid fragmentation, the possibility would still exist that rapid turbulent expansion and fragmentation of the host rhyolitic magma would cause secondary fragmentation of the basaltic magma bodies. Pumice bodies represent coherent plastic to solid bodies that avoid complete fragmentation during rhyolitic eruption, indicating that it is possible for bodies in rheologic contrast to the ignimbritic ash host to survive explosive eruptions intact. Partial fragmentation of basaltic magmatic bodies may occur during post-fragmentation transport. Basaltic enclaves in the plutonic system associated with both the Cranberry Island series and the Isle au Haut series can be up to several meters in diameter. Basaltic enclaves in the volcanic rocks are rarely more than a meter in diameter and are more typically a few centimeters to a decimeter in diameter, suggesting that some dispersion and fragmentation of initially larger bodies occurred. Both the fragmentation and the preservation of basaltic enclaves during pyroclastic eruptions are represented by members F5 and F6, respectively, of the Cranberry Island series ( Calculations of vesiculation depth of the rhyolitic and basaltic magmas considered in this study indicate that the rhyolitic magma would vesiculate at approximately 2970 m beneath the surface, and the basaltic magma at only approximately 460 m beneath the surface. The rhyolitic magma would reach the ∼ The assumption used above that approximately 75–77 vol.% of vapor in a melt leads to fragmentation (e.g.,  The permeability of a magma is the main control on the rate at which gas can escape the magma during decompression. Initial conditions of porosity, magma overpressure, and magma water content in the two volcanic series is unknown. Pumice preserved in rhyolitic ignimbrite has been flattened to impermeable fiamme and/or hosts secondary mineral growth in vesicles. Likewise, preserved basaltic enclaves in the Cranberry Island series have been flattened. Vesicles are generally absent, although rare large basaltic enclaves (> If basaltic enclaves and rhyolitic host underwent fragmentation at lower volume percents of porosity than the 77% critical volume fraction frequently used as a fragmentation criterion, then fragmentation of both the rhyolitic host and the basaltic enclaves would have occurred at greater depths than those shown in It is possible that differences in the degree of porosity in the Isle au Haut basaltic enclaves compared to the Cranberry Island basaltic enclaves influenced the degree of fragmentation. The size distribution of enclaves in the Cranberry Island series mingled rhyolitic ignimbrite (F6), in the Cranberry Island series andesite (F5) and in the Isle au Haut mingled rhyolitic ignimbrite offers further insight into the processes of mingling and hybridization during explosive eruptions. The abundance of basaltic enclaves of the smallest macroscopically visible size (∼ Andesite is the hallmark of subduction zone magmatism. However, the presence of andesite in two well-known volcanic sequences in the coastal Maine magmatic province: the Cranberry Island series (layer F5 of We propose a distinction between ‘petrologic’ andesitic ignimbrites, those for which attainment of intermediate composition occurred as a result of petrologic processes permitted by conditions in peculiar to the geometry of subduction zones, and ‘mechanical’ andesitic ignimbrites, those spatially associated with bimodal magmatic systems and possibly the result of mechanical mixing of ash during pyroclastic flow. The coastal Maine magmatic province hosts over 100 plutons and associated volcanic successions ( We are grateful for the hospitality of people of Great Cranberry Island and of Isle au Haut, Maine, and for discussions with Mike Williams, John Sweeney, John Eichelberger, Ron Vernon, and John Reid about the ideas presented in this work. We thank Ron Vernon and an anonymous reviewer for thorough reviews of the manuscript, and Mike Williams for preliminary reviews of the manuscript. This manuscript was completed as a direct result of a writing retreat funded by NSF ADVANCE grant #0620087.