Scale formation on process equipment is a major problem in the mineral industry because of lost production from equipment downtime required in de-scaling maintenance and its high cleaning cost. Scale formation in the Bayer process mainly occurs from crystallisation of Bayer liquor which is not fully understood. This study investigated the hydrodynamic and heat transfer effects on crystallisation scale growth and its suppression, using a novel experimental approach in a newly fabricated lab-scale agitation tank. A series of experiments were undertaken using laboratory-made potassium nitrate (KNO3) aqueous solutions.
                  Experiments were conducted with different size impellers at varying rotational speeds using various concentrations of KNO3 solutions. It was observed that the impeller agitation speed plays a critical role in the scale growth and suppression mechanisms as the scale growth rate is enhanced at the lower and is reduced at the higher agitation rate. The effects of baffles on scale growth rate and suppression and the bottom settled scale accumulation rate were also examined. The wall scale growth rate decreased with time ranging from 58.06% to 6.79% and the corresponding bottom settled scale increased ranging from 4.19% to 80.2% depending on the agitation rate, impeller size, solution concentration and tank conditions.Mineral scale deposition on process equipment is a major problem since it leads to lower plant efficiency and higher operational cost which can be as high as one third of the operational cost. It is more significant in the mineral industry than other process industries and its mechanism is not well understood. Elucidating its mechanism is necessary for finding appropriate mitigation or suppression methods. Scaling can be defined as undesired solid or porous deposits of material that is formed on the heat exchange surfaces which lead to lessening the efficiency of the process cycle. Scale formation in chemical process equipment is a natural consequence of supersaturated solutions that are generated throughout the process. The accumulation of scale deposition reduces the production efficiency considerably and causes other problems such as flow blockage, probe malfunction, reduction in heat transfer efficiency and increase operational costs involved in the de-scaling process [ A review of existing literature reveals that there are limited research in scaling and it mostly deals with chemical and metallurgical aspects and a few research exists on the effects of the flow characteristics on scaling. It can be seen from the literature that there are many factors and parameters which contribute to scale formation and deposition. These are: the quality of the process solution, the saturation level of process solution, the rheological property (viscosity), the process equipment (material, surface finish and morphology), the turbulence of process fluid, inertia of suspended particles, the velocity (stream-wise, cross-stream and circumferential velocity fluctuation components) of process fluid, the particle size and shape and the adhesive property of the particles [ Epstein [ The precipitator is one of the most critical operational units in many process cycles, including the production of alumina, industrial effluent and waste water treatment, production of ultra-fine monodispersed powders of metal and precursor compounds for the manufacture of high-temperature semiconductors [ Müller-Steinhagen et al. [ Nývlt and Veverka [ Loan et al. [ A novel scale-velocity model was developed by Wu et al. [ In regime B, for fluid velocity larger than 0.1 m/s, surface integration governs the scale deposition rate. In regime C, the rate of scale deposition gradually decreases with the increase of process solution velocity. In this regime, an increase in process solution velocity results in more fluid erosion, which decelerates the scale deposition. Nawrath et al. [ In regime D, the material surface suffers a net loss due to the effect of erosion exceeding scale growth. Wu et al. [ Coletti and Macchietto [ The present work is concerned with crystallisation scale suppression in a mixing tank containing normal solubility salt solution of potassium nitrate (KNO An experimental rig consisting of a newly fabricated agitation tank and a cooling circulator were used for this study and the experiments were conducted using various concentrations of the potassium nitrate solution. For the design of the agitation tank, it was necessary to maintain the standard scale-up ratio of tank diameter to impeller diameter, impeller height to impeller diameter, baffle width to tank diameter and solution height to tank diameter to reflect real operational conditions in the industry. In the crystallisation scale experiment, it is crucial to control solution temperature, coolant flow temperature, solute concentration and commencement of crystal growth timing. In the agitation tank scale experiment, at the beginning of each test some time (between the beginning of experiment and starting of impeller rotation) was allowed for initiation of crystal growth on the heat transfer surface. In particular, for the high agitation experiment (impeller speed from 300 rpm to above), a time of minimum 60 s was allowed for each experiment. The schematic diagram of the experimental set-up with necessary connections for the low-temperature coolant (50% distilled water + 50% ethylene glycol) flow loop is shown in The geometric dimensions and proportions of the agitation tank are given in The KNO Potassium nitrate is a neutral normal solubility salt that cannot be hydrolysed in water, and it dissociates in water only, as shown in Eq. ( For each experimental scale run, the following parameters were considered for measurement and data acquisition: the bulk solution temperatures, wall temperatures, coolant flow temperatures, solution conductivity, coolant flow rate, and impeller torque. A 12 channel temperature recorder (BTM-4208SD) with SD card data logger was used to record the bulk solution temperature at two different points, the tank wall temperature at four different points, and the inlet and outlet temperature of coolant (50% water + 50% ethylene glycol) passing through the external cooling jacket. K-type thermocouples were used to record the temperature readings. The thermocouples were connected to a terminal of the data logger, and then the program was set to record the temperatures every 10 s. The electrical conductivity data were recorded automatically in a HI98192 model conductance cell. The torque and rpm data were recorded in a PC through the mini-USB interface. The properly insulated stainless steel (SS 316) agitation tank was filled with heated KNO The measurements of the scale growth rate which included the scale growth on the tank wall and the tank bottom were performed using two different methods. The first method was used to measure the scale deposits on sample coupons positioned at different locations on the tank wall after a specified time interval, and the second method was used to weigh the total mass of the scale deposit on the bottom manually removed and cleaned with caution. After completion of each experimental scale run, the solution from the agitation tank was completely drained out through the bottom; then the scale was dried slowly for 24 h by an air-dryer. Then the scale patterns, formed scale, and foreign products were inspected visually. A series of experiments were conducted to investigate the effects of varying operating parameters (impeller agitation speed, impeller size, degree of supersaturation, and use of baffles) on the crystallisation scaling rate in the agitation tank. The scaling experiments were performed at agitation speeds varying from 100 to 700 rpm and at three different KNO The crystallisation scale growth rate results of KNO The OHTC and TR results calculated as a function of time for a 4.50 mol/L KNO The scale growth rate of KNO The order of the crystal growth process n was estimated from the slope of the curve as shown in For example, the equation of line plot  This section of the analysis reveals the effect of agitation rate on the cumulative scale growth rate at three different sizes of the impeller (diameter 86, 114 and 160 mm). From This section of the analysis reveals the effects of baffles (four equally spaced baffles) on the cumulative scale growth rate as shown in  Uncertainty analysis was performed in this study to validate the data obtained from the experimental measurements. If, when the equation is a pure “product form” as Eq. (6), then the relative uncertainty can be represented as Eq. (7) [ The uncertainty analysis is important especially when the measured scaling resistances have small values. In this study, the temperature is varied from −4 °C to 48 °C, and the uncertainties of the experimental results would mainly occur due to temperature fluctuations in the bulk solution as well as the coolant. Therefore, the maximum uncertainty in the scaling resistance and the overall heat transfer coefficient were determined to be within ±22.5%. The detailed calculation of a single representative case showing typical scaling behaviour has been given in Appendix. This visualisation is analysed with the surface structure and morphology of the crystal. The photographs as presented in A typical microscopic picture from SEM analysis is given in The photographic observation reveals that more heavy deposit encrustations of KNO A novel experimental set-up which consists of a model agitation tank replicating many industrial processes was designed and fabricated successfully to undertake a variety of experiments to examine the hydrodynamic and heat transfer effects on scaling and suppression using laboratory made solutions. Based on the experimental results obtained, the following conclusions can be drawn: The scaling deposition rate decreases with the increase of agitation rate. When compared with the low agitation rate of 100 rpm, the rate of scale deposition on the agitation tank wall decreases by 1.2, 1.8, 2.4, 2.8, 3.5 and 3.9 times for impeller speeds of 200, 300, 400, 500, 600 and 700 rpm respectively, for the potassium nitrate concentration of 4.50 mol/L, impeller diameter of 86 mm and the tank with baffles. The settled scale on the bottom increases with the increase of fluid agitation erosion. The larger impeller creates more fluid erosion and lowers the scale growth on the wall. The unbaffled tank is advantageous for suppression of scaling. The scaling rate on the tank wall decreases for the unbaffled tank by 4.13%, 11.21%, 23.18%, 17.92%, 29.26%, 22.85% and 31% for impeller speeds of 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600 and 700 rpm, respectively, compared with the baffled tank for the impeller diameter of 86 mm and the potassium nitrate concentration of 4.50 mol/L. The other larger impellers (diameter 114 mm and 160 mm) showed similar results in the without baffles tank less prone to scale deposition than baffles tank. This is explained as tank without baffles increase more uniform swirl flow action over the tank wall rather than tank with baffles. The scaling development is a function of agitation rate which creates a significant resistance to the heat transfer rate. The study provides new and important results for elucidating the scale growth and its suppression mechanism, using for the first time a normal soluble salt to generate the crystallisation scale deposition in a newly built agitation tank that effectively replicates many industrial processes. It could be proposed from experimental observation that agitation tank without baffles or swirl flow technology (SET) prevent the more scale growth on the agitation tank wall due to swirl flow action. It is expected that these results will contribute to establishing guidelines for designing of agitation tanks (without baffles, which is beneficial) and selection of appropriate impellers (not small or oversize), and making the process less prone to attracting scale nuclei during the initiation period. It also will provide new pathways to enhance the reliability, lifetime and efficiency of various industrial processes. The authors gratefully acknowledge the technical support provided by CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia and the assistance by the Engineering Workshop, Central Queensland University, Australia in setting up the experiments. Supplementary material related to this article can be found, in the online version, at doi: The following is Supplementary data to this article: