The mineral industry is seeking ways to reduce the impacts of its mining and mineral processing operations. Members of this industry face several challenges in designing sustainable mineral operations with lower environmental and social impacts while remaining profitable. These challenges must be addressed in the design, operation and postclosure phases, but the design phase affords the greatest opportunity to reduce the impact of operations and increase profits.
                  Some of the most important challenges are the efficient use of water and energy. For example, because of the decline in ore grades in mineral concentration is being used to reduce the particle size to increase the mineral liberation. However, this increase in grinding increases energy consumption and affects the water recovery in the dewatering stages. This manuscript examines these and other effects through process simulation of a flotation plant for copper ores. Based on these simulations, the relationship between particle size, energy consumption, and water recovery is established. This makes it possible to explore the trade-off between energy, liberation, and water recovery.Water is the universal utility, both in domestic and industrial domains, and demand for water never ceases to increase due to rapid development on the global scale ( Most mineral-separation processes involve the use of substantial quantities of water; a large portion of this water ends up in a tailings stream, and a smaller portion ends up in the concentrate bearing the target mineral ( Water is a fundamental resource for the mining industry because it is used in almost every stage of production. Most of the mining activity in Chile is carried out in the Atacama Desert, and the mining companies use a large quantity of groundwater. A large fraction of the groundwater in the Atacama Desert is likely composed o f “fossil” or “ancient” reserves that receive little or no recharge in today's hyperarid climate ( For solid-liquid separation processes, sedimentation, decantation, and filtration are commonly used in mineral processing operations. In the flotation process, the concentrate is thickened and filtered to recover water, while tailings are usually thickened before disposal. The recovered process water is recycled to the flotation operations. Usually, the bulk of the water is first removed by sedimentation, which is a combination of clarification and thickening, to produce a thickened pulp of approximately 55-65% solids by weight. In some plants, up to 70% of the water can be separated at this stage ( Energy use is quite relevant to copper production. Energy consumption has important implications because the process itself requires the combustion of fuels and increasing power requirements that cause greenhouse gas emissions at the thermal power stations that supply electricity to the copper plants ( One of the issues faced in mineral processing operations is that the particle sizes in the concentrate and tailings have an effect on water recovery from the subsequent dewatering systems. Grinding allows for the liberation of valuable species for concentration, but it also requires a large expenditure of energy. It is known that more energy is consumed when materials are ground finer and that a finer or coarser grind has an effect on water recovery in dewatering units (i.e., filtration, thickening, decantation, and tailings permeation). In this work, the effect of particle size on energy, water recovery, metal recovery, and process economy is analyzed by the simulation of a flotation process. For the study, we used a conventional copper concentration plant. The simulated circuit is shown in 44 t/h of chalcopyrite (CuFeS Then, the copper grade is 1.5%. The particle size feed is from 20 μm to 600 μm. After the simulation, the capital and operational costs were determined. The equipment costs were assessed using correlations available in the literature ( From the simulation results, the total recoveries of chalcopyrite, pyrite, and quartz were 95.02%, 0.04% and 0.04%, respectively. Then, the concentrate grade corresponded to 33.7% Cu. In contrast, 94.6% of the water was recovered from the concentrate with a total of 81.06 t/h, while 70.0% of the water was recovered from the tail, corresponding to 1341.63 t/h. The SAG mill is the most expensive piece of equipment, representing 55% of the equipment costs, followed by thickeners (28%). For operational costs, electricity accounts for 54% and water accounts for 40%. At a copper price of 2 US$/lb, the profits were 236.1 US million (MUS $) by year.   In this work, the effects of particle size on energy, water recovery, metal recovery, and process economy are analyzed by simulation of a flotation process. Based on the simulation of a copper concentration process, it was found that the particle size has a significant effect on the process economics and on various environmental aspects. The valuable mineral recovery and concentrate grade depend on the particle size, where small and large particles give the worst results. In contrast, there is an inverse relationship between the energy and water consumption. The energy consumption increases and water consumption decreases with decreasing particle size. The financial support from CONICYT (Fondecyt 1090406), CICITEM (R10C1004) and the Antofagasta Regional Government is gratefully acknowledged.