Image logs are presently the main specialized tools for fracture detection in hydrocarbon reservoirs. Where image logs are not available, other less rewarding substitutes such as isolated well tests and type curve analysis, drilling mud loss history, core description and conventional petrophysical logs are used for fracture detection. In this paper a novel method is proposed for fracture density estimation in the fractured zones, using energy of petrophysical logs. Image and petrophysical logs from Asmari reservoir in eight wells of an oilfield in southwestern Iran were used to investigate the accuracy and applicability of the proposed method. Energy of the petrophysical logs in the fractured zones is calculated and linear and non-linear regressions between them are estimated. Results show that there is strong correlation between the energy of caliper, sonic (DT), density (RHOB) and lithology (PEF) logs with fracture density in each well. In order to find a generalized estimator, a unique normalization method are developed, and by using it, a non-linear regression has been found which estimates fracture density with correlation coefficient of higher than 80%. The resultant regression has the capability of generalization in the studied field.Natural fractures have significant influence on the reservoir behavior and performance. Therefore, in modeling fractured reservoirs, understanding fracture properties is very important ( Since mid 1980s, and introduction of dipmeter technology and image logs, the process of fracture detection and characterization of fracture properties; such as dip, dip direction, fracture density and opening; has become less problematic ( As fractures modeling with an inadequate volume of data can lead to misleading interpretations, any direct or indirect techniques which increase the knowledge of fracture properties is highly valuable. In general, fracture modeling is an object based practice which requires a larger amount of data, compared to pixel based modeling, because of dividing data in some object sets in object based modeling, where each set is separately used in modeling. Earlier attempts to detect natural fractures include the use of sonic waves ( Except the last two mentioned papers, the main deficiency of the majority of the previous studies are inadequate volumes of data and failing to validate the method due to lack of image logs. More importantly, it is impractical to evaluate generalization possibility in the results, even to nearby wells, where the data are inadequate. In this paper a new method has been presented to estimate fracture density in fractured zones. All available conventional petrophysical logs have been used in proposed methodology. Simple linear and non-linear estimators have been used in order to develop an equation with high generalization capability. The proposed methodology has been applied to eight vertical wells in an oilfield located in the southwest Iran, where sequences of fractured zones with variable fracture density is observed along with non-fractured intervals in the Oligo-Miocene Asmari carbonate Formation ( In this section, two techniques and data used in this study have been briefly presented. Calculation of petrophysical logs energy is a simple procedure that magnifies the differences between log data. The following procedure has been used to calculate petrophysical log energy for each log: Select suitable logs for each well, Identify fractured zones in each well using petrophysical logs and the approaches proposed by Calculate petrophysical log energy ( Assign the result of part In the end of the procedure a new log is created which the number of its members is equal to the number of fractured zones in studied well. This log is named energy log in this paper. Normalization of energy log follows the following algorithm: Calculate mean of energy log in each well: Calculate the mean of energy log ( The amounts of More than 300 wells are drilled in the studied field. Whole suit of conventional logs including caliper, Density, Neutron, Sonic, resistivity and natural gamma ray spectrometry ran in most of them whereas image logs ran in only eight wells. There are some probabilistic methods that can help identifying fractured zones in the wells without image logs. As the studied reservoir is a naturally fractured formation, estimating fracture density in fractured zones using petrophysical logs helps generating valuable data for about 300 wells. Petrophysical logs and interpreted image logs of eight studied wells were used to generate an estimator of fracture density in fractured zones which can be generalized to all wells. Fractured zones and the number of fractures in each fractured zone (fracture density) are identified from interpretation of image logs. This approach will be useful if a generalized correlation between energy log and fracture density in each fractured zones can be established. Good linear regression is observed between energy log of some of the petrophysical logs and fracture density in fractured zones of each well. For example, regressions in well #3 are shown in Energy log data of selected petrophysical logs of eight studied wells are gathered together to investigate linear or non-linear regression between energy log and fracture density. The results are shown in  As it can be seen in This expresses that Of course, there is another tentative way for defining Power It is clear that the error of estimation, which is the difference between the number of fractures in each fractured zone find in image log minus the estimated number of fractures; varies for various petrophysical logs. This is because slope Two trends are visible in Non-linear regression for two groups of wells, with high and low fracture density, is fitted separately. Results are presented in This paper proposes a novel method to estimate fracture density in fractured zones using petrophysical logs. High volume of the data used in this study is one of the points of strength which can support the validity of the results. Image logs of eight wells in an Iranian oil field were used in order to identify fractured zones and fracture density. Petrophysical logs of the wells are used for estimation of fracture density in fractured zones. Energy logs and NELs are calculated as the base data of estimation. In order to find better generalized estimator, NEL is calculated and non-linear regression is utilized. According to the results, if MFD in various wells strongly differs, the high and low MFD wells should be separated. In conclusion, the findings of this paper are: It is possible to fit linear regressions between energy log and fracture density in each well separately. For this purpose four petrophysical logs, caliper, sonic (DT), density (RHOB) and lithology (PEF), are more suitable. The arithmetic average correlation coefficient of linear regression between energy log and fracture density in eight studied wells for caliper and sonic logs is about 90%, which indicates existence of high correlation between them. A simple power regression is established which as an unbiased estimator approximate fracture density in fractured zones with about 0.74 correlation coefficient. The figure of this estimator is independent from utilized petrophysical log, and just its slope and intercept depend on the MFD and MEL. After separation of high and low MFD, the average correlation coefficient increased to about 0.80. The Authors would like to express their sincere thanks to the Petroleum Engineering & Development Company of Iran (PEDEC) and the National Iranian South Oil Company (NISOC — especially Mr Taghavipour and Mr Kordavani) for their assistance in providing the information, and for their technical input to this work.  Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at