Diamine oxidase is a copper-containing enzyme with interesting structural dynamics sensitive to environmental conditions. The present work explores the applicability of the system as a tunable platform for the shape and size selective synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles under ambient conditions. Significant changes in the nanoscale morphology of ZnO have been observed, using scanning electron microscopy, with respect to changes in pH and gas atmosphere of the medium. More specifically, hexagonal plates of nanoscale ZnO were formed at pH below the isoelectric point of the enzyme and spherical particles at alkaline pH. Interestingly the average particle size of ZnO nanostructures increases with increasing oxygen content at acidic pH while the opposite trend is noticed at alkaline pH. The observations are explained on the basis of changes in the enzyme's surface charge, conformation and redox potential using a combination of techniques like zeta potential measurements, FTIR spectroscopy, fluorescence spectroscopy, open circuit potential studies and cyclic voltammetry. Thus the present work demonstrates the applicability of an enzyme as a dynamic bio-template for the synthesis of a multitude of ZnO nanostructures which are expected to add newer insight into bottom-up fabrication of oxide nanostructures.Shape-controlled synthesis is an important requirement to enhance the functional selectivity of bottom-up fabricated nanostructures. The nature and polarity of exposed crystal planes and the type of capping ligands have profound implications on the properties of nanomaterials. For instance, electrocatalytic activity of Platinum nanoparticles towards methanol oxidation was observed to vary with their morphology Zinc oxide is among the most important metal oxides due to its varied applications such as varistor, gas sensor, pigment and photocatalyst. It offers many more advantages in the nano-dimensions (100–200 In this context, the present report demonstrates, for the first time, the applicability of the metalloenzyme, diamine oxidase for shape and size-selective synthesis of ZnO nanostructures. Specifically, the shape of the nanostructures has been tuned by altering the pH of the medium with reference to the iso-electric point of the enzyme and size-control has been achieved by changing the gas atmosphere. The results of this investigation are expected to invoke newer insights into the morphology-controlled synthesis of ZnO nanostructures at ambient conditions in a biocompatible manner for diverse applications. Diamine oxidase from porcine kidney was purchased from M/s. Sigma–Aldrich Co. Ltd. (India). Zinc nitrate hexahydrate was purchased from Merck Ltd., India. Open circui00t potential and cyclic voltammetry were performed in a CHI Model 604c bipotentiostat. Dry ZnO samples were coated on a brass stub using carbon tape and made conductive by sputter coating with Platinum and analyzed using a Field emission scanning electron microscope (JSM 6701F, JEOL, Japan). Fluorescence spectra were recorded using an LS 45 Perkin Elmer spectrofluorimeter. Zeta potential measurements were performed using Malvern, model ZETASIZER nanoseries Nano-ZS, ZETASIZER software 6.0 by determining the electrophoretic mobility and then applying the Henry equation. The electrophoretic mobility was obtained by performing an electrophoresis experiment on the sample and measuring the velocity of the particles using Laser Doppler Velocimetry (LDV). Aqueous solutions of DAO were prepared at a concentration of 2 Diamine oxidase is a homodimer with two strongly bound copper ions located near the cofactor, Topaquinone in the active site of the enzyme. The enzyme is known to catalyze oxidative deamination of a variety of diamines like ethylene diamine. Recently, an amperometric putrescine biosensor has been demonstrated based on immobilized diamine oxidase ZnO nanostructures were prepared from Zinc nitrate and diamine oxidase enzyme under different environmental conditions. After studying the effect of pH, the enzymatic synthesis of ZnO was repeated by varying oxygen content in the atmosphere. As the atmospheric condition is varied from O To explore the mechanism of size and shape control, the effect of enzyme conformation, electrostatic charge and redox activity on the morphological evolution of ZnO nanostructures was studied using fluorescence spectroscopy, zeta potential and electrochemical measurements respectively as explained below. Fluorescence spectroscopy was performed to verify whether DAO undergoes any conformational change with solution pH. The fluorescence spectra of diamine oxidase solutions at different pH (4, 7 and 9) are shown in  Having verified the role of electrostatic charge of the enzyme as well as the effect of overall and active-site conformation on the nanoscale morphology, the next objective was to analyze the role of redox activity of the enzyme. Electrochemical measurements were performed in a three-electrode set up using a 2 In summary, the present report demonstrates for the first time, the efficacy of the metalloenzyme, diamine oxidase in tuning the shape and size of ZnO nanostructures in aqueous phase under ambient conditions. Systematic variation of solution pH with reference to the isoelectric point of the enzyme indicated the formation of hexagonal plates in acidic pH and spherical particles in alkaline pH. Whereas, particle size decreased with increasing oxygen levels in alkaline conditions, the opposite trend was observed in acidic pH. Based on these observations, it could be concluded that the electrostatic charge, overall conformation and redox activity of the enzyme affects the nanoscale morphology. The approach could be useful for more systematic bottom-up fabrication of ZnO nanostructures since it involves a simple procedure and offers simultaneous control over size and morphology under ambient conditions. Authors acknowledge financial support from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: