Soot affects climate change and human health. Its structure is influenced by fuel and combustion conditions. Image analysis of high-resolution transmission electron microscopy lattice fringes indicates curvature is common and impacts reactivity. Here an improved curvature quantification determined the distributions of segment frequency, segment lengths, angles between segments, frequency of inflection points, relative inflection point locations, and overall angle changes for each fringe for three soots and a carbon black. Curvature was present in 28–49% of the fringes. Low curvature (<30°) account for the largest portion (61–76%). The most common inflection angles were 10–20°. Geometry optimized (ab initio) atomistic models containing centrally located pentagon rings or Stone-Thrower-Wales defects had angle changes 19–77° depending on viewing angle and molecule. The majority of curved fringes (71–78%) had a singular inflection point. Fringes were primarily within the range 6–15.0 Å length 4–100° cumulative angle. Tortuosity data demonstrated this commonly used parameter was limited for the evaluation of undulating curvature. Linking these data to structural defects will enhance linking reactivity to structure, capturing and improving structural features in atomistic representations. Changes in segment angles <45° however are not likely to be associated with centrally placed isolated pentagon rings.Soot contributes to climate change and human health issues. However, the structure of soot is diverse and depends on the fuel and the combustion conditions. Thus, an improved structural characterization will be useful in the determination of soot origins and impacts. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) is one of the primary analytical approaches for soot particles and allows structural arrangement, diversity, and ordering to be viewed. Image processing and analysis permits lattice fringe extraction for a quantitative analysis of the distribution of structural features. These nanostructure parameters include the distributions of lamella length, separation distance, and curvature Curvature increases the reactivity of basal plane sites. It has been suggested that the presence of C Unfortunately, the quantification of curvature in soot is currently limited to the commonly measured tortuosity Three different combustion produced soots and a carbon black sample were analyzed: (a) HRTEM micrographs were obtained with a 200 keV field emission TEM (JEOL EM-2010F) with a resolution of 0.2 nm. The magnification is x 500,000. A standard TEM operation procedure was employed to ensure choosing the representative regions of interests (ROIs) The lattice fringe images were processed using a custom MATLAB script developed at the University of Nottingham Atomistic structures were created using geometry optimization using density functional theory (Dmol) using Materials Studio software. Curvature was examined using molecular modeling angle determination tools. To avoid displacement issues in a plane when selecting atoms, centroids were placed between atoms. To aid in the visualization of the angle only the backbone atoms along the curvature line were included. Given the scale of the structures this initial work considered corannulene, some larger derivatives with singular or multiple 5-membered rings, also a PAH molecule with a Stone-Thrower-Whales defect and one with a line of these defects. Fullerenic fragments and other defects, such as screw dislocations, could also be considered in a broader analysis. The MATLAB script was employed to identify the    The distribution of angle changes between segments of HRTEM lattice fringes is illustrated in It is expected that the majority of the more highly curved lamella was imparted due to the inclusion of 5-membered rings and other defects. To explore the curvature extent several PAH molecules were constructed, geometry optimized using density functional theory and their curvature was examined. Cumulative angle, the sum of absolute angle differences between adjacent segments, was another index to represent the curvature extent. Tortuosity was also determined using the MATLAB script for comparison. The number of segments is relevant to fringe curvature and expected to also have utility in improving structural characterization. Distributions of cumulative angle (  An improved evaluation of curvature within the lattice fringes of soot samples and a carbon black is presented. The new approach identifies the distributions of segment frequency, segment lengths, angles between segments, frequency of inflection points, relative locations, and overall angle changes for individual fringes from several soot and a carbon black. It is demonstrated that for many of the fringes a significant improvement over the single-value tortuosity parameter was obtained. For the 4 samples from different combustion systems, curvature was present in 28–49% of the fringes. Fringes with low curvature (<30%) account for the largest portion of curved fringes. The majority of curved fringes (71–78%) were comprised of two segments (i.e. a fringes with a singular inflection point). The bulk of curved fringes were within the range defined by fringes lengths of 6–15.0 Å and cumulative angles of 4–100°. Longer curved fringes tended to have more inflection points and subsequently a greater cumulative angle. Although a distribution of inflection points was noted, complexity was evident with some fringes having as many as 8 inflection points creating undulating fringes. A comparison of the cumulative angle and tortuosity data demonstrated this commonly used parameter was limited for the curvature evaluation for the those complex (undulating) curvature observed in soot. Considerable curvature diversity was observed within and between samples. Linking the frequency of inflection points and the angle changes to structural defects will enhance the ability to: link reactivity to structure, to capture the structural features in atomistic representations, and improve their applicability. From an examination of curvature from a few simplistic atomistic structures demonstrated that the changes in segment angles <45° are not likely to be associated with centrally placed isolated pentagon rings. Financial support from the