We reviewed 15 adult patients with intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus treated over a period of 2 years. All patients underwent primary open reduction and internal fixation, which included 11 double plating procedures. The fractures were classified according to the AO/ASIF system. Patient outcome was assessed subjectively by scoring the patients’ residual symptom of pain and their overall satisfaction of the treatment received. Objective assessment was performed using the Mayo Elbow Performance Index (range of motion, assessment of functional status, pain and stability of the joint). At a mean follow-up of 12.3 months, 7 patients were rated as excellent; 6, as good; one, as fair; and one, as poor. These cases had an average arc of flexion of 109.7°. The sub-group of type C fractures without revision surgery had a mean flexion arc of 110.7° (95–140°), with 100% Good to Excellent scores. Complications included two post-operative ulnar nerve neuropraxia, one wound infection, and one fracture fibrous non-union. Three patients required revision surgery which included a total elbow arthroplasty for implant failure, whilst four patients (including the patient with the subsequent arthroplasty) required joint mobilisation procedures for residual stiffness.Intra-articular fractures of the distal humerus are not common and remain one of the most difficult fractures to treat. Non-operative treatment traditionally results in dismal functional outcome with disabling limitations of elbow motion. However, over the past two decades, operative reduction and internal fixation has become more accepted as a means to achieve anatomical restoration of the articular surface and facilitate early mobilisation. Nevertheless, many authors differ in their opinions with regard to the extent and type of internal fixation, as well as the duration of post-operative immobilisation. The improved AO/ASIF techniques for the fixation of small articular fragments has made operative results more predictable and more recently, dual plate fixation in two planes has become the standard of treatment. We treated 15 adult patients with intra-articular distal humerus fractures between 1998 and 2000. All the fractures were classified using the AO/ASIF classification. Twelve patients had complete articular grade C fractures (4 type C1; 4 type C2; and 4 type C3 fractures), and the remaining 3 patients each had a type B1, B2, and B3 partial articular fracture. All patients were identified from the hospital computer database and a review of their medical notes was performed. The mean age of our patients was 43.4 years old (range 21–80), with a female predominance of 13:2. All were closed fractures, of which eight were due to falls at home or while walking; four were sustained during sports; two during work related accidents; and one in a road traffic accident. Only one patient sustained a concurrent ipsilateral fracture of her distal radius (patient 2). All six dominant limb humeral fractures were right sided. Surgery was performed on an average of 1.47 days from the time of injury (range 0–5 days). Eighty percent were operated on within 48 Fixation techniques varied but always evolved around the central aim to achieve sufficient stability to allow early mobilisation. Eleven out of 12 patients with type C fractures were treated with plating of both medial and lateral columns, and intercondylar lag screw fixation. Of these, two required supplementary Kirshner wire insertion. Two other patients (type B fracture) had single column plating with intercondylar lag screw fixation, of which 1 required supplementary Kirshner wires. The last patient required cancellous screw fixation of her type B3 sagital capitellum fracture. The mean duration of surgery was 150.3 Post operative passive mobilisation using the Continuous Passive Mobilisation (CPM) machine was commenced in nine patients on an average of 1.7 days (range 1–4 days) after surgery. Passive mobilisation in an arc between 30 and 60° as tolerated by the patient was supervised by the physiotherapist. The remaining six patients were either splinted or kept in a full cast until active mobilisation was allowed at a mean of 24.8 days (range 1–60 days) post operatively. All the patients in this series were followed an average of 12.3 months (2–27 months). They were all recalled for questioning and assessment for pain, range of motion, joint stability and functional outcome. The Mayo Elbow Performance Index was used to objectively quantify the overall outcome of surgery. A further subjective assessment of patient satisfaction of their outcome after surgical fixation was graded as Excellent, Good, Fair, or Poor. We report the overall results of all 15 patients with the AO/ASIF types B, partial articular; and C, complete articular fractures ( The overall average arc of elbow flexion at final assessment was 109.7° (range 45–145°), with a mean flexion deformity of 12.3°. The mean arc of flexion of patients with type C fractures after primary fixation was 92.5° (45–140°), whilst the type B group has a mean arc of 110° (60–145°). Seven patients reported no pain; seven complained of mild pain. All the type C fractures had only mild to no pain. The single patient with moderately severe pain had a B3 fracture with degenerative capitellum noted on follow-up. Ten patients had no problems performing all the functional tasks; combing hair, feeding, hygiene, wearing shirt, and shoe. The remaining patients (one from the type B fracture group, and three from the type C group) reported problems combing their hair at the back of the head. The last patient (patient 9) with a C1 fracture could only manage wearing his shirt. All but one patient returned to their previous occupation or housework with unmodified duties. Patient 9 was unable to perform his pre-morbid occupation as a painter. An excellent grade on the Mayo Index was attained in 7 patients; Good, in 6 patients; and Fair in one. One patient (patient 9) was graded Poor using this scale. Good to Excellent results were achieved in an overall 86.7% of our surgical fixations.  A further subjective score of patient satisfaction of the treatment outcome was also collected from all patients. Five patients reported Excellent outcome (2 had type B fractures); 8 patients graded their outcome as Good (including the last patient with a type B fracture); one patient scored Fair; and the last patient waiting for his workman compensation claim (patient 9) graded Poor. In our series of 15 patients, complications included two post-operative ulnar nerve neuropraxia ( Amongst our type C fractures, one patient required revision to a total elbow arthroplasty (patient 8). Two required revision for implant failure (patient 5, and 10), whilst 3 patients required joint mobilisation procedures for residual stiffness (patients 6, 8, 9). One patient from the type B group (patient 15) required joint mobilisation, whilst none required revision of fixation ( Capsulectomy performed between 5 and 12 months post-fixation improved the arc of flexion in 2 of our patients by 40° (patient 6) and 45° (patient 15), respectively ( A 40-year-old lady with type C2 fracture underwent dual plating with reconstruction plates after an osteotomy. The ulnar nerve was not transposed. CPM was started the following day (30–75°). Radiographic examination 2 weeks later revealed the cause of her limited range of motion (30–90°) to be an impinging lateral screw. The 22 A 61-year-old lady with a dominant hand type C3 fracture operated on the day of injury. Following an olecranon osteotomy, she underwent double plating with intercondylar screw and Kirshner wire fixation. The ulnar nerve was transposed, and the osteotomy repaired by the tension band technique. Post-operative range of motion was 30–70°, but active mobilisation was deferred for 2 months in view of poor bone stock. One year later, she underwent capsulectomy for persistent stiffness (ROM 30–80°). Unfortunately she suffered a re-fracture of the medial column 14 months after the initial accident. This was treated conservatively with a brace. In view of the poor bone stock, and a persistently stiff elbow (30–80°), a decision was made to proceed with a total elbow arthroplasty. Post-operative range of motion was 10–130°, with full supination and 20° pronation. One year after the arthroplasty, she has a range of motion between 5 and 120°. Outcome was excellent on the MEPI, although she subjectively graded in fair. When we evaluated the sub-group of seven patients with type C fractures (2 C1, 2 C2, and 3 C3 fractures) (see Numerous operative approaches have been described for the distal humerus. Double plating was used in 11 out of 12 type C fractures in this series. Helfet et al. advocated the use of an ulnar one third tubular and a radial 3.5 We mobilise the ulnar nerve with its blood supply routinely during exposure. However, the nerve is not transposed unless there is no soft tissue interposition between the metal implant and nerve. Intra-operative ulnar nerve injury occurred in two patients with type C fractures. In both, the triceps lift was employed and transposition of the ulnar nerves was not performed. We feel that the neuropraxia is most likely due to intra-operative nerve retraction and not the type of surgical exposure. Three patients required revision surgery. One patient required only minor length adjustment of a single screw with the overall fixation being stable. Another patient underwent arthroplasty after a re-fracture in view of the poor bone stock. The third patient’s medial 1/3 tubular plate broke requiring replacement. Review of the post-operative radiographs revealed a short intercondylar screw as the likely cause of the loss of fixation. Morrey et al. in 1981 concluded that most of the activities of normal daily living could be accomplished with 100° of elbow flexion in an arc from 30 to 130°. The majority of our patients were put on Continuous Passive Mobilisation (CPM). Most were sent home only when flexion was 90° or greater. The mean arc of flexion following primary fixation was respectively; 92.5° (ROM 45–140°) for type C, and 110° (ROM 60–145°) for type B fractures. Three of the four patients requiring subsequent joint mobilisation had delayed post-operative limb mobilisation (patient 8, 9, 15). Surgical capsulectomy improved the range of motion in two of them, and remains a viable option especially when the patient is undergoing removal of implants. The Mayo Elbow Performance Index was found to be the most discriminating on validity testing. Ring and Jupiter in 2000 reviewed four series in which only bicolumnar (type C) fractures were considered, AO plating techniques used and the outcome was graded according to Jupiter’s modification of Cassebaum’s rating system. We reviewed 15 patients with intra-articular distal humerus fractures treated surgically, of which three required subsequent re-fixation, and four underwent joint mobilisation surgery. The mean arc of flexion of our patients with type C fractures following primary fixation is 92.5° (45–140°), whilst the type B group have a mean arc of 110° (60–145°). The sub-group of type C patients without revision surgery had a mean flexion arc of 110.7° (95–140°), with 100% Good to Excellent scores. Our overall 86.7% Good to Excellent results achieved by surgical fixation (including revision surgery) of these fractures continue to support the evidence that we should move away from the traditional “bag of bones” non-operative treatment of these complicated fractures and aim for anatomical reduction, rigid internal fixation and early mobilisation.