This paper aims to develop a new approach for determining the performance of regrinding tumbling mills, which is based on the grindability and floatability of locked particles through regrinding systems. The approach combines the grindability factor, in which the grinding of coarse particles is only considered, with the floatability of the regrind mill feed and product using the corresponding grade–recovery curves. The approach was examined in the Sungun industrial regrinding tumbling ball mill using various feed rates. The results showed that the efficiency of the regrinding mill is extremely low and some practical approaches and means are proposed to enhance its efficiency.In most cases, the existence of a regrinding mill in mineral processing plants is inevitable and plays an important role. The main objective of a regrinding mill in mineral processing plants is the liberation of locked valuable minerals. The performance of regrinding mills often deviates from the initial design operating state due to the changes in ore characteristics and operational conditions. To improve the efficiency of such mills, many means and ways have been continuously proposed by researchers. In this sense, the Bond standard grindability test has been widely employed to determine the energy required for grinding middlings and fine particles. As stated by Considering these facts, Based on the approach proposed by Liven, the specific energy required for material grinding is considered equal to the equivalent energy per revolution of the laboratory Bond mill. This energy cannot be accurately estimated since the grinding energy of fine materials considerably differs from the equivalent energy per revolution of the laboratory Bond mill. This implies that the effect of material size on grinding energy is still present and the approach does not takes into account changes in the relationship between size and breakage behavior of material. In addition to this approach,  The objective of this study is to propose a new quantitative approach combining floatability (grade–-recovery curves) and grindability for various feed rates in a circuit. The applicability of this approach will be finally validated using several industrial surveys in the Sungun copper beneficiation plant. The Sungun copper complex is located at the East Aazarbaijan province, in the north-west of Iran. The Sungun mine is an open pit mine of the porphyry copper deposit which is the second largest copper mine in Iran. At this plant, a 3.962 Some important characteristics of the regrinding mill are summarized in To validate the new approach, the regrinding circuit was surveyed 4 times under various feed rates ranging from 72 to 100 Once the representative samples were collected, a number of the samples were dried and weighed for size analysis. The size distribution of the regrinding mill feeds and products were determined using the sieve analysis to −37 More than 1000 particles from each size class were processed for the liberation study using an optical microscopy. Another part of the representative samples was immediately subjected to the flotation kinetics tests to extract grade–recovery curves. The flotation kinetic tests were conducted on the taken samples without adding any chemical reagents, i.e., the relevant chemical reagents have been already added at various points in the plant regrinding system. The flotation tests were carried out in a Denver flotation cell at pH 11.5. In the flotation kinetic tests, froth was collected in a pan for a certain period of time and the pan replaced by another pan. Each pan of the concentrate was weighed and assayed for copper to calculate copper recovery to the concentrate over time. The flotation tests were extended up to 13 Any change on variables affecting the rate or extent of flotation will lead to changes in the operating point on a grade–recovery curve, or to a new grade–recovery curve. For example, factors affecting all particles in the same manner, such as residence time and air addition rate, will cause movement along a grade–recovery curve. Those factors that affect the flotation of one particle type more than another will lead to a new grade–recovery curve. Thus, careful attention should be paid to run the flotation kinetics experiments in a similar manner and at fixed conditions. Finally, the floatability index ( It is thought that any approach for evaluating the regrinding mills should meet the following criteria which are the metallurgical objectives of the regrinding process in the mineral beneficiation plants: The approach must explain the grinding process, whether the regrinding is performing or not. In the regrinding process, not only the production of much more fine materials (slime production) must be limited (due to the detrimental effects of the fine materials in downstream processes like flotation) but also the liberation of locked valuable minerals must have occurred sufficiently. For a given beneficiation condition, the regrinding positive effects must be reflected on the grade–recovery curves for any given feed. It is therefore necessary to develop the relationship between grindability and beneficability in order to understand the regrinding performance during operation. It should be noted that the minimization of the energy consumption would be important during primary milling as a key concept in the evaluation of the grinding performance. However, in the regrinding circuit, the main duties of the regrinding mill are more important compared to the energy consumption. Thus, the approach is constructed based on the metallurgical objectives of the regrinding mill. The proposed approached consists of two main steps, as follows: To derive the approach, the feed and product size distributions along with their grade–recovery curves of the beneficiation process have been considered for evaluating the regrinding performance. Once the feed and product size distributions of the operating plants were obtained, the area between the size distribution curves in terms of cumulative passing size could be estimated, namely Then, the obtained area is compared with the area of the reference state, which would be the initial design of the plant case or economic optimum operating case, namely It should be mentioned that in most cases, the product size distribution normally shifts to the left of the feed size distribution and in this case a positive sign is assigned for the calculated area as convenience. It is rarely likely that part of product size distribution shifts to the right of the feed size distribution. If it happens for any reason, the negative sign will be assigned to this part of calculated area as shown in To evaluate the effects of the regrinding mills performance on a subsequent flotation process, grade–recovery curves can be constructed for any regrinding mill feed and product streams. Afterwards, the improvement in the process would be recognized from the displacement of reference and plant survey curves. If the regrind process has a positive effect on the process, the product grade–recovery curves must shift to the right of the feed grade–recovery curves. For a given recovery, the distance between the observed product and feed grade- recovery curves can be simply measured, namely Once the grindability and floatability indices are calculated individually, the following index will be proposed to evaluate the performance of the regrinding mill in the mineral processing plants: For data collection, a detailed survey was conducted at the regrinding circuit of the Sungun copper beneficiation plant. The regrinding circuit (see Finally, the index was calculated for four surveys and the obtained results are shown in It is clear that with increasing the feed rate, the regrinding performance was enhanced but never approach to the initial design status, indicating that the regrinding performance had dramatically declined compared to the initial design. The underlying reasons are attributed to the operating of the regrind mill and feed characteristics as discussed in detail in the following section. The proposed approach combines the grindability and floatability characters, reflecting the ability of a regrind mill in having a positive beneficial effect. According to the definition of the grindability index, it reflects the ability of a regrinding mill in the milling of only coarse particles and subsequently, increasing substantially the level of libration of valuable minerals from the regrinding. In order to have positive grinding effects, some requirements such as the regulation of suitable operating condition and pulp rheology in the regrind mill are essential. On the other hand, the effects of slime and chemical conditions are recognized by the grade–recovery curve as the floatability index, although the two defined indices not entirely independent from each other. Thus, the proposed index takes into account the metallurgical regrinding objectives and its impact makes better sense than the single index. In the Sungun regrind mill, the dependence of the performance index on the regrinding circuit feed rate (cyclone underflow) would be attributed to the plant feed characteristics and operating conditions. The circulating load in the regrinding circuit was around 100% which is much less than the optimum range and initial design case in which the circulating load was considered to be 280%. As a result, an overgrinding event takes place by operating the regrinding mill with the circulating load of 100% as it was evident from the portion of the fraction smaller than 40 With increasing the regrinding mill feed from 72 to 100 The performance of the regrinding mill in the Sungun plant was evaluated through a detailed survey and it was quantified using a new proposed approach. The approach was constructed based on the metallurgical objectives of a regrinding unit which are connected with the grindability and floatability of locked particles through the regrinding system. The obtained results showed that the performance of the regrinding unit in Sungun is always lower than the initial design operating case due to bad and awkward operation. In addition, it was found that the performance of the regrinding mill depends strongly on the regrinding circuit feed rate and consequently to the plant feed rate and characteristics. As the feed rate decreases due to increasing of ore hardness, the performance of the regrinding mill decreases dramatically. At the best condition, the performance ratio of 58% was calculated for the Sungun regrinding mill based on the proposed approach. The authors would like to thank National Iranian Copper Industries Company (N.I.C.I.Co.) for supporting this research and permission to publish this article. Special Thanks is also extended to the metallurgy and R&D personnel for their continued assistance.