Background
                  The LCP Distal Humerus Plate (DHP) system represents an angular stable fixation system consisting of 2 anatomically pre-shaped orthogonal plates intended for the treatment of fractures of the distal humerus. The purpose of this retrospective study was to evaluate the clinical and radiologic outcome after a minimum follow-up of 2 years after open reduction and fixation of distal humeral fractures with this device.
               
                  Methods
                  Twenty-two consecutive patients with distal humeral fractures were treated with the DHP system between January 2004 and June 2006. Of these, 16 could be clinically and radiologically evaluated after a mean follow-up of 30.5 months. Follow-up included anteroposterior and lateral radiographs; assessment of range of motion; pain according to a VAS; Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score; and Mayo Elbow Performance Score.
               
                  Results
                  All fractures showed satisfactory articular reduction. One patient showed preoperative sensory ulnar neuropathy, which recovered incompletely, and two patients showed sensory ulnar neuropathy postoperatively, requiring revision surgery in one patient. Mean range of motion was as follows: flexion, 129°; extension, −16°; pronation, 82°; and supination, 71°. The mean visual analog scale score was 1 point; the mean Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand score, 23.3 points; and the mean Mayo Elbow Performance Score, 84.7 points.
               
                  Conclusion
                  The DHP system represents a valuable tool to perform internal fixation of complex fractures of the distal humerus. In contrast to conventional plating, we did not observe any case of secondary fracture displacement, even in elderly patients with potentially reduced bone mass. The multiple angular stable point fixation also of small distal fragments seems to be effective in the application of this system.Fractures of the distal part of the humerus are complex injuries that may be associated with a significant number of intraoperative and postoperative complications including acute and chronic ulnar neuropathy, nonunion, and soft-tissue contractures leading to a restricted range of motion during the follow-up. Open anatomic reduction of the articular surface and stable internal fixation have been proposed as a standard treatment The LCP Distal Humerus Plate (DHP) system (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) represents a new angular stable fixation system consisting of 2 anatomically pre-shaped angular stable orthogonal plates intended for the treatment of fractures of the distal humerus. In our department, this system has been consecutively used since 2004. Several studies have reported promising preliminary results after the use of this device, This study hypothesized that the DHP system may enable adequate fracture fixation and satisfactory functional elbow function after a minimum follow-up of 2 years, even in elderly patients with potentially reduced bone mass. This retrospective study was approved by the Ethical Committee of the Canton of Lucerne (Internal Process No. 743) and is in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki. We treated 22 consecutive patients (7 men and 15 women) with fractures of the distal humerus in our department with the LCP DHP system (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) between January 2004 and June 2006 ( To effectively evaluate fixation stability of the DHP system in patients with comminuted fractures and potentially reduced bone mass, a subgroup of patients aged older than 60 years with type C fractures was evaluated. Preoperative evaluation included anteroposterior and lateral radiographs. If image quality of the plain radiographs impaired adequate fracture visualization, additional computed tomography scans with multi-planar reconstructions were performed. Inclusion criteria included use of the DHP system. Exclusion criteria were skeletal immaturity, pathologic fractures, and use of a plating system other than the DHP. During the whole patient acquisition period, no patients were treated by primary total elbow arthroplasty or conservative treatment. Follow-up examinations took place 6 and 12 weeks postoperatively and after a mean final follow-up of 30.5 months (range, 24 to 39 months). Radiologic follow-up included standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs that were evaluated by 2 trauma surgeons in a common session for reduction, fracture union, and hardware migration. As recommended by Reising et al, The LCP DHP system (Synthes, Oberdorf, Switzerland) consisted of two anatomically pre-contoured 3.5-mm locking plates, one of which is placed posterior and the other laterally at an angle of 90°. Both plates are available with 3, 5, 7, 9, and 14 holes to fit different fracture patterns and fracture extensions. The system provides flexibility of axial compression and locking capability. Surgery is performed with the patient in the prone position and under general anesthesia. The arm is placed on a bar allowing elbow flexion up to 120°, and a single-dose application of 2 g of cefazolin is performed. A tourniquet was used in 2 patients in this series. A curved posterior incision is performed radial to the olecranon. The ulnar nerve is identified and isolated. In 14 fractures (8 type A, 1 type B, and 5 type C [3 type C1 and 2 type C2]), an extra-articular flap osteotomy of the olecranon tip was performed, and in 8 fractures (2 distal type C2 fractures and 6 type C3 fractures), a chevron-shaped olecranon osteotomy was performed to enable direct visualization of the trochlea. Articular fragments of the distal block are reduced under direct visualization and temporarily fixated with K-wires. In 7 type C fractures, interfragmentary compression was applied to the reconstructed joint block by use of a 4.0-mm cancellous screw inserted through the ulnar epicondyle. The two DHPs are placed dorso-laterally and medial in an orthogonal fashion ( From the first postoperative day, active-assisted physiotherapeutic mobilization without load was started. The elbow was immobilized in an upper arm splint between the physiotherapeutic sessions and during the night for the first 4 postoperative days. After 6 weeks, active mobilization was performed. The mean operation time was 162 minutes (range, 88 to 235 minutes). Eight severely displaced intra-articular fractures were initially temporarily stabilized with a joint-spanning external fixator over a mean period of 3.3 days (range, 2 to 5 days). The mean time from injury to definite internal fixation was 3.6 days. Postoperatively, none of the fractures showed a step or gap in the articular surface of more than 1 mm. No complications occurred in relation to the olecranon osteotomies. One 70-year-old male patient showed preoperative sensory ulnar nerve dysfunction that recovered incompletely during the follow-up period. Two patients (a 48-year-old man and a 57-year-old woman) showed sensory ulnar nerve dysfunction postoperatively. In one patient (48-year-old man), sensory ulnar function recovered completely after 1 week, and in the other patient (57-year-old woman), revision surgery including decompression and transfer of the ulnar nerve was performed, resulting in an incomplete recovery of ulnar sensory function. One 54-year-old male patient showed radiologic signs of delayed fracture union 6 months after surgery. The patient was free of symptoms and refused any revision surgery. At the final follow-up 28 months postoperatively, the fracture was healed. One 96-year-old female patient sustained skin necrosis over the ulnar plate followed by deep wound infection 2 years after fracture fixation requiring surgical revision and removal of the ulnar plate. Overall, 4 of the 22 patients (18%) had intraoperative or postoperative complications ( Mean range of motion was as follows: flexion, 129° (range, 110° to 140°); extension, −16° (range, −45° to 0°); pronation, 82° (range, 50° to 90°); and supination, 71° (range, 15° to 90°). The mean VAS pain score was 1 (range, 0 to 5), with 8 patients (50%) being completely pain free whereas 6 complained about minor occasional pain. The mean DASH score was 23.3 points (range, 0 to 67.5 points) and the mean MEPS was 84.7 points (range, 30 to 100 points), representing a good result in 14 patients (86%), a fair result in 1 (7%), and a poor result in 1 (7%). Overall, patients with type A and B fractures showed slightly better mean DASH scores (14.1 points; range, 0 to 34.2 points) than patients with type C fractures (30.5 points; range, 1.7 to 67.5 points). Likewise, patients with type A and type B fractures (90.7 points; range, 80 to 100 points) achieved slightly better MEPS values than patients with type C fractures (80 points; range, 30 to 100 points). Ten patients with type C fractures were aged older than 60 years. No case of pseudarthrosis, loss of reduction, or deep wound infection was observed in this subgroup. Of these 10 patients, 7 could be clinically and radiologically evaluated after a mean follow-up of 32 months (range, 24 to 37 months). The mean VAS pain score was 0.9 (range, 0 to 2.5); the mean DASH score, 25 points (range, 1.7 to 51.7 points); and the mean MEPS, 86 points (range, 65 to 100 points). Overall, this subgroup achieved comparable results to the total collective. This study evaluates the clinical and radiologic outcome after a minimum follow-up of 2 years after ORIF of distal humeral fractures with the DHP system. The results confirm our hypothesis that adequate fracture fixation and satisfactory functional outcome may be achieved with this device, especially in elderly patients (>60 years) with comminuted fractures and potentially reduced bone mass. In this study 2 different types of olecranon osteotomies were used. According to our experience, severely comminuted fractures and fractures located very distally require an intra-articular chevron osteotomy, whereas extra-articular fractures and fractures without comminution may be adequately exposed and reduced through an extra-articular flap osteotomy of the olecranon tip. During the last 2 decades, dual-plate fixation has become an accepted standard method in the treatment of distal humeral fractures. In this series all fractures healed without any incident of screw breakage or secondary fracture dislocation. These data are in accordance with the findings of a biomechanical study that showed superior biomechanical stability of the DHP system compared with non-locking reconstruction plates in the fixation of distal humeral fractures. Total elbow replacement has been proposed as an alternative method of treatment in osteoporotic and severely comminuted type C fractures of the distal humerus. Several retrospective studies have shown favorable short-term results after implantation of total elbow prostheses. In this study, the subgroup of patients aged older than 60 years with type C fractures showed comparable results to what has been reported from several retrospective and prospective studies after total elbow replacement. In this study, patients with severely displaced intra-articular fractures had initial closed reduction and intermediate fixation with a joint-spanning external fixator. In our opinion, this procedure may limit soft-tissue trauma and may so lead to a faster resolution of swelling and to lower rates of neuropathy. Actually, in our study, the time from injury to definite surgical treatment was shorter than what has been reported in the study of Reising et al. A postoperative ulnar neuropathy developed in 2 of the 22 patients (9%) in this study. Even though this rate is relatively low compared with 6% to 27% reported in other clinical trials, The major limitations of this study include the small sample size and the relatively high number of patients lost to follow-up. The follow-up is too short to address long-term development of osteoarthritis. Furthermore, in this study, most patients had relatively low-energy traumata compared with other clinical trials. The presented DHP system represents a valuable tool to perform internal fixation of complex fractures of the distal humerus with complication rates comparable to what has been reported for other implants. Surgical treatment of distal humeral fractures is related to a significant number of complications that may be more related to the type of fracture than to the mode of fixation. In contrast to conventional plating, we did not find any case of secondary fracture displacement, even in elderly patients with potentially reduced bone mass. The multiple angular stable point fixation also of small distal fragments seems to be effective in the application of this system. Special thanks to Stephanie Thormann for her valuable support during the preparation of the manuscript. The authors, their immediate families, and any research foundations with which they are affiliated have not received any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.