An integral closed circuit hydrometallurgical process is presented for base metal recovery from electronic waste. The leaching medium consists of a sodium citrate solution, from which base metals are retrieved by direct electrowinning, and the barren solution is recycled back to the leaching stage. This leaching-electrowinning cycle was repeated four times. The redox properties of the fresh citrate solution, as well as the leach liquors, were characterized by cyclic voltammetry to determine adequate conditions for metal reduction, as well as to limit citrate degradation. The leaching efficiency of electronic waste, employing the same solution after four complete cycles was 71, 83 and 94% for copper, iron and lead, respectively, compared to the original leach with fresh citrate solution.In recent years, there has been a considerable increase in waste generation ( For this reason, there has been a continuous search for alternative procedures for the treatment of this type of waste. The different studies can be grouped according to their principal extraction characteristic or a combination of these: biotreatment ( In the first part of this research ( The present study focusses on an integral, non-polluting process for base metal recovery, specifically copper, iron and lead, from EWPCB. In addition to leaching, the circuit presented includes a method to recover the metals (direct electrowinning) from the pregnant leach solution (PLS) and to recycle the barren solution back to the leaching stage, with a minimum of potentially dangerous by-products. The leaching capacity of the citrate solution and the metal recovery efficiency after several leaching/electrowinning cycles is analyzed. In aqueous-phase mineral processing (hydrometallurgy), predominance diagrams are an important tool to determine possible operating conditions and to effectively plan an experimental program. Specifically, for the system of interest, the solution redox potential and pH are important parameters, on one hand, to dissolve and on the other, to electrodeposit the metals of interest. The thermodynamic information necessary to construct the predominance diagrams (E In the previous publication ( The material used for this study was an EWPCB sample with a high metallic content ( The solutions used in this and the previous study ( The preliminary electrochemical analyses of PLS were carried out on synthetic solutions to determine the approximate reduction potentials of each metal, without the possible interference from other impurities. These tests consisted of cyclic voltammetry (CV), using a potentiostat (PARSTAT 2273 – The electrowinning of the actual PLS, was performed in a conventional Before re-use in a new cycle with a fresh batch of EW-PCB, the pH of the barren solution was adjusted to pH 4.5. Since there was some loss of liquid due to solution manipulation, the amount of solids and volume of peroxide were adjusted to conserve the same solid/liquid ratio and concentration, respectively. Once the first leaching/electrowinning cycle was completed, the same procedures were repeated. The general process scheme is shown in  This represents a large advantage with respect to other leaching media for EW-PCB, such as cyanide, thiosulfate, thiourea, bromide and inorganic acids, which do not demonstrate any selectivity ( It is important to note that in Cyclic voltammetry has been used previously to analyze the redox behavior of metals in citrate solutions ( The redox behaviors of the citrate solution in synthetic solutions, with (0.05 Electrowinning is a widely used and extensively analyzed procedure because of its versatility and relative ease of operation (  On the other hand, iron is initially precipitated at a very fast rate, which quickly tapers off, leaving approximately 10% of the original iron in solution. During the electrowinning process, there was a noticeable alteration in the color of the PLS ( One of the most important aspects for the economy and sustainability of this process is the recyclability of the citrate solution. In this section, the effect of re-using the citrate solution in up to three cycles will be examined. Other authors have also studied this aspect, based on carboxylate solutions, such as EDTA at alkaline pH values (pH 7–11) ( One cycle is defined as the assembly of unit operations, including leaching, filtration, electrowinning and solution recirculation. Before re-utilization, the pH of the barren solution was readjusted (from 4.37 to 4.5), but no citrate was added. In this manner, a total of four batches of EW-PCB were leached with the same solution, the last three of which were recycled solutions. The criterion used to suspend the electrowinning stage and recycle the solution was the time required to recover at least 95% of the copper in the PLS. Under these conditions, the percentages of electrowon metal are presented in To better visualize the effect of using recycled citrate solutions in the leaching stage, in this section, the behavior of each metal is discussed separately. In the case of copper ( Iron dissolution is examined in a similar manner ( The fastest and most consistent leaching behavior in all of the cycles was observed for lead ( To compare the leaching ability of the recycled solutions (cycles II to IV) relative to that of the fresh citrate solution in six hours, the efficiency will be defined as follows: In this context, the maximum efficiency corresponds to the metal extraction in 6 A summary of the six-hour leaching efficiency of the three metals for the four cycles is shown in The aforementioned results open the possibility to implement novel processes at ambient conditions for the treatment of EW-PCB to recover its metal content, in a manner that permits solution recirculation. Depending on the metallic composition of the waste material, the number of cycles and the amount of citrate make-up, which minimizes water use and waste generation, can be established. The aqueous-based process presented for the metal recovery from EW-PCB of metals is a robust procedure, applicable to a large variety of waste materials. Each of the extracted metals studied (copper, iron and lead) shows a singular behavior during treatment. The citrate leaching solution can be recycled after metal electrodeposition without make-up, although the extraction kinetics are slightly slower, especially for copper. Lead was the metal which showed the best performance, displaying very little difference in the leaching as well as the electrowinning stages, independent of the cycle (up to four). On the other hand, difficulties were encounter for the full recovery of iron from the PLS, which possibly impacted its extraction in subsequent cycles. In all of the PLS and the barren solution after four cycles, the citrate solutions exhibited adequate chemical stability, demonstrated by the absence of precipitate formation or turbidity. The authors appreciate the valuable collaboration of Juan Carlos Jiménez-Mora during the experimental work. The authors would like acknowledge the support granted by the project Thermochemical data used in E-pH diagrams ( Table 1 from See