Photoluminescence (PL) from the Si ion irradiated SiO2/Si/SiO2 layers on Si substrate at room temperature and elevated substrate temperatures has been studied to elucidate the luminescence origins. The irradiation of Si ions into SiO2/Si/SiO2 layers instead of SiO2 films was performed to improve the PL intensity by increasing the number of proper-sized Si nanocrystals. Before annealing at high temperature, a luminescence band around 450 nm is observed. This luminescence band was found to originate from the diamagnetic defect known as B2 band generated by Si ion irradiation. The intensity of this band increases when ion irradiation is carried out at high substrate temperature. After annealing at high temperature, the PL peaks originating from the B2 band disappear and a new PL peak appears around 700 nm. This luminescence band is associated with ∼5-nm sized Si nanocrystals. Also it can be found that the PL peak intensity around 700 nm is significantly increased with the high substrate temperature during ion irradiation. Therefore, it is concluded that ion irradiation into SiO2/Si/SiO2 layers is more effective than ion implantation into SiO2 films to obtain an intensive PL peak originating from Si nanocrystals.Bulk single crystal Si, as an indirect band-gap semiconductor, is of limited use for optoelectronic applications because it has only a small chance of radiative recombination. After the discovery of a visible luminescence from porous Si at room temperature (RT) In this paper, the irradiation of Si ions into SiO Amorphous SiO For the PL measurement, an Ar ion laser (351 nm) was used as an excitation source and a cooled photomultiplier tube employing photon counting techniques detected the luminescence. A cut-off filter to pass only long waves above 375 nm was used to block the lights scattered from the excitation source. Electron spin resonance (ESR) spectra were taken to qualitatively evaluate the amounts of paramagnetic defects in as-implanted samples. The ESR signal was measured at room temperature using Bruker ESP-300 X-band spectrometer operating at a microwave power of 5.024 mW, a modulation amplitude of 5.213 G and the zero crossing g-value of 2.0024 was obtained from implanted samples. The samples for cross-section transmission electron microscopy (XTEM) were prepared in a standard process of mechanical polishing and ion milling steps. High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image was obtained at 200 keV to observe the Si nanocrystals in the SiO  The presence of paramagnetic defects in Si-irradiated SiO   PL from Si ion irradiated SiO This work was supported in part by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) through the ASSRC at Yonsei University, and in part by the grants from KOSEF (981-0209-035-2).