The combustion characteristics of fuel briquettes made from Idigbo (Terminalia ivorensis) charcoal particles, pinewood (Pinus caribaea) sawdust and their agglomerates using gelatinized cassava peels were investigated. The charcoal particles and pine sawdust were blended in the mixing ratios of 90:10, 80:20, 70:30, 60:40, and 50:50, respectively and vice-versa. More so, briquettes were produced from pure charcoal particles and pine sawdust separately for the purpose of comparison with the blended briquettes. The gelatinized binder was 5% of the total briquettes weight. The briquettes were produced using a pressure of 5 MPa with a dwelling time of 5 min in a hydraulic briquetting machine. Proximate, elemental compositions and heating value analyses were carried out on the raw charcoal, sawdust, cassava peel, and their briquettes. The results showed that variations in the mixing ratios of the bio-residues had significant effects on all the properties investigated. An increase in the charcoal particles led to an increase in the fixed carbon content and heating value of the briquettes. Conversely, higher pine sawdust content in the briquette resulted in higher volatile matter content and lower heating value. The briquette made from pure charcoal particles had the highest heating value (24.9 MJ/kg) and ash content (6.0%). Its carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen contents were in the range of 44.6–50.1%, 5.1–5.6% and 34.4–41.5%, respectively. The proximate analysis, elemental composition analysis, and heating values of the produced fuel briquettes depicted that they have better combustion properties when compared to the raw charcoal, pine dust, and cassava peel. Thus, the produced briquettes would serve as good fuel for domestic and industrial applications.With rapidly rising global energy needs by teeming world population Briquetting is a densification process in which loose biomass are compacted under pressure so that the density of biomass residues could be increased up to about 1000–1200 kg/m Several research works have been reported on biomass briquetting. For instance, Kuti and Adegoke Numerous biomass residues are in abundance in Nigeria. Organic or inorganic binders are utilized to bind these numerous biomass residues. Therefore, to obtain suitable blends from the bio-residues for briquettes production, the physical properties and combustion characteristics of biomass briquettes are important to be investigated The bio-residues utilized in this study were Handpicking technique was employed for the initial removal of foreign materials from the raw samples of charcoal particles, pine sawdust, and cassava peels. The charcoal particles and pine dust were then pulverized to obtain the required fines for the densification process. The charcoal fines and pine sawdust were screened to 0.5 and 2 mm ASTM sieve sizes, respectively. The sieved samples of charcoal fines and pine sawdust were then stored separately in a zip-locked polythene bag. The cassava peel was adequately washed in water and sun-dried for five The briquettes were produced at the Forest Research Institute of Nigeria, Ibadan, Nigeria. The process adopted was a piston press method which involves the usage of a binder and high-pressure briquetting technique. Each agglomerated sample of charcoal fines and pine sawdust was fed into the briquetting machine mold. Cassava peel gel was used as a binding agent in the mixing of raw materials at different ratios. Each briquette sample was subjected to an applied pressure of 5 MPa. Dwelling time of 5 min was allowed for each of the bio-residues consolidations in the mold to prevent the compressed biomass from spring back effect Briquettes samples were pulverized and screened to a particle size of < 0.5 mm in preparation for the combustion tests. The combustion properties such as the percentage volatile matter ( The moisture content ( One gram of each pulverized briquette samples was measured and placed in a crucible of known mass. It was then oven-dried to constant mass. After, the samples were heated in the furnace (LF3/F4244 Model, Vecstar Ltd, United Kingdom) at a temperature of 900 °C for 7 min and weighed after cooling. The volatile matter ( One gram of each pulverized briquette sample was measured and then placed in a crucible of known mass and oven-dried to constant mass. These samples were later heated in the furnace (LF3/F4244 Model, Vecstar Ltd, United Kingdom) at a temperature of 800 The percentage fixed carbon of each sample of briquette was estimated using the relation in The calorific or heating value ( Based on the result of the proximate analysis, the elemental composition of common organic elements such as carbon (  However, the volatile matter of charcoal particles was lower when compared to the other raw materials. This could be due to its production process (carbonization), wherein a degree of devolatilization could have occurred  The moisture content of fuels affects combustion characteristics. Thus, it should be as low as possible because the high moisture content is a challenge when burning and would require excessive energy for drying. The non-combustible component obtained from biomass is ash. Volatile matter consists of elements such as carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen which are present in the biomass. However, volatile matter does not contain water that is usually removed by the biomass carbonization process. The percentage of carbon available for char combustion was the fixed carbon of a fuel.  The elemental compositions of solid fuel have also been reported to affect its energy content and fuel ratio The combustion characteristics of fuel briquettes made from The authors have declared no conflict of interest.