Objectives
                  The aims of this study were to create a new surface topography using simulated body fluids (SBF) and Gold Nanoparticles (GNPs) and then to assess the influence of UV Photofunctionalization (PhF) on the osteogenic capacity of these surfaces.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Titanium plates were divided into six groups All were acid etched with 67% Sulfuric acid, 4 were immersed in SBF and 2 of these were treated with 10 nm GNPs. Half of the TiO2 plates were photofunctionalized to be compared with the non-PhF ones. Rat's bone marrow stem cells were seeded into the plates and then CCK8 assay, cell viability assay, immunofluorescence, and Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) were done after 24 hours. Gene expression analysis was done using real time quantitative PCR (qPCR) one week later to check for the mRNA expression of Collagen-1, Osteopontin and Osteocalcin. Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assessed after 2 weeks of cell seeding.
               
                  Results
                  Our new topography has shown remarkable osteogenic potential. The new surface was the most biocompatible, and the 10 nm GNPs did not show any cytotoxicity. There was a significant increase in bioactivity, enhanced gene expressions and ALP activity.
               
                  Conclusions
                  GNPs enhances osteogenic differentiation of stem cells and Photofunctionalizing GNPs highly increases this. We have further created a novel highly efficient topography which highly enhances the speed and extent of osseointegration. This may have great potential for improving treatment outcomes for implant, maxillofacial as well as orthopedic patients.Titanium has become the material of choice in many treatment modalities in the dental field Although titanium is the most biocompatible and the most clinically used alloy for orthopedic and dental implants, it was found to be subjected to “biological ageing” in which they encounter time-related degradation of their bioactivity leading to a decrease in their osteoconductivity over time [ On the molecular level, protein absorption, and osteoblastic function becomes highly enhanced leading to an almost ideal surface contact, and therefore better primary stability and substantial therapeutic significance. Photofunctionalization have shown to decreases morbidity and improves treatment outcome by highly increasing the Bone-implant contact leading to a 3-fold increase in the strength of primary stability. It therefore allows for a quicker loading protocol and a decreased overall treatment time. It also permits the use of shorter and smaller implants in complex cases without compromising the success rate [ The unique physical and chemical properties and the high biocompatibility of Gold nanoparticles (GNPs) have made them highly attractive for the use in different medical fields such as targeted gene and drug delivery, diagnostics as well as tissue engineering research [ Cellular uptake of GNPs causes them to bind to cytoplasmic proteins and act as osteogenic agents to enhance bone tissue regeneration Previous studies have shown that beside these osteogenic capabilities, GNPs also inhibit osteoclast formation In this study, 10 nm diameter spherical GNPs were used in order to assess whether this size will promote more osteogenic differentiation than those previously mentioned in the literature. In order to bond to living bone, it is essential for any biomaterial to form a biomimetic bone-like apatite on the material surface. Simulated body fluid (SBF) is a solution which has an ion concentration close to that found in human blood plasma [ Stem cells are promising tools in tissue engineering; they are characterised by their ability of self-renewal and their potential to differentiate into various cell lineages from the three germ layers. Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent cells and have the potential to differentiate into mesodermal cells to form bone, cartilage, skeletal muscles or adipose tissue [ The bone marrow contains a considerable population of MSCs capable of differentiating into bone. The differentiation of these cells into osteogenic progenitor cells can be influenced by many factors [ The objective of this study was to assess the cell growth of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) obtained from rat's bone marrow stem cells on the surface of titanium (TiO  1- (TiO 2- (TiO 3- (TiO  1- (TiO 2- (TiO 3- (TiO Commercially pure (99.7%) Titanium grade 4 disks (20*20 mm, 1.5 mm thickness) were obtained (Baoji Rare Titanium Nickel co, Guangzhou, P.R. China). The sequence of processing was acid etching for 30 minutes, SBF for 24 hours, PhF for 48 hours, GNPs for 24 hours, followed by MSCs application on the TiO All titanium plates were sterilized using a regular autoclave, and then acid-etched with 67% Sulfuric acid (H Group B titanium plates were photofunctionalized by closely exposing them to UV light for 48 hours in a dark box using a 15 W bactericidal lamp; (Toshiba, Tokyo, Japan) with a combined peak intensity of 0.05 mW/cm Simulated Body Fluids from Beijing LEAGENE Biotechnology Co., Ltd (CZ0400), was prepared to mimic the ion concentrations found in human plasma. Titanium plates in groups 2A, 3A, 2B and 3B were soaked in SBF (pH 7.40) at 37 °C for 24 hours prior to the experiment. The disks were then removed and gently washed three times in distilled water for 30 seconds and then air-dried on a clean bench. Surface morphology was then assessed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM). TiO All procedures employed in this study involving animals and their care were conducted in accordance to the National Institutes of Health guidelines (NIH Publication No. 85–23, revised 1996) and were approved by the Wuhan University Animal Care and Use Committee. Healthy 6–8 week old Sprague Dawley (SD) rats (4 SPF) were purchased from animal experimental center of Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University; L-DMEM medium (Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's medium), fetal bovine serum, trypsin, penicillin and streptomycin from (Procell); 100 mm plastic cell culture dishes from (Corning, USA); Inverted phase contrast microscope from (Olympus, Japan). SD rats anesthetized with 10% chloral hydrate. 75% ethanol disinfection was done for 10 minutes twice and both lower limbs and lower abdominal area were cut with sterile scissors. Lower limb skin was cut. Legs, thighs, thigh muscle and bone were removed. Femur was exposed and hip joint and knee joint were cut. Then the bilateral femur and tibia were removed under sterile conditions, followed by the bone surface muscle and periosteum. Femur and tibia were separated into a sterile petri dish and sterilized by flushing the bone three times with a sterile solution containing 5% PBS penicillin and streptomycin, and 1% mycillin. Washing was repeated by soaking in large 50 ml centrifuge tube. When the liquid was completely soaked the bones, rongeur metaphysis was applied, using a needle pulling 5 ml culture system (L-DMEM medium +100 U/mL penicillin and streptomycin + 2 mML- glutamine + 7.5% NaHCO Following 48 h of primary culture, the medium was replaced by a fresh medium. Then the cells were covered with the bottom of the culture bottle and they were fused into a single layer. The density of the cells was 70%–80%. Cell passaging was carried out with the ratio of 1:2. Cells where seeded on all titanium plates. MEM- alpha was added to 10 % FBS and 1% Penicillin-Streptomycin Solution. When the cell density reached 80%, the cells were passaged. The culture medium was then discarded and washed with PBS and 1–2 ml 0.25% trypsin. Separation of cells was observed under the microscope till they became rounded indicating complete digestion. Pancreatin was discarded and the cells were put into a single cell suspension and then passaged according to the ratio of 1:3 at 37 °C and 5% CO The cell counting kit (CCK-8) was performed to determine the extent of the MSCs viability after 24 hours of cell culture with the different TiO Cell counting kit (CCK8) was applied to each well by adding of 300 ml of the solution for 4 h, and then another 100 ul was added to each of the 5 holes in every group of titanium plates. The mortality rate was measured in each hole by OD450 standard enzyme. spectrophotometry was then done do check for the optical density. Confocal laser scanning microscopy was used to examine cell viability in hBMSCs seeded onto titanium surfaces. After 24 h of culture, the cells were fixed in 10% formalin and stained using the fluorescent dye calcein-AM (Green) for live cells and Propidium iodide (red) for dead cells. Using fluorescent images, each TiO Morphology and morphometry of cells on TiO Scanning electron microscope (S2300, Hitachi, Japan) was used after 24 hours of seeding the cells on the plates to examine the surface topographies of the titanium plates as well as the cellular morphology in each group. 1500, 3000 and 5000 magnifications were used for observation. Extraction of RNA was done using TRIzol™ reagent, the excess PBS was washed off, rinsed twice, then 1 ml of TRIzol™ was added to cells followed by to 1.5 ml RNase in the EP tube for 10 min and 200 ul chloroform and mixed thoroughly several times in room temperature for 5 minutes. It was then centrifuged for 15 minutes at 12000 rpm till the RNA was visible under the third phase. The upper aqueous phase (about 400 ul) was transferred into a new 1.5 ml EP tube. 400 ul isopropyl alcohol was added, mixed well, placed at room temperature for 10 min and then centrifuged at 12000 rpm for 10 minutes. The bottom of the tube was seen white due to RNA precipitation. Excess liquid was discarded and RNase of 75% ethanol 1 ml was added, mixed and centrifuged again for 5 minutes at 10000 rpm. The RNA precipitation was air dried for 5–10 minutes and then dissolved and diluted in 20 ul DEPC solution. Optical density (OD) was calculated. The OD260, OD280 and OD260/OD280 values were determined by UV spectrophotometer, and the purity and concentration of RNA were calculated. According to the ratio of OD260/OD280, the quality of RNA was estimated, and the ratio was between 1.8 and 2.0. The absorbance value was calculated according to the following formula the concentration of the sample RNA: Total RNA concentration (ug/ul) = OD260 * 40 * 200 * 10-3. The total RNA was placed in the refrigerator at −80 °C for storage.     The primer sequence for different markers is shown in ( Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was assessed after two weeks of cell seeding into the titanium plates and was evaluated as the amount of p-Nitrophenyl Phosphate (PNPP) released by the enzymatic reaction at specific areas in a photo of the titanium plates. It was measured using the use of IPP6.0 software. Graphpad prism 5.0 was used to perform the statistical analysis in this study. The One-way analysis of variance (One-way ANOVA) was used to compare between the results of different TiO The optical density (OD) was measured and cell count was performed and then calculated in percentages compared to 1A ( One-way ANOVA was used to perform statistical analysis. Bonferroni's Multiple Comparison Test between each two groups revealed that there is a statistical significant increase in cellular count when adding SBF, GNPs and UV light treatment to the titanium plates. The only two non-significant differences were between 1A vs 2A and 3A vs 2B ( PhF and GNPs increase the cellular viability ( Statistical analysis shows that the live/dead ratio is significantly higher in UV treated groups than the non UV treated ones ( The OD of Actin and vinculin are good indicators for cytoskeletal development. The pattern of actin and vinculin expression was as the following: 1B > 1A, 2B > 2A, and 3B > 3A. The expression of actin and vinculin was found to increase in the titanium plates in the following order 1A, 2A, 1B, 3A, 2B, 3B ( IPP6.0 software was used for the analysis of the optical density of fluorescent photographs, each group had three TiO SEM was preformed 24 hours following seeding the cells onto the TiO The osteogenic differentiation was assessed using quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) after one week of cell culture to measure the gene expressions of the Col-1, OPN and late osteogenic biomarker OCN was analyzed. Beta-actin was used as the reference gene, it was used as a positive control for the expression of Col-1, OPN and OCN ( The average relative gene expression of Col-1 protein was calculated from the PCR results are plotted in (  The mean Col-1 expression of different groups was 1A (1.000), 2A (1.547), 3A (1.807). 1B (1.781), 2B (2.412), 3B (3.446). Col-1 expression after one day of cell culture on the titanium plates was higher on the UV treated group (group B) than that of group A. 1B showed more Col-1 expression than 1A, 2B showed more expression than B1 and 3B also showed more expression of Col-1 than 3A. Titanium plates with SBF coating showed more expression of this biomarker than the plates with no SBF treatment, while the TiO  The average relative gene expression of OPN protein was calculated from the PCR results are plotted in (  The mean OPN expression of different groups was 1A (1.000), 2A (1.202), 3A (1.850). 1B (1.365), 2B (2.616), 3B (3.843). qPCR analysis of OPN showed that the non-PhF surfaces expressed less OPN than the UV treated groups.  The average relative gene expression of OCN protein was calculated from the PCR results are plotted in (  The mean OCN expression of different groups was 1A (1.000), 2A (1.735), 3A (2.037). 1B (1.848), 2B (2.834), 3B (3.885). The expression of the OCN was similar in pattern to those expressed by Col-1 and OPN. The UV treated surfaces had a noticeably higher gene expressions than their counter groups in the none-PhF surfaces.  ALP activity was measured two weeks after cell seeding onto the TiO ALP activity results following two weeks of cell seeding showed remarkable differences between the PhF TiO The implant's surface topography can highly affect the osseointegrative capacity and enhance the level of cellular attachment and spreading. Rougher surfaces for instance show higher osteoblastic proliferation and collagen synthesis than smooth surfaces. The biological properties can also significantly influence the cellular reactions toward the surface of the implant. For example, hydrophilic surfaces enhances osteoblastic differentiation than hydrophobic surfaces [ Takahiro Ogawa et al. Collagen type I (COL-1) is the major matrix protein produced during the proliferation of osteoblasts and it is the most abundant protein in bone matrix [ In our study we have created a hybrid micro-nano topography on the TiO In order to investigate the cytotoxicity of different modification modalities on the MSCs, a live/dead assay was performed. and the results showed an increased cellular viability in the following matter 1A < 2A < 3A < 1B < 2B < 3B with the number of live cells compared to total cells is roughly 50%, 55%, 60%, 65%, 70% and 80% respectively. Following 24 hours of cell seeding into TiO Confocal laser scanning microscopy was done after 24 hours of cell seeding and the immunofluorescence images showed the various osteoblast differentiation on the different titanium surfaces. PhF surfaces expressed 13% more actin fibers and 17% more vinculin than 1A which can be considered a representative of typical “as received” commercial implants. There was a higher cytoskeletal development and more organized stress fibers in the SBF coated plates 2B than 2A, and in the GNP-modified 3B than 2B. This confirms the positive physiochemical effect of the UV on reversing the biological ageing of the titanium surface. Our findings comes in accordance with many previous studies regarding the ageing of TiO The increased cellular attachment on UV treated plates can be linked to the removal of the hydrocarbon layer on the surface of TiO Other treatment modalities also showed noticeable differences in cellular behavior. SBF immunofluorescent images showed higher cellular proliferation, more actin and vinculin expression and more cytoskeletal development than the none-SBF coated TiO The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were also taken 24 hours after the stem cells were seeded onto the titanium plates. UV treated plates showed considerable increase in the cellular activity and extracellular matrix (ECM) production compared to the none UV treated ones indicating that PhF induced an increase in the affinity of cellular and protein absorption to the TiO The size of GNPs is reported in the literature to have various effects on cellular differentiation. D. Zhang et al. investigated the osteogenic effect of 20 nm and 40 nm GNPs differentiation and mineralization and they concluded that “size matters” and that the smaller GNPs show higher ALP activity than the larger ones We used 10 nm GNPs in our experiment, which is one of the smallest to be used for growing cells on a titanium surface and could be a key parameter for catalyzing the cellular differentiation process. The results showed that the 10 nm GNPs are very effective in promoting cellular differentiation and adhesion via increasing the protein adsorption at the nanoscale surface. Some studies have shown that nanosurfaces can interact with the osteoblasts and activate the integrin singling pathway to produce more extracellular matrix (ECM), and can also induce surface binding proteins to expose more membrane anchoring sites in the osteoblasts leading to enhanced cellular differentiation [ Previous studies have shown that GNPs can specifically and highly promote the mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) pathway leading to upregulation of the Runt-related transcription factor 2 (RunX-2) which is considered the major gene in the process of osteoblastic differentiation and in turn directly promotes the expression of other osteoblastic specific genes such as Col-1, OPN and OCN The results of the real time quantitative PCR have shown different levels of mRNA expression of Col-1, OPN and OCN. 1A had the least mRNA expression for the three genes and was considered the control group. All the other titanium groups showed an increase in all gene expressions indicating involvement of the MAP kinase pathway and the up-regulation of the expression of the osteogenic gene Runx-2. The expression of the genes was significantly higher than the control group in the UV treated hydroxyapatite coated TiO ALP is a considered an early marker of osteogenic differentiation Our attempt was to combine different treatment modalities in order to get the advantages of each and get the most biocompatible TiO Our method showed highly enhanced cellular differentiation rates on a titanium. The new topography could further enhance the already existing “Superosseointergration” phenomenon, meaning that it can improve the bone to implant contact (BIC) ratio to more than 98% in a very short time, leading to better primary stability, less healing time, elimination of the stability dip, better anchorage for short implants and better predictability and prognosis. It could also open new treatment options in the fields of orthopedics and maxillofacial surgery for the use of screws, plates or any titanium surfaces. Further investigations should be done to evaluate the effect of this new surface on osseointegration in vivo. We have created a novel hybrid micro-nano titanium surface with a remarkable osteogenic potential. 10 nm GNPs did not show any cytotoxicity. Immunofluorescence and SEM results showed that it highly increased the rate of differentiation, proliferation, attachment, spreading and mineralization. PCR results showed enhanced gene expressions of Col-1, OPN and OCN osteogenic markers. ALP activity was also higher than the other groups. GNPs plays an important role in cellular activity and growth. Photofunctionalizing GNPs can highly improve its ostogenic capabilities. The new topography seems to have a very high potential in enhancing osseointegration and improving outcomes for implant, maxillofacial and orthopedic patients. Yassir Elkhidir: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data; Wrote the paper. Ranfa Lai, Zhiqiang Feng: Conceived and designed the experiments; Performed the experiments; Analyzed and interpreted the data; Contributed reagents, materials, analysis tools or data. This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. No additional information is available for this paper.