Microbial activity in volcanic glass within the oceanic crust can produce micron sized pits and tunnels. Such biogenic textures have been described from the recent oceanic crust and mineralized equivalents in pillow lavas as old as 3.47–3.45Ga from the Barberton Greenstone Belt (BGB) of South Africa. In meta-volcanic glasses these microbial traces are preserved by titanite mineralization (CaTiSiO5) and on the basis of morphological, textural and geochemical evidence have been argued to represent Earth's oldest trace fossils. Here we report the results of in-situ U–Pb dating of titanite that infills trace fossils from the Hooggenoeg Complex of the BGB using laser ablation MC-ICP-MS (multi-collector inductively coupled, plasma mass spectrometry). This yields a titanite age of 3.342±0.068Ga demonstrating the antiquity of the BGB trace fossils. This radiometric age confirms that a sub-seafloor biosphere was already established in the PaleoArchean and that it likely represented an important habitat for the emergence and evolution of early microbial life on the Earth.Sea floor pillow basalts contain tubular and granular alteration textures in their glassy chilled margins (e.g. The fossil record of life in volcanic glass extends far beyond the oldest Trace fossils found in meta-volcanic glass of the Barberton Greenstone Belt (BGB) in South Africa are the focus of this study ( The PaleoArchean BGB of South Africa contains some of the world's oldest and best-preserved pillow lavas ( The ~ The Hooggenoeg samples investigated here were collected from a non-vesicular and variolitic pillow lava outcrop on the banks of the Komati River in the south eastern limb of the Onverwacht anticline ( The BGB trace fossils occur in pillow rims and interpillow hyaloclastites. They are mineralized by micro-crystalline titanite and appear dark brown in thin-section. They occur as dense clusters and bands containing a central “root zone” from which they radiate ( There are three reported occurrences of mineralized microbial traces from Archean pillow lavas. The first and also the oldest examples yet described come from the BGB of South Africa ( A biogenic origin for the titanite mineralized textures from the Barberton has been advanced on the basis of 3 lines of evidence summarized below: The micro-textures are restricted to pillow rim and interpillow breccia samples and extend away from healed fractures along which seawater once flowed ( Disseminated carbonate from bulk rock samples of pillow rims from the Onverwacht Suite have δ  No plausible abiotic mechanism has yet been advanced to explain the BGB micro-textures. Abiotic processes that have been tested and rejected include: purely chemical dissolution, and the migration of ambient inclusions. These abiotic mechanisms are discussed in detail in The antiquity of the Barberton trace fossils has been argued for from textural observations. The micro-tunnels are segmented by metamorphic chlorite (e.g. Direct dating of Archean trace fossils in volcanic glass was first undertaken on samples from the Pilbara Craton of Western Australia ( A multi-collector ICP-MS (Thermo Finnigan Neptune) coupled to a 213 The laser was set up to produce energy density of 3 The data were corrected for channeltron dead time and processed off line in a spreadsheet-based program (LamTool; Energy dispersive x-ray (SEM-EDX) images were acquired with a Zeiss Supra 55VP scanning electron microscope equipped with a Thermo Noran EDS detector at the University of Bergen. The EDX spectra were collected at 15 Focused ion beam milling (FIB) and transmission electron microscopy were done at the GeoForschungsZentrum in Potsdam (GFZ) using a FEI FIB2000 TEM and a FEI TecnaiG2 F20 X-TWIN instruments. The field emission gun of the TEM was operated at 200 Scanning and transmission electron microscope investigations of the BGB sample, together with previous textural and mineralogical observations confirm the similarities between the titanite that infill the tubular structures and the titanite in the “root zones” ( Titanite U–Pb isotopic data obtained by LA MC ICP-MS for trace fossils are given in The 3.342 The difference in age between the infilling titanite (3.342 The nature and timing of metamorphism of the Hooggenoeg volcanic glasses is only sparsely characterized. The 3.342 This is only the second study to use direct in-situ dating techniques to obtain an absolute age for a candidate biosignature from the Paleoarchean. Other traces of Archean life such as organic microfossils, stromatolites and geochemical signatures are not possible to date directly. The age obtained here is approximately 0.4 billion years older than the previously published age of 2.9 We report a minimum age of 3.342 Funding for this study was received from the