This study investigates treatment outcome in zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fracture repair.
               
                  Methods
                  The medical records and CT-images of patients that received treatment for a unilateral ZMC fracture in 2005–2011 were studied. ZMC fractures were categorised as incomplete (type A), tetrapod (type B) or comminuted (type C). The incidence of sequelae, wound infection and secondary surgical interventions was analysed per fracture category.
               
                  Results
                  A total of 153 patients were treated in the selected period. Persisting sensory disturbances in the area innervated by the infraorbital nerve were observed in 50 cases (37%), facial asymmetry in 19 cases (14%), enophthalmos in 10 cases (7%) and persisting diplopia in 9 cases (7%). Wound infection occurred in 6 cases (4%). Secondary surgical procedures of the ZMC, orbital floor, and/or extraocular muscles were performed in 14 cases (9%). C-type fractures were associated with more secondary corrections for ZMC malreduction (12%, p = 0.03), more secondary reconstructions of the orbital floor (10%, p < 0.01), and more functional corrections of diplopia by extraocular muscle correction (5%, p = 0.02).
               
                  Conclusion
                  Treatment outcome in C-type ZMC fractures is less favourable than treatment outcome in A-type and B-type fractures. Intraoperative imaging, surgical navigation devices and 3D-planning software may improve treatment outcome in C-type ZMC fractures.Zygomaticomaxillary complex (ZMC) fractures are common injuries in maxillofacial trauma patients ( The surgical technique is adapted to the fracture pattern and the patient. Mild cases can be treated in a minimally invasive method, the ZMC is reduced through a small incision and no fixation or 1 miniplate is required. Severe cases need several surgical approaches to both the zygoma and the orbital floor, miniplate fixation at multiple sites and reconstruction of the orbital floor ( Recent technological advances such as intraoperative conebeam computed tomography (CT) imaging, surgical navigation devices and 3D-planning software, offer the surgeon additional means to ensure a positive treatment outcome ( This study was undertaken to investigate in which ZMC fractures treatment yields inadequate results when performed without the use of technological aids. In a retrospective cohort the ZMC fractures were categorised and the occurrence of sequelae, wound infection and secondary surgical procedures of the ZMC, orbital floor and extraocular muscles (functional diplopia correction) was analysed. Several classifications for ZMC fractures have been proposed in the literature. Based on these classifications, we made the following classification ( Incomplete fractures – low-energy fractures in which at least one pillar of the ZMC remains intact. Tetrapod fractures – all four pillars of the ZMC are fractured. Comminuted fractures – high-energy fractures, the ZMC is divided into 2 or more fragments by additional fractures trough the zygomatic body, lateral orbit or infraorbital rim. If the paranasal part of the infraorbital rim or the triangular process of the frontal bone constitutes a loose fragment, the fracture is also considered comminuted. Fractures with minor fragmentation at a fractured point of articulation and W-type fractures of the zygomatic arch do not qualify as comminuted. A retrospective cohort study was conducted. The study was performed in accordance with the STROBE guidelines for reporting observational studies ( Patients who were treated for a ZMC fracture between 2005 and 2011 were identified through the electronic hospital information system. Included were patients who received primary surgical therapy for a unilateral ZMC fracture. Patient records, operative reports, radiology reports of maxillofacial imaging, and available maxillofacial radiographic images of all patients were studied. The collected data included: gender, age, aetiology, concomitant other injuries, surgical treatment, sequelae upon follow-up, occurrence of wound infection, and secondary surgical procedures. In cases with available adequate CT-scans, CT-images were reviewed and the ZMC fracture was categorised following the classification outlined in the introduction. Two observers (WvH and EVC) assessed the CT-scans and categorised the fractures. The observers were blinded for treatment outcome. Consensus was reached regarding the findings. Treatment is performed under general anaesthesia. Antibiotic prophylaxis is administered at the induction of general anaesthesia or preoperatively. In cases with no indication for orbital floor exploration, reduction without fixation is attempted primarily. If unstable, internal fixation is applied at the lateral orbital rim or at the zygomatico-alveolar crest, depending on fracture characteristics and the surgeon's preference. If indicated more points of internal fixation are applied in a stepwise progressive approach. Primary orbital floor exploration is performed in case of significant internal orbit disruption. In cases with indication for orbital floor exploration, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) of the ZMC is performed at one or several points, after which the orbital floor is explored and, if necessary, reconstructed. At the end of the procedure, the forced-duction test is performed to check ocular mobility. Postoperatively the patient is instructed to avoid pressure on the affected side of the face, and to avoid blowing the nose for 2–3 weeks. Postoperative antibiotic prophylaxis is prescribed on indication. The patient is reviewed 1 week after discharge, several months postoperatively, and further on indication. No intraoperative imaging, surgical navigation device or 3D-planning software was used in the study period. Statistical analyses of the study results were performed with IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows Version 21.0 (IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA). Spearman's rank correlation test was used to determine correlation of treatment outcome and other injuries with the fracture classification. Pearson's chi square test was used to determine if treatment outcome and other injuries were associated with individual fracture categories. In the discussion section, Pearson's chi-square test was used on the results published by Probabilities of 0.05 and less were accepted as statistically significant. A total of 153 patients were treated in the selected period. The cause of injury and involvement of intoxication are listed in CT-images on which classification could be performed were present in 126 cases (82%), in 27 cases (18%) no (adequate) CT images were available. There were 32 A-type fractures (25%), 52 B-type fractures (41%), and 42 C-type fractures (33%). Patient characteristics per fracture category are listed in Left-right distribution was 87:66. Presence of other injuries per fracture category is listed in Concomitant maxillofacial fractures were present in 48 cases (31%). In 34 cases an isolated concomitant fracture of the mandible (n = 13), midface (n = 15), or frontal bone (n = 6) was present. In the other 14 cases the concomitant fractures entailed the mandible and midface (n = 7); the midface and frontal bone (n = 5); or the mandible, midface and frontal bone (n = 2). The presence of concomitant maxillofacial fractures correlated with fracture classification (p < 0.01) and was associated with C-type fractures (p < 0.01). Concomitant non-maxillofacial injuries were present in 58 cases (38%). These included neurotrauma (n = 26, 17%), e.g. fractures of the cranial base, intracranial haemorrhage, need for intracranial pressure monitoring; spinal fractures (n = 17, 11%); fractures of extremities, including shoulder and pelvis (n = 30, 20%); thoraco-abdominal injuries (n = 15, 10%); and 1 brachial plexus lesion. Ophthalmic injuries were present in 4 cases (3%). One patient had a superior orbital fissure syndrome and 3 patients had a traumatic optic nerve neuropathy (TON). The presence of ophthalmic injuries correlated with fracture classification (p = 0.03) and were associated with A-type fractures (p = 0.02). The treatment per fracture category is listed in Orbital floor treatment was performed more often in C-type fractures (38%, p < 0.01). The number of sites used for internal fixation was greater in cases in which the orbital floor required treatment. Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis was administered in 143 cases (93%). No antibiotic prophylaxis was administered in 7 cases (5%), and in 3 cases (2%) the use of perioperative antibiotics could not be determined due to incomplete records. Amoxicillin-clavulanate (n = 104, 68%), clindamycin (n = 12, 8%), cefazolin (n = 11, 7%), cefazolin and metronidazole (n = 8, 5%), and other antibiotics or a combination of antibiotics (n = 8, 5%) were used. Postoperative follow-up in the outpatient clinic was performed in 134 cases (88%). Follow-up was performed in 24 of the cases with A-type fractures (75%), 47 of the cases with B-type fractures (90%) and 39 of the cases with C-type fractures (93%). Average follow-up was 206 days (SD 230).  Six patients experienced a wound infection (4%). Three patients were treated with systemic antibiotics only, 2 patients were treated surgically under local anaesthesia in the outpatient clinic, 1 patient was treated under general anaesthesia as the infection caused a late bleeding in the maxillary sinus. Surgical antibiotic prophylaxis was administered at the primary surgical procedure in 5 of the 6 patients that experienced a wound infection, amoxicillin-clavulanate (n = 3) and clindamycin (n = 2) were used. The infection-rate was higher in patients treated with clindamycin than in patients treated with amoxicillin-clavulanate (p = 0.03). Two 8 mg gifts of dexamethasone were administered perioperatively in 2 of the 6 patients that developed a wound infection. No association existed with an intra-oral surgical approach (p = 0.88) and reduction without fixation did not result in fewer wound infections (p = 0.32). The occurrence of wound infection per fracture category is listed in Secondary surgical procedures of the ZMC, orbital floor, and/or extraocular muscles are listed in C-type fractures were associated with correction of ZMC malreduction by re-ORIF or a zygoma-osteotomy (p = 0.03), secondary orbital floor reconstruction (p < 0.01), and extraocular muscle correction (p = 0.04). Three of the 48 cases treated by reduction without fixation (6%) showed re-dislocation, necessitating ORIF of the ZMC. Re-dislocation did not occur after ORIF. Lower eyelid malposition after primary treatment of the ZMC fracture with a lower eyelid approach occurred in 8 out of 37 cases (22%). In 6 cases (16%) the sequelae were possibly related to the lower eyelid approach. Persisting ectropion occurred in 2 cases (5%), one of which needed secondary correction. Persisting entropion occurred in 2 cases (5%), which were both corrected secondarily. Lateral canthus dystopia occurred in 2 cases (5%), for which in 1 case secondary lateral canthopexy was performed. One patient (3%) developed a superficial wound infection at the site of a transconjunctival incision with lateral canthotomy. This was one of the patients who later developed entropion requiring secondary correction. In 2 cases (5%) the lower eyelid sequelae were likely unrelated to the lower eyelid approach. In 1 of these cases the periorbital soft tissues were severely injured, necessitating secondary reconstruction of the nasolacrimal duct system and lateral tarsorrhaphy. In the other case secondary re-fixation of the medial canthal ligament was performed. In our cohort C-type (comminuted) fractures were associated with more secondary corrections for ZMC malreduction (12%, p = 0.03), more secondary reconstructions of the orbital floor (10%, p < 0.01), and more functional corrections of diplopia by extraocular muscle correction (5%, p = 0.02). C-type fractures also resulted in increased incidence of facial asymmetry (21%), enophthalmos (13%), diplopia (13%), transient facial nerve palsy (5%), persistent facial nerve palsy (3%), and wound infection (7%). However, these associations did not reach statistical significance. The absence of a statistically significant association of C-type fractures with asymmetry, enophthalmos and diplopia in our cohort might be due to insufficient study power, as other authors published similar findings of increased incidence in comminuted fractures (  In our cohort, 3 patients with C-type fractures were treated with reduction without fixation by percutaneous traction hook or a Gillies temporal approach. In 2 of these cases a postoperative CT was obtained, both revealed significant asymmetry of the ZMC. One of these patients needed a zygoma-osteotomy and secondary orbital floor reconstruction. Reduction without fixation is not recommended in C-type fractures. In our cohort 4% of the patients developed a wound infection. This is consistent with incidences of 2–8% reported in the literature (  An association between wound infections and an intraoral surgical approach has been reported ( In our cohort 37 lower eyelid approaches were performed in 153 patients. Malposition of the lower eyelid due to the approach occurred in 6 cases (16%), in 4 of these cases (11%) secondary correction was performed.  Similarly in publications focussing on ZMC fracture repair, It seems likely that severity and mechanism of trauma, degree of soft tissue injury, and type and extensiveness of the underlying fracture strongly influence the risk of developing lower eyelid sequelae ( Regardless of the exact incidence of sequelae of lower eyelid approaches, the abundance of publications on the subject confirms that postoperative lower eyelid malposition is a risk of lower eyelid approaches that needs to be considered. Consequently we feel lower eyelid approaches in ZMC fracture repair should be limited to cases that require orbital floor reconstruction and cases with severe disruption of the infraorbital rim. In our cohort 1 patient (0.7%) suffered from superior orbital fissure syndrome and 3 patients (2%) from traumatic optic nerve neuropathy (TON). Reported incidence of superior orbital fissure syndrome in maxillofacial fractures is 0.3–0.8% ( Remarkably, all patients with TON in our cohort had incomplete ZMC fractures (p = 0.02). A possible explanation is that in incomplete ZMC fractures the orbital compartment is confined due to the intact zygomatic pillars, which allows for an increase in orbital pressure due to haematoma and oedema. Whereas in tetrapod and comminuted fractures a natural and instantaneous decompression of the orbital compartment occurs. In contrast, Treatment outcome, as measured by sequelae upon postoperative follow-up and secondary surgical procedures, in C-type ZMC fractures is less favourable than treatment outcome in A-type and B-type ZMC fractures. It is in C-type (comminuted) ZMC fractures that technologies such as intraoperative (conebeam) computed tomography imaging, surgical navigation devices and 3D-planning software are most likely to improve treatment outcome. None. No grants were received.