Adsorption mechanism of mixed cationic C12 amine and anionic sulphate/oleate collectors was investigated on hematite through Hallimond flotation studies. The flotation response of hematite independently with cationic and anionic collectors and with mixed cationic/anionic collector systems is assessed. Hallimond flotation response of hematite as a function of pH and collector concentration was investigated. The study revealed that hematite flotation recovery is maximum at acidic pH with sulphate, at neutral pH 6–7 with oleate, and at basic pH about 9.5 with C12 amine. It is the first time that the hematite flotation results show an increased adsorption of cationic collector in the presence of anionic collector apart from its own co-adsorption. Flotation results indicate the presence of oleate increased the C12 amine adsorption due to a decrease in the electrostatic head–head repulsion between the adjacent surface ammonium ions and thereby increasing the lateral tail–tail hydrophobic bonds.Hematite is of significant interest due to its variability in chemical and physico-chemical properties, from one sample to another, which modifies, sometimes significantly, its floatability behaviour ( The use of surfactant mixtures can have a synergistic advantage over the use of single surfactant ( According to our knowledge, the adsorption mechanism of hematite flotation with mixed collector systems has not been studied. However, in the reverse cationic flotation of magnetite ore with mixed collectors has been investigated very recently ( Pure hematite mineral was handpicked from Barbil area of Orissa. The chemical analysis of the sample contained 68.6% Fe with 1.01% SiO The cationic collector C The single mineral flotation tests were carried out using Hallimond cell of 100 Although the objective of the study is to delineate the underlying mechanism of mixed cationic/anionic collectors in preferential flotation, the flotation response of the minerals independently with cationic and anionic collectors is first assessed and the present tests are intended to compare the flotation responses of hematite with mixed collector systems. The flotation response of hematite as a function of pH at fixed cationic and anionic collector concentration is shown in Flotation results of hematite as a function of sodium oleate concentration in absence and presence of 5 For the first time, it was shown from flotation results an increased adsorption of cationic collector in the presence of anionic collector. The increase in oleate concentration beyond C The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Department of Science & Technology (DST) under Integrated Long Term Programme (ILTP) with Russian Academy of Sciences (RAS), Russia.