A total of 21 raw, washed and ground Spanish kaolins were studied. Kaolinite, mica, quartz, feldspars and occasionally anatase and analcime were present. Calcined samples in which the kaolinite had been transformed into metakaolinite (650 °C, 3 h), as shown by X-ray diffraction and observed using SEM were also studied. These samples featured particles with openings and a lateral loss of laminar continuity, generated spaces, joined crystal edges and superficial coatings which appeared to be fused to the surface of the aggregates.
                  Whiteness and tint indices (W10, Tw,10), revealed that only nine kaolins could be considered white (limits of CIE Colorimetry, 1986. 2nd ed. CIE Publication No.15.2. Vienna: Central Bureau of the CIE), though upon calcination, this number is reduced to three. Calcinating also produced coloring and reddening of the samples. The CIELAB color parameters significantly correlated with compositional properties such as mineralogy, the chemical analysis of elements, the free oxide contents (Al2O3, SiO2, Fe2O3) extracted with ammonium oxalate and with citrate–dithionite–carbonate, and trace elements. In the non-calcined kaolins: Cab* is positively related to SiO2 and negatively to the percentage of kaolinite; L* is negatively related to K2O; hab is negatively related to K2O and MgO; and W10 is positively related to the percentage of kaolinite and negatively to the percentages of mica, K2O, MgO, MnO and free Fe2O3. The calcined samples showed correlations of hab and L* (positive) and of Cab* (negative) with the proportions of both elemental Al and the Al extracted as free oxides. There are nonsignificant differences between the L* of calcined and non-calcined kaolin samples, meaning that both samples fulfill the requirements of high lightness for use in the paper industry.A material is considered to constitute kaolin when the amount of kaolinite in a rock is greater than 50% ( When kaolinite is calcined ( Color is an easily perceived physical characteristic of materials, and wields great importance for manufacturers, particularly in the pharmaceutical sector ( The main objective of this work is to study the influence of the mineralogical and chemical composition on the color parameters of different Spanish kaolins and their corresponding calcined samples. In order to relate morphological changes to color, some aspects of the metakaolinization process are investigated using SEM. We studied 21 kaolin samples from seven deposits in Spain, provided by different mining companies ( This was carried out using X-ray diffraction with a Rigaku Miniflex Ca 2005 and Phillips PW 1730, equipped with a Ni filter and Cu Kα radiation source. The crystalline powder method was used with side-filled sample holders to avoid preferential orientation of the particles. Quantitative interpretation was based on the intensity factor method on random powder diagrams ( The elements were determined by X-ray fluorescence with a Philips PW1404/10 spectrometer equipped with a rhodium anode tube and a 3-kW generator. The trace elements were determined with a Perkin Elmer Sciex-Elan 5000 mass spectrometer with a plasma torch ionization source and a quadruple ion filter. The elements obtained from extraction solutions of ammonium oxalate ( The morphology of the samples, powdered on adhesive paper and previously metallized with gold in two different orientations ( The color measurements of the previously dried kaolins (110 °C for 24 h) and the samples after calcination (650 °C for 3 h) were carried out with a SpectraScanPR-704 spectroradiometer placed in front of a VeriVide portable cabin with D65 light source. From these measurements, we calculated the corresponding color parameters in CIELAB and the indices of whiteness and tint (W The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used to ensure that the data satisfied the condition of normality. To investigate the influence of the extraction procedure (citrate or oxalate) and calcination on the composition of the free oxides (Fe, Al and Si), two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used: the dependent variable was either Fe, Al or Si, successively; and the factors were calcination (vs. uncalcinated kaolin) and the extraction procedure (citrate vs. oxalate). At the same time, the possible interaction between the two factors was explored. To determine whether the calcination had a significant effect on the color parameters, paired Student's In 18 of the 21 kaolins studied ( In the samples calcined at 650 °C, an intense and characteristic band of amorphous materials between 17° and 27° 2 As seen in Highly significant regression equations ( The percentage of free oxides extracted with oxalate (ox) and citrate–dithionite–bicarbonate (cdb) is shown in Consistently significant differences were found between the quantities of oxides extracted with oxalate and citrate, and between the uncalcined kaolins and the calcined samples (ANOVA,  CIELAB color parameters ( With SEM, the powdered kaolins appear to be composed mainly of roughly spherical particle aggregates with an internal fabric tending towards concentric that is possibly acquired during grinding ( The ungrouped or only slightly grouped particles in kaolins have an average size of approximately 5 μm—within the range 0.4–61 μm—although the size distribution ( The calcination process increased the size of the aggregates, which had a mean size of 116 μm ( A detailed observation of the calcined samples is difficult because the destruction of the kaolinite and its amorphization entail a certain loss of ultramicrorelief and the generation of more static electricity, leading to a poorer SEM image. Nevertheless, it was clear to see that the metakaolinite aggregates had been discontinuously coated by material that appeared to be “melted” onto them ( The most significant correlations with color parameters ( The correlations between the color parameters and the elemental chemical composition of the kaolins ( No highly significant correlations ( The correlations among the calcined samples ( The multiple regression equations between the color parameters and the trace elements ( The study of 21 Spanish rough, washed and ground kaolins leads us to conclude that kaolinite is the most abundant mineral phase of the kaolins, together with dioctahedral mica, quartz, feldspars, and sometimes, anatase and analcime. This mixture of minerals diverts the ideal chemical composition towards higher SiO Calcination of the samples (650 °C, 3 h) led to the disappearance of the kaolinite reflections (band of amorphous material between 17° and 27° 2 The quantitative measurement of the relationship between compositional properties and color parameters, the main objective of this study, is demonstrated using simple and multiple linear regression equations. The greater content of kaolinite, a white mineral, is vital for explaining the whiteness of the kaolins (W As a result of calcination, the kaolin reddens (<h This study was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Technology, project no. BT España 2000–1152. We thank Professor E. Murad and an anonymous referee for their critical comments on the manuscript and valuable suggestions.