Introduction
                  Wnt/β-catenin (cWnt) signaling plays a key role in osteogenesis by promoting the differentiation and mineralization of osteoblasts, activities altered in human osteoarthritic subchondral osteoblast (OA Ob). Sclerostin (SOST) has been shown to alter cWnt signaling. Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) acts as a novel bone regulator and represses SOST levels in Ob. However the role of SIRT1 and SOST in OA Ob remains unknown. Herein, we explored the role played by SIRT1 and SOST on the abnormal mineralization and cWnt signaling in OA Ob.
               
                  Methods
                  Primary human normal and OA Ob were prepared from tibial plateaus. SOST levels were evaluated by immunohistochemistry, the expression and production of genes by qRT-PCR and WB analysis. Their inhibitions were performed using siRNA. cWnt signaling was measured by the TOPflash TCF/lef luciferase reporter assay. Mineralization was determined by alizarin red staining.
               
                  Results
                  SOST levels were significantly increased in OA Ob compared to normal and were linked with elevated TGF-β1 levels in these cells. SIRT1 expression was significantly reduced in OA Ob compared to normal yet not modified by TGF-β1. Specific inhibition of SIRT1 increased TGF-β1 and SOST expressions in OA Ob, while stimulating SIRT1 activity with β-Nicotinamide mononucleotide reduced the expression of TGF-β1 and SOST, and increased mineralization in OA Ob. Resveratrol also reduced SOST expression in OA Ob. Reduced cWnt signaling, β-catenin levels, and mineralization in OA Ob were all corrected via reducing SOST expression.
               
                  Conclusion
                  These data indicate that high level of SOST is responsible, in part, for the reduced cWnt and mineralization of human OA Ob, which in turn is linked with abnormal SIRT1 levels in these pathological cells.Clinical and in vitro studies suggest that human subchondral bone sclerosis and altered bone remodeling, due to abnormal osteoblasts (Ob), are involved in the progression and/or onset of osteoarthritis (OA) Sclerostin is a cysteine-knot protein of the DAN family Recent reports indicated alterations of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in OA tissues. Targeted overexpression or a decrease of β-catenin expression in chondrocytes both lead to alterations of articular cartilage similar to those observed in OA The pathophysiology of OA is believed to be linked with abnormal biomechanical alterations of bone tissue. Such alterations would compromise the overlying articular cartilage in joints leading to cartilage fibrillation, fissures and loss. Inasmuch as biomechanical alterations are observed in OA and contribute to its pathophysiology, and Wnt/β-catenin signaling is altered in OA bone tissue, SOST could then be playing a role in OA initiation and/or progression since it affects both pathways. Sirtuins are widely distributed class III histone deacetylases. Sirtuins are involved in a number of processes ranging from cell cycle regulation, apoptosis/proliferation, metabolism, cellular senescence/aging, and inflammation. There are presently seven mammalian sirtuins family members, SIRT1 to SIRT7 Tibial plateaus were obtained from OA patients undergoing knee replacement surgery and prepared as previously described Isolation of subchondral bone plate and the cell cultures were prepared as previously described ALPase activity was determined by substrate hydrolysis using p-nitrophenylphosphate, and osteocalcin in cell supernatants using an EIA as previously described Conditioned medium (CM) was prepared from Murine L cell lines transfected with either an empty vector (Parental) or with Wnt3a (Wnt3a) obtained from the American Culture Type Collection (Cedarlane Laboratories, Ontario) as described Confluent cells were incubated in BGJb media containing 10% fetal bovin serum (FBS), 50 TGF-β1, SOST and SIRT1 expressions were inhibited in OA Ob by specifics siRNA (si) as previously described Cell extracts were prepared for WB as previously described RT reactions were primed with random hexamers with 1 Normal and OA Ob were plated in 24-well plates at a density of 1.5 Full thickness specimens from the tibial plateaus were processed for immunohistochemical analysis as described Quantitative data are expressed as mean As we previously reported Sclerostin immunohistochemistry showed an increased cell staining in OA bone tissue compared to normal ( As we previously reported the elevated TGF-β1 levels in OA Ob Since SOST is an antagonist of Wnt/β-catenin signaling, and because SOST expression and production is elevated in OA Ob, we next looked at the effect of inhibiting SOST expression on the Wnt/β-catenin signaling. Firstly, data showed that Wnt3a stimulates TOPflash/Renilla activity by about 9 to 10-folds in normal Ob whereas it was only stimulated 4 to 5-folds in OA Ob ( We previously showed that the mineralization of OA Ob is reduced compared to normal Ob There is no information on the potential regulation of SOST in OA Ob. However, sirtuin 1 (SIRT1) represses SOST expression in bone Wnt signaling is crucial for normal skeletal tissue homeostasis and function. Subchondral bone tissue is abnormal in OA patients The present study further demonstrates that abnormal regulation of SOST expression and release by OA Ob is playing a role on the terminal differentiation of these cells namely their osteocalcin expression and Ob mineralization. First, we observed an interesting linear relationship between SOST and osteocalcin expression in OA bone tissue extracts, indicating a potential link between the two genes. We further determined that the presence of recombinant SOST is driving the in vitro expression of osteocalcin in OA Ob. Second, SOST expression and release are increased in OA Ob compared to normal Ob, and this increased expression is due, in part, to elevated TGF-β1 expression by these cells since TGF-β1 inhibition in OA Ob reduced SOST expression, and to an abnormal activity of Sirt1 in OA Ob. The role of TGF-β1 here is similar to our observation for DKK2 in OA Ob As SOST inhibits bone formation In the present study, we observed that SOST inhibited Wnt/β-catenin signaling in OA Ob. Indeed, interfering with SOST expression by siRNA increased the Wnt3a-dependent Wnt/β-catenin activity of these cells which almost normalized Wnt/β-catenin signaling in these cells. Moreover, the inhibitory role of SOST on β-catenin signaling was observed both at the transcriptional level using the dual TOPflash/Renilla reporter assay and at the protein level using Western blot analysis of β-catenin levels. In animal studies, a high fat diet reduces SIRT1 expression and levels Although the present data indicated a role for TGF-β1 on SOST expression and the potential role of Sirt1 on TGF-β1 expression, we also clearly demonstrated that SIRT1 can directly control SOST expression. Indeed, SIRT1 has been shown to promote osteoblast differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells The present study demonstrated that abnormal SIRT1 and TGF-β1 may be responsible for the increased SOST expression of OA Ob which contributes to reduce Wnt/β-catenin signaling and mineralization in these cells.  canonical Wnt/β-catenin signaling osteoarthritis osteoblasts sclerostin sirtuin 1 quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction silencing RNA TCF/Lef luciferase assay transforming growth factor β-1 alkaline phosphatase activity osteocalcin low density lipoprotein receptor-related proteins-5/6 bone morphogenetic protein Dickkopft-2 active form of vitamin D β-Nicotinamide mononucleotide matrix metalloproteinases dental matrix protein 1 The authors declare they have no competing interests. EA, DC and AD performed the experiments, participated in the statistical analysis and the interpretation of data, and drafted the manuscript. JMP and JPP participated in the immunohistochemical experiments, interpretation of data, and reviewed the manuscript. ND provided the human OA knee, participated in the interpretation of data, and reviewed the manuscript. DL participated in the design of the study, performed the statistical analysis and the interpretation of data, and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. EA is a post-doctoral fellow from the Fonds de la Recherche du Québec en Santé. We thank Frédéric Paré for his expert assistance with the immunohistochemical experiments. This study was supported by grant