Aqueous solubility of a drug substance is an important attribute affecting oral bioavailability. Nanonization, particle size reduction to submicron level, is an elegant approach to improve drug solubility and dissolution by increasing the surface energy, which in turn necessitates the use of stabilizers. The purpose of this study was to develop a nanosuspension of a practically water-insoluble investigational molecule by nanomilling approach using wet media milling. A variety of polymeric and surface active excipients were tested for their wettability. A combination of hydroxypropyl methylcellulose and sodium lauryl sulfate (SLS) were selected as stabilizers on the bases of compatibility studies and efficient wettability behaviour in contact angle measurements (≈80˚). A factorial design set-up was used to study the effect of milling bead diameter and stabilizer concentration on the efficiency of particle size reduction. Nanonization outcome was different when milling beads of 0.5 mm and 1 mm diameter were used at different concentrations of the stabilizers, which demonstrated the complex nature of the whole system. Storage of the nanosuspensions under different temperature conditions resulted only in minor changes of the particle size fractions.Development of nanosized pure drug crystals (nanonization) is one of the approaches to improve dissolution behaviour of poorly water-soluble drugs and it has made the fastest breakthrough from development to an industrial scale ( It is well established that nanosuspensions are associated with physical instability ( Nanosuspensions can be produced via reduction of particle size (top-down techniques) or via precipitation of dissolved molecules into solid particles (bottom-up techniques) ( As stated above, there is an interplay between many variables which affect particle size and stability of nanosuspensions, and the importance of each of them is challenging to evaluate. In previous studies, attempts have been made to estimate the influence of different parameters on the formation of nanosuspensions using different approaches (e.g. Design of Experiment, dynamic equilibrium curve etc.) ( The primary aim of our study was to gain an insight into how two different bead sizes in the wet-ball milling process affect particle sizes when different viscosity affecting stabilizer concentrations are used; particularly of interest was how smaller beads perform in highly viscous media compared to larger beads. Our secondary aim was to investigate the stability of prepared nanosuspensions in different storage conditions. Nanosuspensions were prepared by wet-ball milling using two different bead sizes; 0.5 mm and 1.0 mm. For both the bead sizes, several combinations of different concentrations of HPMC and SLS were used utilizing factorial design as the study plan. Amount of HPMC is affecting to the viscosity of the system, which reflects to the milling efficiency. Particle size and polydispersity index (PDI) were compared between the bead sizes as well as among the different stabilizer concentrations. Stability of nanosuspensions was assessed in three different storage conditions during the time period of three weeks. ODM-106, IUPAC name 3-(4-bromobenzyl)-7-fluoro-1-methylquinazoline-2,4(1H,3H)-dione (Orion, Espoo, Finland), an investigational poorly water soluble active pharmaceutical ingredient (API), was used as a model drug for wet-ball milling. HPMC (Pharmacoat 603) from Shin-Etsu Chemical (Tokyo, Japan) and SLS (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany) were used as the stabilizers. SLS was used as an electrostatic stabilizer and HPMC was used as a steric polymeric stabilizer. PVP and vitamin E TPGS were procured from Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA. Methanol (HPLC grade, VWR International, Pennsylvania, USA), monobasic potassium phosphate (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), sodium hydroxide (Sigma, St. Louis, MO, USA), hydrochloric acid (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany), and Polysorbate 80 (Tween® 80, Fluka Chemika, Buch, Switzerland) were used for the characterization of nanosuspensions. In all the experiments ultrapurified Millipore® water (Millipore, Molsheim, France) was used. The dynamic contact angle of the ODM-106 with water and with aqueous solutions of the surface active excipients (0.1% w/v) and suspending agents (1% w/v) was determined using DCAT 11 (DataPhysics Instruments GmbH, Filderstadt, Germany). The ODM-106 micronized drug was attached to the rectangular microscopic slide partially covered with standard double-sided adhesive tape. The velocity of plate’s feed was 200 µm/s, the immersion depth was 10 mm. The measurements were run in triplicate. Nanosuspensions were prepared by the wet-ball milling technique. A custom central composite design was utilized to statistically investigate the interaction between three independent variables: (1) HPMC concentration (5 level numeric factor), (2) SLS concentration (3 level numeric factor), and (3) milling beads diameter (2 level category factor), on two dependent variables: drug particle size (nm) and PDI. Design matrices were comprised of 26 runs. Stabilizer solutions were made by dissolving HPMC (0.625 – 5.0% w/w) and SLS (0.0625 – 0.1875% w/w) in water. The API (1.25 g), aqueous stabilizer solution (5 g) with different proportions of HPMC and SLS, and zirconium oxide milling beads (30 g, diameter 0.5 mm or 1.0 mm) were placed into the milling vessel (vessel volume 20 ml) and dispersed. With the addition of API, final concentrations of HPMC were 0.5, 1, 2, 3 and 4% w/w (level: −1.5, −1, 0, +1, +2, respectively) and final SLS concentrations were 0.05, 0.1 and 0.2% w/w (level: −1, 0, +1, respectively) ( The mean particle sizes and polydispersity indexes (PDIs) of the nanosuspensions were analyzed by photon correlation spectroscopy (PCS) with Malvern Zetasizer 3000HS (Malvern Instrument, Malvern, UK). PDI means the width of the particle size distribution. The lower the PDI value, the more monodisperse in size the particles are. If the PDI is higher than 0.7, the particles in suspensions are polydisperse. A part of the fresh nanosuspension was diluted with saturated solution containing ca. 0.1% w/w of HPMC, in order to achieve a suitable concentration for the measurements by PCS. The nanosuspensions were sonicated for 4 min before the size measurements. The analyses were performed with a dispersant refractive index of 1.33. The measurements were performed 3 times for each sample. The selected suspensions were pipetted on formvar film-coated copper grids with mesh size of 300 (Agar Scientific, Essex, UK) and dried at ambient temperature. The morphological evaluation of the particles was done using TEM (Jeol JEM-1400, Jeol Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). To determine the polymorphic transformation(s) during wet milling, if any, differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and X-ray powder diffraction (XRPD) analyses were performed. Nanosuspension containing 0.1% of SLS and 2% of HPMC, centre point of all the studied stabilizer concentrations, was chosen for this evaluation and compared with the unmilled form of ODM-106. Thermal properties of room temperature dried samples were analyzed with a DSC 823e (Mettler Toledo Inc., Columbus, USA). The samples were placed in sealed aluminium pans perforated in the lid. The temperature range for the measurements was from 0 to 200 ˚C with the heating rate of 10 ˚C/min. The measurements were performed under nitrogen flow of 50 ml/min. Pure bulk drug, HPMC, and physical mixtures of the drugs and the stabilizers (in the same weight ratio as nanocrystals) were tested as controls. The data were analyzed with STARe software (Mettler Toledo, Columbus, USA). XRPD patterns were determined from dried nanomilled samples, pure drugs and physical mixtures of drugs and stabilizers by an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker AXS D8, Karlsruhe, Germany). The XRPD was performed in symmetrical reflection mode using Cu-Kα radiation with λ = 1.54 Å (40 kV and 40 mA). The sample was placed on a flat aluminium sample holder. Data were collected by scanning from 5˚ to 50˚ with 0.01˚ steps. Nanosuspensions were envisioned to be dried for final formulation development within a two weeks period. However, the physical stability of nanosuspensions was tested for a longer period of time, up to three weeks, by monitoring particle size distribution to better understand the stabilization efficiency at different SLS concentrations (HPMC concentration was fixed at 2%) under several temperature settings: refrigerated condition (4 ± 2 °C), ambient room temperature (25 °C), and 40 ± 2 °C. Samples were taken at the interval of 1 week and were diluted as per instructions for particle size distribution analysis after 30 s of vortex shaking of nanosuspension vials, followed by 1 min of sonication, and once more 30 s of additional vortexing. Interactions between stabilizers’ concentration and milling beads diameters and their effects on particle sizes, were statistically studied using design of experiment approach (Design-Expert ver. 11, Stat-Ease, Inc.). ANOVA test was performed to get information on significant parameters. The level of significance was fixed at p = 0.05. One stabilizer can be enough for stabilizing drug nanocrystals ( Milling time at constant milling speed is a direct measurement of energy input to the system ( The required milling time for ODM-106 was determined by dispersing bulk ODM-106 (1.25 g) in 5 ml of aqueous stabilizer solution containing HPMC (125 mg; 10% relative to the drug amount) and SLS (6.25 mg; 0.5% relative to the drug amount) ( Particle size reduction with an increase in milling time can be attributed to the increase in the energy and shear forces produced due to impact between the grinding balls and the drug that provides high energy to break the microparticles to nanosized particles ( Particle size and PDI of nanosuspensions at different stabilizer concentrations and milling beads are presented in It is well established that increasing amount of steric stabilizer, such as HPMC, results in more efficient particle size reduction ( Stabilization due to electrostatic stabilizers alone is sensitive to pH, ionic strength, In this study, we noticed that optimum proportions of HPMC and SLS were needed for maximum particle size reduction. As can be seen from As the particles are becoming smaller during milling, their surface area as well as number concentration is increasing, leading to an increase in collision frequency and decrease in inter-particle distances ( In comparison to 1 mm beads, 0.5 mm beads have a higher surface area and thus higher probability of contact with the API and thereby reducing particle size by impaction forces. However, smaller beads are more sensitive to viscosity changes since smaller and lighter beads do not have enough kinetic energy to break the particles in more viscous media ( When HPMC concentration was increased to 4%, it was observed that the obtained suspension was very viscous (6 mPa s, 20 ˚C in aqueous solution), and after some days of storage at room temperature, it solidified in both 1.0 mm and 0.5 mm batches. Interestingly, lowering the HPMC concentration also resulted in the formation of very unstable suspensions, which had a strange morphology even right after the milling process, as depicted in Furthermore, HPMC is a polymer with lower critical solution temperature (LCST) between 75 and 90 ˚C and, therefore, with increasing temperature it forms reversible gels via hydrophobic interactions occurring between the hydrophobic sections of the polymer chains ( The addition of SLS as an electrostatic stabilizer in combination with HPMC is well known to be beneficial for the stabilization effect ( The SEM image of micronized API is presented in The DSC thermograms are shown in The X-ray diffractograms are shown in For testing the stability of the prepared nanosuspensions, three different formulations in triplicates were made with both beads sizes. Given that at 2% HPMC concentration both the milling beads sizes demonstrated efficient milling, the concentration of HPMC was fixed at 2% and three different SLS concentrations were selected (0.05, 0.1 and 0.2%). All chosen formulations were stored in three different conditions: ambient temperature (25 °C), 4 °C and 40 °C. Stability was assessed via particle size and PDI value measurements, where particle size increase and/or increase in PDI was interpreted as an indicator of physical instability ( The stability study results of formulation prepared with 2% of HPMC and 0.1% of SLS using 0.5 mm beads revealed that there was a significant increase in particle size after 7 days of storage at all temperature conditions, and after that no further significant changes in particle sizes were noticed ( Given the fact that least fluctuations in the size and PDI were noticed from samples stored in refrigerated conditions, the effect of SLS concentration on 3 weeks stability was studied only from those samples (4 ± 2 °C). In When the applied concentration of SLS was 0.2%, slight increase in the particle size was noticed with both the bead sizes. That could be due to the fact that the critical micelle concentration (CMC) might have been exceeded in this case. This could have a significant deleterious effect on physical stability of the suspension, since the presence of charged micelles could facilitate particle aggregation in the suspension (  The present study aimed at investigating the impact of using different milling beads sizes in the wet-ball milling process on drug particle size when different stabilizer concentrations were used. It has been concluded that the effect of bead size on particle size is complex and highly dependent on the properties of the whole system, particularly the concentration of both the used stabilizers, i.e. HPMC as well as SLS. Although it has been observed that smaller bead size generally leads to smaller particle sizes, as expected from the literature, the complexity of the whole system needs to be considered. Especially the concentration of HPMC seemed to be of particular importance here, since it greatly affected the suspension viscosity. Firstly, it has been seen that higher HPMC concentration and, thereby, more viscous suspension resulted in a smaller difference between the 0.5 mm and 1 mm milling beads under a given SLS concentration. Secondly, lowering HPMC concentration has been shown to have a significant effect not only on particle size, but also on the consistency of the suspensions, most probably due to the associated temperature changes during the process. Also in this case, the behaviour of suspensions differed between the two bead sizes. The suspensions tested on three-week stability at different storage conditions generally showed satisfactory physical stability, regardless of the storage temperature.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. M.S. is grateful to the Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: