Surface deposition of paste or thickened tailings is increasing contemplated as an alternative to conventional slurry deposition. One important challenge in managing paste is to predict the evolving geometry of the tailings stack during deposition. This study dynamically images multilayer deposition of paste in flows in flume and axisymmetric flows. Each layer is left to self-weight consolidate for a day before the next layer is placed. It is found that both the steady-state profiles and the dynamic flows can be modelled as a Bingham fluid using equations developed from lubrication theory. Yield stress and viscosity were determined using rheometry and slump tests. It is shown that the yield stress obtained from the slump test may overestimate the yield stress of significance to flow deposition; namely that yield stress that characterizes when the tailings stop flowing. The lubrication theory equations show that the overall angle of a tailings deposit at steady-state is dependant on the scale of the flow, which may explain the discrepancy between laboratory flume angles and field angles noted in practice.Disposal of thickened or paste tailings is an attractive option for surface disposal, as it eliminates or reduces some of the risks associated with conventional tailings disposal, most notably obviating the need for dams and eliminating the risk of catastrophic failure associated with conventional impoundments ( While the behaviour of thickened or paste tailings in the pipeline have been studied to a significant degree ( Equations for the equilibrium profiles of yield stress fluids may be derived using “Lubrication Theory”, in which the continuity and momentum equations for fluids are simplified by assuming the slow spreading of a thin layer or film. The simplifying assumptions are The ratio of thickness to horizontal extent of the flow are small. The velocity of the material is slow, such that terms that include the ratio of inertial to viscous forces will vanish from the momentum equation. In other words, the Reynold’s number is small, and hence the flow in laminar. These simplified momentum and continuity equations have been solved analytically for yield stress fluids under special geometries and special conditions by several researchers, for applications such as mud or lava flow ( For example, after the above assumptions are applied, if one considers flow along an inclined plane, the momentum equation in the direction of flow would reduce to ( In the same vein as the derivation of Eq. A depth-integrated transient solution to the Navier–Stokes equation based on lubrication theory may be similarly derived ( It is possible to use Eqn. The rheological parameters of thickened or paste tailings are influenced by a range of properties that include particle size, solids concentration, zeta potential, and temperature ( The goal of this paper was to test out the applicability of lubrication theory. Consequently, care was taken to ensure that the properties (temperature, pore-water chemistry) potentially affecting the rheological parameters did not vary during the testing period. This included shearing the tailings using a mechanical stirrer prior to the experimental tests, and ensuring minimal oxidation occurs by covering the tailings with water between tests. The gold tailings used in these experiments are from the Bulyanhulu mine in Tanzania. The particle size distribution is attached in These tailings were shipped from the Bulyanhulu Mine late in 2006, and have slightly different properties than reported in other studies ( For all tests, the pH of the tailings and the temperature was monitored. The pH ranged between 6 and 7 while the temperature ranged from 21 to 24 The rheology of the tailings was characterized at water contents ranging from 30% to 60% gravimetric, using both slump test and by obtaining flow curves using a Brookfield Model RS-Plus rheometer with a plate on plate geometry. Slump tests have been advocated as a good index test to obtain the yield stress from thickened tailing ( Flume tests have been extensively used to study the depositional behaviour of dewatered mine tailings ( Initial tests were performed to examine the effect of width of the flume and lubrication of the walls. A hydrophobic grease was used as a lubricant, and the walls were narrowed from 15 to 10 A few “pour” tests were done, using the funnel, where the material was deposited on a flat plane, and would spread radially away from the deposition point to form axisymmetric deposits. All the tests were performed on the sample in the “as-received” stated (no deflocculant was added) and at room temperature (20–24 The yield stress determined from the slump tests are shown in An example of a flow curve obtained using the rheometer is shown in The yield stress obtained by considering only points with a shear rate lower than 100, considering all the data minus the initial 10% of the low shear rate data, and from the slump test are plotted in The viscosity of the tailings, determined by the slope of the interpolated Bingham model to the flow curves, is given in In general, it was found that equilibrium profiles were highly repeatable for a given volume of flow and given water content – the difference in elevation at any specific run-out distance was certainly less than 1 It was found there was a significant difference between the shape of the flows between the two methods of deposition. The method using the gate resulted in thinner and longer steady-state profiles, especially when a larger volume of flow was used, as shown in   Multilayer deposition results are presented in An example of the flow visualization in the flume is shown in It can be seen that while there is reasonable agreement at the early times, the simulated flow arrives at the equilibrium profile faster than the recorded flow. We suspected that this may be due to our assumption of constant viscosity. Nevertheless, the results are surprisingly accurate given the crude boundary condition. Two examples of predictions for multilayer flow are presented in The best fit yield stresses for Eqs. We present fits of Eq. There are important differences between our experiments and how tailings are deposited in the field that are not studied in this paper, principally the effect of the deposition rate on final geometry. We believe, however, that theory demonstrated in the paper may be applicable to the field, as we believe that spreading flow distant from the deposition point will obey the assumptions of lubrication theory, namely slow velocity and thin layer flow. The Bulyanhulu mine in Tanzania is the first to employ full-scale surface deposition. Deposition is cycled between a number of towers to facilitate desiccation. During early deposition, where the separate deposits centered around the different towers were not yet interfering with each other, the deposits had fairly regular geometry, though asymmetric due to a slight East-West slope of the base topography. It is possible that certain phenomena may occur in the field that could influence the rheological parameters during deposition. For example, decrease in temperature as the material comes out of the pipe and moves away from the deposition point. Also, if the older layer is quite dry, a decrease in the water content of the new layer may occur during deposition sufficient to significantly alter the yield stress.  It should be noted that this study was performed a single gold tailings from a specific mine, employing a specific mineral processing system. Other gold paste tailings may possibly exhibit quite different rheological behaviour, and have significantly different flow curves. The next stage of this work is to examine larger geometries of flow with varied rates of deposition. We hope to develop a 3-D version of the static and dynamic simulation techniques that have been presented, against large flume tests (∼10 Static profiles and dynamic flows of multilayer deposition of paste tailings are simulated in the laboratory, and compared to analytical and numerical predictions developed from lubrication theory of non-Newtonian flow. The results compare well and the theory shows promise for upscaling to the field. The theory shows that a single angle cannot be used to characterize the geometry of freshly deposited flow, and that the overall angle is scale dependant. This at least partially explains the discrepancy noticed between laboratory flume tests and field scale thickened tailings flows. It is observed that the best fit yield stresses agree with rheometry results when a Bingham model is fit to data on a flow curve measured at low shear rates. This is a problem since these points are often discarded due to large measurement errors that occur at lower shear stresses. However, an alternative method to obtain the yield stress pertinent to deposition modelling is to fit flume tests using the theory outlined in the paper. This research was primarily funded by the Ontario Centre of Excellence and Golder Associates. Barrick Gold provided the tailings, and the field profile from Bulyanhulu was obtained by undergraduate student Akber Pabani, who was employed by Barrick as a summer student, under the supervision of Bulyanhulu personnel. Golder Paste Tec provided technical support. We thank Professor John Goldak for an initial review of this paper.