Hypothesis
                  The terrible triad is a debilitating injury that involves elbow dislocation with injury to the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex, the radial head, and the coronoid process. This study investigated the role of these components in varus stability of the elbow.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  We investigated the role of these components in varus stability of the elbow using 10 cadaveric fresh frozen upper extremities. The testing order allowed each of four states to be tested (intact, LCL complex deficient or repaired, radial head resected or replaced) at two flexion angles and multiple coronoid resection levels. Values for restraining load (newtons [N]) at 1.5 cm of varus displacement were obtained on a materials testing machine.
               
                  Results
                  Beyond a 50% loss of the coronoid process, neither repair of the LCL nor replacing the radial head alone resulted in a statistically significant increase in varus stability. For a loss of the coronoid process between 67-75%, repair of the LCL and replacement of the radial head showed improved stability over repair alone, or radial head replacement alone. For loss of the coronoid beyond 75%, even repair of the LCL and replacement of the radial head did not improve varus stability of the elbow.
               
                  Conclusion
                  These findings provide a biomechanical basis for aggressive treatment of coronoid fractures as a component of the terrible triad injury.
               
                  Levels of evidence
                  Basic science study.The terrible triad is an uncommon but debilitating injury that involves an elbow dislocation with injury to the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex, the radial head, and the coronoid process. The short-term and long-term results are historically poor, with a high rate of complications, including stiffness, instability, pain, and heterotopic ossification. Several studies have investigated the outcome of this injury. In 2002 Ring et al The importance of each component in stabilizing the elbow complex is still emerging. The role of the coronoid process in the osteoarticular stability of the elbow has been investigated. In 1989 Regan and Morey In addition to the bony contributions, the ligaments are important in elbow stability, particularly the LCL complex, which consists of the lateral ulnar collateral ligament, radial ulnar collateral ligament, and annular ligament. For varus stability, O'Driscoll et al The study used 10 upper extremities without obvious abnormalities from deceased donors who were a mean age of 58 years (range, 48-72 years). Extremities were stored with full musculature and skin at –6.7°C and allowed to thaw overnight at room temperature before testing. The limbs were disarticulated at the radiocarpal joint so that the triangular fibrocartilage complex and interosseous membrane were preserved. The biceps, brachialis, and triceps tendons were isolated to allow attachment of muscle tendon loads. The humerus was transected at the midshaft, approximately 12 cm proximal to the tip of the medial epicondyle, and fixed in a 1.5-in-diameter polyvinyl chloride (PVC) pipe filled with polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA). One anterior 0.25-in bolt was placed into the PVC/PMMA construct 4 cm from its distal end. The anterior bolt was inserted to a depth that positioned 2 predrilled guide holes in the bolt, 2 and 4 cm anterior to the central long axis of the humerus, for guiding the line of action of the biceps and brachialis muscles. A posterior hole was drilled directly into the PVC/PMMA, 2 cm posterior to the central long axis of the humerus, to guide the line of action of the triceps muscle. Coronoid resections were made through a medial approach, using a cutting jig as described previously. The LCL was cut at its origin on the humerus, where it is most often avulsed in this injury state. For the repair, braided microfiber suture was placed in the ligament in running locked fashion; the suture was then passed through a drill hole at the origin of the ligament at the isometric point centered on the lateral aspect of the capitellum. The suture was threaded through the tunnel and an eyelet on the medial aspect of the distal humerus ( For repair of the radial head, an ExploR The prepared specimen was mounted in a custom positioning apparatus with the humeral shaft horizontal and the medial epicondyle oriented vertically ( This study did not undergo Institutional Review Board approval. With the specimen in 30° of flexion, tendon loads were applied (40 N to the triceps and 20 N to each of the biceps and brachialis tendons), Each specimen was first tested in combinations of intact, cut, and repaired LCL, and intact, resected, and replaced radial head, while the coronoid process was left intact. This allowed comparison of the repaired LCL with the native LCL, the replaced radial head with the native radial head, and in reverse order for the matched pair specimen. These tests allowed each specimen to serve as its own control. Subsequent tests involved combinations of four repair states: LCL deficient/radial head resected (LxRx), LCL deficient/radial head repaired (LxRr), LCL repaired/radial head resected (LrRx), and LCL repaired/radial head repaired (LrRr) at each of 7 coronoid process resection levels, which were intact and cut by 25%, 40%, 50%, 67%, 75%, and 100%. The test sequence allowed alternating tests of the LCL repaired/unrepaired, which pilot testing had shown would allow recovery of the LCL repair. Tests were performed at 30° and 90° of elbow flexion, and load was collected continuously during each test while 5 cycles of loading to 1.5 cm of varus displacement were applied. This level of varus displacement was chosen based on a previous study The loads used for data analysis included the loads at the beginning of the fifth cycle (load at 0 cm) and at 1.5 cm of varus displacement (peak displacement). Statistical analysis was performed using an incomplete block design analysis of variance to investigate the effect of specimen condition (radial head status, LCL status, coronoid resection level) on measured loads for a given flexion angle. If a significant effect was achieved ( For the load at the beginning of the fifth cycle (starting position), at 30° flexion, the LCL repair state was not different from the intact (native) LCL within any given radial head state (intact, excised, or repaired; The change in load from the start of the fifth cycle to 1.5 cm of excursion (delta load) at 30° flexion was measured. The native state (intact LCL, radial head, and coronoid) resisted varus displacement with a load of 24.8 ± 13.8 N. With a deficient LCL and resected radial head (LxRx), the varus-resisting load significantly decreased from the native state ( For the unrepaired state (LxRx), the 100% cut was the only level that significantly differed from the intact coronoid ( Radial head repair alone (LxRr) did not increase varus resistance compared with the unrepaired state (LxRx) for any coronoid resection level ( Varus resistance was similar at 90° of flexion. For the load at the beginning of the fifth cycle (starting position), a replaced radial head no longer significantly pushed the elbow into varus compared with the intact (native) radial head ( At 90° flexion, the change in load from the start of the fifth cycle to 1.5 cm of excursion (delta load) was also measured. The native state (intact LCL, radial head, and coronoid) resisted varus displacement with a load of 32.9 ± 15.2 N. With a deficient LCL and resected radial head (LxRx), the varus-resisting load continued to be significantly decreased from the native state ( The unrepaired state (LxRx) now significantly differed from the intact coronoid state at 75% ( Radial head repair alone (LxRr) still did not increase varus resistance compared with the unrepaired state (LxRx) for any coronoid resection level ( Elbow stability is achieved by interaction between osteoarticular and the soft tissue components, of which there are both static and dynamic constraints. The joint is said to provide 55% of varus stability in extension and 75% at 90° of flexion. One limitation of our study was the inability to address posterolateral rotatory instability because the study was designed specifically for pure varus testing. The annular ligament was also not repaired in this model in an effort to maintain consistency across specimens, because pilot testing had shown that no reproducible mechanism existed to tension this portion of the LCL complex. Although the kinematic effect of the annular ligament has not been fully elucidated, More recently, Doornberg et al Johnson et al This study showed that beyond a 50% loss of the coronoid process, neither LCL repair nor replacing the radial head alone—and beyond 67% for both repaired—resulted in a statistically significant increase in varus stability. Further, each incremental increase in coronoid loss resulted in further loss of varus stability, starting at a 67% coronoid at 30° and 90°. No additional resistance to varus displacement was conferred by isolated radial head replacement. This further supports our previous findings The donation of hardware for radial head repair by Biomet is greatly appreciated.