Developing masticatory apparatus, chewing robots or an artificial mouth is an old but ever more important goal in food science, nutrition or dental research fields, as reflected by the number of existing digital or biomechanical systems. Whatever the objective of the approach, basic knowledge of the physiology of mastication, adaptation and neurophysiological control is absolutely needed before conceiving an apparatus. Obviously, the final step in the development of a mastication simulator is its validation before performing food or food bolus characterization. This validation step is imperative to avoid biased interpretation and can be performed through in vivo–in vitro comparison of particle size distributions in food boluses obtained after normal mastication. This kind of validated machine offers the chance to produce boluses for other related uses such as nutrient bioaccessibility or digestion studies, for example. Such an apparatus can also be employed to simulate different dental states or ageing conditions.  This review comes from a themed issue on Edited by For a complete overview see the Available online 5th April 2016  2214-7993/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Two main driving-objectives can be identified while simulating mastication: firstly, when the goal is to improve knowledge, to reproduce the biomechanical aspects of the masticatory system or to analyze the effect of forces, movements or constraints, for example. It generally results in the development and the use of mathematical models alone in an Despite the important understanding gathered in several aspects of the masticatory process, simulation of mastication in the area of food science has, too often, been over-simplified and reduced to grinding, probably due to the lack of knowledge of physiology. This review resumes the main physiological key points of masticatory process, and describes the different existing simulations with biomechanical and modalities of functioning. Through a complex and well-coordinated sensory-motor and visceral activities, mastication of a solid mouthful results in a bolus made of particles reduced in size, moistened enough to be cohesive, plastic to avoid particle aspiration, and to permit passage through the throat without discomfort or pain. The sensory-motor and visceral program is continually commanded by the central nervous system. The food properties are sensed as early as the first bite and, through sensory-motor feedback, the masticatory program is adjusted to the changes in bolus features occurring along the masticatory process. This highly complex and feedback-dependent dynamic complicates any attempt to reproduce instrumentally mastication. Therefore, advanced knowledge about how food structure influences the pattern of oral processing is required. Food is a complex stimulus, but the physical dimensions modulating the oral processing are limited to its hardness, its rough rheological dimensions (plasticity, elasticity or brittle nature for example), and size of the mouthful. Briefly, an increase in food hardness as well as in mouthful size leads to an increase in the number of masticatory cycles (tooth strokes) and applied muscle forces, whatever the rheological nature of the food. On the other hand, the rheological properties of food seem mostly to impact the kinematics of mandibular movements due to a need to adjust the combination of compression and shear stresses [ In summary, the basic points to be considered, before simulation and according to the research strategy, are [ Mastication of solid food ends with a bolus swallowable without risk of mucosal injury and aspiration. For each food, a correct and specific granulometry, rheology and saliva impregnation characterize a swallowable bolus. In normal mastication, bolus particle size distribution is specific to food structure and similar between boluses from different subjects. If such a bolus cannot be produced, mastication must be considered as impaired. At the individual level, two indicators sign for an impaired mastication: increased bolus granulometry above a certain threshold level and variation in frequency of the strokes while masticating a given food compared with normal mastication. In subjects with perfectly healthy mastication, increasing either the force or the number of tooth strokes or the combination of compressing Subjects with moderate impairment of the anatomical or physiological conditions of the masticatory apparatus can also succeed in making a viable bolus through a more demanding adaptation. Again, the adaptation relies on increasing the force, the number of tooth strokes or the constraint modes. Computer or computer-assisted models have often been elaborated to analyze the dynamics of biomechanical aspects of the masticatory function for dental, medical and therapeutic objectives and for understanding biological systems. It participates in predicting jaw movements, muscle activations, recruitment patterns and controls, resulting forces, or movements at the temporomandibular joint [ Several mastication robots or mechatronic devices have been conceived and designed to study biomechanics of the masticatory process. Development of a series of mastication robots was carried out for quantitative and dynamic assessment of mechanical stress applied to oral elements during oral activity. The ‘Waseda Jaw (WJ)’ systems were mostly developed to analyze the mechanical effects of mastication on jaw bones in terms of position, force, velocities and muscle controls [ The first attempts to mimic jaw movement with a main interest towards the food sample were equipment roughly designed to activate the upper jaw against the food sample for measuring mechanical properties of food texture or equipped for example with a piston presenting a cuspal angulation reflecting angles observed in the mouth [ Since it leads to perception of flavour, the release of volatile aromatic compounds during food disruption is one of the issues most studied using chewing simulation [ The ‘AM Depending on the reason for using them, the various existing mastication simulators have differently set five key variables: teeth or equivalent, inside-mouth volume, saliva or equivalent, temperature control, and kinetic and stress modalities of functioning. The most crude simulation of tooth function is probably Mills's ‘ Three other key points are important in the development of a simulator. Saliva should be used. Ideally, its composition, flow distribution along masticatory sequence and total injected volume should mimic those seen in the human mouth. The volume of the ‘masticatory chamber’ should be similar to the volume of the mouth and a possibility of controlling the oral temperature should exist. Saliva, volume and temperature items are fundamental for studying aroma or nutrient release and food texture measurements. Not all apparatuses are equipped for these controls and this may affect data interpretation. The final items that should be considered are kinetic factors and constraint modalities of functioning. Various degrees of freedom have been chosen depending on the main purpose for using the apparatus (aroma release, food texture/bolus measurements, dental training, for example). Obviously, complex mandibular movements adjusted to the food being chewed cannot be completely reproduced. Complete feedback control is always absent although it has been sought while studying the first stroke [ The food bolus is the main focus of interest in most topics in food science research. Food bolus analysis is at the crossroads between food structure, food formulation, food perception, food oral processing and the further stages of digestion. The ready-to-swallow bolus contains information about the oral conditions of its formation. In addition, it constitutes the vector for nutrients. For all these reasons, a mastication simulator provides a valuable contribution since it allows recovering the totality of the food bolus at the end of the masticatory sequence. During mastication, food sample is drastically disrupted to form a cohesive entity, which can be swallowed easily and without risk of particle aspiration. As particles are formed, they are mixed with saliva. During this process, the smaller the food particles, the greater the surface contacts between food and saliva, favouring the access of salivary enzymes to substrates. The ready-to-swallow final bolus is composed of particles of various sizes and saliva or juice released from the food matrix. The bolus can be analyzed for particle size distribution, a major characteristic of food disruption. Any chewing device used to provide food boluses has to be validated against human mastication ( In summary, when the major objective of simulation is to reproduce the biomechanics of jaw movements and forces, mathematical models or robots are more appropriate. When the objective is to study the resulting food bolus, a device reproducing masticatory parameters and correct food disruption is a better option. The specifications and technical limits for a simulation device depend on the primary research purpose: aroma release, food texture assessment, production of a food bolus providing for subsequent digestion analyses, the impact of a change in food formulation on bolus, biomechanical analysis of stress applied to oral elements and other factors are specific questions. Nevertheless, taking account of the main laws governing the biomechanical mechanisms of the masticatory processes and the dynamics of bolus properties are always needed [ Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as: • of special interest •• of outstanding interest The authors want to thank O. François (University of Auvergne) for his involvement in the development of the AM