The objective of this study was to evaluate applicability of a commercially-available, one-dimensional (1-D) large-strain consolidation model to predict mine tailings consolidation in a full-scale tailings storage facility (TSF). Data pertaining to tailings production, cyclone operation time, impoundment height, and impoundment volume were made available for a full-scale copper mine TSF. A numerical model was applied to predict tailings consolidation for two considerations: Design Assessment – based on design estimates, and Operation Assessment – based on actual operational data. Comparison between actual average tailings dry density (ρd) during the first 4 yr of operation and predicted ρd yielded coefficients of determination (R
                     2) as high as 0.81 for the Operation Assessment and 0.93 for the Design Assessment. Predictions of tailings height for both assessments also agreed well with actual impoundment heights for the first 6 yr of operation. A procedure was developed to predict average ρd of a full-scale TSF that includes (i) estimating TSF volume based on predicted impoundment height and (ii) using TSF volume with dry tailings mass to compute ρd. The main finding was that the modeling of gradual tailings deposition via a 1-D large-strain consolidation model can provide a reliable prediction of tailings height and capacity during TSF operation.Mine tailings are a by-product of ore processing that predominantly consist of fine-grained particles with high water content and residual chemicals from ore extraction (e.g., Understanding and predicting physical and chemical processes of tailings following deposition in TSFs present challenges to the mining community. In particular, consolidation of tailings presents a challenge at nearly all mines due to increasing tailings generation and disposal of tailings as slurry. Consolidation relates to the decrease in volume of tailings that is attributed to the dissipation of excess pore water pressure, discharge of pore water, and increase in effective stress. Thus, high water content, low hydraulic conductivity fine-grained mine tailings can yield large volume reductions and long elapsed times for completion of consolidation (e.g.,  The objective of this study was to evaluate the applicability of a commercially-available 1-D large-strain consolidation program in predicting tailings consolidation to estimate tailings dry density and storage capacity of a full-scale TSF. Four years of data pertaining to the following operations were made available to the authors for a full-scale copper TSF: monthly average whole tailings production rates, cyclone operation time, tailings underflow production, impoundment height, and impoundment volume. An additional two years of data were provided for impoundment height and impoundment volume. Consolidation models were conducted to predict tailings dry density considering an as-designed scenario (Design Assessment) as well as actual tailings production and discharge operations (Operation Assessment). A cross-sectional schematic of the TSF at the full-scale copper mine evaluated in this study is shown in A summary of select geotechnical characteristics for WT and OT from the copper mine are summarized in The WT-2 classified as low plasticity clay/silt (CL-ML) with approximately 60% fine-grained material (i.e., passing the No. 200 sieve; <0.075 mm), and specific gravity ( Large-strain consolidation modeling was conducted to assess applicability of using a 1-D model to predict capacity of a full-scale TSF. The focus herein is on applicability of the commercially-available model FSConsol v. 3.49 (GWP Geo Software, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada), which includes capabilities for impoundment design and planning, and yields outputs such as settlement versus elapsed time and profiles of average solids content, void ratio, and pore-water pressure. Prior to completing this full-scale application, a series of benchmark model simulations as well as a parametric assessment were conducted to demonstrate functionality of the program ( FSConsol is based on the finite-strain consolidation theory in Application of large-strain consolidation modeling required constitutive relationships for compressibility and hydraulic conductivity. The compressibility constitutive function is based on the void ratio versus effective stress ( Constitutive relationships of The full-scale TSF was discretized into a series of concentric, stacked columns as shown in  Operational data from the copper mine were provided for the first 4 yr, and consisted of monthly average measurements of whole tailings production rates, cyclone operation time (COT), tailings underflow production, impoundment height, and impoundment volume. Two additional years of data were provided for impoundment height and impoundment volume. The relationship between tailings surface height and tailings surface area of the impoundment is shown in Topographic surveys of the TSF periodically were conducted that consisted of surveying the tailings surface elevation and depth of the supernatant pond. These surveys, combined with ground topography and mass of tailings discharged to the impoundment, were used to compute an actual average dry density (ρ Two large-strain consolidation simulations were conducted with FSConsol: (i) Design Assessment and (ii) Operation Assessment. The Design Assessment accounted for initial criteria used to design the TSF, whereas the Operation Assessment accounted for actual production data and tailings characteristics collected during full-scale operation of the TSF. A summary of the tailings production schedule and percentages of discharged overflow and whole tailings for the Design Assessment at COTs of 70% and 90% is in The production rate of whole tailings delivered from the thickener at the concentration plant to the cyclone station ( The Operation Assessment included annual average tailings production, COT, and underflow recoveries for the first 4 yr of operation ( During mine operation, only a fraction of the whole tailings were deposited into the TSF ( The contributions of overflow tailings (OT Percent contributions of overflow and whole tailings for different COTs are tabulated in Individual Average ρ In Procedure 1, average ρ The total impoundment volume ( In Procedure 2, the total impoundment volume ( Calculation methodologies in Procedure 1 and Procedure 2 both used cumulative Temporal trends of actual average tailings ρ A coefficient of determination (R Procedure 1 yielded lower predicted The actual ρ Estimates of impoundment capacity (in dry tailings mass) and height were completed based on ρ Total predicted impoundment capacity in dry mass of tailings and total filling time for the Design and Operation Assessments are summarized in Temporal comparisons of predicted impoundment height using Procedures 1 and 2 to compute ρ The lower ρ  The actual average ρ The continued increase in ρ The consistency of the predicted ρ The ρ Impoundment heights used in the ρ A case study was used to evaluate the efficacy of applying a 1-D large-strain consolidation model to predict dry density, impoundment capacity, and surface height of a full-scale TSF for a large copper mine. Design and Operation Assessments were considered in the full-scale TSF analysis to include design criteria parameters (Design) and actual average parameters measured during TSF operation (Operation). Model results were compared to operational data, which included 4 yr of average tailings dry density and 6 yr of average tailings height within the impoundment. Two procedures (Procedure 1 and 2) to calculate average dry density were evaluated in this study. Average dry density of tailings within the TSF was accurately predicted via Procedure 2, which was based on model predictions of tailings surface height and cumulative dry tailings mass discharged to the impoundment coupled with a surface height-to-volume relationship of the impoundment. Tailings dry density predictions incorporating Procedure 2 yielded coefficients of determination of 0.93 for the Design Assessment with a cyclone operation time of 70% and 0.81 for the Operation Assessment. Procedure 1, which predicted average tailings dry densify based on model predictions of average tailings solids content, underpredicted actual tailings dry density in all cases. With Procedure 2, good agreement was observed between predicted and actual tailings dry density and tailing height (i.e., impoundment surface) within the full-scale TSF, which indicates that the 1-D numerical model used in this study is applicable for predicting dry density and surface height in a full-scale TSF. One caveat to long-term predictions of TSF impoundment capacity is the potential for stabilization of tailings dry density at a lower value that was predicted via numerical modeling. This premise was only anecdotally evaluated in this study and is a design parameter in need of further evaluation to enhance long-term predictions. Financial support for this study was provided by