The enthalpy of mixing of molten Fe–C–Si alloys is a significant element in performing mass balances on iron production and steelmaking, but almost no experimental data has been reported on enthalpy determination in these melts. As a result, models expressing this property as a function of composition must be derived from measurements of component activity, which are more widely available. The use of three such models – the regular solution model, Wagner’s model for dilute solutions, and the unified interaction parameter model developed by Bale and Pelton – have been used to calculate enthalpies of mixing in Fe–C–Si melts. The results are compared with each other and with the experimental data of Vitusevich et al.In performing energy balances on furnaces processing liquid iron alloys, one of the less-appreciated but significant factors is the enthalpy of mixing of the alloy. This is particularly true in the case of iron–carbon–silicon alloys, which are produced in the blast furnace as hot metal and in the cupola as cast iron, and converted to steel by oxidation of the dissolved carbon and silicon during the BOF process. Healy and McBride However, including enthalpies of mixing into energy-balance calculations involving molten hot metal or cast iron has always been made difficult by the lack of experimental data for the system. Carbon dissolves slowly in molten iron alloys, and as a result no direct experimental measurements of Δ Given the lack of experimental data on enthalpies of mixing in Fe–C–Si melts, the construction of energy balances involving these alloys has instead relied on dubious assumptions. One common assumption While very little experimental work has been performed on the measurements of enthalpies of mixing in molten Fe–C–Si, a much more extensive experimental database is available for Gibbs energy-related thermodynamic properties, in particular the activities of carbon and silicon. As a result, it is possible to develop estimated enthalpies of mixing by modeling the activity data. This presentation will examine several methods of such modeling, and compare the resulting Δ One previous effort has been made to use phase-equilibria data to model enthalpies of solution in molten Fe–C–Si alloys. Schmid’s work As previously mentioned, very little experimental data exists for enthalpies of mixing in Fe–C–Si melts. However, a substantial number of investigators have determined the activities (and thus the activity coefficients) of dissolved C and/or Si in these solutions, as a function of both temperature and composition. This allows the determination by regression analysis of A simpler model for calculating thermodynamic properties in relatively dilute solutions stems from the work of Wagner Sigworth and Elliott One of the difficulties in using Wagner’s model for calculating solute activities is its primary applicability to dilute solutions. As solute concentrations grow, the model increasingly requires the use of a second-order interaction parameter to accurately reflect the relationship between ln Bale and Pelton have derived a revised version of Wagner’s model consistent with the Gibbs-Duhem expression, and more appropriate for non-dilute solutions Using this approach, enthalpies of mixing have been calculated as a function of composition and are again mapped in  As previously mentioned, some experimental measurements have been made in the system by Vitusevich et al. At relatively low concentrations of carbon and silicon, any of these three models will generate reasonably reliable estimated enthalpies of mixing in Fe–C–Si melts. The models are all adaptable to more complex melts (e.g. Fe–Mn–Si–C–P–S, etc.), although the needed data for this are more available if the Wagner and Bale-Pelton models are used. At very high alloy concentrations, the regular-solution model may yield more accurate results, although the occurrence of these alloys in practice is rare. Further studies of these three (and possibly other) models in systems with more experimental enthalpy-of-mixing data to compare with would be of more than some interest.