Flotation is one of the most effective technologies for the up-gradation of coal fines of particle size below 0.5mm because of the inherent hydrophobic nature of coal. Contrary to this, reverse flotation of coal in which coal particles are depressed and gangue particles floated, was developed as an alternative process to minimise the sulphur content in the coal. This method can also be applied to reduce the ash content of coal by floating the mineral matter present in coal. Therefore the mechanism and performance of this process treating different types of coal have become an active research topic and several literatures have also been published. Despite the research efforts, this process has yet to find application in the coal preparation industry which it deserves. In the present review article, an effort was made to understand the basic mechanism of this process along with the effect of variables and chemicals used on its performance. Finally, some challenging issues that need special attention are highlighted to further improve the process.Flotation is one of the prime mineral processing methods that has found wide application from separation of complex ores such as sulphides of lead–zinc and copper–zinc to platinum, nickel and gold hosting sulphides, to oxides like hematite, cassiterite, oxidised minerals such as malachite, cerussite and finally to non-metallic ores like fluorites, phosphates as well as coal ( In the case of coal, flotation is by far the most commonly used beneficiation method in the finer sized range. Coal because of its natural hydrophobicity is collected in the froth while mineral gangues remain in the pulp as tailings. There are several research articles published on flotation of coal and its allied research topics covering both basic science as well as on applied research. The idea of reverse flotation for coal started with the first patent done by Eveson in 1961 on bituminous coal in which shale i.e. the mineral matter was floated and reported in the froth phase while the clean coal was depressed and remained in the suspension. The concept was further developed for the selective removal of pyritic sulphur from US coals by several investigators ( The driving force behind the works done so far to develop reverse flotation as a viable processing tool to produce clean coal is the advantages associated with it. Coal makes up around 60 to 80% of the flotation feed and as the coal rises, with it gangue particles also raise which cannot be avoided. This problem is known as ash entrainment which is inevitable during direct flotation and adversely affects the quality of product ( Even though the coal reverse flotation process has some obvious advantages over forward flotation and a development period of around 50 Hence the objective of this review is to bring forth the developments done so far in the field of coal reverse flotation with focus mainly on ash reduction and discuss the effects of reagents and process conditions required for exploring new horizons. As explained above, reverse flotation appears to be an emerged process in the recent past for different minerals as well as for coal. In the case of coal, there are two areas in which it is being applied with an objective either to reduce the sulphur content or ash content. The details about each one are explained further. Sulphur is a detrimental element in coal which limits the scope for use of coal. It is a typical problem in most of the U.S. coal deposits along with other deposits in other part of the world. Also it is present in coal in three forms i.e. pyritic, organic and sulphatic among which only pyritic sulphur can be removed by physical means ( Reverse flotation as a process to lower ash content of coal was firstly extensively studied by  The process has been widely studied for hard to float low rank coals like lignite and oxidised coals. Reverse flotation involves the flotation of ash forming minerals which means that the collectors used should be such that they make the mineral matter hydrophobic in nature. Some of the most common minerals found in coal are quartz, clay minerals (like kaolinite, illite etc.), feldspar, carbonates such as calcite, siderite and dolomite, and sulphide minerals such as pyrite. Other less commonly found minerals include phosphates, hydroxides and salts like gypsum, sylvite, and halite ( Amines are the most common cationic collectors derived from ammonia in which the hydrogen atoms are replaced by aryl or alkyl groups. They are classified as per the number of groups, R, attached to the nitrogen atom as shown in The study of mechanism of amine adsorption on oxides and silicates like quartz and feldspar has been extensively done for alkylamines. Different experimental techniques such as floatability measurements, zeta-potential study, contact angle measurements and adsorption studies have been widely used to develop models. The Gaudin–Fuerstenau–Somasundaran model ( The adsorption of quaternary amines on hydrophobic surfaces is shown to be through hydrophobic interactions in many literature studies (  The collecting action of amines which is significantly affected by other parameters such as concentration, pH, coal type and presence of other reagents, has been investigated in most of the coal reverse flotation works. Further Another study by  The most important issue in coal reverse flotation is the natural hydrophobicity of coal which makes coal to float on its own. Since the concept of coal reverse flotation is opposite to the nature, hence strong reagents are needed to depress the coal. In this regard, the depressants play a critical role by rendering the coal hydrophilic in nature and thus enhancing the selectivity of the process. Except Dextrin is a highly branched polymeric carbohydrate composed of dextrose units. This organic polymeric depressant, having good water solubility is less hazardous than inorganic depressants ( Humic acid belongs to the class of naturally occurring acidic organic polymer containing both phenolic and carboxylic groups. Humic acid occurs naturally in low rank coal or upon weathering/oxidation of coal (   Activators are the reagents which render a mineral surface hydrophobic by modifying its chemical nature. They are used to increase the overall floatability of a mineral and have therefore enabled the flotation separation of complex sulphide ores, silicates, oxides, calcium containing minerals etc. The activators affect the mineral surface in different ways such as the chemical cleaning of mineral surface (e.g. acid treatment of oxidised mineral), ionic exchange and ionic adsorption (e.g. activation of sphalerite by copper cations), catalytic oxidation (e.g. copper activation of galena which result in formation of hydrophobic elemental sulphur on the surface) and formation of hydroxides at the surface (e.g. activation by metal cations) ( Frothers are used in flotation with mainly two objectives i.e. production of stable froth and reduction of bubble size. They play an important role as these directly affect the characteristics of the froth and entrainment of unwanted particles in the froth phase. The common chemical groups present in most of the effective frothers include either of the hydroxyl, carboxyl, carbonyl, amino group or sulpho group ( The pH of the pulp plays a very important role in flotation. The surface characteristics and behaviour of a mineral depend on the pH of the liquid phase which in turn governs the adsorption of all types of reagents on the mineral surface. There is no specific pH for the flotation of a particular mineral entity but depends on the nature of the reagents and in most of the cases there is a pH range for which the reagent gives the best results for that particular mineral. This can sometimes become a complex and sensitive situation when highly selective flotation products are required. Likewise for coal reverse flotation the effects of OH   The minerals in coal occur in mostly five different forms. They occur in disseminated form as tiny inclusions within the macerals or as layers wherein fine grained minerals dominates or as nodules in lenticular/spherical concretions or as fissures i.e. cleat and fracture fillings or as rock fragments. In order to avoid the interference of gangue particles with the coal grains during separation, proper liberation is required. In the case of coal flotation, it is well known that best results are obtained at particle size below 300  In another work ( Coal is an organic sedimentary rock made up of different organic components with distinct physical and chemical properties along with inorganic matter mostly in the form of minerals. It is a well-established fact that the hydrophobicity of coal increases with the increase in the rank of coal ( As stated above reverse coal flotation process has been tried for both sub-bituminous, lignite as well as oxidised coals ( Coal is a sedimentary rock and more than 100 different minerals have been identified in coal. The type of minerals found in a specific coal or coal seam depends on the geologic conditions of the deposit. The source of the minerals found in a coal include the original mineral matter present in the living plants from which coal was formed or the sedimentary matter added during subsidence or also due to the deposition of air-borne as well as water-borne dust and mineral matters ( The minerals found in coal are mostly polar minerals as they are chemically carbonates, oxides–hydroxides, silicates, quartz, halites, phosphates etc. which are known to react strongly with water and hence naturally hydrophilic. But a lot of work has been carried out on the flotation of these minerals in spite of their natural hydrophilicity. For example quartz flotation is widely studied not only with the aim of beneficiation but also for the modelling of flotation systems ( Coal reverse flotation has been successfully tried for both sulphur removal as well as ash reduction. In the case of ash reduction, the reagent type and process parameters depend on the nature and characteristics of the mineral matters to be floated. Mostly quaternary amines were found to be good collectors and sometimes also act as collector-cum-frother. The adsorption of quaternary amines on both the surfaces i.e. gangue minerals as well as coal surface, is similar in nature and takes place by means of both electrostatic and hydrophobic surfaces dependent on the presence of polar and non-polar sites. Depressants like dextrin, starch and humic acid play a major role in the process by increasing the wettability of coal particles by water and hence reducing coal entrainment to the froth. In order to improve the floatability of the minerals, activators like certain metal ions could be used. Not much work has been carried out on the selection of frothers and conventional frothers like MIBC or even the amines themselves have shown good results. In most of the works it was observed that the trend of reagent consumption is towards the higher side and so development of better reagents or ideas like staged reagent addition or optimization of conditioning time need to be explored. Even though the surface properties of gangue minerals and coal vary with respect to pH, it was concluded that pH has no significant role in the reverse flotation of a bituminous coal while for oxidised coal and sub-bituminous coal, normal and slightly alkaline pH conditions were favoured respectively. Liberation pattern and distribution pattern of the mineral matter in the coal sample is found to be critical to enhance the floatability of the desired mineral species. Overall the process has been found to be advantageous for low rank coals like sub-bituminous or lignite and can be seen as a reasonable alternative of forward flotation in future with the depletion of good quality coals and increasing cost of reagents like kerosene, diesel used in forward flotation. Better results can be produced by targeting the dominant mineral species present in a particular coal. Another view is that as the flotation of complex mineral systems consisting of different silicates, carbonates, phosphates etc. have been industrially made possible then this process which involves the flotation of a variety of minerals present in coal can also be worked upon. The authors would like to thank the Tata Steel management and Dr. Sanjay Chandra, Chief RD&SS (Tata Steel) for his encouragement, support and permission to publish the paper. The authors are also thankful to Dr. Pratik Swarup Dash (Pricipal Scientist, R&D, Tata Steel) and Mr Dilip Makhija (Principal Researcher, R&D, Tata Steel) for their contribution to enrich the manuscript.