This article covers both the mixing equipment used for the mixing and blending of sausage and other meat mixtures and the equipment used for the particle reduction of meat materials and the production of meat batters for sausage. The selection of equipment for various processed meat products will be covered as well as pertinent information on proper equipment use. This term is preferred in the US when referencing a device using a rotating knife and stationary plate to reduce meat particles. Synonymous with mincer. This term is preferred in Europe and the UK when referencing a device using a rotating knife and stationary plate to reduce meat particles. Synonymous with grinder. To remove entrapped air from a meat mixture. The terms ‘mixer’ and ‘blender’ are often interchanged and from an engineering standpoint there seems to be no clear cut difference. In the meat industry, a blender is usually a device that imparts more mechanical action to the product for the purpose of solubilizing and extracting the salt-soluble proteins. A mixer, on the other hand, is used to incorporate and uniformly distribute components of the processed meat formulation. For some meat products, equipment is needed that provides both the mechanical action to the meat proteins and the uniform distribution of ingredients in the meat mixture. When using any type of mixing and blending equipment, care must be taken to choose the correct piece of equipment for the particular product being manufactured. For example, the mixer that one would choose for a dry sausage would not be the type that one would choose in a blender/emulsion mill operation for the manufacture of an emulsion-type sausage. In production, care must be taken to ensure that the temperatures of the product are optimum for both the type of equipment and the product being produced. Paddle-type mixers are most often used where a more gentle handling of the meat materials is desired ( Paddle mixers would be the equipment of choice for processed meats such as dry and semi-dry sausages or coarse ground fresh and cooked sausages where particle distinction is critical. They are also used where the main purpose is to distribute ingredients with a minimum of mechanical action to extract the salt-soluble proteins. Counter-rotating paddles further optimize the distribution of ingredients, with minimal damage to the fat particles. Paddle mixers are more desirable for most meat mixing applications. Paddle mixers are more efficient in uniformly mixing two or more ingredients. Compared to ribbon agitators, paddle agitators provide more lift and less push to product, which results in less compaction of ground meat, and paddle agitators are preferred when mixing high-viscosity mixtures, such as very cold meat or drier meat blends, such as ground beef, fresh sausage and dry sausage. Paddles are typically self-cleaning during the mixing process, so fat build-up is less of a problem. Overlapping of paddle agitators speeds up the mixing process, reducing the mixing time needed to produce a uniform mixture, which is particularly important when trying to introduce a number of different non-meat ingredients into meat. This reduced mixing time should also reduce fat smearing for products in which particle definition is important. Twin overlapping, counter-rotating paddle agitators are shown in There is some debate about this issue, many believe that paddle mixers would be more effective for extracting protein for mixing lean meat in pre-blends or for mixing blends prior to emulsification. However, there is little scientific data to support either argument. If the surface area of the paddles moving through the product is increased, by either using larger paddles or more, smaller paddles, the mechanical action of meat working against meat is increased, which increases protein extraction. Paddle mixers run at reduced revolutions per minute (rpms), which can be useful for applying mechanical action to whole-muscle pieces or softer muscle like poultry to produce a surface protein exudate without damaging muscle integrity. Single shaft paddle agitators are also used in massagers to produce protein exudate and increase water-holding capacity of muscle pieces. Ribbon blenders have a similar configuration and drive mechanisms to the twin overlapping paddle mixers ( Ribbon blenders are less effective than paddle mixers in evenly distributing different ingredients that are added to the mixer, unless paddles or additional ribbons are added between the shaft and the outer ribbon. The double ribbon concept involves the counter-rotation of the two ribbons on a single, center axle ( Ribbon blenders can cause compaction of drier blends, such as ground beef, fresh sausage and dry sausage. Ribbons can also cause “log” or “barrel rolling,” which results in meat packing around the shaft and turning around the shaft with no mixing action. This is particularly a problem when water is added to frozen meat in a blender. Double ribbon agitators, with counter-rotating action can minimize barrel rolling. Fat build-up is also a bigger problem on ribbon agitators than on paddles. Fat smearing can be a problem with ribbon agitators because of the meat being slid along the sides of the blender and pinch points between the ends of the ribbons, particularly if product temperature is too warm. In addition to the type of agitator, mixing times and temperatures are also very important in getting proper protein extraction, particle definition and final product texture. Mixing times for hamburger and sausage patties, as well as for fermented and dried products would be shorter than for cooked sausages, because protein extraction is not important in making these products. Also, for hamburger and sausage patties, over-mixing will result in an undesirable, rubbery texture and possibly fat smearing. For all of these products, colder meat temperatures will help to minimize melting of the fat, and therefore, fat smearing. The interior walls of a mixer need to be highly polished to minimize temperature rise from the friction of meat sliding along the walls of the mixer. For cooked sausage products, where protein extraction is important, the lean portion should be mixed as long as is feasible at the coldest temperatures possible, with the salt (and phosphate, if used), to optimize protein extraction. After the fatter ingredients are added, mixing time should be minimized and product temperatures kept as cold as possible to minimize fat smearing. When determining the capacity of a mixer, at a minimum, the volume of meat should be at least up to the center shaft of the agitators. At a maximum, meat should not extend past the tip of the agitators. Bridging can occur with over-filling of mixers, and proper mixing will not occur with under-filling. The sequence of final grinding vs. mixing will also impact product texture, and particle definition. Products, where good particle definition is important, should be mixed after the final grinding. This also applies to products that contain cheese, peppercorns, encapsulated acid, etc. Both mixers and blenders can be equipped with steam or hot-water jackets to heat the meat mixture during this step in processing. The most usual configuration for converting the ribbon blender to a cooker would be to insert scraper paddles between the ribbon flights to prevent the cooked meats from sticking to the heating surface. These jackets can also be used with chilled liquids to help maintain product temperatures. More effective cooling can be obtained, however, by equipping the mixer/blender with a hood for applying carbon dioxide snow. The use of carbon dioxide as a chilling device is effective because of the large temperature differential between the product and the coolant, plus the fact that nothing is added to the finished product, as would be the case if ice were added. Mixer/blenders can also be fitted with a perforated pipe or bottom injection nozzles for the incorporation of carbon dioxide snow or liquid nitrogen as a coolant. In these cases, the blender needs to be fitted with a hood and an exhaust to vent the carbon dioxide or nitrogen gas. A lid can be added to mixer/blenders to enable mixing and blending under vacuum. For most cooked products as well as dry and semi-dry sausages, vacuum mixing is important, but vacuum mixing would not be recommended for looser textured products, such as ground beef and fresh sausage patties. Vacuum mixing removes air bubbles and pockets, which improves texture and appearance of cooked sausage products. Vacuum mixing is only applicable where it is applied in the final step before stuffing. Some smaller mixer/blenders use a single sweep arm as the mixing device. This produces a ‘kneading’ effect on the meat product. Sometimes this single sweep arm is coupled with counter-rotating paddles. Combination mixer/mincers are available. These are designed to mix the product before the final grinding/mincing step. They are most useful in operations such as hamburger grinding/mincing, where the coarse minced lean and fatter meats are being incorporated into a final blend prior to the final grinding/mincing. Further integration of processes has become very popular and may involve the product moving from the grinder to the mixer, and on to the stuffing process. Mixing systems are becoming more automated, which reduces the chances for operators to over or under-mix batches and to allow processors to customize mixing processes for different products without overwhelming the operator. Mixing times, speeds of agitators and direction that agitators move, can all be programmed for each type of product, with less concern for human error. Mincers/grinders are the most widely used particle reduction equipment for meat processing. These comminute the meat by forcing it through a plate with holes of varying sizes and then cutting off the extruded particles by means of a rotating knife. The most common configuration consists of a variable-pitch screw, which serves to deliver the meat to the mincer/grinder plate. The particle diameter is controlled by the size of the holes in the mincer/grinder plate. They can vary from very large, the so-called ‘kidney plate’ (because of the shape of the holes) that produces fist-sized chunks, to 3 Some mincers/grinders are designed with a double plate that consists of a double-edged knife, or knife holder, sandwiched between a coarse plate of about 13 It is critical in operating a mincer/grinder that the knives and plates are sharp and carefully matched, so that a clean cut is obtained. The knives should make close contact with the plate for the entire length of each knife. Since the knife and plate are in close contact, the mincer/grinder should never be run empty as this will result in burning of the knife and plate and loss of sharpness. It could also result in metal fragments being incorporated into the product. To obtain the proper consistency and appearance of the final product, it is important to pay attention not only to the sharpness of the knives and plates but to the temperature of the meat being ground/minced. Each product has very specific temperature requirements. Large-capacity mincers/grinders can be equipped with screws that are designed to give optimum performance with a specific type of meat. While there are ‘general-purpose’ screws, it is best to use a screw designed for a specific purpose – frozen meat, fat, lean, etc. In general, plates with the largest possible hole size should be used. Gradual particle reduction with multiple grinding steps reduces the damage to the meat, which ultimately results in improved ground product texture and cooking yield, compared to a single grinding step. The first grinding/mincing step, in which large chunks or whole muscles are to be reduced, plate hole sizes of ½ to ¾ inch (13–19 Grinders are available which are designed specifically for grinding frozen meat. The auger is adapted for pulling frozen meat pieces into the knife and plate. Frozen meat grinders can be used for grinding meat that is not frozen, however because of the auger design, the ground product output is lower than for traditional grinders. Bone or hard cartilage separators can be fitted to most mincer/grinders. These devices involve designing the knife and plate so that hard particles will migrate to either the centre or the outer edge of the mincer/grinder head to be eliminated from the soft tissue. Since some soft tissue is forced out as well, the user has to be prepared to sacrifice some yield in order to eliminate the hazards and annoyance of bone or hard cartilage pieces in the finished meat product. Regulating the discharge rate usually controls the degree of bone removal. At best, bone removal systems can only be expected to eliminate 80% of the hazard. They are most effective when used on final mincing/grinding of 1/8–1/4 in. (3–7 With in-line or pump mincer/grinder systems, coarse ground, and/or preblended, meat is delivered to the mincer/grinder head by a stuffing pump, usually a piston or vane type. This eliminates the need to use a traditional grinder and a couple of handling steps traditionally done between the final grinding and stuffing. Meat is only pressurized once during the grinding and mixing processes, which results in less fat smearing and better fat particle definition, compared to traditional processes in which meat is pressurized both during grinding and then during stuffing. Feeding the in-line grinders with piston or vane stuffers, rather than augers, results in cleaner cuts and less air in the final ground product. A separate drive motor controls the knife rotation so that the relationship of the meat being delivered through the plate to the speed of the knife can be varied infinitely. This allows for varying the particle length. In addition, these systems can operate as closed systems, reducing environmental contamination risks. These in-line systems can also be vacuumized, a further advantage as it will help eliminate air particles in the meat mixture. In many cases these in-line mincer/grinders are connected directly to stuffing and linking devices, making for a continuous in-line, closed system. In-line grinding/mincing works well for fresh sausage and ground beef, because of the cleaner knife cut and improved particle definition. With less air being incorporated during the grinding process, in-line grinding/mincing also results in more uniform drying of dry sausage products. In line grinding/mincing doesn't work for products that require a final mixing step after the final grind, including products containing encapsulated acids, cheese and other inclusions, or products that need longer mixing times for protein extraction, such as cooked sausages. These devices have been popular for batch operations for the production of coarse-cut sausages and meat emulsions ( The bowl chopper consists of a rotating bowl with a series of rotating knives running in a vertical plane in the trough of the bowl. The knife head speed can be varied, as can the rotation speed of the bowl. Knife heads can vary from 2 to 12 knives and chopper capacity can range from a few kilograms of meat to well over 1000 In operation, the knives must be kept sharp and uniformly balanced. The knives should be set with minimum bowl clearance to produce effective chopping. As with the mincer/grinders, all types of comminution equipment produce frictional heat. This heating effect must be considered in arriving at the optimum final batch temperature. Most larger choppers have an unloading device that scoops the finished meat batter out of the chopper as the bowl rotates. They may also be equipped with temperature-measuring devices to monitor the meat temperature during chopping and may be equipped with bowl rotation counters and timers. Monitoring the condition of the meat by number of minutes or number of revolutions of the bowl has severe drawbacks because it does not take into account variations in meat texture. Choppers can be equipped with a vacuum hood to enable the vacuumizing of an emulsion or meat batter during chopping ( Choppers can be equipped with a steam jacket to allow for cooking while chopping. This feature is useful in the manufacture of some liver sausages and patés. There are some vertical mixer/cutters that resemble large food processors. In these cases, the knife head rotates in a horizontal plane. These are usually of relatively small capacity for production use. They are quite useful, however, for preparing samples for laboratory analysis. These devices are used to convert a meat mixture to a fine batter or emulsion. While they act to disperse the fat particles in the meat and other protein matrix, they must be preceded by a blender to solubilize the myofibrillar proteins. This is the reason that it is usually referred to as a blender/emulsion mill system. Emulsion mills accomplish the same basic task as bowl choppers, but they are part of a continuous system. They also have the advantage of producing a uniform particle size, as opposed to a bowl chopper in which the particle size is operator-dependent. Emulsion mills can range in capacity and it is to be expected that the capacities of a continuous blender/emulsion mill system will exceed that of a bowl chopper. For this reason, most high-capacity continuous systems employ a blender/emulsion mill combination. Meats are usually preminced or ground through a conventional mincer/grinder before being introduced into this type of system. There are two general types of emulsion mills. The most common type uses a plate and knife or multiple plates and knives, not unlike a mincer/grinder. The meat is forced through this plate/knife combination by some type of pump. Since this is a closed system, a vacuumizing device can be included in the system to vacuumize the emulsion. The frictional heat rise must be taken into account before the meat mixture is introduced into the emulsion mill. If additional heating is needed to attain the desired final temperature of the emulsion, this can be achieved by controlling the back-pressure on the finished emulsion side. The particle size is controlled by the size of the holes in the emulsion mill plates. As with the mincer/grinders, it is critical to maintain sharp knife and plate sets and the same cautions apply to running the equipment empty. Another type of emulsion mill uses an impeller to force the meat mixture against stationary blades. This design does not have metal-to-metal contact so it can be operated without meat in the system. However, it does not have provisions for vacuumizing the emulsion. This must be accomplished later with a separate piece of equipment in the system. There are various types of equipment designed to cut meat particles into very fine flakes. Such equipment is primarily used where the meat in to be reformed into a solid piece under pressure. The popularity of this technology has diminished in recent years. There are various types of frozen meat breakers that are used to reduce particle size for chunks of frozen meat. It is advisable to temper the frozen block of meat before breaking it up. This saves energy and prevents the destruction of the texture of the meat. A temperature of −7 Slicers are most often used in the final processing step. They can range from the small meat slicer in a retail operation to the high-speed slicers used for slicing and portioning ready-to-eat (RTE) meat. The meat is presented to a rotating circular or elliptical knife. The thickness of the slice is controlled by the distance the meat advances before it contacts the knife. Slicers can be linked to portioning devices as well as devices that shingle or stack in exact weight units. In the more sophisticated slicers, the weight of a unit coming off the slicer can regulate the thickness of slices in the next unit to achieve exact weights. The type of product being sliced as well as the configuration of the slicer determines the optimum temperature for slicing. This can range from partially frozen, in the case of bacon, to near the freezing point in the case of RTE luncheon meat. A relatively new entry into the array of slicers is used to preslice the meat on a boneless, or bone-in, cooked and smoked ham in a spiral pattern, making it easier for the consumer to carve. Precooked meats and some fresh meats are often diced for further processing or for final use by the consumer. Dicers come in various configurations. Usually the meat is forced through a grid made up of knives or a plate with holes of various sizes. A guillotine or elliptical rotating knife then cuts off the pieces. Each particular dicer has rather specific requirements as to temperature of the material being diced and the adjustments to the machine, such as knife clearance.