 Kuanyshbek Bituovich Musabekov is a Doctor of Chemistry, Professor and organizer, scientific supervisor and Chair of Colloid Chemistry of the Al-Farabi Kazakh National University, the only center for educating experts in colloid chemistry in Kazakhstan. Prof. Musabekov is a member of the Royal Society of Chemistry, UK; the International Association of Colloid and Interface Scientists (IACIS); and of the European Colloid and Interface Society (ECIS). He is a Full Member of the New York Academy of Science; Academician of the Academy of Sciences of Higher Education of Kazakhstan; Academician of the Kazakh National Academy of Natural Sciences. In 1959 he enrolled at the biological faculty of the S.M. Kirov Kazakh State University (KazSU). The encounter of great scientists, such as the dean of the chemical faculty of KazSU, Prof. B.A. Beremzhanov changed the destiny of Kuanyshbek Bituovich and he moved into the chemical faculty of KazSU. He graduated with Honors from the Department of Chemistry of the KazSU in 1964. In 1965, by recommendation from Academicians E.A. Bekturov and S.R. Rafikov he started a postgraduate study at the Institute of High Molecular Weight Compounds at the USSR Academy of Sciences (Leningrad), where, under the guidance of Prof. G.V. Samsonov, K.B. Musabekov developed methods for synthesizing high-permeability ionites for the separation, isolation and purification of complex organic compounds. Here he also defended successfully his PhD thesis, called “candidate's dissertation” back in these days. In 1970, B.A. Beremzhanov, at that time the Dean of the KazSU, invited K.B. Musabekov to work in the Department of Chemistry, and set him under the scientific advice of the famous colloid chemist P.A. Rehbinder at the Moscow State University. In 1972, when the Chair of Colloid Chemistry was founded at the KazSU, he was appointed as head. The close cooperation with P.A. Rehbinder, A.I. Rusanov, E.D. Shchukin, B.A. Zhubanov, E.E. Ergozhin, E.M. Shaikhutdinov, E.A. Bekturov, A.B. Zezin, V.N. Izmailova, I.M. Papisov, I.A. Tutorskii, and other prominent scientists enabled him to found a new field of research: colloid chemistry of synthetic polyelectrolytes (SPE) and their association with surfactants. We can call Kuanyshbek Musabekov the founder of the school of Colloid and Interface Science in Kazakhstan. By simple mixing of aqueous solutions of SPE and surfactants, polyelectrolyte complexes were obtained which present new macromolecular surfactants with controlled properties such as amphiphilicity, electrostatic free energy, and macromolecular conformation in aqueous and water-organic media K.B. Musabekov developed concepts of efficient regulation of the properties of different interfaces with the help of associates of SPEs and surfactants. A synergetic increase in the surface activity of SPEs in the presence of surfactants was found out and the rate-limiting steps of the formation of adsorption layers of these associates (diffusion of macromolecules to the interface and their conformational transformations at the interface) were revealed (see Prof. Musabekov's studies in the field of modification of solid surfaces with mixtures of SPEs and surfactants are of scientific as well as practical interest. The mechanism of surface complexation according to the Davis–James-Lecky ion pair model was proposed for the adsorption interaction between SPEs and solid surfaces in reference Under the guidance of Prof. Musabekov the flocculation and stabilization of model dispersions by polymeric surfactants have been studied, selective combined flocculants were proposed for thickening and separating different dispersions, protocols for the purification of industrial waste and circulating water, the improvement of filtration characteristics of sediments in hydrometallurgy, and stabilizing water based paints and latex adhesives have been created. Foams and foam films based on surfactants and compositions with surfactants and polymers are one of the applied scientific interests of K.B. Musabekov. He investigated and created new keratin foamers based on natural raw materials The plasticizing action of keratin composite foamers on cement paste was found, and pilot tests of the obtained foaming agents for new formulations of foamed concrete and fire fighting mixtures were carried out. An interesting field of K.B. Musabekov's scientific activity is the colloid chemistry of biological systems. He performed complex studies devoted to the surface properties of microorganism cells and the stability of biological dispersions with respect to high- and low-molecular-mass electrolytes and substantiated the mechanisms of the bactericidal, coagulating and flocculating action of electrolytes, polymers, and polymer-surfactant complexes on suspensions of microorganism cells. The conditions were optimized for the production of immobilized biocatalysts, representing a new generation of catalysts based on yeast cells, as well as efficient biosorbents which at an optimal ratio of metal/biosorbent provide a high degree of purification of waste water The research in the field of structuring biological systems was directed toward the decrease of synthetic ingredients in compositions of gelled confectionary products based on structured agar and gelatin in the presence of melon pulp, fruits and other native materials. K.B. Musabekov's successful and significant scientific activity in practice is reflected in 45 invention certificates and more than 600 scientific communications, most of his publications appeared in Russian and Kazakhstan journals. 6 doctoral dissertations and 45 candidate's dissertations, have been defended under his guidance. He successfully combines his scientific work with pedagogical activities: he delivers lectures, publishes handbooks in Russian and Kazakh languages, guides the graduation works of Bachelors, and works as a scientific supervisor of Master and PhD students. Prof. Musabekov's professionalism and high scientific and pedagogical potential were marked by a Certificate of Merit of High School Ministry of KazSSR and the title of Honored Worker of Education (1998). He was awarded with the State Research Grant of Kazakhstan as a prominent scientist (2004–2005) and received grants of the Ministry of Education and Science of the Kazakhstan Republic “The Best Lecturer of the Institute of Higher Education” (2007, 2013). In 2010 he was also awarded the title of Honored Worker of the Republic of Kazakhstan. The geography of scientific cooperation of K.B. Musabekov is wide and includes the Moscow University and Saint Petersburg University; Institute of Macromolecular Compounds, Institute of Physical Chemistry and Electrochemistry of the Russian Academy of Sciences, (Russia); Szeged and Miskolc Universities (Hungary), Imperial College London (England), Norwegian Institute of Agriculture, Institute of General and Inorganic Chemistry of the Uzbekistan Republic, Institute of Colloid Chemistry and Chemistry of Water of the Academy of Sciences of Ukraine in Kiev, Wageningen Agricultural University (Netherlands), and the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam, Germany. The staff of the department expresses its congratulations to Prof. Musabekov on behalf of colleagues and friends and wishes him achievements in scientific activity.