Food oral processing plays a key role in the sensory perception of food. The objective of this review is to give an overview of instrumental methods used to characterize food boli in connection with perceptions. Texture, structure, rheology, tribology and hydration, as well as the enzyme activities of the food bolus, can be investigated during oral processing and provide tools to help us understand perceptions. Recent publications have proposed integrated systemic approaches that include the physical characterization of food bolus evolution and the corresponding dynamics of perceptions. On the basis of these recent publications focused on gels and breads, this review proposes a synthetic analysis of methods and results. The major constraints in bolus characterization are identified and new perspectives for the future are proposed.  This review comes from a themed issue on Edited by For a complete overview see the Available online 21st May 2016  2214-7993/© 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. During oral processing, food products undergo major and dynamic transformations that make it difficult to understand the complex links between the initial physicochemical properties of food and perceptions. As a result, it is an almost impossible task to predict sensory properties from the knowledge of food product composition, structure and mechanical properties alone. Numerous recent studies have successfully proposed considering the properties of the food bolus during oral processing to better understand its sensory properties and its dynamic evolution during consumption. The pattern by which food structure is fragmented and hydrated with saliva during oral processing is at the origin of stimuli release that is, in turn, responsible for texture, flavor and taste perception, and is therefore determinant for the acceptability of food products [ However, food boli are heterogeneous materials with physical properties that vary over a wide range and a very short time period during oral processing (from introduction into the mouth until swallowing) [ Despite this heterogeneity, variability and rapid evolution of food bolus properties, many physical methods have been proposed to characterize food boli and have been successfully linked to some sensory properties. Volumetric, interfacial and structural properties have often been determined just before swallowing as well as at different key times of oral processing. The objective of this review is thus to give an overview of the different instrumental methods used to characterize food boli and to discuss their major assets in order to better understand food perceptions. The first part of the paper presents a brief synthesis of the instrumental methods found in the literature for the characterization of food boli. Then, on the basis of two examples and recent publications, these methods are discussed in relation to sensory properties. The two chosen examples are gels and breads. These two food products have very different initial water contents and structures, leading to different food breakdown pathways during oral processing. Many different methods have been recently developed or adapted to characterize food bolus properties at different stages of eating [ Bolus hydration measurement is an indication of saliva incorporation during oral processing. It was shown to be a key property that could trigger swallowing [ Bolus rheology has been widely studied over a large range of products ( While rheology provides some information on bulk properties, tribological and small-gap measurements are useful to characterize the surface properties involved in mucosa coating, after-feel perception and swallowing [ In the case of solid foods, particle size is commonly measured in the bolus to provide insights into the in-mouth comminution and the agglomeration mechanisms. Different techniques are used depending on the products and the ranges of particle size, including image analysis, sieving methods and laser diffraction. Finally, bolus microstructure and the mixing properties of food with saliva are sometimes also determined in order to identify interactions between the saliva and the different food constituents. Enzymatic activities during oral processing have also been considered, in particular to determine the role of amylase activity in saliva for the formation of boli made of cereal products [ Boli are usually obtained Instrumental measurements performed on boli are sometimes associated with sensory methods in order to better understand the links between oral processing, bolus properties and perceptions. Different sensory methodologies can be used to characterize the dynamic variations of perception throughout the eating process. The time intensity (TI) [ Many articles in the literature deal with the effect of food properties (especially mechanical properties) on sensory perception, but only a few of them consider bolus properties. The following paragraphs aim at illustrating the importance of bolus properties to explain perceptions, with a focus on two examples of food products that present different structures (gels and bread), and, consequently, different breakdown trajectories. Emulsion-filled gels such as polysaccharides or dairy gels have been extensively studied in the literature. However, only a few articles link the bolus to sensory properties. In the case of agar–gelatin gels, a recent study focused on the evolution of bolus properties during eating in relation to dynamic texture perception [ In the case of dairy products, dynamic texture perception and bolus properties were compared at the swallowing point [ The modifications of the physical properties of the bolus also have an impact on aroma and taste release during eating and, as a consequence, on flavor perception. Some studies focused on the impact of the evolution of food bolus properties during eating on (i) taste and aroma release, and (ii) sapid and flavor perception for gels and dairy products [  Bread is widely consumed in numerous countries. A wide diversity of breads that vary in composition and structure exists worldwide. Designing new breads with high fiber content and low salt levels while being appreciated by consumers is a challenge for public health care [  Even if most of these studies focus on crumb, bread crust is often consumed together with crumb and contributes considerably to consumer appreciation. Bread crumb and crust have an impact on oral processing features such as: (i) the duration before swallowing; (ii) the hydration capacity; and (iii) the rheology, the heterogeneity and the breakdown degree of the bolus [   Based on four recent publications [ The major conclusion of these different recent studies is that the evolution of the texture perception of bread during oral processing is strongly influenced by bolus hydration and texture, but weakly by the initial structure of the bread. This result highlights the importance of furthering our understanding of bolus properties during oral processing. In conclusion, this review shows that only a few articles are dedicated to the multidisciplinary aspects of food oral processing, including the study of: (i) bolus properties evaluated by a wide range of instrumental methods and (ii) dynamic perception [ For all of these reasons, studying bolus formation in relation to the dynamics of sensory perception is essential to better understand the role of (i) food composition and/or structure and (ii) instrumental mechanical properties on texture perception [ Although some progress has been made to develop new instrumental measurements of food bolus properties, some drawbacks still exist and could explain the difficulty of interpreting sensory perception on the basis of instrumental properties [ Thus, these first available studies clearly emphasize the need for further investigations on food oral processing using Papers of particular interest, published within the period of review, have been highlighted as: • of special interest •• of outstanding interest