A fully coupled finite element (FE) model of coal deformation, gas flow and diffusion and competitive adsorption was developed to investigate the net effect on the evolution of CO2 injectivity. Here we developed new cross coupling relations between coal porosity and mechanical, hydrological, binary gas diffusion and competitive adsorption-induced volumetric strains under variable stress conditions. The cubic relation between porosity and permeability is then applied to relate coal storage capability (changing porosity) to coal transport characteristics (changing permeability) also under variable stress conditions. These two relations coupled the multiphysics of coal–gas interactions. We implemented these two relations into a finite element model to represent the complex interactions of stress and gas composition under in-situ stress conditions. This relaxes the common assumption of prior studies that vertical stress remains constant and allows exploration of the full range of mechanical boundary conditions from invariant stress to restrained displacement. The FE model was verified against experimental data, and then extended to field scale to explore the sensitivity of CO2 injection rate and ECBM production to in-situ stress conditions. Model results indicated that the net change in coal permeability accompanying binary gas diffusion is controlled competitively by the influence of effective stresses and differential matrix swelling. The balance between these two influences can be altered either by changing mechanical parameters (Young's modulus and Poisson's ratio) or by changing the coal sorption properties such as the swelling strain. The impact of gas sorption-induced deformation on coal permeability increases with the magnitudes of coal modulus or Poisson's ratio, and with the magnitudes of the gas swelling strain constant.CO Since the concept of coal seam sequestration was first proposed by Macdonald of Alberta Energy during discussions with Gunter and coworkers in 1991( The potential impacts of differential swelling on the performance and implementation of CO Based on experimental observations, a variety of models have been formulated to quantify the evolution of permeability during coal swelling/shrinking. The first attempts to quantify the role of stresses on the evolution of coal-reservoir permeability assumed invariant vertical stresses and linked changes in horizontal stress with the gas pressure and the sorption strain ( Mechanical and permeability models incorporating the correct physics are essential for the accurate prediction of CO Experimental, theoretical and field observations, as presented above, have illustrated that the injection of CO A model is developed to represent the effects of stress and mechanical restraint on the evolution of porosity and permeability in a porous medium. The following assumptions are considered in the modeling: Coal is a homogeneous, isotropic and elastic continuum, and the system is isothermal. Strains are infinitesimal. Gas contained within the pores is ideal, and its viscosity is constant under isothermal conditions. Gas flow through the coal matrix is assumed to be viscous flow obeying Darcy's law (a water phase is not included in the model). Henry's Law (1803) (e.g. In this The prior cases relate to a single gas system but the gas adsorbed on coal is not always pure methane. Coal can also adsorb appreciable amounts of CO The ELI is expressed as: For a binary mixture of CH Volume changes in coal are known to accompany gas sorption and desorption ( The advantage of using a linear function is that obtaining precise volumetric strain data is difficult because of the complexity of the experiments, and so far, volumetric strain experiments have been conducted on very few coals. Thus, the sorption-related volumetric strain accompanying gas production for different coals can be readily modeled even if only the isotherm is known. In this model, it is presumed that the gas sorption-induced strain Experimental evidence ( The total sorption-induced strain is determined by summing the strains caused by each gas species, as, The deformation of the coal matrix is affected by gas absorption/desorption, gas flow and transport and initial and boundary conditions. The coal matrix shrinks when CH Coal deformation is defined through the Navier equation for linear poroelastic media, accommodating pore pressure and absorption/desorption induced effects as additional source terms acting as additional body forces. According to assumption (a), the strain-displacement relation is defined as According to the equation of state (EOS) for the binary gas, each partial pressure ( To simplify the treatment here, both gases are considered as ideal ( Both terms on the left side of Eq. As discussed in In this paper, the following equation is chosen to calculate the relation between permeability and porosity Considering a porous medium containing solid volume of According to Eq. A similar procedure to that of Zhang is used to extend the model to binary mixtures ( Considering the cubic law relation (see Eq. Mass transport in coal seam for CO Combining porosity Eq. In the above equations, For the Navier-type Eq. For the gas convection and diffusion equations, if the concentration of the injected gas remains constant then the boundary condition is defined as If the injection rate is a constant the boundary condition is defined as The above governing equations plus boundary and initial conditions are solved numerically in the following through a general PDE solver. Eqs. In this example, a dry coal sample under a biaxial stress state is simulated to verify the validity of the FE model. The change in strain with time and the sweep efficiency of the produced gas against displaced volume are the model outputs compared with experimental measurements. The experimental sample is 334 The comparison between modeling results and experimental data is shown in The relation between the change in sweeping efficiency and the displaced volume is shown in It can be seen from The successful match between modeled results and experimental data has demonstrated the validity of the FE model. In the following section, the model is used to predict the performance of CO A field scale model incorporating a five-spot well pattern is used to simulate the performance of CO The five-spot well pattern model geometry of 100 In order to investigate the mechanical response of the coal seam to CO A(25,25) is the analysis point, as shown in    The net change in permeability accompanying binary gas diffusion is controlled competitively by the influence of effective stresses and differential matrix swelling. In this simulation, three different magnitudes of the gas swelling strain constant were used to alter the balance between the sorption-induced permeability change and the effective stress-induced permeability change. Modeling results are shown in The model of with the strain constant reduced by one half (case 1)is to simulate the binary gas injection of an N The impact of the gas swelling strain constant on the permeability change is shown in    For all three cases, the displacement front has not reached the outside boundary. This is why the pore pressures are much smaller than the outside boundary pressure (or the injection pressure). The net change in permeability accompanying binary gas diffusion is controlled competitively by the influence of effective stresses and differential matrix swelling. The balance between these two influences can be altered either by changing mechanical parameters (Young's modulus and Poisson ratio) or by changing the sorption properties such as the gas swelling strain constant. Their relative importance is illustrated in A fully coupled coal deformation, binary gas flow and diffusion and gas absorption/desorption finite element (FE) model is developed to achieve a better understanding of the CO Modeling results indicate that the net change in coal permeability accompanying binary gas dispersion is controlled competitively by the influence of effective stresses and differential matrix swelling. The balance between these two influences can be altered either by changing mechanical parameters (Young's modulus and Poisson ratio) or by changing the coal sorption properties such as the swelling strain. The impact of gas sorption induced deformation on coal permeability increases with the magnitudes of coal Young's modulus or Poisson ratio, and with the magnitudes of the gas swelling strain constant. This work was supported by