Certain complex copper sulphide ores contain trace levels of radioactive elements, most of which can be separated from the copper sulphide minerals during flotation. However, the flotation process is less effective at removing some of these radionuclides, namely Pb-210. It is hypothesised that Pb-210 is interacting with copper sulphides and this interaction is contributing to flotation rejection inefficiency. Throughout this study, regular lead is used to simulate Pb-210. Cryogenic X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometry (Cryo-XPS) has been used to confirm an interaction between lead and copper sulphide minerals in which lead forms as a lead sulphide-like compound on the surface of copper sulphide minerals. Lead interacts with copper sulphide mineral surfaces via two mechanisms: chemically adsorbing to sulphur to form lead sulphide and lead sulphite species, and precipitating on the surface as various lead oxides species. The ratio of lead-sulphur species to lead-oxygen species on the copper sulphide surfaces is increased by regrinding due to the lead-sulphur species being more strongly associated with the mineral surfaces. Lead remains on the mineral surfaces during flotation and is carried to copper concentrates during cleaner flotation.Flotation is an effective technique for separating typical waste minerals such as the various iron compounds and silicates from complex copper sulphide ores. However, certain copper deposits contain minor amounts of radioactive elements that the flotation process is less effective at removing. Due to their radioactive nature, radionuclide recovery to flotation concentrates must obviously be minimised. One of the common radionuclides in copper concentrates is Pb-210, a radioactive isotope of lead with a half-life of 22.3 years ( Due to its radioactive nature, even extremely low concentrations of Pb-210, on the order of parts-per-trillion, can present a hazard to human health and cause issues with meeting regulatory requirements for concentrate sale ( Pb-210 may potentially be hosted in other, radiogenic, lead minerals within the orebody. Lead minerals may be separated from copper sulphide minerals using a variety of depressants ( Lead is known to adsorb on to sphalerite in the flotation of complex lead-copper-zinc ores, causing the sphalerite to report to concentrates above expected levels ( In the acidic pH range, the mechanism is somewhat contentious as some studies propose that lead substitutes for zinc in the sphalerite lattice, similar to the mechanism of copper activation (ion exchange/lattice substitution) ( Lead has also been observed activating pyrite in the flotation of complex sulphides via the precipitation of lead hydroxide on to the mineral surface ( Chalcopyrite is known to form metal-deficient, sulphur-rich regions on its surface resulting in collectorless floatability ( The aim of this study is to confirm that lead adsorbs to copper sulphide mineral (bornite and chalcocite) surfaces as a lead sulphide-like species and that, during the regrinding and flotation stages of mineral processing, these species are not removed from the copper sulphide mineral surfaces. This is achieved by adsorbing lead to copper sulphide surfaces during an initial “activation” grinding stage followed by subjecting the lead activated copper sulphides to regrinding and simulated cleaner flotation. Cryo-XPS is used to confirm the presence and species of lead on the copper sulphide minerals. Conclusions will be drawn about the behaviour of Pb-210 in flotation based on the behaviour of its proxy, common lead. Minerals used in this investigation are high-purity bornite and chalcocite obtained from GEOdiscoveries. The purity of these minerals was confirmed by XRD with the bornite being 99% (1% chalcopyrite) pure and the chalcocite 94% (6% other copper sulphides) pure. In order to introduce lead ions to the mineral surfaces, 200 g of the copper sulphide mineral was initially ground in an 8.2 L tumbling mill at 50% solids with the rod charge occupying 40% of the mill volume. The mill was sealed to the atmosphere during the batch grinding process. Lead ions were adsorbed on to the mineral surfaces by grinding the copper sulphides in a 2% lead nitrate solution with the pH adjusted to 4.0 with nitric acid. This pH was chosen as it would result in the lead being predominantly in the form of Pb Regrinding was carried out in a 1.5 L Netzsch laboratory mill (type PE 075) at 50% solids in 1 kg of ceramic media and DI water. The regrinding was conducted in a batch process open to the atmosphere. The mill has not been modified in any way. The target grind size was 80% passing 20 μm. The pH was not controlled and was around 5.0 after regrinding whilst the Eh was recorded as approximately 170 mV (vs SHE). Flotation was performed in a 1.5 L mechanical cell for 15 min at natural pH. Sodium Ethyl Xanthate was used as collector whilst Interfroth 754 (an alkyl aryl ester) was used as frother. After the initial grind, regrind and flotation, the products were taken for sampling for surface analysis by XPS. The solids were frozen in liquid nitrogen prior to introducing them to the XPS chamber. Cyro-XPS measurements were conducted on a Kratos Axis Ultra photoelectron spectrometer emitting monochromated 1486.6 eV X-rays. In the spectrometer, the samples were cooled to approximately −160 °C using a sample stage cooled by liquid nitrogen, and subjected to a vacuum on the order of 10 The results in this section are organised by mineral type then by treatment method. Discussion on the results is presented in the subsequent section. The elements surveyed during the Cryo-XPS are copper, iron (where appropriate) and sulphur as they are constituents of the mineral, lead as the element of interest to the study, oxygen for insight on oxidation products formed and carbon as a major contaminant on all surfaces. It should be noted that surface carbon is a major, but quite variable component of all of the surfaces studied. As the majority of this surface carbon is as a result of contamination upon exposure to air, carbon will not be examined in any detail in this study. A high resolution scan of the carbon was taken, however, in order to use the main carbon peak as the reference for calibrating all other peaks. Traditionally, separating PbS and various oxidised Pb species (PbO, PbO The Cu 2p 3/2 spectrum ( The total amount of lead detected on the bornite surface was 6.3 at.% (percent of atoms on the mineral surface). Of greater interest to this study is the amount of sulphur-associated species (PbS and PbSO Another method of comparing the two groups of lead species is to examine the ratio of sulphur-associated species to oxygen-associated species. In this case the ratio is 4.2. It is hypothesised that the sulphur-associated species are chemically bound to the bornite surface as opposed to the oxygen-associated species which are precipitated on the mineral surface. Hence, the aforementioned ratio is also a descriptor of the ratio of chemisorbed to precipitated lead species and the change in this ratio throughout the processing steps will indicate how those processing steps are affecting the make-up of the lead species on the bornite surface. The Cu 2p 3/2 spectrum of chalcocite is shown in The concentration of all lead detected on the chalcocite surface was 7.3 at.%, higher than that observed for bornite. The concentration of sulphur-associated species was 4.7 at.% whilst the PbO The Cu 2p 3/2 and Fe 2p 3/2 (for bornite) spectra are not shown for the subsequent tests (both for the regrinding and the flotation) as they are largely similar to the initial grinding case and are not relevant to this study. The Cu 2p spectra for all the minerals are dominated by the signal from the bulk mineral. The small copper signal to the right (lower binding energy) of the bulk mineral signal persists throughout the processing steps except for bornite where a minor Cu(II) species is detected. The Fe 2p spectra for bornite in both cases show a small signal from the bulk mineral with Fe()-oxide/hydroxide species also present.  The regrinding process reduced the total amount of lead detected on the bornite surface from 6.4 at. % to 3.7 at.%. The concentration of sulphur-associated species was reduced from 3.6 at.% to 2.8 at. %, however, the concentration of PbO Although PbSO The S 2p and Pb 4f spectra of the reground chalcocite are shown in As with the bornite example, regrinding has reduced the concertation of lead on the chalcocite surface from 7.3 at.% to 4.2 at.%. More specifically, the concentration of sulphur-associated species has been reduced from 4.6 at.% to 3.0 at.% whilst the concentration of PbO The S 2p and Pb 4f spectra of bornite concentrate after simulated cleaner flotation are shown in The total amount of lead on the bornite surface decreased to 3.1 at.%, most likely due to oxidised lead species being removed from the lead surface during the flotation process. The concentration of lead-sulphur species on the mineral surface decreased from 2.8 at.% to 2.0 at.% whilst the concentration of PbO As with the bornite, lead is still present on the chalcocite surface after undergoing simulated cleaner flotation as indicated in the S 2p and Pb 4f spectra in The total lead concentration on the mineral surface has decreased to 2.9 at.%. The concentration of sulphur-associated species has decreased to 1.7 at.% however, unlike bornite, the concentration of PbO This study shows that, once adsorbed to the bornite and chalcocite surfaces, lead is carried through the regrinding and flotation process and reports to concentrates. Of the lead species detected on the mineral surfaces, those associated with sulphur are more prevalent and, in general, better retained through the processing stages than oxygen-associated species, reflecting the different mechanisms by which these species are adsorbed. The mechanism by which lead bonds to sulphur at the mineral surface is proposed to be via the adsorption of Pb All of the Cu 2p spectra showed a small, as of yet unidentified peak, around 931 eV ± 0.5 eV. It is possible that this peak occurs as a result of some interaction between copper and lead as these peaks are not present when lead was absent from the system. It is proposed that an adsorption mechanism similar to one discussed previously for lead on sphalerite may be occurring i.e. lead adsorbs to copper via a Pb-O-Cu bond. This bond is potentially stronger than simple precipitation of a lead-oxide species to the mineral surface, a species which would be removed by the physical action of grinding a mineral surface. The regrinding process had the effect of reducing the concentration of lead on both of the mineral surfaces when compared to the post-activation grind case. Importantly, whilst reducing the total lead concentration, the regrind process had the effect of increasing the relative concentration of sulphur-associated lead species on the copper sulphide surfaces, when compared with the concentration of oxygen-associated species. This is attributed to the aforementioned adsorption mechanism for the respective species with the sulphur-associated species being much more strongly associated with the copper sulphide surfaces than the oxygen-associated species. Upon regrinding, oxygen-associated species are removed from the copper sulphide surfaces whereas sulphur-associated species remain associated with the copper sulphides, most likely reporting to the fine particle fractions generated by the surface abrasion. After simulated cleaner flotation, there was a greater proportion of oxygen-associated lead species present on the mineral surfaces than was present prior to flotation. This is attributed to the dissolution of lead from the mineral surface followed by the subsequent precipitation, as PbO When comparing the lead adsorption trends between the two minerals, it is clear that chalcocite, initially, has a greater affinity for lead as a greater overall amount of lead was detected on its surface after the activation grind (7.4 at.% compared to 6.4 at.% for bornite). In terms of comparing the nature of the species on the two mineral’s surfaces, the amount of sulphur-associated lead on each mineral was approximately equivalent with chalcocite having more sulphur-associated lead initially (after the activation grind) and bornite having more sulphur-associated lead after cleaner flotation. The main difference between the lead on the surface of the two minerals is the amount of oxygen-associated lead present. After both the initial grinding and regrinding, chalcocite has 2.5 times the amount of oxygen-associated lead than bornite. This falls to approximately parity after flotation. It is proposed that the association of PbO This study confirms that lead ions can adsorb to the surfaces of chalcocite and bornite where they react with sulphur to form stable, sulphur-associated, surface species, PbS and PbSO  None. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the