Nano-biocomposites that mimics bone’s extracellular matrix with hydroxyapatite as an inorganic and silk fibroin as organic phase for three different ratios via a simple in-situ co-precipitation method have been synthesized. The silk fibroin, a biodegradable polymer from cocoons of Bombyx mori silkworm were extracted by employing a chemical-free High-Temperature High-Pressure method as a degumming route. Then followed by the regeneration process which was done by using calcium chloride-formic acid solvent system to replace time-consuming, cost-effective traditional methods. The prepared composites were structurally analyzed using Fourier Transform Infra-Red spectroscopy (FTIR) and X-ray Diffraction (XRD) techniques. The morphology and the elemental composition of the nano-biocomposites were examined using Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscopy (FESEM) and Energy-dispersive X-ray Spectroscopy (EDX). The in-vitro bioactivity of the bio-composites namely, swelling ratio, biodegradation and biomineralization ability is monitored in the presence of Simulated Body Fluid (SBF). Our observation demonstrate that silk fibroin concentration influences the formation of hydroxyapatite.Over a few decades, major portion of the humankind suffers from bone defects which is mainly due to aging, tumor, trauma and other factors like estrogen deficiency [ Numerous polymeric matrices have been utilized for this concern including the synthetic biodegradable polymers such as poly (lactic acid) (PLA), poly (ε-caprolactone) (PCL), poly (glycolic acid) (PGA) and natural polymers such as chitosan, hyaluronic acid, alginate, dextran, collagen, gelatin, elastin and silk fibroin [ Most of the composites are fabricated from the simple mixing of inorganic and organic phases resulting in nanocomposites with very limited interaction between these two phases [ The degumming process was opted to extract silk fibroin from cocoons of In order to acquire regenerated silk fibroin, an aqueous solution of formic acid-CaCl HAP/SF nanocomposite was prepared via an The formation of biominerals on the surface of a prepared specimen was evaluated in the SBF solution. This blood plasma like solution was prepared as described in the literature [ The swelling and biodegradation behavior of the scaffold was investigated by immersing equal shaped disc into the SBF solution maintained at human body temperature for a different period of time (1, 6, 11 and 15 days). At the end of each specified time period, wet weight was calculated after blotting the scaffold with a filter paper. The swelling ratio is measured from the following equation [ Biodegradation was measured by calculating the dry weight after the different incubation periods, which is obtained from the following equation [ FTIR spectroscopy has been carried out to analyze the inter and intra-molecular bonding between HAP, SF and their composites. FTIR spectra of the prepared samples are shown in The characteristic bands of HAP show four modes of vibration for PO Comparing the spectra of composite materials (HS-1, HS-2 & HS-3) with pristine HAP and SF, it could be observed that band associated with HAP and SF are present with a slight shift in band values signifying that HAP was incorporated into SF. The band position of amide-I in HS-1, HS-2, and HS-3 shifted from 1651 cm Crystallographic characteristics of pristine HAP, SF and HS composites were studied by XRD analysis and the results are shown in The calculated average crystallite size of the pristine HAP, HS-1, HS-2, and HS-3 were 30, 22, 17 and 14 nm, respectively. The crystallite size of the nanocomposites decreases with increase in the SF ratio. The decrease in the crystallite size of the composite enhances cell proliferation, integration and degradation. The surface morphology of the prepared nanocomposites with different weight ratios of three dissimilar composites and pristine HAP were analyzed using FESEM and shown in The EDX spectrum for the HAP nanoparticles and HS nanocomposites are shown in The effect of soaking time and concentration of polymers influences the degradation rate of the scaffolds as shown in The swelling ability of the material was the key factor for transmitting nutrients and minerals to enhance bone cell growth. Moreover, the degree of swelling plays the most important role in artificial scaffolds [ From the figure, it is evident that the absorption ability of the nanocomposites was higher in comparison with pristine HAP. Also, it was confirmed that the swelling ratio of SF increased with the SF concentration. This result was in good agreement with the degradation results. The swelling ratio of the nanocomposites scaffolds is reduced after 15 days that may due to the formation of minerals on the surface of the scaffold. An increase in the swelling ratio of the nanocomposite scaffolds are mainly due to the higher hydrophilic surface nature of SF in the HS-3 [ Bioactivity of the scaffolds was tested using the FTIR spectra of pristine HAP and composites were depicted in The A potentially bioactive HAP/SF nanocomposite were prepared by the 