Available results of equilibrium composition and total enthalpy computation for the systems: Zr–Si–O–Ar and Zr–Si–O–C–H–Ar, presented in the paper, enables thermodynamic optimization of the plasma process for zirconium carbide production from zircon. In the first step of the considered process, zircon decomposition to zirconia and silica is followed by their evaporation in argon thermal plasma. In the second step by introduction of methane or propane–butane gas in the Zr–Si–O–Ar system and reactive quenching, the temperature of such obtained Zr–Si–O–C–H–Ar is lowered to a range in which it is possible to deposit zirconium carbide powder. On presented examples the procedure of determination of optimal mass, energy and temperature process parameters is demonstrated. From presented data, it is possible to calculate and optimize process parameters for any other thermodynamic conditions.Zirconium carbide (ZrC Different methods have been used to produce ZrC; one method is by direct reaction of zirconium hydride or halide with carbon. Another method used is direct reduction and carburization of zirconium oxide, ZrO Before the paper was finished, by kindness of Prof. Patrick R. Taylor (University of Idaho) we received Ref. The thermodynamic method used here, based on the Mass Action Law, is given completely in The temperature dependence of the equilibrium composition for the Zr–Si–O–Ar system with atomic ratio Zr:Si:O:Ar=0.02:0.02:0.08:0.88 is given in The temperature dependence of total enthalpy per mol* First, we will consider the system with the ratio of ZrSiO In The presented results indicate technological steps in a plasma chemical process for zirconium carbide powder synthesis from zircon concentrates as precursor. In the first step, zircon dissociation to zirconia and to silica in argon thermal plasma is followed by their full evaporation ( In the second step by introducing methane (CH The system in For this enthalpy value in If we inject 0.0571 mol of cold methane, whose enthalpy at The enthalpy of this system will be For Zr:Si:O:C:H:Ar=0.0143:0.0143:0.0571:0.0571: 0.2286:0.6286 and for enthalpy value of 121.38 kJ/mol*, in The temperature dependence similar to that in In An iterative calculation procedure similar to that in If in the first step of the process we inject 0.0225 mol of zircon to 0.865 mol* of argon plasma. With the assumption that there is no heat losses to the surroundings, the enthalpy of the obtained system (Zr:Si:O:Ar=0.0225:0.0225:0.09:0.865) will be In the second step of the process, it is necessary to inject 0.0173 mol of propane–butane (C The enthalpy of such an obtained system will be Procedures presented in Since the presented In Five condensed phases, zircon ZrSiO4(s) for temperature In As we can see from A calculation procedure similar to that presented in To obtain the system from To obtain the system from The yield [number of ZrC(s) mol per number of Zr mol in the system [or number of SiC(s) mol per Si mol, respectively] for considered cases [ The presented results of thermodynamic computation (of the equilibrium composition and total enthalpy behavior) of the Zr–Si–O–Ar and Zr–Si–O–C–H–Ar systems enables the determination and optimization of the temperature, mass and enthalpy parameters for the processing of zirconium carbide powder production from zircon in argon thermal plasma. The method of process parameter determination and optimization is illustrated by two examples: for reactive quenching with cold methane or with cold propane–butane gas, in the second step of the process. In the first step of the process, zircon dissociation to zirconia and silica in argon thermal plasma is followed by their full evaporation. As a result of this process, the argon plasma partially cools, and (with products of zircon) gives the Zr–Si–O–Ar system. In the second step of the process, sufficient quantity of methane or propane-butane gas (as reduction and cooling reagents) is injected in the system of Zr–Si–O–Ar; this process gives adequate Zr–Si–O–C–H–Ar system and, in the corresponding temperature range, zirconium carbide powder. The systems from which it is possible to obtain composite zirconium carbide+silicon carbide powder, are also considered in the paper. Presented results can also be used for one step process Generally, the results of such calculations enable cutting down experimental work and decreasing the cost of investigations.