The calcaneus is the most commonly fractured bone of the foot and accounts for almost 2% of all skeletal fractures. Sixty percent of these are intraarticular and displaced, affecting the axis, length, height, and width of the hindfoot, thus shortening the lever arm of the triceps surae muscle ( Both operative and nonoperative treatment methods have their pitfalls and limitations. Nonoperative management cannot adequately restore normal anatomy and may result in pain and limitation of subtalar joint movement; thus, it is proposed only for calcaneal fractures with minimal displacement ( In particular, circular frames (Ilizarov frames) have been used in severely injured heels with extensive bone comminution and soft tissue damage ( In this article, we present the application of a new circular frame construction, a below-the-ankle Ilizarov frame, for the reduction and stabilization of calcaneal fractures in combination with minimally invasive fragment reduction techniques. Preoperative imaging of the calcaneus includes appropriate x-ray views as well as transverse and coronal computed tomography slices ( First, a 5/8 ring (reference ring) is placed at the level of the talus to serve as the ceiling from which the ring mount on the calcaneus will be suspended. An olive wire is inserted through the talus, exiting anterior to the deltoid ligament (body of the talus). A second olive wire is inserted anterolaterally through the base of the talar neck, exiting anteromedially. The wires are mounted and tensioned at 90 kg on a 5/8 half ring. A third smooth wire may be inserted from the medial side through the navicular or cuneiforms on the under surface of the ring and perpendicular to the long axis of the foot ( In step 2 ( In step 3, reduction of the axis and height of the calcaneal body takes place by means of indirect manual manipulation through the rings and gradual distraction. We try to insert the foot plate perpendicular to the long axis of the body of the calcaneus. Doing so easily reduces a great part of the varus deformity of the tuberosity by placing the 2 rings parallel to each other. The 2 rings are then connected by distraction rods based on universal joints to allow multiplanar mobility. The rods are directed from the anterior segment of the proximal ring to the posterior aspect of the distal ring, 50° to 70° from the plantar level ( In step 4, the posterior facet may be reduced if needed. A small incision of 1.5 to 2 cm just anterior to the tip of the lateral malleolus facilitates the reduction of the major articular fragment of the posterior facet under fluoroscopic control. With a dentist’s hook and a blunt periosteal elevator, the major fragments are carefully disimpacted and pushed back in place. One or 2 olive wires are then passed through the reduced fragment and the sustentaculum tali and attached to the superior 5/8 half ring ( After adequate skin closure, a light dressing is applied, and ankle and toe motion are encouraged from day 1. Removal of the frame takes place after radiographic evidence of fracture consolidation, usually 8 to 12 weeks postoperatively. Partial weight bearing on adjusted footwear may be allowed after 4 weeks. Full weight bearing is gradually encouraged within 3 weeks after frame removal. Not infrequently, adjustments and corrections can be performed postoperatively.  ORIF has been proven to be an effective method for treating intraarticular fractures of the calcaneus ( The reconstruction of the subtalar joint is of critical importance to achieve good functional results ( Paley and Fischgrund ( To the authors’ knowledge, all circular frames that have been used to treat calcaneal fractures are stabilized in the lower tibia and immobilize the ankle joint. In such a configuration, ankle joint contractures and stiffness should be expected, in addition to wire-related complications to the tendons and neurovascular structures of the lower third of the tibia ( To further minimize trauma, complications, and frame complexity, we developed a below-the-ankle frame, which involves the combination of only 2 rings, both confined to the foot. The proximal ring serves as a “stable ground” through the talus and midfoot bones and supports the distal ring. The 2 rings are distracted to withstand the deforming forces of the Achilles’ tendon, the plantar musculature and aponeurosis, and the pull of the peroneal retinaculum. For reduction of the fragments, ligamentotaxis can be used. However, soft tissue attachments, mainly the posterior subtalar joint capsule, cannot reduce a collapsed and impacted articular fragment. Thus, the application of the new frame was combined with minimally invasive open fragment reduction techniques. The configuration of the Ilizarov frame proposed here is lightweight and only consists of 2 rings confined to the foot. The frame is easy to apply, and reduction of the shape and height of the calcaneus is relatively easy with the use of gradual distraction. The authors have treated 19 fractures to date. Reduction was achieved and maintained in all except 1 fracture. The early clinical outcome is satisfactory for all patients, and no restriction of ankle joint movement was observed in any patient. In the authors’ experience, stability of the reference ring is a key factor for successful application of the frame. We currently use 2 olive wires crossed through the neck of the talus and an additional wire anterior to these through the midfoot. This configuration improves stability and reduces micromotion of the ring. The authors currently use the below-the-ankle frame for open, displaced intraarticular fractures of the calcaneus and for fractures with severe soft tissue contusions and severe comminution of the articular surface and the sustentaculum tali. We also use this construct to treat Sanders II and selected Sanders III intraarticular fractures. By using minimal incision and reduction techniques and olive wires mounted on the reference ring, the authors have not experienced any loss of reduction of the subtalar joint during the course of treatment. The placement of the posterior wires is dictated by the fracture pattern. When the posterior part of the body is intact, 2 crossing wires at a distance 1 to 2 cm from each other ( In the authors’ experience, the frame we describe proved to be stable enough to withstand loads applied throughout the treatment period in all our patients. Therefore, we believe that rings attached to the distal third of the tibia are not necessary. We have used the frame in patients regardless of age, gender, and weight. We report only 1 loss of subtalar joint reduction, but no mechanical failures of the frame. In most of our patients, partial weight bearing was allowed before frame removal, but time varied widely depending on the fracture pattern and patient compliance. The below-the-ankle circular frame for treatment of displaced calcaneal fractures is, in our experience, a reliable tool for restoration of integrity to the os calcis, especially in fractures complicated by soft tissue problems. Combined with minimally invasive techniques, this frame can be an effective method for treatment of calcaneal fractures, minimizing complications and failures.