The depressurization of an expanded liquid organic solution (DELOS) crystallization technique is a new one-step process, which uses a compressed fluid (CF) (e.g. CO2), for the straightforward production of sub-micron- or micron-sized crystalline particles. The driving force of a DELOS crystallization process is the fast, large and extremely homogeneous temperature decrease experienced by a solution, which contains a CF, when it is depressurized from a given working pressure to atmospheric pressure. In contrast to other already reported high-pressure crystallization techniques (RESS, GAS, PCA, PGSS), in a DELOS process the CF behaves as co-solvent over the initial organic solution of the solute to be crystallized. Through a DELOS process it is possible to produce fine powders of a compound provided that a system ‘compound/organic solvent/CF’ in a liquid one-phase state is found. In order to compare DELOS and gas anti-solvent (GAS) procedures, 1,4-bis-(n-butylamino)-9,10-anthraquinone has been crystallized from ‘acetone/CO2’ mixtures by both methods. The crystallization results obtained have been analyzed upon the solubility behavior of 1,4-bis-(n-butylamino)-9,10-anthraquinone in ‘acetone/CO2’ mixtures with different composition. It will be seen how important is the knowledge of the solute solubility behavior in the CO2-expanded solvent in order to choose the most convenient crystallization technique (GAS like or DELOS) and the best operational parameters. Finally, it has been experimentally determined which are the operational parameters that control the temperature decrease experienced in a DELOS crystallization. The results obtained have been corroborated through thermodynamic considerations.The particle size and size distribution of solid materials produced in industrial processes are frequently not those desired for its subsequent use, and therefore further down stream operations, like comminution and homogenization operations, are carried out on a large scale in different industrial sectors (chemical, pharmaceutical, dyes, polymers, explosives, etc.) in order to achieve the desired particle characteristics. The processes used to accomplish particle-size reduction are as diverse as the materials used (crushing, grinding, ball milling, air micronization, jet milling, etc.). However many materials such as certain dyes, chemical intermediates, pharmaceutical and biological compounds, speciality polymers and explosives, which are chemical sensitive, thermo-labile, waxy or soft, are difficult to comminute by the above conventional techniques. Within the last two decades, new eco-efficient processes for the production of micron-sized crystalline particles have emerged using compressed fluids (CF) either under supercritical conditions or in the liquid state In this paper we present a new method, called depressurization of an expanded liquid organic solution (DELOS) In any crystallization process, a compound (solute) changes from the solvated state to the solid state. The supersaturation ratio, Therefore, the crystallization yield and the physical characteristics (size, size distribution, morphology, polymorphic nature, etc.) of the particles produced depend strongly on the evolution of the solution In this work we present a comparative study of the crystallization results achieved when colorant 1,4-bis-( The DELOS process comprises the following three steps, which are schematized in Colorant 1,4-bis-(  The crystallization experiments of colorant The crystals produced through a GAS process inside the vessel R1, during the CO Several crystallization experiments of colorant The experimental data gathered in Thus, experiments E1–E5, performed with an initial supersaturation ratios of In all these experiments, during the addition of CO Experimental data summarized in The size and size distribution differences can be attributed to the different evolution of the supersaturation profile during a GAS and a DELOS crystallization process. The supersaturation profile occurring during a DELOS process is ideally homogeneous over all solution due to the fact that the magnitude and rate of the solution temperature decrease is identically experienced in any solution point ( From the results summarized above, it can be concluded that the DELOS method is more efficient than the GAS procedure for the production of micro- and sub-micro crystalline particles of colorant Finally it is interesting to analyze the CO We can conclude that in those ‘solute/organic solvent/CO The driving force of a DELOS precipitation is the high, steep and greatly homogeneous temperature decrease, from In The statistical results given in As is shown in In Summarizing, the magnitude of the temperature decrease, which is the driving force of a DELOS crystallization, is determined by the nature of the solvent employed and by the CO The experimental results exposed above are in good agreement with the following thermodynamic considerations. Thus, during the DELOS depressurization step, the compressed CO Since the heat transfer to the surroundings occurring in a DELOS crystallization can be considered as non existent, the heat required for the CO Therefore as it is inferred from It has been shown that the DELOS process is an efficient high-pressure crystallization method for the straightforward production of crystalline micron-sized particles provided that a system ‘compound/organic solvent/CO Summarizing, the DELOS process is a promising new high-pressure crystallization technique, which can be a useful processing tool in the particle engineering of different compounds and materials of industrial interest. The authors acknowledge financial support from CARBUROS METALICOS S.A., and Joan Llibre and Joaquim Torres for their valuable comments. We also thank R. Solanes (ICMAB) for the operation of high-pressure facilities at the ICMAB, as well as Dr Felicià Plana and Rafael Bartolı́ for their assistance during the performance of particle size measurements. This work was supported by grants from DGI, Spain (project MAT2000-1388-C03-01), and DGR, Catalunya (project 2001 SGR 00362).