The morphology of calcaneal fractures in 9 adolescents (mean age 13.4 years) with 10 fractures were classified using plain films and computed tomography scans. The patterns were found to be similar to those in adults.
                  All except one of the fractures (which was not significantly displaced) were treated with open reduction and internal fixation. In all cases it was possible to achieve anatomic reduction and rigid internal fixation. Seven patients had ‘excellent’ long-term clinical results. One patient with pending litigation scored ‘good’, and one patient with an ipsilateral fracture of the talar neck scored ‘fair’. This patient had mild limitation of ankle movement, all others had full ankle movement. Five had unrestricted subtalar movement, in two it was mildly limited and in three it was moderately limited (50–80%). There was no evidence of abnormality of the physes on follow up X-rays. We conclude that operative treatment of this fracture yields good results.Os calcis fractures in children and adolescents are uncommon (0.005% of all fractures in children Several authors have reported the results of conservative treatment for these injuries We report our experience of os calcis fractures in adolescents assessed using CT scans ( Between 1995 and 1999, 10 skeletally immature patients presented to our department with os calcis fractures ( Treatment was determined by the fracture pattern seen on plain films and CT scan, and had been decided by the two senior authors. All except one of the fractures (which was not significantly displaced) were treated with open reduction and internal fixation using a “Y” plate and tension band wire in one case each and the AO calcaneal fracture plate in the other cases. In addition the patient with multiple injuries had a single 3.5 All the patients were available for follow up. Notes and radiographs were reviewed. Using the CT scans, the fractures were classified by two independent observers according to the Sanders, Essex-Lopresti, Zwipp and Tscherne, and Atkins classifications Of 10 fractures, 8 were displaced intra-articular fractures and 2 were extra-articular beak fractures, 1 of which was undisplaced. Of the intra-articular fractures, seven were Essex-Lopresti central joint depression fractures and one was a tongue-type. In the adult population 53% (124/235) were found to be central joint depression and 35% (82/235) tongue-type Using the Sanders classification, the posterior facet had been split into two fragments only in all cases. In one case the primary fracture line crossed the lateral part of the posterior facet (type 2A), in two cases it crossed in the mid part (type 2B) and in a further two cases it was situated medially (type 2C). In two cases the course of the primary fracture line differed from that seen in adults, in that it did not cross directly across the posterior facet but turned medially towards the posterior part of the joint. The fractures in adults showed greater fragmentation, despite the less serious fall. In 72% (134/186) the posterior facet was in two parts (Sanders type 2); in 23% (42/186) it was in three parts (type 3); and 6% (8/186) showed greater fragmentation (type 4). In adults, the fragmentation was proportional to the height fallen The Zwipp and Tscherne classification, which classifies the number of fracture fragments and joints involved again demonstrated that the adolescents’ fractures were less comminuted than the adults’ fractures. Thus, 37.5% (3/8) of the adolescents’ fractures were five-part, compared with 46% (68/148) of the adults’ fractures; four-part fractures were found in 62.5% (5/8) of the adolesents and 45% (67/148) of adults; and three-part fractures were found in 0 and 2% (3/148) of cases, respectively. Again the height fallen was found to correlate with the degree of comminution in adults There were no cases of wound breakdown or infection. Six patients had ‘excellent’ results (>90/100) in all seven scoring systems, one had six ‘excellent’ results and one ‘good’ (70–90/100) ( Of the eight patients with plates, six had noticed improvement in symptoms following its removal, including less stiffness, aching and swelling, two reported no change. There was no evidence of abnormality clinically or radiographically of growth of the calcaneal physis. Previous reports of os calcis fractures in skeletally immature patients have not classified the injuries using CT scans. Several authors suggest that children are more likely to suffer an extra-articular fracture, and Schmidt and Weiner In general other series have reported excellent results with conservative treatment In this series, outcomes were excellent in all but two fractures, and plate removal subjectively improved symptoms in over half of the cases. Whilst we accept that there is scope for hind foot remodelling if a displaced position is accepted, we suggest that the situation may be compared to that of a displaced intra-articular distal radial fracture where reduction is usual even though the deformity may remodel with time. The authors would therefore agree with Brunet