It is known that the rheological behaviour of mineral slurries affects their processing. However, in addition to controlling the transportation of slurries around processing circuits, rheological behaviour also influences separation processes such as flotation. The rheological behaviour of mineral slurries is indicative of the level of inter-particle interaction or aggregation. In fact, rheological studies can be used as a direct approach to investigating such phenomena, thereby furthering our understanding of inter-particle interactions and potentially of bubble–particle interactions in mineral slurries. Although the impact of rheology in unit operations such as grinding and slurry transport has received considerable attention, this has not been the case for flotation. The pathways by which the rheology influences the flotation performance are not yet fully understood. These pathways may include various mechanisms occurring in the pulp and froth phases. However to date, little work has been done on froth rheology. Measuring the rheological properties of mineral slurries is also difficult since particles tend to settle during measurement. Finding a proper practical way for taking such measurements remains a challenge for research. In this paper the importance of rheology in mineral flotation is reviewed, and the gap of knowledge in this area is highlighted for further research.It is known that the rheological behaviour of mineral slurries can dramatically affect slurry processing. However, in addition to controlling the transportation of slurries, rheological behaviour can affect separation processes such as flotation. The rheological behaviour of mineral slurries indicates the level of inter-particle interaction or aggregation, and therefore, it can be used as a useful processing control parameter. The flotation separation of minerals may be influenced by inter-particular interactions, and rheological data can offer a direct approach to further understanding these interactions. For example, rheology has been used to investigate particle–particle interactions in slurries of oxide minerals ( It should be noted that although the impact of rheology in unit operations such as grinding and slurry transport has received attention in the past, this has not been the case for flotation. In fact, the pathways by which the pulp or froth rheology influences flotation performance is not yet fully understood ( The significance of rheology in minerals processing has been reviewed previously ( Rheology is the study of the deformation and flow behaviour of fluid under applied stress. The flow properties of a fluid are characterised by the plot of the shear stress associated with a shear rate applied to the fluid. Various behaviours that can be observed are illustrated in Several researchers have reported different techniques to measure the yield stress using various types of rheometer geometries at constant shear rates or shear stress modes. A direct measurement technique (Vane method) at a constant low shear rate mode (≪1 Furthermore, foams behave as plastic or pseudo-plastic fluid which can be approximated by the Bingham or Casson rheological models (Eqs. It has been shown that in suspensions where only electrostatic and van der Waal forces are operative (DLVO behaviour), the yield stress and zeta potential of the particles are related to each other according to Eq. It should be mentioned that the rheology of suspensions is strongly affected by a large number of factors including particle size and chemistry of the suspension medium. For many dispersion systems, rheological research methods offer a unique possibility of studying the surface properties of the suspended solid particles. Also, it has also been shown that in mineral slurries, yield stress and viscosity are useful indicators of the degree of aggregation or dispersion of particles ( The majority of research on rheology in mineral processing has been focused on ore grinding. Studies of mineral suspension behaviour have shown that charge and morphology, particularly as they relate to the gangue minerals, play a very important role in determining slurry rheology ( The rheological characteristics should be also carefully considered in reagent selection to achieve an effective performance from mineral flotation processes. For example, the flow properties and apparent viscosity of mineral slurries are sensitive to the use of chemical additives ( Rheological investigations can be used to understand the interactions occurring in the flotation process ( The viscosity of flotation medium may also affect the flotation recovery. A higher recovery of coarse composite copper bearing particles has been reported by increasing the viscosity of the flotation medium (when a glycerol water mixture was used) ( The significance of froth properties in determining flotation performance is also well known. It is believed that rheology is an important froth property, because it can affect both froth mobility and froth stability. Mobility and stability are two important properties of froth in flotation. Froth mobility includes the vertical motion of the froth from the interface between the pulp and the froth towards to the upper surface, and the horizontal motion towards the concentrate overflow weir. Froth stability describes the processes that occur within the froth while it is flowing, including bubble bursting, particle detachment and drainage of water and solids from the froth. The relationship between the pulp viscosity and froth stability (maximum froth height attained in a column) of an ore slurry at different pH values is summarised in The effect of metal ions (salts) on the viscosity and froth stability of the ore slurry is also presented in  In recent years, a number of studies have been undertaken to identify froth characteristics, and to model froth recovery in laboratory and industrial flotation cells ( The relationship between the pulp rheology and flotation recovery/grade was discussed above. However, a correlation between froth rheology and the grade of hydrophobic and hydrophilic minerals (chalcopyrite and quartz, respectively) is also reported, as shown in This review has revealed that, although rheology parameters are known to be important in mineral flotation processing, the mechanisms (either through pulp or froth phases) by which the rheology influences the flotation performance is not yet fully understood. This may be due to the lack of accurate and reliable methods for measuring rheological properties of mineral slurries, since the solid particles tend to settle during the measurements. Finding a proper practical way to measure the rheology of such slurries remains a challenge for research. Furthermore, little work has been done on froth rheology. A direct correlation between froth viscosity and mineral flotation grade has been shown; however, it is not yet clear whether froth rheology is a consequence of pulp rheology (and can be controlled by the latter) or if it should be considered separately. Further investigations into this area are undoubtedly warranted. In conclusion, in order to better understanding the effect of rheology in mineral flotation, investigating the following topics is proposed: Proper methodology for accurately measuring rheological properties of the mineral slurries (considering the non-Newtonian behaviour of high solid suspensions, and settling behaviour of mineral ores) Correlating the pulp/slurry rheological characteristics with the mineral flotation performance for different mineral systems; how and why flotation performance can be affected upon changing the rheology? Froth rheology and correlating it with froth mobility which may be used as a proxy in predicting froth recovery in flotation process, and consequently, the overall flotation performance Relationship between the pulp and froth rheology and highlighting the influential parameters (such as particle size, shape and density, water chemistry and ore mineralogy) Studying the effect of clay minerals on the pulp and froth rheology in mineral flotation. The author gratefully acknowledges fruitful discussions with Professor Dee Bradshaw (JKMRC).