Although Na2S doesn’t depress the flotation of molybdenite, as the most utilized depressant, its effect on the flotation of molybdenite in the case where Pb2+ is involved has not been investigated yet. In this work, the flotation behavior of molybdenite in Pb2+ solution with or without Na2S was investigated. The mechanism was also studied by Zeta potential measurement, SEM-EDX, AFM and XPS analysis. The results indicated Pb2+ depressed the flotation of molybdenite, and Na2S enhanced the depression effect significantly. The depression effect depended on pH in both Pb2+ and Pb2+-Na2S solutions. In Pb2+ solution, the depression is mainly due to formation of PbS on molybdenite surface. While in Pb2+-Na2S solutions, the deterioration of flotation was majorly attributed to coating of strongly hydrophilic Pb(OH)2 precipitate on molybdenite surface.Molybdenite is the most important material for the production of molybdenum In practical flotation process, the effect of metal cations can’t be ignored, because those metal cations were generally unavoidable, primarily stemmed from flotation reagents, reused water and dissolution from mineral surface As a common activator, Pb This work contributed to study the effect of Pb Molybdenite samples originated from Guangxi Province, China, were used in this work. The samples were carefully hand-picked, crushed and ground before the experiments. After grinding in porcelain mill for desired time, the powder was sieved into different size fraction and stored separately. Samples in the size fractions of −75 + 38 μm size were used for flotation tests, SEM-EDS, XPS analysis, while samples in the size fractions of −5μm were utilized for assay, XRD analysis, ICP and Zeta potential measurements. The XRD pattern illustrates that the samples were very pure ( Analytical grade lead chloride (PbCl A XFG flotation machine was used for the flotation test. In each test, 2 g samples were first dispersed by an ultrasonic cleaner for 3 min. and then the suspension was transferred into 70 ml flotation cell and conditioned for 1 min. Before the pH of slurry was adjusted to predetermined value, various concentration of Pb Bulk molybdenite (0.5 cm × 0.5 cm × 0.05 cm) was used for the AFM observation. The fresh surfaces were soaked in Pb XRD, SEM, XPS and zeta potential measurement was performed using Bruker AXS D8 Avance system, JEOL JSM-IT300, Thermo Fisher Scientific ESCALAB 250Xi and Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS, respectively. The specific measure details were introduced in our previous publication   The floatability of molybdenite untreated and treated in Pb Zeta potential of molybdenite as a function of pH was shown in According to The flotation behavior of molybdenite ( Molybdenite samples after being conditioned in Pb AFM images of molybdenite after being treated in Pb The survey spectra of molybdenite before and after the treatment in Pb   The S 2p spectra of molybdenite before and after conditioning in Pb In summary, Pb-S and Pb-O compounds formed on the surface of molybdenite after Pb  Pb pH determined the depression performance in both Pb XPS revealed that the depression was primarily due to the coating of less hydrophobic PbS and strongly hydrophilic Pb(OH) This work was supported by