The solvent extraction of zinc from ammoniacal/ammonium sulfate solutions using a mixture of β-diketone, 1-benzoyl-2 nonyl ketone (Mextral54-100, HA), and 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime (Mextral 84H, HR) in sulphonated kerosene has been investigated. The effects of different ratio of extractants, extractants concentration, aqueous pH, total ammonia concentration and temperature on zinc extraction were examined. The results indicate that the mixture of Mextral54-100 and Mextral 84H shows evident synergistic effects on zinc extraction, and zinc is extracted as ZnAR by the mixed extractants. As the molar fraction of HR rises, the co-extraction ammonia content increases constantly and reaches a maximum value at χ(HR) 0.5. The extraction efficiency decreases dramatically with the increase of aqueous pH and total ammonia concentration, indicating that the formation of zinc amine complexes depresses the ligand exchange reaction. The thermodynamic parameter ΔH shows that the extractions of zinc by both extraction systems are exothermic driven. FT-IR studies confirm that the ammonia molecules can be co-extracted into synergistic adducts.Due to the increasing demands of zinc in industry and the urgent supply of zinc concentrate, exploiting and utilization of non-traditional zinc resources, such as zinc-bearing low grade oxidized ores, sulfide-oxidized mixed ores, tailings and wastes, have greatly attracted the interest of metallurgists. These non-traditional zinc resources have the characteristics of low zinc content and high basic gangue. If acid leaching method is adopted, it has high production cost as a result of huge acid consumption of high basic gangues ( Thus, recovery and separation of metals from ammoniacal solutions is a significant process in the treatment of non-traditional zinc resources ( However, it should be paid attention that the extraction efficiency of various β-diketones mentioned above is still too low for industrial application and decreases dramatically with the increase of pH or ammonia concentration ( Hydroxyoxime extractants are widely used in solvent extraction for the separation of various metal ions, such as nickel ( The 1-benzoyl-2 nonyl ketone, commercially as Mextral54-100, and 2-hydroxy-5-nonylacetophenone oxime, commercially as Mextral 84H were purchased from Chongqing HaoKang Pharmaceutical Chemical co., Ltd. The diketone (denoted as HA) content in Mextral54-100 is 99.5% and oxime (denoted as HR) content in Mextral 84H is 58.0%, respectively. The extractants dissolved in distilled sulfonated kerosene to the required concentration. All other chemicals were of analytical grade and were used without further purification. The deionized water used in the experiments was purified with a Millipore Milli-Q system. Organic solutions including HA with HR in sulfonated kerosene were prepared for the extraction trials. Synthetic leaching solutions containing 0.1 Extraction experiments were carried out in a thermostated vessel using a batch technique. The temperature was maintained at (298 Zinc-loaded organic phase equilibrated with ammoniacal solution at pH The extraction behaviors of two extractant mixtures, HA with HR, were examined to elucidate their synergistic effects on the extraction of Zn(II) from ammoniacal/ammonia sulfate solutions.  In order to identify the extracted species, the distribution coefficient of zinc was determined at initial pH The extraction behaviors of Zn(II) in ammoniacal solutions are very complicated due to the formation of zinc amine complexes. To evaluate the effect of the aqueous pH, the extraction of zinc was examined at different pH. The effect of equilibrated pH (pH The relationship between the logarithmic distribution ratio (log D) of Zn(II) and equilibrated pH (pH  The concentration of total ammonia is a key factor that affects the recovery of zinc from oxidized ores. So, the extraction behaviors of zinc from ammoniacal sulfate solutions with different total ammonia concentrations were examined. In The temperature was varied from 293 The enthalpy change for both extraction systems, ΔH, can be calculated from the slope of log D versus 1/T using Van't Hoff equation given below: The calculated ΔH values for the extraction reaction of single system and synergistic system are − In accordance with the derivation of As discussed above, the results of Sections Due to the keto-enol tautomerism of β-diketone, the enol configuration is found to play a crucial role in zinc extraction ( Stripping of zinc from the loaded organic phase was performed using sulfuric acid at phase ratio of 1:1 (each of 20  The extraction behaviors of zinc from ammoniacal/ammonium sulfate solutions have been investigated using a mixture of β-diketone (Mextral54-100) and hydroxyoxime (Mextral 84H) under different ratio of extractants, different extractants concentration, different total ammonia concentration and aqueous pH in aqueous phase and different experimental temperature. The mixture of two extractants shows evident synergistic effects and the synergistic enhancement factor was calculated to be 2.61. The synergistic adduct extracted by their mixture is determined to be ZnAR. The extraction efficiency decreases dramatically with the increase of aqueous pH and total ammonia concentration, indicating that the formation of zinc amine complexes depresses the ligand exchange reaction and accordingly decreases the extractability. The thermodynamic parameter ΔH shows that the extractions of zinc by both extraction systems are exothermic driven and the extracted complex, ZnA, is prone to react with HR to form the synergistic adduct, ZnAR. FT-IR studies confirm that the ammonia molecules can be co-extracted into synergistic adducts. This work has been supported by the