This prospective study describes the use of a short hand cast, which leaves the finger metacarpophalangeal and wrist joint free, for angularly displaced little finger metacarpal shaft fractures which require reduction. Twenty-seven patients with a mean age of 25 (range, 16–39) years with little finger or combined ring and little finger displaced metacarpal shaft fractures were prospectively recruited. All were treated by closed fracture reduction and immobilization in the cast. Patients were followed up at 1 week, 4 weeks, and between 6 and 12 months. At each of these follow-up visits posteroanterior and lateral radiographs of the metacarpals were performed to assess angulation of the fracture. The mean initial angulation of the 17 little finger metacarpal fractures with complete follow up was 40° (range, 20–60°). Their mean final angulation at 6 to 12 months was 8°. The fracture reduction was lost in three patients in whom the final angular deformities were 15° (one patient) and 20° (two patients). Journal of Hand Surgery (British and European volume, 2004)Little finger metacarpal shaft fractures are common and cause cosmetic deformity if significant malunion occurs. There is, however, no general consensus regarding their management or the limit of acceptable angular malunion ( The aim of this study is to evaluate the effectiveness of this cast for the maintenance of little finger metacarpal shaft fracture reductions. Approval was obtained from the local ethics committee and patients were prospectively recruited from our Hand Fracture clinic. Inclusion criteria were patients with displaced, angulated (>20° flexion) fractures of the little, or combined ring and little, metacarpal shafts. Exclusion criteria were fractures which were irreducible by closed means and open fractures. Twenty-seven patients were recruited during the study period, of which five had combined ring and little metacarpal shaft fractures. Patients were consented for reduction of the fracture under a local haematoma block and the application of the short hand cast. ( Once anaesthesia was achieved and the swelling caused by the local anaesthetic agent had resolved, a 10 Patients were followed up at 1 week, 4 weeks and at between 6 and 12 months. All were examined for tenderness at the fracture site and range of movement at 4 weeks. At the final follow-up it was recorded whether the patients had regained confidence in their hand. At each follow-up visit PA and lateral X-rays of the metacarpals were performed to measure residual angulation at the fracture site. All casts were removed at 4 weeks. Twenty-five men and two women, with a mean age of 25 (range, 16–39) years were recruited. One patient withdrew from the study following an adverse skin reaction to the Elastoplast and another nine patients were lost to follow up after the 4 week appointment, leaving 17 patients with adequate follow up. Three of these 17 patients had sustained combined ring and little finger metacarpal shaft fractures and another had a segmental fracture of the little finger metacarpal. Thirteen of the 17 fractures occurred within 10 At week 4, following removal of the cast, the mean angulation for the 17 patients with complete follow up was 9° (range, 0–20°). The mean angulation at the 6 to 12 month assessment in the same 17 patients was 8° (range, 0–15°). Thus, the mean change in the angulation between the 4-week and 6 to 12 month assessments was 2° (range, 0–5°), and this was probably artefactual in most cases. However the reduction was lost before week 4 (during treatment in plaster) in three patients in whom the final angular deformities were 15° (one patient with an isolated little finger metacarpal fracture with initial angulation of 38°) and 20° (two patients, both with combined ring and little finger metacarpal fractures). All three had had reapplication of their casts at 1 week because of loosening and their fractures were all within 10 At the 4 week assessment 11 of the 17 patients had no tenderness at the fracture site. The other six had minimal tenderness and all 17 had full ranges of metacarpophalangeal joint movement. At final follow-up none of the 17 patients had tenderness at the fracture site and all had gained full confidence in their hands, and had no functional restrictions. It has been suggested that the limit of acceptable angulation for ring and little finger metacarpal shaft fractures is between 20° and 40° (   There are many methods of internal and external fixation for metacarpal shaft fractures. External fixation using K-wires and acrylic resin was described by The small number of patients in this study make it difficult to reach any definitive conclusions on the effectiveness of this method of treatment for combined ring and little metacarpal shaft fractures. Nevertheless, the short hand cast appears effective for isolated little finger metacarpal shaft fractures.