Two step leaching experiments were carried out to extract nickel, vanadium, and molybdenum present in spent refinery catalyst. A bioleaching process was applied in the first step. Pulp density, initial Fe(II) concentration, initial pH, particle size, and temperature were varied to optimize the bioleaching process. Ni, V, and Mo were leached out with maximum recoveries of 97%, 92% and 53%, respectively, at an optimized bioleaching condition of initial ferrous ion of 2g/L, initial pH of 2, pulp density of 10% (w/v), particle size of (−106+45) μm, and a temperature of 35°C. As the Mo leaching rate was very low, a second leaching step for the bioleached residue was applied with different concentrations of (NH4)2CO3, Na2CO3, or H2SO4. The second step leaching was optimum at a concentration of 30g/L (NH4)2CO3 with respect to Mo extraction. The rate of Mo dissolution with respect to concentration of lixiviant in the second leaching step was evaluated. The percentages of Ni, V, and Mo leached were 97%, 97% and 99%, respectively, by combining the first step under optimized conditions and the second step with 30g/L (NH4)2CO3.Molybdenum, vanadium, and nickel are important metals for human life and industry. To meet the rapidly growing demands for Mo, V, and Ni products, the metal industry has increased their production and output. This has created problems for the metals industry, as many of the known high-grade mineral deposits are diminishing rapidly. In light of an expected shortage of primary resources, increased efforts are needed to develop secondary resources with the aid of new or improved technologies. Among secondary resources, spent catalysts discarded from petroleum refinery industries are undoubtedly very important, because these catalysts contain metals such as Al, V, Mo, Co, Ni, and iron (Fe). Catalysts are extensively used in the refining industry to purify and upgrade various petroleum feeds and to improve process efficiency. Catalyst materials, particularly those used in petroleum refineries, usually contain chemicals such as metals, metal oxides, and metal sulfides, which aid in hydrocarbon transformation to produce a full range of transportation fuels ( Bioleaching has been developed as a novel approach to recover metals from spent refinery catalyst ( In our previous study ( In this study we bioleached spent catalyst using iron oxidizing bacteria. The spent catalyst was pretreated before applying bioleaching. The effect of contact time, initial Fe(II) concentration, initial pH, pulp density, temperature, and particle size were studied to optimize bioleaching. Then, chemical leaching was performed on the bioleaching residue collected under optimum conditions of the bioleaching process to recover the remaining Mo present. All chemicals used were of analytical grade. All aqueous solutions were prepared using deionized water. The spent catalyst for the leaching experiments was collected from the Korean Petroleum Company. This spent catalyst was oily and dirty and could not be used directly in the leaching process, as shown in The de-oiled spent catalyst was ground using a porcelain mortar and pestle, followed by sieving to produce different size fractions. This powdered material was used as a base material in all leaching experiments. In this study three different size fractions of spent catalyst powder, − The metal contents of the de-oiled spent catalyst powder were then analyzed using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES), and the following values were obtained (wt.%): Al, 19.5%; S, 11.5%; Ni, 2.0%; V, 9.0%; Mo, 1.4%; and Fe, 0.3%. The bacteria used in the bioleaching experiment were cultured from a water sample collected from the Dalsung mine area in South Korea. The water sample was initially cultured in freshly prepared 9 Bioleaching experiments were conducted in a 250 Various leaching parameters such as initial Fe(II) concentration, pulp density, initial pH, temperature, and particle size were assessed to evaluate their effects on leaching efficiency. Leaching experiments were conducted at an initial pH of 2.0, with a pulp density of 10% (w/v), temperature of 35 During the bioleaching process, 97, 92, and 53% Ni, V, and Mo, respectively, leached out under optimum conditions. As only 53% of the Mo leached out during bioleaching, the recovery of residual Mo was the main objective in this step. Further leaching was considered to recover the residual Mo using different chemical reagents. Thus, several sets of bioleaching experiments were conducted under optimum conditions, and each set was filtered separately to obtain residues. Each residue was then used for chemical leaching under a particular set of conditions so that leaching efficiency of the chemical processes could be understood easily. Three different reagents, H All experiments were conducted in triplicate, and the average deviation among replicates was within 3%. The recovery of Ni, V, and Mo for all parameters is given in From the table it is observed that the leaching rate (%) of Ni and V were > Second-step leaching was conducted using H  The first step leach residue was treated with different concentrations of Na Different concentrations of lixiviant were used to evaluate the effect of Na (NH  The overall leaching efficiency of Mo, obtained by combining both bioleaching and chemical washing, is shown in The rate of chemical leaching of the residue increased with an increase in concentration of the lixiviants. The order of the reactions with respect to the concentration of lixiviants was evaluated.  lixiviant concentration order of the reaction with respect to lixiviant concentration constant The logarithm form of the Eq. From Eq. Bioleaching was conducted to leach Ni, V, and Mo from de-oiled spent refinery catalyst using iron oxidizing bacteria. Leaching parameters were varied to optimize the bioleaching process such as pulp density, initial Fe(II) concentration, initial pH, particle size, and temperature. At an optimum bioleaching condition (initial Fe, 2 This research was supported by Leading Foreign Research Institute Recruitment Program through the