Image processing is applied in the calculation of clast sizes for conglomeratic type ore and band width mineral distributions/compositions for banded iron formation (BIF) type ores. Hematite band widths are defined according to hematite mass percent thresholds and were developed to act as a bridging concept between microscopic hematite band widths and macroscopic hand specimen band widths. The difficulties of defining clasts against matrices through automated mineralogy include the occurrence of hematite clasts in a hematite matrix making clast boundaries indistinguishable in a QEMSCAN system. Defining clasts according to size is also problematic since hematite can either form matrix when associated with quartz granules or clasts when associated with clay. After mineralogical classification the ores are crushed to determine liberation and grind size characteristics. The correlations between hematite clast size/hematite band width with liberated grind sizes are compared for use in predictive models.The Minerals and Process Research division of the Research department of Anglo American’s Technical Solutions developed a methodology for the characterisation of low grade iron ores through the use of its QEMSCAN (EDS–SEM) instruments, supplemented with X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) techniques and Mineral Liberation Analyzer (MLA) instrumentation. EDS–SEM instruments are energy dispersive spectrometers attached to scanning electron microscopes and, in the case of MLA and QEMSCAN instrumentation, are largely automated ( Low grade ore is defined differently according to commodities and the ability to beneficiate the ore into concentrates that are sufficiently valuable for sale (as determined by economics), products or smelting. In the case of iron ore, low grade iron ores are generally defined as presently having an iron content of between 65% and 55% Fe (lower for certain taconite ores) – see: The characterisation of lower grade iron ores is becoming more complicated owing to the depletion of world lump iron ore stocks ( The understanding of lower grade iron ore mineralogy and the subsequent characterisation of lower grade iron ore will allow for the efficient processing of the ores and the optimisation of downstream smelting. The initial low grade ore samples were cut into rock slabs of 9 For liberation analyses, crushed particulates were mounted in 30 QEMSCAN instrumentation uses computer grey-scale backscatter electron (BSE) imaging in conjunction with a custom-designed X-ray spectral window database to identify phases of interest. MLA instrumentation uses a best-fit model to compare collected EDS X-ray spectra with a spectral library. For both systems, potential difficulties in analysis occur when phases of similar chemistry have similar average atomic numbers (i.e. similar back-scatter electron intensities) making distinctions difficult. For illustrative purposes, whilst albite and quartz have similar average atomic numbers they are readily distinguishable due to their unique chemistries. Similarly, (also for illustrative purposes) whilst pyrite and pyrrhotite have similar chemistries they are distinguishable due to their unique average atomic numbers. Problem minerals therefore encountered in analysis (and these are specific to this study) may include hematite and magnetite since they share similar chemistries and similar average atomic numbers. It is therefore important to note that QEMSCAN and MLA distinctions between magnetite and hematite are dependent on a number of factors, specifically the surface characteristics of the iron oxides being measured (scratching, plucking, dipping beneath mounting media, porosity, carbon coating thickness etc.) and the degree of ionic substitution being encountered in the iron oxides (in particular Mg, Ca and Mn). The MLA technique tends to produce X-ray centroid measurements, whereby single EDS X-ray spectra are collected for common BSE grey-scale levels, at higher magnifications/lower field sizes (and also at lower working distances resulting in superior resolution). It is thus a preferred technique for small grain sizes. The QEMSCAN technique produces X-ray maps, whereby EDS X-ray spectra are collected at predefined (low) beam stepping intervals, at lower magnifications/higher field sizes. The chamber geometry of QEMSCANs is such that they operate at large working distances to ensure maximum X-ray collection but this can result in poor image resolution. QEMSCAN is thus a preferred method for characterising solid solutions and finely intergrown complex textures since X-ray spectral measurements are typically taken every 1–20 More information on the QEMSCAN and MLA techniques may be found in the following sources: The accuracy of the QEMSCAN and MLA results was tested by calculating chemical assays and comparing them with measured chemical values. The precision, as defined by Granulation was applied to conglomeratic ores where clasts were extracted from matrix to obtain clast size distributions ( Similarly, hematite micro-band width distributions can be constructed using granulation functions for banded iron formations (BIFs), though there is no need for erosion functions. Once again, these are constructed only for hematite since it is the economic mineral of interest. Furthermore, since it can be assumed that the bedding bands are laterally continuous, stereological correction is not necessary for accurate size determinations. An example of a micro-band width distribution is presented in Subsequent to initial measurements, it was discovered that hematite micro-band widths typically return values on the micron scale, since macro-bands of hematite are typically contaminated with micro-laminations of quartz which is to be expected when macro-hematite bands transition to macro-quartz bands. Put differently, microscopically, it is evident that there are hematite micro-layers present in quartz and vica versa for all BIF samples. There is thus a disconnect between the size of hematite bands seen in hand specimens and the small hematite bands measured within a QEMSCAN system. Hematite macro-band width compositions were thus defined according to hematite mass percent thresholds and were developed to act specifically as a bridging concept between microscopic hematite band widths and macroscopic hand specimen band widths. After mineralogical characterisation the ores were crushed to determine liberation and grind size characteristics. The correlations between hematite clast size or hematite band width/composition with liberated grind sizes were then compared for possible use in predictive models. The amount of iron oxides, in this instance hematite, present in an ore should necessarily form the basis of a first order of prioritization for the economic extraction of iron. The bulk modal results for the lower grade ores are therefore presented in Samples C4 and C6 recalculate to 68 and 66 Conglomerate clast size distributions are presented in  Hematite micro-band width distributions are presented in Hematite macro-band width compositions are presented in  There are a number of difficulties associated with characterising conglomerates, not least of which is the classification of conglomerates. There are further a number of difficulties associated with defining clast sizes against matrices in automated analyses systems. These include the occurrence of hematite clasts in hematite matrix (sample C4, Another peculiarity of conglomerates associated with lower grade iron deposits is the occurrence of “Banded Iron Conglomerates” as seen in Lastly, in terms of beneficiation rank according to clast/matrix size, this is difficult to assess since there is no known evidence to suggest whether it is preferential to beneficiate conglomerates where hematite is present as matrix or whether hematite is present as clasts. In general, the conglomerates have greater percentages of mica and clay than the BIFs, as seen in In terms of implied liberation grind size based on clast size distribution, it can be seen that for conglomerates C1, C3 and C4 that all have high clast size distributions for the >3500 Hematite granulation of the BIF samples makes it evident that hematite has a degree of mobilisation along cracks and micro-faults, since hematite is partly mobilised where quartz is not, as demonstrated in Micro-band width distributions will have implications for product grade (quality). Macro-band width distributions based on band width composition will have implications for tonnage (hematite quantity). For macro-band width compositions where the 80% hematite cut-off category is not met (samples B1, B5 and B8 in This study set out to create a methodology for the characterisation of lower grade iron ores of the conglomeratic and BIF types to facilitate the understanding and prediction of downstream processing with special reference to liberation grind sizes. The concepts of clast size distribution, band width distribution and band width composition were introduced specifically for this purpose. Potential correlations between clast size distribution and liberation may allow for the prediction of ideal grind sizes for conglomeratic type ores in the future. There is less correlation between band width compositions and liberation classes though useful information, for instance the degree of quartz micro-band contamination can be extracted from the data. The above data will however always allow for the preliminary ranking of the ores, as seen in It should be stated that representative sample statistics will always be difficult to achieve with 9 It is recommended that future work place its emphasis on determining whether hematite present in matrix or hematite present as clasts is more beneficial for processing. Improved statistics may improve correlations between band width distribution/composition and liberation grind sizes for BIF type ores. The authors wish to acknowledge Mr. Gerhard Hoffman, Mrs. Marie Nel and Mrs. Bongi Ntsoelengoe for assistance in the above and for catalyzing the concepts presented in the paper. Funding for this research was provided by