The chlorination of a chromite concentrate was studied between 600 and 1000°C. The reaction products were analyzed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and chemical analyses. Chlorination of a chromite concentrate at about 700°C allowed the extraction of about 50% of the iron, thus doubling the Cr/Fe ratio in the treated concentrate. Aluminum chloride was tested as a chlorinating agent in the presence of a reducing atmosphere.
                  The effect of temperature on the kinetics of chromite chlorination was studied between 900 and 1040°C using thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). Temperature effects changed significantly with reaction extent. The initial stage of the chlorination was characterized by an apparent activation energy of about 112kJ/mol, while a value of about of 269kJ/mol was found for reaction extents greater than 0.4.The high reactivity of chlorine towards various compounds at moderate temperatures makes chlorine technology a competitive alternative for the extraction of several valuable metals. Further, the periodic imbalance between the world consumption of NaOH and Cl Recently, Gaballah et al. Different applications using chromite concentrates and ores require a high Cr/Fe ratio The literature concerning the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of the chlorination of simple oxides contained in the chromite (FeO, Fe This paper focuses on the chlorination of chromite concentrates to selectively remove iron as FeCl The sample of chromite concentrate was obtained from an Albanian mine. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD), microprobe and chemical analyses were used in the physical characterization of this concentrate. The gangue is essentially composed of magnesium and silicon oxides along with iron and aluminum oxides ( The chlorination tests were performed using several grams of chromite concentrates. The horizontal experimental setup shown schematically in The sample used to investigate the temperature effect on chlorination was the chromite mineral contained in the concentrate mentioned earlier. It was separated from the gangue by a series of successive treatments using heavy media. The chlorination tests were carried out on 40 The chromite concentrate was treated using a gas mixture of chlorine and nitrogen having a Cl  Another series of chlorination experiments of chromite concentrate was carried out at 1000°C. Pure chlorine and a gas mixture containing Cl Extraction of iron and chromium as a function of the reaction time is illustrated in One may note that shorter chlorination times will only lead to partial removal of iron and lower extraction extents of chromium. Thus, the chlorination of chromite ores or low grade concentrates using a gas mixture of chlorine and nitrogen at about 1000°C generates a residue having a high Cr/Fe ratio and meeting the standard requirements for the metallurgical production of ferro-chromium. From the thermodynamic point of view, aluminum chloride appears to be a good chlorinating agent. The evolution of the free-energy changes (Δ While the chlorination reactions of chromite compounds with AlCl The partial vapor pressure of aluminum chloride in Cl The diffusion of AlCl The oxygen partial pressure in the reactor allows partial oxidation of gaseous AlCl The Al To avoid some of these disadvantages, another series of experiments were conducted between 800 and 1000°C, using CO as a reducing agent. A gaseous mixture of AlCl The non-isothermal chlorination test of chromite mineral was investigated from room temperature to 1000°C using TGA. To determine the effect of temperature, isothermal tests of chromite chlorination were performed between 900 and 1040°C. Results are given in Different kinetic equations  Nevertheless, the kinetics of the chromite chlorination is complex due to the simultaneity of several phenomena as follows: Chromite contains several elements having different reactivities towards chlorine. Chlorination of iron and to some extent of chromium (≈35% WL) probably generates porous chromite grains. Formation of a layer of magnesium chloride can act as a barrier for further reaction. Iron chloride enhances the vapor pressure of other produced chlorides due to the formation of gaseous binary chlorides However, the effect of temperature on the chlorination and the volatilization of products was estimated by constructing an Arrhenius diagram. These results confirm that upgrading of the chromite concentrate, at a temperature lower than 900°C, will operate mainly through the selective extraction of iron allowing the increase in Cr/Fe without significant loss of chromium. The chlorination of chromite at 800°C could be employed to upgrade chromium concentrates. At this temperature and for a reaction time of 2 Aluminum chloride can be used as a chlorinating agent for the chromite at temperatures of about 800°C. However, special caution to control the partial pressure of oxygen in the chlorination reactor is needed. Between 900 and 1040°C, the temperature coefficient of the reaction of chromite mineral with Cl This work was performed in the frame of the contract N° BRE2-CT92-0173 thanks to the financial support of the European Union (DG-XII). The authors thank Dr. H.L. Schmidt for discussion, suggestion and help. They also would like to thank Dr. J.C. Mugica, Dr. R. Solozabal (INASMET, San Sebastian, Spain) and Dr. M. Coelho (INETI, Lisbon, Portugal) for technical discussions. Authors are indebted to Dr. A. Bonazébi, Dr. M. Djona, Dr. S. Ivanaj, Dr. N. Menad, Dr. N. Mirghaffari for discussions and help on different subjects and to Mrs. C. Richard for technical and administrative support.