Crosswind effect is a common issue which limits the cooling efficiency of natural draft dry cooling towers (NDDCTs) of all sizes. On short NDDCTs with total heights less than 30m, this effect might be much more significant. Following the authors’ previous numerical investigation on crosswind effects in a 15m-tall cylindrical NDDCT, an experimental study was carried out and is presented in this paper. The study used a 1:12.5 scaled cooling tower model equipped with an electric resistance heater simulating horizontally placed heat exchangers. The air velocity, temperature, and the heat input on the model were measured at different crosswind speeds in a wind tunnel. Comparisons against CFD models show good agreement between the experimental and numerical results when the similarity conditions between the CFD model and the experimental model are fully satisfied. Based on these results, the total heat transfer rate of NDDCTs was proposed to be a combination of a natural convective heat transfer term and a forced convective one. In small cooling towers, the natural convection term is comparable with the forced convection term. This explains why the correlation of the total heat transfer with the wind speed has a turnabout point below which the heat transfer decreases with increasing crosswind speed and above which it does the reverse. The turnabout point occurs when the sum of natural and forced convection terms is the minimum.area (m air-side area, front area and fin-root area of heat exchangers, respectively (m surface area of numerical cell (m constant coefficients discharge coefficient constant specific heat (J tower diameter (m) outer diameter of finned tube (m) Euler number source term for momentum equations Froude number temperature correction factor Grashof number height, elevation (m) convective heat transfer coefficient (W generation term of generation term of pressure loss coefficient turbulent kinetic energy (m air mass flow rate (kg Nusselt number exponent pressure (Pa) Prandtl number fin pitch and tube diagonal pitch, respectively (m) heat transfer rate (W) heat flux (W gas constant (J Reynolds number modulus of the mean rate-of-strain tensor volumetric source term for variable quantity temperature, air temperature (K) mean air temperature and heater surface temperature, respectively (K) air temperature difference (K) and dimensionless temperature difference velocity components in numerical cell volume (m velocity scalar (m cartesian co-ordinates permeability (m bulk thermal expansion coefficient (K viscosity (kg density and mean density (kg velocity air cross wind effective heater heat exchanger inside or inlet and outside or outlet model and prototype pure natural convection radiator tower overall reference value The cooling tower performance is crucial to the power conversion efficiency of power plants. It is reported that about 0.3 The cooling performance of a NDDCT is often affected by many environmental factors, which are not considered in existing design theories of cooling towers. Crosswind is one of the most important factors. A variety of investigations and measurements on wet and dry natural draft cooling towers subject to crosswinds have been carried out. Du Preez and Kroger However, on small natural draft dry cooling towers with the height less than 30 Previous studies by the authors were all based on numerical simulations. In this paper, results from an experimental study are reported. A scaled version of the prototype 15 The cylinder-shaped prototype natural draft dry cooling tower modelled in the previous CFD study is 15 In order to make the airflow condition in the scaled experimental model similar to that in the CFD prototype, Eqs. In Eq. Theoretically, the dynamic similarity between the scaled model and the prototype is achieved when all above dimensionless parameters are the same for both. However, it is impossible to satisfy the similarity for The subscripts The scaled experimental model is 1.2 The heater contains 27 heating spiral-fin tube elements of different lengths which are specially designed and manufactured so that they generate same heat at each unit length. The heater is powered by three-phase AC and has a maximum heating power of 25 The geometric dimensions of the heater need not be scaled with the dimension ratio since the heat exchanger bundles are treated as a high-temperature porous medium in authors’ studies. Therefore the heater only needs to provide heat and resistance for the airflow. The local heat transfer details and the flow fields between the tubes are not of interest to the purposes of the current study. The overall pressure drop coefficient through the heater The pressure loss of the heater is not enough to validate Eq. The electric input power of the heater is adjustable through a three-phase thyristor controller. So the air exiting the heater can obtain a desired temperature The schematic diagram of the experiment system is shown in The experiment is run based on two basic modes: constant heating power and constant heater surface temperature. In the first mode, the electric power of the heater is fixed, which corresponds to the CFD model with a constant heat flux. In the second mode, the surface temperature of the heater finned tube is monitored by the attached sensors and controlled by the PC. This constant temperature equals to the heater surface temperature in pure free convection when there is no crosswind. This model corresponds to the CFD model with a fixed heat exchanger temperature. During the measurements, the flow conditions at each crosswind speed remain stable for at least 10 An open circuit wind tunnel Considering that the limited ceiling height may affect the heat dumping performance of the cooling tower model, a parallel test was done with a part of working section replaced by an open channel without the ceiling. The channel simply consists of two smooth boards which the two vertical walls on two sides. The channel has the same height and span as the wind tunnel working section so that it can join up with the remaining part of latter perfectly. The scaled cooling tower model was tested inside the open channel, and in spite of the absence of ceiling, the airflow attacking on the tower model is found generally uniform. The measured results were compared with those obtained in the original working section. It was found both results had small differences less than 7% for the crosswind speed of 1.5 Since the flow conditions for the scaled tower model and the 15 The modelling approach described in author’s previous work The numerical simulation is implemented using the commercial CFD code Fluent. The pressure-based steady-state solver is used, which bases the governing equations on the conservation equations of mass, momentum, and energy. The airflow turbulence is modelled using the realizable The no-slip adiabatic wall boundary condition in The 1.2 Both the aerodynamic and thermal characteristics of this heat exchanger model are same as those in the experimental model rather than the CFD prototype. Specifically, With above modelling approaches, all the dimensionless scaling parameters in this CFD model are identical to those in the experiment. The results from this model will be therefore directly compared with the experiment results. The comparison with the 15 The scaled NDDCT model was tested in a pure natural convection manner first without using the wind tunnel. The heater in this case worked at certain constant powers. The natural convective airflow velocity and temperature were measured by the sensors at positions illustrated in The uncertainty analysis for each sensor was done based on the measured data following the procedure introduced in A direct comparison of the results between the measurement and the identical scaled CFD model (1.2 The total heat transfer rate 4926 The measurement results in the no-wind case have verified that the target similarity is satisfied for the Froude number and Euler number. The measurements under crosswinds was run first at the constant heating power mode, e.g. the heater operated at Under wind conditions, the hot airflow speed All three show a similar turn-around trend that first decrease and then increase with a minimum somewhere. But the slopes of the curve for the 15 It is noted that the speed sensors used in the experiment only measured the local air speeds at the sensor tips but not the precise flow directions. This fact implies that the observed increase of air speed post the critical wind speed in the measurement can be attributed more to the airflow circulations in the cooling tower than the acceleration of the uni-directional airflow. In fact, similar situations can be found in the CFD results from the 1.2 The temperature distribution is investigated to better understand the airflow behaviour. The air temperature is measured at seven positions along the aforementioned central line of each level inside the cooling tower model. To eliminate the influence of the environmental temperature on the experiment results, the temperature difference Δ The temperature distributes nearly symmetric along with the central line at any level of the tower in free convection case. The crosswind tends to increase the temperature much more on windward side than on leeward side in the tower top, as the draft airflow on windward side slows down while on the other side the ambient cool air penetrates into the tower. At the measuring level underneath the heat exchangers, temperature increases significantly in windward side when the crosswind speed rises. These profiles clearly indicate that the reversed airflow occurs at windward part due to the local air vortices, which brings heat down from the heat exchangers. At bottom level above the heat exchangers, the maximum temperature position generally moves from windward side towards leeward side as the wind speed increases, because the negative pressure zone under the heat exchanger in windward side is expanding. The position where vortex centre is has the lowest air speed and thus highest temperature. The temperature distribution obtained in experiment then is compared with the results of the 1.2 These comparisons show a satisfying agreement between the experiment and CFD results for bottom and underneath levels. However at the tower top, the temperature distribution predicted by CFD behaves quite different from that in experiment. In fact, the air flow field near either the tower outlet or the tower inlet is rather complicated. To examine the crosswind effect on the total heat transfer of the heat exchanger, the experiment at variable heating power mode was conducted. During the measurements, the electric power of the heater was regulated, so that the temperature of the heater surface at all wind speeds was maintained at the same value as the surface temperature in pure natural convection case. Because of the energy conservation, this power was roughly equal to the total heat transfer rate by finned tubes of heater – Similarly, a dimensionless total heat transfer rate can be defined as The correlation obtained from the experiment data with error bars are displayed in All the total heat transfer rate curves in The interesting trend of the heat transfer rate was preliminarily explained in author’s previous work as that with the presence of crosswind, the heat from the horizontal heat exchanger bundles is taken away by both the upward air stream through the tower outlet and the horizontal airflow through the tower inlet In non-wind condition, the heat transfer coefficient When the crosswind exists, the vertical hot airflow is deflected and thus slower while just leaving the tower exit, resulting in the reduction in On the other hand, the forced convection heat transfer occurs mainly when the airflow parallel passing by the heat exchanger bundles. If one assumes the bundle to be a hot square plane, the convective heat transfer coefficient over the plane is approximately in the term of Based on Eqs. In Eq. Eq. In small NDDCTs, the forced convection term gradually becomes comparable with natural convection one as the crosswind gets faster, which is the direct reason why the overall heat dump rate follows the V-shaped trend. It is noted that this trend is different from the one observed in large cooling towers which continuously declines with the increase of the wind speed The effect of crosswind on the small natural draft dry cooling towers is investigated in the wind tunnel experiment. The study uses a 1:12.5 scaled cooling tower model equipped with a round electric heater. The air velocity, temperature, and the heating power have been measured under different crosswind conditions. The experimental results are compared with the results from its prototype CFD model – a 15 The results of the experiment and the 15 The cooling tower model experiment verifies that the reversed airflow exist near the heat exchanger level as the CFD models predicted. In certain high wind speeds, the CFD model might overestimate the vortices near the tower outlet, resulting in a pessimistic prediction of the cooling tower performance in this crosswind speed range. The heat transfer coefficient of NDDCTs under crosswind can be proposed as a combination of a pure natural convection heat transfer coefficient and a forced one. In small cooling towers, because of the low buoyancy-induced airflow, natural convection heat transfer is comparable with forced convection at high wind speed range. Therefore, the total heat transfer rate experiences a turnabout at a certain crosswind velocity. Below this velocity, the total heat transfer decreases with increasing wind speed. As the crosswind speed is increased above this critical value, the forced-convection component becomes more and more dominant and the total heat transfer rate increases with increasing crosswind speed. This research was performed as part of the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative (ASTRI), a project supported by the Australian Government, through the