Cone crushers are used in the aggregates and mining industries to crush rock material. A model to predict the worn geometry of cone crushers was previously developed. In that model there was some disagreements between predicted and measured geometry and several effects were suggested to explain the discrepancy in the model. In this study the effect of shear forces along the crushing surfaces was implemented in the model. Simulations were compared to measurements on two different crushing chambers. The results show a significant improvement with respect to the discrepancy between measured and simulated geometry. Measurements were made on a coarse crushing chamber where the operating parameters hydroset pressure, power draw and capacity were tracked during the lifetime of the set of liners. The simulated operating parameters show some agreement with measured data, but the crusher was not run under ideal conditions at all times.Cone crushers are widely used in the mining and aggregates industry to crush blasted rock material. The two main crushing parts are the mantle and the concave. The main shaft of the mantle is suspended on a spherical radial bearing at the top and in an eccentric at the bottom. A hydraulic cylinder supports the thrust bearing that carries the thrust force of the main shaft. The hydraulic system can raise the main shaft in order to compensate for the wear of the mantle and concave. The hydraulic pressure in the cylinder that supports the thrust force from the main shaft is called the hydroset pressure. As the eccentric is turned the rock material will be squeezed and crushed between the liners (see Along its path through the crushing chamber, a rock particle will be subjected to several crushing events. The shortest distance across the crushing chamber is called the closed side setting, CSS, and is an important variable for the performance of the crusher. The control system is calibrated regularly to maintain a constant CSS. Previous research The geometry of the crushing chamber is crucial for the performance. Due to wear the geometry of the liners will change, and hence the crusher performance will also change and sometimes suffer. Therefore it is desirable to simulate the change of geometry and performance as the liners wear. A model for this purpose was previously developed Among the other explanations for the discrepancy, that were proposed by Lindqvist and Evertsson Other suggested explanations are non-linear dependency between pressure and wear, shear stress at the interface between rock and liner, dependency between particle size and wear rate. Chenje and Radziszewski Among the possible explanations of the disagreement in the model, shear forces in the contact between rock and liner is the one that is addressed in this paper. The wear model presented by Archard The wear model presented by Archard In the model for wear prediction, described by Lindqvist and Evertsson The “average pressure” expressed in Eq. The wear resistance parameter If a particle squeezed between oblique surfaces, as in If a particle is squeezed between oblique surfaces, the shear force in the contact can be computed. Consider the particle squeezed between two oblique surfaces in The tangential frictional force If the computed factor In the crusher model, the pressure is computed according to the pressure response model presented by Evertsson and Lindqvist So the shear–stress Here A measurement rig that was previously developed for measuring the worn geometry of cone crushers was used. The method resembles the one used by Rosario (2004). The crusher is stopped and a probe detects the location of the surfaces of the mantle and concave. The device is made of a frame that is attached to the main shaft of the crusher (see The measurements were carried out at the NCC quarry located approximately 70 The coordinates from the measurements were transformed, and the measured geometry was entered into a CAD-tool. The worn liner profiles were computed using the crusher model.   Hydroset pressure and power draw were read off the control panel of the crusher once every day. When the inlet bin of the crusher is entirely filled with rock material, the crusher is said to be choke fed, and this is the preferred way to operate a cone crusher. Readings were taken during normal operation of the crusher, i.e. choke fed conditions. The feed was between 32 and 250 The wear model is indifferent to how time is scaled, and the wear rate is exaggerated in the simulations, to save computation time. The wear was accelerated by a factor of 4700 times, as compared to the wear rate found by Lindqvist and Evertsson  Readings of power draw and hydroset pressure were taken during normal choke fed conditions once every day (see The measured capacity of the crusher was computed as the daily output divided by the number of hours the crusher was run that day. The crusher is a secondary crusher. When designing a crushing plant the components are generally over-dimensioned and the plant bottleneck is placed late in the process. This means that the rest of the plant, at times will be under-utilised, and the crusher may not be choke fed. The measured capacity hence fluctuates. This is the reason why the capacity is generally over predicted. During some shifts, the plant was set to crush 0–90 material in the secondary crusher, and during those shifts readings of power and hydroset pressure were not taken. Those shifts are not representative for the most common use of the machine, which is set to crush 0–90 The aim of this study was to improve the crusher model by adding a shear force dependent component in the wear model. As mentioned, in a previous study, there was a discrepancy between simulation and measurement in the upper part of the chamber Another proposed mechanism that could explain the discrepancy is that wear is dependent on particle size and number of contact points that occur. Furthermore, the rotation of the mantle deviates from ideal rolling against the rock in the upper part of the crushing chamber (see An important question is whether the model parameters described by Lindqvist and Evertsson The crusher was not run choke fed at all times. This explains the under-prediction of capacity (see By adding a shear force dependent factor in the wear model for cone crushers, the agreement between simulated and measured worn geometry was significantly improved. The prediction of operating parameters hydroset pressure and power draw was satisfactory, but measured power draw and hydroset pressure fluctuated. As was mentioned in previous sections, there are other possible explanations for the addressed model discrepancy, for example, the particle size distribution or non-linear relationships between wear rate and pressure. The crusher model used in this study can be described as a “grey-box” model. Introducing more model parameters to describe more phenomena might eventually make the problem of finding optimal model parameters poorly conditioned. Even though the model presented here, has successfully solved the addressed problem, further work is necessary to fully understand the importance of other variables. The measurements were carried out at the NCC Ramnaslätt Quarry in Southern Sweden. Thomas Gustafsson and the other staff, are gratefully acknowledged. SANDVIK Rock Processing AB is gratefully acknowledged for providing funding, information and support.