Fluidized bed combustors (FBCs) are noted for their ability to capture SO2 in situ via direct reaction with Ca-based sorbents. However, despite more than 30 years of intensive study of sulfation processes in atmospheric FBC boilers and numerous laboratory studies, there are still many uncertainties and disagreements on the subject. In particular, the mechanisms of the sulfation reaction are still not properly understood, and there is dispute over the explanation of the well-known temperature maximum for optimum sulfur capture found in FBC boilers. This paper discusses these points of contention and suggests the most probable mechanisms and explanations for the various phenomena seen with sulfur capture, based on current literature and personal experimentation.Fluidized bed combustors (FBCs), whether circulating, bubbling, pressurized or at atmospheric pressure, have the ability to capture SO The economic barrier to alternative sorbents is important, as FBC competes with other technologies such as pulverized coal (PC) combustion with backend flue gas desulfurization (FGD), or integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC). Any significant increase in the cost of the FBC sulfur capture process itself is likely to favor one of the other technologies. In atmospheric FBC boilers sulfur capture occurs via the following overall reactions: In pressurized systems, operating at pressures of 1–2 The present discussion provided here is devoted mainly to atmospheric FBC (currently the more commercially significant of FBC systems) except where consideration of sulfation at pressure may elucidate some feature. Readers interested in pressurized FBC (PFBC) can find valuable discussion of the issues surrounding sulfur capture elsewhere The sulfation reaction is far from quantitative; typically 30–40% CaO conversion is obtained, but for atmospheric systems, is effectively enthalpy-neutral in that on a molar basis 2–3 times as much CaCO Depending on the temperature and partial pressure of SO In practice FBCs are usually operated in the 800–950°C range, under overall oxidizing conditions; however, localized reducing conditions are known to exist. These occur as a result of variations in gas concentrations in the dense bed that arise from bubble phenomena, air staging and the existence of volatile plumes. The sulfation process can follow a number of routes. One of the earliest discussions of the possibilities was by Moss He suggested that The second route was supported by Burdett The importance of the second route is, however, highly questionable for a number of reasons. First, SO More importantly, while any SO Their work further suggested that ionic species such as S Nonetheless, the idea that SO There is no clear explanation for the findings of Wieczorek-Ciurowa Limestones vary greatly in properties, and the interested reader is referred to the books of Boynton Most limestone has low porosity, and Boynton In a study carried out by the Coal Research Establishment (UK), Ford and Sage Limestone performance bears no relationship to stone geological type or chemical properties, except for cretaceous type stone or chalk, which has very high sulfation capacities. Stones obtained from different locations within the same quarry can exhibit very different SO Due to the significant contribution of transportation cost to the overall cost, particularly for coarse grades (whose price will be the lowest because they have been subject to minimal processing), the most cost-effective sorbent is likely the one that is locally available. However, it has been suggested that younger limestones are significantly more reactive than older ones, and this point of view is normally presented in the literature in apparent contradiction to conclusion one of the Ford and Sage study Conclusions two and three of Ford and Sage's study In the case of bench-scale reactors or TGAs in the study of sulfur capture, the Pennsylvania State University workers note that it is difficult to get such equipment to operate in the same regime as a real CFBC boiler. Expressed another way, these workers point out that it is difficult for bench-scale reactor to mimic actual field conditions (e.g. combustor temperature, gas composition, continual reduction in particle size due to sorbent attrition and particle residence time. Further, the ability to correlate bench-scale data with full-scale data is compromised by the accuracy and precision of the full-scale data (e.g. ability to accurately measure the fuel and sorbent feed rate and the amount of sulfur fed to the comubstor for example). They also point out that chemical composition and limestone purity provided no indication of the performance of any limestone as sulfur sorbent. Interestingly, they failed to find any correlation between sulfur capture performance and calcination times in contrast to the work of Dam-Johansen and Østergaard A final caveat on comparing limestone performance in a bench- or pilot-scale unit to that in a commercial unit is to ensure chemical steady state, as sorbent may only be removed slowly from the bed. A simple formula to calculate the bed replacement time or mean sorbent residence time, is as follows: It should be noted that formulae like Lyngfelt and Leckner  A nonporous calcitic limestone might be expected to give a calcine with a porosity of about 36%, providing the limestone particles do not shrink on calcination. In practice figures of up to 55% are found for the porosity of commercial quicklimes It should be noted that in the matter of shrinkage, as in many other respects, limestones can be expected to be very variable in their behavior. Murray et al. The sulfation process is normally viewed as continuing until significant blocking of external pores occurs, leading to the formation of an impenetrable CaSO Studies using Dolomites are generally more reactive on a Ca molar basis than calcitic limestones. It should be noted that the simple core shell picture of sulfation is an over-simplification. Thus Pickles et al. Cyclic release and uptake of sulfur promoted greater penetration of sulfur into the particle than did sulfation on oxidizing conditions. The direct conversion of CaO to CaS followed by oxidation to CaSO The heat release and temperature rise (measured as an increase of 1–15°C) associated with the oxidation of CaS to CaSO Or that CaS formation in the product layer may create cracks or disruptions in the crystal structure ensuring a higher rate of gaseous or ionic transport through the product layer. However, as Mattisson himself noted Finally, work done at the University of British Columbia on sorbent reactivation showed three distinct sulfation patterns At typical FBC temperatures (800–950°C) and overall oxidizing conditions, CaSO Results from such sensors indicated that partial pressures of O Another conclusion of their most recent work is that significant recapture of SO Hansen In particular, Mattisson's work has been used to explain anomalous sulfur capture results first obtained by Mjörnell et al. Mattisson It has been known for over 20 years that sulfur capture in atmospheric FBC systems is strongly influenced by temperature, typically with a maximum sulfur capture efficiency at about 850°C ( It should be noted that The concept that reducing reactions might be involved in causing the sulfur capture efficiency temperature maximum is supported by Chalmers University Sintering of sorbent particles is enhanced at higher temperatures resulting in lower porosity and surface area, hence reducing the overall conversion of limestone. SO High temperatures result in an enhanced sulfation rate which causes small pores to become blocked, hence preventing entry of SO Oxygen depletion in the dense phase of the bed, due to increasing volatile combustion at higher temperatures, inhibits sulfation above 900°C. In this theory it is supposed that coal volatiles and oxygen can coexist below 850°C, allowing sulfation to proceed, while at temperatures above 900°C, oxygen is depleted thus diminishing the production of CaSO That sintering determines the capture efficiency temperature maximum can probably be rejected immediately. The shape of the curve for the temperature maximum varies greatly in FBC systems ( Further, strong evidence against such structural impairment theories also comes from work of Lyngfelt and Leckner That SO There is more support for the view that an accelerated sulfation reaction resulting from increasing bed temperature blocks the surface pores and decreases the overall rate of conversion. The idea received early support by Ulerich et al. In criticizing this concept, Mattisson The particulate phase oxygen depletion theory of Dennis and Hayhurst In consequence, Lyngfelt and Leckner Recently, Allen and Hayhurst In a study of the reduction of CaSO It should, however, be noted that Steenari The above explanations for the sulfur capture efficiency temperature maximum are by no means exclusive, and Lyngfelt and Leckner Finally, the existence of a temperature maximum for sulfur capture efficiency in experiments carried out under oxidizing conditions is also somewhat of a concern, as theories that invoke reducing conditions do not apply to such situations. However, it has been noted such temperature maxima are less pronounced, although this is based on a fairly limited data set It is well known from batch experiments carried out in TGA, differential reactors, etc. that limestone sulfated under oxidizing conditions will attain a maximum conversion in typically under 90 However, new experimental evidence indicates there is no upper limit to the sulfation reaction until complete conversion has been achieved, and that conversions greater than 69% can occur with long sulfation times (days to weeks). These results come from two sources: studies on deposits obtained from FBC boilers, which have achieved near quantitative conversions to CaSO It is of interest that this near-quantitative conversion has been noticed for CaO in hot gas filters from PFBC units using dolomitic limestones. Here, sulfation over filter cake can be associated with a significant amount of the sulfur capture Given that typical residence times in boilers are of the order of hours, it might be assumed that the long-term sulfation process described above has no implications for sulfur capture. However, this view has been recently disputed by Abanades et al. Fragmentation and attrition are potentially important phenomena in determining sulfur capture performance of limestones. There are in fact some limestones which decrepitate so severely on calcination that they are likely to perform very poorly as sulfur sorbents In an early study on attrition of seven European limestones, Spitsbergen et al. Additional findings of this work were that increased impurities from about 4 to about 18% by weight, led to more attrition resistance in the limestones studied, and that the primary fragmentation occurring in the first 5 Salatino and his co-workers have revisited the subject of fragmentation and attrition of sorbents most recently Dolomitic limestones behave very similarly to calcitic limestones from the point of view of fragmentation and attrition (although for the dolomitic stone examined there was no evidence of primary fragmentation). This is in contrast to work by Hu and Scaroni Primary fragmentation occurs immediately after the injection of the particles into the bed, as a consequence of thermal shock and the internal overpressure caused by CO Sulfation brings about a dramatic reduction in fines produced by surface abrasion, by an order of magnitude or more. In a sense this behavior parallels that of coal fragmentation and attrition, where devolatilization is the major cause of fragmentation, but unlike coal, where combustion-assisted attrition dramatically enhances attrition rates and hence enhances combustion inefficiency, here sulfation dramatically reduces sorbent attrition. These workers also note that early studies of limestone particle attrition in “inert” or non-sulfating conditions dramatically overestimated attrition rates. They also point out that the texture and particle size of the fresh sorbent crucially affects primary fragmentation, and also the subsequent comminution of the sorbent. Consequently they suggest the characterization of any sorbent from the point of view of attrition be carried out at appropriate temperatures and with suitable heating rates. While it is clear that fragmentation producing fines is likely to have a deleterious effect on sulfation, a number of workers have suggested that fragmentation may contribute significantly to improving sorbent performance by reducing the effects of pore plugging A particularly important example of high-sulfur fuel used in CFBCs is petroleum coke. This fuel may have 5–8 At this time the precise mechanism(s) for the agglomeration phenomenon whereby loose packed bed ashes become hardened deposits must be regarded as somewhat uncertain. In addition, it should be noted that currently available information does not deal with initiation or deposition processes, an area requiring further study. Nonetheless, it should be noted that the phenomena described here are different from those in which “sticky” material (such as low melting point alkali components) first bond bed particles together, leading to defluidization. In order to study the agglomeration and densification process, samples of ash from a number of FBC and CFBC units and a variety of limestones, including those used in the FBC and CFBC units were selected. These were subjected to long-term sulfation in crucibles placed in a temperature-controlled oven ( Both studies also demonstrated the important fact that agglomeration is possible in the presence of very low levels of Na, K or V; i.e. the elements that are often associated with the formation of low melting point eutectics, or significant ash softening. Here low levels are taken to mean that those elements are present at levels of several hundred parts per million or less. If Na and/or K are present at higher levels (i.e. the percent level), they can contribute significantly to the agglomeration process, i.e. they act synergistically, causing agglomeration to occur at lower levels of sulfation than otherwise would have this effect All of these studies This test work has also demonstrated that after continuous sulfation over days to weeks a wide variety of CFBC ashes develop a hard, highly sulfated agglomerated layer on the top of the test samples. The thickness of these hard agglomerates is about 4–5 The work by Anthony and his co-workers It was suggested early on that CaO might react with ash components In contrast, work carried out on the 165 Thus, up to 10–15% of the CaO in the system is not readily available for sulfation (other work has shown that some of the OCC sulfates much less readily, if at all, than does the parent limestone The low utilization of limestone (typically 30–40%) in a FBC is a limitation for the technology. Usually ashes must be landfilled, at relatively high cost in some cases (from $10–20/t This list does not include methods that involve, for instance, decomposing and regenerating the CaO, or modifying the combustor or cyclone substantially, as this paper concentrates on reactivation technologies which could be used with existing CFBC boilers. It should also be noted that techniques such as cool-side humidification In practice, only reactivation by hydrating the ashes using either water or steam has shown promise. Water treatment leads to the formation of Ca(OH) Reactivation methods usually concentrate on treating bed material which may represent about 30% of the solid residues or more when firing a high-sulfur fuel in a CFBC (for petroleum coke-fired units levels of up to 50% are not uncommon). The choice of reactivating only bed material is made for two reasons: first, the bed materials will usually have a higher CaO content; second, even if the finer fly ash is hydrated its short residence time may preclude it as an effective sulfur sorbent. Despite its technical merit, sorbent reactivation has not yet been commercialized for essentially economic reasons and most of the current effort is directed at overcoming this limitation. There are, however, a number of new insights on this subject that merit attention. First, as noted above, significant amounts of the apparent analytical CaO in the bed material may actually be present as OCC. Further, CaO itself is capable of undergoing reaction with ash components which can modify its behavior as a sulfur sorbent Finally, some recent work carried out by Laursen et al. This paper has discussed various aspects of the sulfur capture process in FBC. Despite over 30 years of serious study of sulfation phenomena, there are still major uncertainties in this area. At this time, the mechanisms of the sulfation process are not fully understood. Nor is there agreement on the origin of the well-known sulfur capture efficiency temperature maximum seen near 850°C. However, the idea that this arises from a competition between the sulfation reaction and reductive decomposition superimposed on a more gradual maximum produced by a change in reaction mechanism around 850°C, seems most likely. New results from Chalmers University on the influence of periodic oxidizing and reducing conditions on sorbent performance have also shown that this may be potentially important, in contradiction to earlier findings. Similarly, findings on the existence of OCC, and a variation in resulfation performance depending on the “sulfation pattern” of the limestone also suggest the sulfation behavior in FBC is more complicated than previously thought. This paper has also suggested that better methods for limestone characterization are needed, as are more in-depth studies of the fundamentals of the sulfation process. Despite the considerable attention this subject has received, it deserves further study. The authors would like to thank Dr Jia Lufei of Natural Resources Canada, and Mr Qiu Kuanrong of Chalmers University, Sweden for their assistance during the preparation of this paper, and Professors E.M. Bulewicz (Cracow University of Technology, Poland) and A. Lyngfelt (Chalmers University) for many helpful suggestions during the course of writing this paper.