This study investigates the effects of silicate removal from recycled wastewater on scheelite flotation performance. Systematic experiments were conducted to identify and evaluate the mechanisms underlying the influence of sodium silicate on scheelite flotation and silicate removal. When the sodium silicate concentration exceeds 1 × 10−2 mol/L, scheelite recoveries decrease from 80% to 20% because excess sodium silicate strongly competes with sodium oleate for adsorption sites on the scheelite surface. Under treatment with 5 g/L calcium chloride, silicate removal can reach 90%, and system pH decreases from 12.5 to 11. The reduction of system pH to the range of 11–9 is conducive to promote silicate polymerization and improve silicate removal. The micromorphology and crystal structure of the precipitates that formed under different reaction pH levels were analyzed through scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectrometry, X-ray diffraction, and Fourier transform infrared. The results of these analytical tests confirm that calcium chloride removes silicate through the formation of amorphous calcium silicate hydrate precipitates with low crystallinity. Continuous pilot-scale tests on recycled wastewater treatment and reuse further demonstrate the feasibility and stability of silicate removal. Silicate removal can reach 90%, and system pH can decrease from 11 to 9.5. The use of treated water increases scheelite roughing grade from 0.47% to 0.63% and improves scheelite recovery by 5%.The mineral processing industry poses a severe threat to environmental ecosystem and public health because it produces massive volumes of wastewater that contains various pollutants, such as suspended solids, organic matter, and heavy metals ( Sodium silicate and its modified compounds are widely used as a dispersant and a depressant in flotation to separate valuable minerals from gangue minerals ( Chemical precipitation is an effective method for the removal of phosphate ( This study demonstrates the influence of residual reagents on scheelite flotation and wastewater treatment and reuse. Thus, the results of this study have crucial application in mineral processing and environmental protection. This study was primarily performed to demonstrate that the removal of residual silicate from recycled water significantly improves scheelite flotation performance. The mechanism underling the influence of sodium silicate on scheelite floatability was investigated through Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) analysis. The mechanism of silicate precipitation was illustrated by equilibrium speciation analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy coupled with energy dispersive spectrometry (SEM–EDS), and FTIR spectroscopy. Treated water was reused for scheelite roughing to verify the influence of silicate on scheelite flotation. Recycled wastewater was collected every 2 h for 48 h from a tailing dam in a scheelite flotation plant located in Luanchuan, China. The wastewater samples were mixed to ensure representativeness and stored hermetically in plastic buckets. The inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP–OES) analysis results for the recycled wastewater samples are shown in Raw ore was mined and processed to recover molybdenite and scheelite concentrates through sequential selective flotation in their respective flotation circuits. Scheelite feed ore originated from the tailings of molybdenite flotation and was processed through the scheelite roughing and cleaning flotation circuits. The detailed flotation system is described in Single mineral flotation experiments were performed on a XFG self-aspirating impeller flotation machine (Exploring Machinery Plant, Changchun, China) with a 40 mL plexiglass cell at an impeller speed of 1900 rpm. The mineral suspension was prepared by adding 2.0 g of minerals to deionized water, and the suspension pH was adjusted to 10 ± 0.2. The suspension was dosed with 1 × 10 Silicate aqueous solution ([Si] = 1150 mg/L) was prepared using sodium silicate and deionized water at room temperature (23 ± 2 °C). Then, 100 mL of the silicate aqueous solution was poured into a beaker on a magnetic stirrer (78HW-3, Hangzhou Instrument Electric Machine Co. Ltd., China). Different doses (1–7 g/L) of calcium chloride were added to the solution for the removal of silicate. The mixture was stirred for 3 min and allowed to sediment for 8 h. The supernatant was taken and filtered with a filter membrane for silicon and pH analyses. Silicate removal was quantified by using Eq. The pH of the silicate aqueous solution was adjusted from 9 to 13.5 using 5% NaOH or 5% HCl prior to the addition of different doses (2–5 g/L) of calcium chloride. The supernatant was collected and filtered for silicon and calcium analyses, and the precipitates were washed thrice with deionized water and dried for silicon and calcium analyses. The morphology and structure of the precipitates that formed under treatment with 5 g/L calcium chloride and different formation conditions were analyzed through SEM-EDS, XRD, and FTIR. The relative contents of hydrolysates in the electrolyte aqueous solution vary at different solution pH levels. The pC–pH diagram of the silicate speciation model was established on the basis of protonation reactions and material balance ( A laboratory-scale treatment test was conducted to examine silicate removal performance with recycled wastewater. The procedure was similar to that used in the silicate aqueous solution precipitation tests. A continuous pilot-scale test was performed to further demonstrate the feasibility and stability of silicate removal through precipitation with calcium chloride. The flow diagram is presented in Scheelite roughing was conducted using a 1.5 L flotation machine (XFD IV, Jilin Prospecting Machinery Factory, China) installed in the plant. Scheelite feed ore was mixed with untreated and treated recycled wastewater for scheelite roughing. Pulp density (solid %) was controlled from 38% to 40%. Sodium carbonate and FX-6 were added at doses of 2000 and 250 g/t, respectively. The reagent reaction and floatation time were 3 and 5 min, respectively. The roughing concentrates and tailings were filtered, dried, weighed, and sampled for WO The silicon content of the recycled wastewater and silicate aqueous solution was analyzed through ICP-OES (SPECTROBLUE, Germany). The precipitates were analyzed with SEM-EDS (JEOLJSM-7500F, Japan), XRD (Rigaku D/max 2500, Japan), and FTIR spectroscopy (Thermo Fisher Nicolet 6700, America). The silicon and calcium contents of the precipitate were examined through XRF analysis (AxiosmAX, PANalytical, Holland). All laboratory tests were performed in triplicate, and the data were presented as averaged values. Scheelite, calcite, and fluorite exhibit similar reactions activity with the fatty acid collector given the similarities among their surface chemical properties. Sodium silicate is the most commonly used depressant and remarkably depresses calcium-bearing and silicate gangue minerals ( FTIR spectroscopy is commonly used to characterize the mechanism of the reaction between a mineral and a reagent. The FTIR spectra of scheelite that has reacted with sodium silicate are shown in Calcium salt is a commonly used precipitant, and calcium ions can combine with silicate to form calcium silicate hydrate. The silicate removal from silicate aqueous solution under precipitation with different doses of calcium chloride are shown in The concentration of each hydrolysate varies at different solution pH levels. The pC–pH diagrams of sodium silicate and calcium chloride aqueous solutions (5 × 10 The structural unit of silicate is the [SiO The XRD patterns of calcium silicate hydrate that formed at different pH levels are shown in The connection modes among [SiO Comparing the results of SEM-EDS, XRD, and FTIR shows that silicate is removed through precipitation as calcium silicate hydrate. In this process, silicate combines with calcium to form calcium silicate hydrate. The decrease in reaction pH promotes the polymerization of silicate to amorphous calcium silicate hydrate with low crystallinity and facilitates efficient silicate removal with low amount of calcium. The recycled wastewater from the tailing dam is an important water source for flotation. However, the presence of residual sodium silicate in recycled wastewater influences scheelite flotation performance. The silicate removal performance in laboratory-scale test under precipitation with different calcium chloride doses is shown in The scheelite roughing performance when recycled or treated water was used is presented in This study introduced the use of silicate removal from recycled wastewater to improve scheelite flotation performance. The mechanism underling the influence of sodium silicate on scheelite floatability was investigated through single mineral flotation experiments and FTIR analysis. The mechanism of silicate precipitation was investigated on the basis of equilibrium speciation and morphological and structure analyses. The continuous pilot-scale tests of recycled and reused wastewater treatment and reuse were conducted to further demonstrate the feasibility and stability of silicate removal. The following conclusions were drawn. Excess sodium silicate at the concentration of 5 × 10 Decreasing the solution pH from 12.5 to 11–9 promotes the polymerization of silicate into amorphous calcium silicate hydrate with low crystallinity, thus facilitating silicate removal with low amount of calcium. Under treatment with 5 g/L calcium chloride, silicate removal through precipitation can reach 90%. Scheelite roughing recovery is significantly improved by 5% with the use of treated water relative to that with the use of recycled wastewater. Thus, the removal of silicate from wastewater will promote the utilization of flotation wastewater and improve the performance of scheelite flotation. The research was supported by The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at