The surface of subbituminous coal contains a significant amount of oxygen containing functional groups which contribute to a low degree of hydrophobicity. As such, upgrading of the fine fractions is difficult using conventional flotation practices which rely on bubble-coal particle attachment and separation based on density. Alternatively, reverse flotation provides a viable option whereby the mineral matter is made hydrophobic through the addition of a collector while a depressant is added to make the coal particle non-floatable. Bench-scale reverse flotation experiments were conducted using artificial mixtures of subbituminous coal and quartz of varying particle size to assess the flotation performance. The process provided a reduction on the ash content from values around 35% to while recovering nearly 85% of the combustible material. The performance was achieved using mixtures of coarse coal with fine quartz and medium-size coal with fine silica. The performance was significantly better than that achieved by the conventional practice of floating the coal and rejecting the mineral matter to the underflow stream. The separation efficiency obtained when evaluating a mixture of fine coal and quartz particles was not as favorable due to the effect of hydraulic entrainment.Subbituminous coal is a low rank coal with low carbon contents and relatively high moisture contents with values ranging from 20%–30% by weight. It makes up 47% of U.S. coal production by weight and 41% by energy intensity Alternatively, the mineral matter associated with low rank coals is typically comprised of primarily silica and clays Coal reverse flotation is not a new concept as indicated by the results of numerous investigations including those focused on coal desulfurization Pawlik and Laskowski Zhang et al. found that particle size of lignite coal strongly affects the reverse flotation kinetics Even though the reverse flotation of low rank coal has been previously studied The subbituminous coal used for this study was collected at a surface mining operation located in the Powder River coal basin of the U.S. Upon receiving the coal from the mine in drums, the coal sample was split using standard sampling procedures to obtain representative samples which were subsequently crushed to below 200 X-ray diffraction (XRD) was conducted on the coal sample, which revealed that the primary component of the mineral matter in the Powder River basin coal was quartz. As such, quartz was used in the flotation study as a model mineral. The ASTM quartz c-778 was purchased from ebay at a purity level of 98.8%. The quartz was crushed to below 200 Flotation feed was prepared by mixing subbituminous coal and quartz of different size fractions using a coal-to-quartz ratio of 7:3, which represents a typical ratio for coal flotation feed materials. Conventional flotation feed was comprised of raw coal (− Diesel fuel oil No. 2 and SPP were used as collectors in the conventional flotation tests. SPP contained 90% fuel oil and 10% petroleum sulfonate Dextrin was purchased from Fisher Scientific and used as a coal depressant. Its chemical formula is (C Sodium hydroxide (NaOH, 99.99% grade), hydrochloric acid (HCl, 25.00% v/v) and potassium chloride (KCl, 100.00% grade) bought from Fisher Scientific were used to adjust the solution chemistry for the zeta potential measurements. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to evaluate the surface composition of the coal surfaces with a focus on the degree of oxidation. The FTIR unit was manufactured by NEXUS Inc. The FTIR spectrum of subbituminous coal was obtained with KBr pellets, compressed together with around 10 For the zeta potential distribution measurements, both the coal and quartz were ground using agate pestle to reduce the particle size to smaller than 30 For both conventional flotation and reverse flotation, the tests were carried out in a 1-L Denver laboratory cell under natural pH conditions. A mixture consisting of 40 For the conventional flotation tests, collector was added and conditioned for an additional 3 When preparing for reverse flotation tests, dextrin and amine were each conditioned in the coal-quartz slurry for 3 For both conventional flotation and reverse flotation, combustible matter recovery in concentrate and silica recovery in tailing were calculated by Eqs. Given that the coal sample in this study is a low rank coal, it was expected that the coal surface was heavily oxidized. In the FTIR spectrum shown in As shown in According to  In contrast to the findings obtained using coarse and medium size coal particles, the results obtained with a mixture of coal finer than 38 A more interesting finding is that the presence of ultrafine coal particles suppressed the flotation of the fine quartz. As shown in the previous figures, quartz recovery values were above 85% with coarse and medium-sized coal. However, in the presence of ultrafine coal, quartz recovery was less than 50%. This may be due adsorption of a significant portion of the amine collector unto the negative charged and high-surface area coal particles thereby leaving an insufficient amount to properly coat the quartz particles. The results show that fine silica has different flotation behaviors when mixed with subbituminous coal of different particle size ranges. When mixed with coarse coal (150–200 Separation efficiency of the reverse flotation tests of coal particles with different size ranges and fine silica was plotted in   The reverse flotation results of raw coal and fine silica with different collector dosage are shown in As shown in The separation efficiency indexes of all the reverse flotation tests are compared in Subbituminous coal is a low rank coal with high content of moisture and surface oxygen-containing functional groups such as hydroxyl and carboxyl. Conventional flotation cannot perform well on subbituminous coal effectively even with large doses of collectors. Good reverse flotation results can be achieved when the flotation feed is made up of coarse or medium subbituminous coal particles and fine quartz particles. Entrainment also plays an important role on reverse flotation performance. The presence of fine subbituminous coal particles deteriorates the flotation behavior of fine silica, and a large dosage of dextrin and collector will be consumed. Fine silica has a better flotation performance than coarse silica. In general, mineral particles are always finer than coal particles in coal samples