Implant dentistry demonstrated its reliability in treating successfully an increased amount of patients with dental implants exhibiting hydrophilic (modSLA) or non-hydrophilic (SLA) surfaces. Objectives of this minipig study consisted in assessing bone regeneration at both types of dental implants in a new experimental model (lateral bone defects) by implementing a convergent analysis approach combining histology and contact radiography.
                  In six adult female minipigs standardized acute alveolar defects were created, then receiving two implants in the mandibles bilaterally (modSLA and SLA, one of each combined with Guided Bone Regeneration). Animals were sacrificed after 28 days of healing. Mid-crestal specimen were analyzed assessing missing BIC to implant shoulder (fBIC); vertical bone growth upon implant surface, bone:tissue ratio and grafting material area occupied by material remnants for GBR sites. Values obtained from both analyses were compared and statistical correlations scrutinized. Although dimensions of mean differences and adjusted means given by radiographic method were lower than histological ones, comparison of different implants yielded similar results.
                  Statistical analyses of correlation and concordance coefficients used to evaluate radiological method of measurement showed high level of concordance (concordance coefficient=0.912 and correlation coefficient=0.939) for fBIC. Similar results were observed for vertical new bone and for remnants of graft. Discrepancies for new bone and for mineralized tissue resulted in concordance coefficient of 0.182 and 0.054.
                  The results indicate that contact X-rays can be used for morphometric assessments regarding defect fill; however, histological staining remains beneficial if greater resolution for distinguishing qualitative differences in the tissues is required.In general terms dental implantology did important progress during the last 25 years. The recent improvements in integrating dental implants in alveolar jaw bone were achieved focusing at macro and micro surface qualities and their chemical traits. Initial water contact angles of approximately 0° for chemically modified sand blasted, large grit, and acid-etched (modSLA) titanium implants compared to more than 130° for conventional hydrophobic SLA surfaces characterized the surface hydrophilicity of the first ( Furthermore, chemically modified sandblasted acid etched implants were shown beneficial in accelerating apposition of bone by stabilizing the blood clot on the hydrophilic surface compared to standard SLA implants in a dog model ( Deficient alveolar bone displaying an inappropriate volume requires the implication of augmentative techniques in width and/or height either prior to or concomitantly with the placement of an implant to guarantee for the new bone formation ( Different methods are implemented to investigate on bony ingrowth around dental implants ( The objectives were to create a bone defect model matching at most a clinical situation of an irregular atrophic alveolar ridge, which would be characterized by certain amount of residual alveolar bone in the anterior part, lacking bone height in the posterior zone. Placing an implant in such area raises the question how to deal with the exposed part of the implant facing the edentulous gap, whereas the mesial proximity of the implant may be covered by bone completely. The defects created in the edentulous spaces of pig mandibles were expected to heal either spontaneously or being augmented by terms of GBR using a bone graft and a membrane before flap closure. The main objective, however, was the comparative analysis of the outcomes measurements using histomorphometry and contact radiography to determine if the use of contact radiography is of advantage over histomorphometry. Six female minipigs of 18 months of age (∼35 The study was carried out in two surgical phases. In the first phase, extractions of the mandibular first, second, third premolar and first molar (P1-M1) were performed bilaterally. After 16 weeks of healing standardized bone defects were surgically created followed by installation of either modSLA (SLActive, Straumann All surgeries were performed using Ketamin hydrochlorid 50 After intramuscular injection of 10 Teeth (P1, P2, P3 and M1) were extracted bilaterally from the mandibles of 6 minipigs. Peri-apical radiographs taken from each site confirmed the absence of remnants of root tips. Full closure of the wound area was achieved and sites were allowed to heal for 16 weeks ( At 4 weeks post-surgery, the animals were sacrificed by an overdose (via intra cardiac injection) of Pentobarbital (Narcorens, Merial GmbH, Hallbermoos, Germany). Periapical radiographs were taken and hemi-mandibula block sections were retrieved following sacrifice. Biopsies fixed for 14 days (formaldehyde 4%) were later prepared for histological processing according to hard tissue processing guidelines. Each implantation site was separately embedded in MMA. The sectioning of the blocks was performed in mid-crestal mesio-distal extension resulting in specimen displaying the implant's highest proximity towards the former defect together with tissues next to it. Following grinding and polishing sections of ∼80 The mid-crestal specimen were histomorphometrically analyzed assessing missing BIC to the implant shoulder (fBIC); the vertical bone growth upon implant surface, bone:tissue ratio and additionally for GBR sites grafting material area occupied by material remnants. Vertical bone growth was calculated in mm missing after healing to close up with the implant shoulder as reference plan. Vertical defect fill was additionally calculated in % of the length of the implant surface exposed to the defect initially. Contact radiographs (Hewlett Packard Faxitron with Agfa Strukturix X-ray sensitive film) were taken from each section prior to further processing. The continuous exposure lasted for 30 The examined outcome parameters, fBIC, new vertical bone growth, new bone, graft and mineralized tissue were summarized as means and standard deviations and as medians and ranges. Hydrophilic implants were compared to hydrophobic implants and complemented implants with GBR to those non-complemented. The implants were paired within animal and the signed rank test was used to evaluate the difference between treatments. In addition, multivariable mixed model regressions were performed to adjust the difference among treatments by the effects of side and position of the implant on the mandible (as fix effects) and the effect of the animals (as random effects). Adjustment for multiple comparisons was done using the Dunnett–Hsu method. To evaluate the outcome measurements using contact radiology to those using histomorphometric methods, the concordance correlation coefficient was calculated. This coefficient combines measures of precision and accuracy to determine to determine if the observed data significantly deviate of the perfect concordance. To further analyze the agreement between the two measurement methods, Bland–Altman plots were drawn and the limits of agreement calculated ( SAS release 9.3 (2010, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA) and STATA v12.1 (2011, StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA) were used to perform the statistical analysis. Statistical significance was set to an alpha level of 0.05. The postoperative healing was uneventful in all animals. No complications such as allergic reactions, abscesses or infections were observed throughout the whole study period. Within 4 weeks healing period all 24 implant sites showed uneventful healing clinically and radiographically ( Radiographs showed significant gain of mineralized tissue within formerly created defects; in the group without GBR being almost completely filled by newly formed bone and in the group augmented with BCP partly being filled by BCP material together with mineralized tissue ( Histological evaluation confirmed observations gained radiographically. The defects created surgically appeared almost completely filled by newly formed mineralized tissue. Furthermore, the results did not reveal significant differences in terms of bone growth along modSLActive and SLA surfaces in vertical dimension, respectively. For the vertical apposition of newly formed bone structures neither the surface characteristic nor the assignment to GBR control group or to the spontaneously healing tests appeared decisive. Similar trend was observed regarding the amount of newly formed mineralized tissue for the defect fill. Histomorphometrical analysis confirmed histological observations by missing the level of statistically significance in all parameters assessed. The mean value for most coronal BIC (fBIC) was −1.17 The comparison of the histomorphometric outcomes and the contact radiography analysis revealed that calculating values for parameters on behalf of X-rays generally resulted in lower numbers for the amount of new bone, the mineralized tissue compound, the new bone in vertical dimension, but the value for remnant graft particles ( Paired comparisons of the modSLA to SLA, of the modSLA to modSLA  Although the dimension of the mean differences and adjusted means given by the radiographic method are a bit lower than the histological ones, the comparison of the different implants yielded similar results. The statistical analyses of correlation and concordance coefficients used to evaluate the radiological method of measurement showed high level of concordance (concordance coefficient The study was designed to proof the feasibility of a model for surgically created infra-alveolar defects testing the potential of hydrophilic and hydrophobic chemical condition of titanium surface to support spontaneous bone growth. Both surface types were positioned in the residual bone exposing similar areas of the implant towards the voids created in the edentulous ridge. Proposing either spontaneous defect healing or being augmented by terms of Guided Bone Regeneration (GBR) using grafting material and membrane placement coronal migration of the BIC along the implant and the defect fill were studied by two imaging techniques. Whereas the size of defects created was standardized and the materials used were determined by the study protocol, the BIC and the defect fill were evaluated histomorphometrically and by contact radiography. Histological monitoring of early steps in process of osteointegration by calculating BIC numbers at day 28 following implant placement for the modSLA and SLA surfaces in humans was suggested by Lang and Bosshardt. Almost three fold greater values resulted for modSLA than for SLA surface at the same time point (48.3% vs. 32.4%), however, without achieving the level of statistical significance, probably due to the low number of biopsies ( Preferably dog studies revealed that the BIC values differ significantly for chemically modified implants at the early stage of integration, whereas after certain amount of weeks these values will turn equal ( In terms of enhancing defect resolution Schwarz et al. calculated the BIC with 81.4 Considering the area of interest determined in this study one should be aware of favourable results in regard to new bone formation on the exposed implant surface and within the defect observing the formation of trabecular bone inside the cortical envelope histologically. Taking into account the healing potential of the young adult minipig the period of 4 weeks of healing was assumed lasting long enough to equalize the outcome between the implants with different surface characteristics. In the spontaneously healing test sites, both surface conditions revealed similar results for vertical bone growth expressed by mm missing to the implant crest (1.17 The bone formation process moved more into focus of histological analyses in a dehiscence type defect in a dog model ( In the defect model suggested in this study the assignment to either test group or the GBR control group did not affect the outcome values of parameters assessed in regard to the surface characteristics ( The results indicate that contact X-rays can be used for morphometric assessments regarding defect fill; however, histological staining remains beneficial if greater resolution for distinguishing qualitative differences in the tissues is required. The authors highly appreciate the support by Marco Wieland preparing the study protocol. The histomorphometrical analyses were in part performed by Kevin Wieland, whose contribution is gratefully appreciated. The authors are grateful to the Institut Straumann AG, Basel, Switzerland for supporting the study by a grant. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the supplementary data to this article: