This paper presents the results of an experimental study on the behavior of twenty geopolymer concrete prisms tested under uniaxial tension to investigate the tension-stiffening effect on the deformation and crack width of geopolymer concretes, prepared using either fly ash-based geopolymer concrete or granulated lead smelter slag (GLSS)-based geopolymer concrete. The test parameters included concrete type, concrete prism cross-section and steel bar diameter. The results suggest that the tensile stress of concrete decreases with an increase in the reinforcement ratio due to the reduction in concrete volume. Moreover, enlarging the concrete cross-section results in postponing the transverse tensile cracks. The results also suggest that geopolymer concretes exhibit slightly more significant tension-stiffening effect than that of OPC concrete. Furthermore, it has been shown that the tension-stiffening mechanisms of geopolymer and ordinary Portland cement (OPC) concretes are in agreement, suggesting that the provisions developed for OPC concrete can be modified to predict the behavior of geopolymer concrete.The worldwide demand for construction and building materials has increased and it will reach a major industrial concern in the foreseeable future. Ordinary Portland cement (OPC) has been used as the active constituent binder in concrete production for centuries. However, according to statistics, the production of OPC involves heating calcareous materials, such as limestone or chalk in a rotary kiln to a temperature of about 1300–1450 °C The tensile behavior and bond performance of geopolymer concrete were found to be comparable to that of conventional OPC concrete This paper presents an experimental study that was aimed at investigating the tension-stiffening mechanism and the key parameters that influence the uniaxial tension behavior of geopolymer concretes manufactured using fly ash and granulated lead smelter slag (GLSS). This is one of the first comprehensive study on the uniaxial tension behavior of prisms manufactured with geopolymer concretes, and the primary aims to determine crack width and crack spacing pattern. The paper initially summarizes the experimental program, including material and specimen properties and testing procedures. Subsequently, the results of the experimental program are presented followed by the discussions on the influences of the type of concrete and steel bar diameter. In the final part, empirical models to predict the crack width of geopolymer concrete are presented, which were based on mathematical regression analysis of the experimental data. A total of 20 reinforced concrete prisms were designed, manufactured, and tested under direct tension at the laboratory of Adelaide University. All specimens had a length of 650 mm and cross-sections of either 75 × 75 mm or 150 × 150 mm. A single reinforcing ribbed steel bar of either 12 mm or 16 mm diameter was placed longitudinally through the centroid of each specimen. The axial tension load was applied to the exposed reinforcement bar as shown in The specimens were manufactured using three different types of concrete: OPC, fly ash and GLSS as binders. To manufacture fly ash-based geopolymer concrete, low-calcium class-F fly ash produced at Port Augusta Power Station in South Australia was used. The GLSS-based geopolymer concrete was manufactured using 50% fly ash and 50% granulated lead smelter slag sourced from Nystar port Pirie in South Australia. The alkaline solution phase in both concrete types, fly ash and GLSS, consisted of a combination of sodium silicate (Na Two linear variable displacement transformers (LVDTs) were placed on opposite sides of the prism as shown in All test specimens were subjected to short-term uniaxial tensile load at a rate of 0.1 mm/min in a 900 kN capacity universal testing machine using tension grips to hold the extended bars at each end, as shown in The typical failure mode and crack pattern of specimens are shown in The measured material properties of each concrete including compressive strength ( The experimentally recorded axial cracking load ( The axial tension stress ( The tension-stiffening bond factor is a highly variable material property that can be used for investigating cracked concrete because it is independent of concrete strength and the reinforcement ratio Geopolymer concrete prisms with a 150 mm cross-section and reinforced with a 12 mm steel bar experienced a gradual reduction in the bond factor after initial cracking, indicating that the concrete did not carry a significant load between cracks, as can be seen in The concrete stress versus concrete average strain responses of fly ash, GLSS and OPC concretes are depicted in It is worth mentioning that the tensile stress of concrete (in effect the tension-stiffening) is greater when the reinforcement ratio is smaller. This is attributed to the volume of concrete around the steel, which has an inverse relationship with the volume of steel, as the concrete volume increases with a decrease of the reinforcement ratio. Therefore, it can be said that the The maximum, average and minimum crack widths for each specimen are plotted against normalized steel stress to yield stress (σ For cross-section 75 mm For cross-section 150 mm This paper has presented the results of an experimental study that was undertaken to quantify the crack spacing, crack width and tension-stiffening behavior of different concretes, including fly ash, granulated lead smelter slag (GLSS) and ordinary Portland cement (OPC). The mechanisms of tension-stiffening of concretes reinforced with two different steel bar diameters (i.e., 12 mm and 16 mm) and two different concrete cross-sections (i.e., 75 mm and 150 mm) have been explained. It was demonstrated that, in general, the tension-stiffening member response of geopolymer concrete is similar to that of OPC concrete. It was also shown that increasing the reinforcement ratio leads to a marginal decrease in the tensile stress of concrete, which in effect a decrease in the tension-stiffening. Moreover, the transverse tensile cracks were developed at higher steel stress in specimens with larger cross-sections, and the width of the cracks was wider. The tension-stiffening effect of geopolymer concrete was shown to be slightly more significant than that of the corresponding OPC concrete. Finally, it has been shown that the tension-stiffening mechanisms of geopolymer and OPC concretes are in agreement, suggesting that the provisions developed for OPC concrete can be modified to predict the behavior of geopolymer concrete. This research was funded by the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 