A model for predicting the overflow rate from a column of rising foam is presented. This model assumes that the Plateau borders have the cross-sectional geometry the same as the void between three mutually contacting cylinders. Another assumption is that the Plateau border walls are rigid. This theory is tested against experimental data for the overflow rate of a rising foam of water/glycerol mixtures stabilised with sodium dodecyl sulphate. The theory is seen to over-predict the observed overflow rate; this discrepancy is attributed to the fact that the Plateau border walls probably do not exhibit the property of rigidity. An empirical approach to predicting overflow rate that uses a Richardson and Zaki-type expression for the hindered rising of bubbles is seen to have far greater success than the mechanistic model. The applicability of experiments and theories for gas–liquid foams to mineralised froths is discussed.Archimedes number defined in Eq. a geometrical constant ∼0.402 (–) arithmetic mean bubble diameter (m) Sauter mean bubble diameter (m) diameter of a circular capillary (m) acceleration due to gravity (m liquid superficial overflow velocity (m gas superficial velocity (m length of a Plateau border (–) an adjustable constant in Eq. an adjustable constant in Eq. Richardson and Zaki index (–) number of bubbles sampled (–) an adjustable constant in Eq. an adjustable constant in Eq. radius of curvature of the Plateau border walls (m) bubble radius (=0.5 average liquid velocity in a vertical Plateau border (m bubble velocity (m maximum liquid velocity in a vertical Plateau border (m bubble rise velocity in an infinite medium (m absolute slip velocity between gas and liquid phases (m volumetric liquid fraction in the foam (–) orientation of Plateau border with respect to the vertical (–) liquid dynamic viscosity (Pa apparent dynamic viscosity of a slurry of Newtonian rheology (Pa liquid density (kg gas density (kg solids fraction in a slurry (–) Knowledge of liquid overflow rate is important to the designer of froth flotation equipment so that estimates of downstream drying duty of the concentrate can be made. In this paper, we present two methods of calculating the liquid overflow rate from a rising column of foam. It has become common practise to model flotation froths as columns of demineralised foam. For example, A significant body of literature exists about liquid drainage from foam, especially stationary foams. The drainage behaviour of foams is often described in a force balance expression, due, in its present form, to There is growing evidence that the assumption of no-slip at the Plateau borders walls is not generally valid. Previous attempts to model liquid overflow from rising foam columns have assumed that liquid flows through Plateau borders that have a cross-sectional geometry that is circular ( In this paper we present results of the overflow of aqueous foams stabilised with sodium dodecyl sulphate from a column. The results will be compared against two new theories for foam drainage. The first model is an extension of the theory of Haas and Johnson that assumes no-slip at the Plateau border walls. The second is based upon the slip-velocity concepts of If one assumes channel-dominated foam drainage (i.e. no-slip at the walls of the Plateau border) and no coalescence (as was observed in the related experiments of Now that we know the radius of curvature of the Plateau border walls, it is relatively straight forward to calculate the volumetric liquid flowrate in a vertical Plateau border under the action of a hydrostatic pressure gradient= Now, In an Eulerian reference frame, the mean upwards velocity of the liquid can be written as Because liquid is observed to drain downwards in a rising column of foam with respect to an observer travelling upwards with velocity In general, the slip velocity is regarded as a function of the liquid fraction, The velocity of bubbles in infinite media or in swarms is dependent upon bubble shape. Clearly the shape of a gas bubble in foam is dissimilar to the shape of a bubble of equal volume rising through an infinite medium. The correlation of Because of these difficulties we choose to correlate The experimental rig is shown in a schematic diagram in The liquid overflow rate was measured from the mass of liquid collected over approximately 10 min. Experiments commenced after the column had been running for at least 30 min to ensure that a steady state had been reached and there was no liquid accumulation in the launder. The liquid used is 2.92 g/l analytical grade sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS) (i.e. 20% above the critical micelle concentration) in fresh solution with a mixture of mains water and glycerol (glycerol fraction 0–60% by volume). Physical properties are shown in The bubble size of the foam was analysed from digital photographs taken of the foam through the flat glass walls of the column. Close-up digital pictures were taken of the froth with a scale in the frame. Placing a fluorescent light with a light diffuser behind the column illuminated the foam enabling clear and well-defined bubbles to be photographed. The pictures were analysed using Optimas 6.1 software and over one-hundred bubbles were measured for each phototograph to obtain a representative distribution of bubble size. These distributions were used to calculate the Sauter mean bubble size, The liquid hold-up, (the volumetric liquid fraction in the foam), was determined by measuring the gauge pressure at various depths in the foam. This was done by inserting a thin copper capillary tube into the foam, and measuring the air pressure required to form a tiny bubble from the tip of the probe. The pressure in the air line was measured by a micro-manometer and recorded on an analogue chart recorder. The chart readings were calibrated by inserting the probe into water and recording the head above the probe whilst maintaining the same air rate. The liquid hold-up, As expected, liquid hold-up increases with increasing air rate and liquid viscosity. These values will be used to predict liquid overflow rate. Cumulative distributions for each solution used are shown in Information about number of bubbles sampled and calculated Sauter mean and arithmetic mean bubble diameters are given in Measured liquid overflow superficial velocity is shown as a function of superficial gas rate and liquid viscosity in The theory presented in  The deterministic no-slip theory of It is conceded that the success of the empirical approach is only moderate given that four adjustable constants are required and that only three independent parameters have been varied (i.e.    The second sample was left in a covered vessel in the dark room in which the experimental column is situated whereas the third sample was placed in a sunny, north-facing window. Both samples were left for 6 days. These samples were then tested in the same way as the fresh solution. These results are also plotted on Thus far, only the behaviour of demineralised froths has been considered (i.e. a two-phase gas/liquid system with no particles present) in the interests of simplicity. However it is clear that the presence of attached (floatable) particles at the Plateau border walls as well as unattached material suspended in the liquid phase will have an affect upon the fluid mechanics of foam drainage. The authors know of no work that has attempted to measure the velocity profile of a froth laden with floatable and gangue particles. It is reasonable to assume that the presence of floatable particles attached to the Plateau border walls will make the walls effectively rigid. This means that, even for foams where the liquid–gas interfaces are mobile in the absence of particles, the no-slip assumption, which underpins channel-dominated foam drainage theory, may be approximately valid. Moreover, attached particles stabilise the froth and therefore lower coalescence frequency. However, the presence of solid material will change the apparent physical behaviour of the interstitial liquid. This was recognised by However, Because of the lack of experimental results illuminating the affect of particles on the fluid dynamics of foam drainage, we look to the field of hydraulic conveying for guidance. In a recent review of slurry transport in horizontal pipes, The importance of considering correct rheology is evident when one considers the seemingly unrelated work of The current accepted foam drainage equations, be they channel-dominated or node-dominated, are for foams with interstitial liquid that is Newtonian. The mathematics that would be involved in developing a drainage equation for a fluid with even a simple power-law rheology would be quite intractable. Protracted numerical solutions for the flowfield within the Plateau borders are required before any attempt at developing a foam drainage equation for a real flotation froth. In order to investigate the Until more data regarding draining of mineralised froths is available it is difficult to judge what impact, if any, the above complications have on models such as  A theory for predicting liquid overflow from a column of rising foam has been presented that relies on the velocity profile of Sparrow and Loeffler for the flow in a conduit of cross-sectional geometry of the void between three mutually contacting cylinders. The theory assumes that the walls of the Plateau borders are rigid. This theory is seen to over-predict experimental data for the liquid overflow rate of foams stabilised with sodium dodecyl sulphate. This discrepancy is, at least in part, attributed to the invalidity of channel-dominated foam drainage. An empirical approach to predicting foam drainage similar to that of Solutions stabilised with sodium dodecyl sulphate denature. This process affects the surface chemistry and the rigidity of the Plateau border walls. The design engineer should employ caution when using models and experimental data for rising liquid–gas foams to predict the behaviour of mineralised froths. The presence of hydrophobic particles is likely to make the Plateau border walls more rigid. However, the presence of hydrophilic particles in the liquid phase in a froth may cause the liquid to behave like a slurry with non-Newtonian rheology. The support of the Australian Research Council for the Special Research Centre for Multiphase Processes and for a Discovery-Projects grant for Dr. Stevenson is acknowledged. We thank Drs. Stephen Neethling and Jan Cilliers of UMIST for useful discussions.