Mo–MoSi2 functionally graded materials were prepared by a liquid phase siliconizing method. The microstructure, phase constitution, cross-section elemental distribution, grains size, and coating thickness of these materials were investigated with scanning electron microscopy (SEM), back scattered electron (BSE), energy dispersive spectroscope (EDS), glow discharge spectrum (GDS) and X–ray diffraction (XRD). The results indicate that the Mo–MoSi2 functionally graded materials have a dense multi-layer structure, mainly composed of surface layer (Si–MoSi2 layer, 1–10 µm), intermediate layer (MoSi2 layer, 22–40 µm), transitional layer (Mo5Si3 and Mo3Si layer, 2–3 µm) and Mo substrate. Moreover, the silicon concentration, grains size, and coating thickness increase gradually with the increasing temperature. The surfaces silicon concentrations are about 68–75 wt%, the average grains sizes of MoSi2 columnar crystals are about 7.1–9.4 µm, and the coating thicknesses are about 28–35 µm.Molybdenum (Mo) with a high melting point of 2617 °C, excellent electrical and thermal conductivity and mechanical properties, is widely used in electronics, metallurgy, nuclear industry, and aerospace, etc. At present, the MoSi The liquid phase siliconizing method has been demonstrated to be an effective method to prepare Mo-MoSi In the present work, Mo–MoSi The Mo substrates were cut into 50 mm × 20 mm× 2 mm from a block of pure molybdenum substrate (99.95 wt%). These samples were hand-polished up to 2 mm by using 2000 grit SiC paper, then ultrasonically cleaned in alcohol and dried at 373 K for 20 min. For the liquid phase siliconizing process, the polysilicon with a purity of 7 N was used as a siliconizing melt in this work. First, the polysilicon was placed in an alumina crucible, then smelted inside a vertical alumina tube furnace. Second, the treated samples were vertically immersed into the molten silicon bath for 15 min at a constant temperature in Ar atmosphere, and the temperatures are 1430 °C, 1460 °C, 1490 °C, 1520 °C, respectively. Finally, the Mo–MoSi The surfaces of the Mo–MoSi The surface phase constitutions of the Mo–MoSi The surface microstructures of the Mo–MoSi Cross-section microstructures of the Mo–MoSi The effect of temperature on cross-section elements distributions of Mo–MoSi Mo–MoSi This work was supported by the