Poly-SiGe offers an attractive alternative for low temperature MEMS post-processing above CMOS. This paper presents several investigations made to obtain a crystalline material with excellent mechanical (low stress, low stress gradient) and electrical (low resistivity) properties. Two different techniques were used to enhance the crystallization of the plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD) layers at low temperatures. The use of a high hydrogen dilution (H2/(SiH4
                     +GeH4)≈90) leads to microcrystalline SiGe (μcSiGe:H) at temperatures as low as 350°C. In this work ∼0.6 and 2μm thick μcSiGe:H layers were characterized and optimized. Alternatively, a chemical vapor deposition (CVD) crystallization layer can be used below the PECVD layer in order to deposit thick (4–10μm) polycrystalline films of high quality at temperatures around 450°C. For both layers, the strain gradient can be optimized by the use of a compressive top layer. In the case of the μcSiGe:H layers an alternative new strain gradient optimization method, which uses a variable hydrogen dilution to effectively fine-tune the mechanical properties of the μcSiGe films, is presented. Also new results on the surface roughness of the layers are presented.Polycrystalline-SiGe (poly-SiGe) has been demonstrated to be an ideal material for post-processing MEMS above CMOS, since films with very good electrical and mechanical properties can be obtained at CMOS-compatible temperatures Crystalline SiGe layers were deposited in an Oxford plasma technology (OPT) Plasma lab 100 cold-wall PECVD system, which uses a standard parallel plate reactor. A gas flow of 10% germane (GeH Rutherford back scattering (RBS) was used to determine the Si and Ge concentration in the layers. A four-point probe was used for the sheet resistance measurements. Morphology and grain microstructure were investigated with transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The average stress was determined by measuring the curvature of the wafer, before and after deposition of the layers, using an Eichhorn & Hausmann MX 203 stress-meter. The poly-SiGe layers were patterned and plasma etched in a deep dry etching system from surface technology systems (STS) using an SF μcSiGe layers are deposited at 1 For the variable hydrogen dilution depositions (see Section The multi-layers are deposited at 2  Similar experiments as described in Section Hydrogen plays a key role in obtaining crystalline material at low temperatures and in reducing defects during growth. The results presented above prove that the high hydrogen dilution used during deposition is an effective method for obtaining high quality crystalline SiGe layers at temperatures as low as 350–400 An additional benefit of this method of strain gradient optimization is that no variation in Ge content over the layer is expected (in contrast to the method where a top Si-rich layer is used), which can be important for the thermal stability of the SiGe films. Also, the overall growth rate of the deposition process increases with reduced H An overview of the performed experiments and the characteristics of the films are reported in Two different conditions were used as a basis: (A) SiH For condition B1 ( The microcrystalline deposition method results in excellent films at very low temperatures. Due to the hydrogen dilution however, a rather limited growth rate is obtained. Even in the case of the variable hydrogen dilution, the growth rate stays below 40 The polycrystalline SiGe multi-layer stack used in this work is composed of a thin PECVD seed layer (a-Si or a-SiGe), a LPCVD SiGe crystallization layer and a bulk PECVD SiGe layer ( A 1 Similar as shown for the microcrystalline films, it is possible to modify the stress and strain gradient in these multi-layers by stacking layers of opposing stress behavior. Thus, a top compensation layer on the multi-layer stack could further reduce the strain gradient. A few options that were explored for a 10 For example, a 10 For a similar 10 Starting with a similar stack as for the 10 The optimized films described here can be used as structural layers for CMOS-integrated gyroscopes ( As these multi-layer films with top compressive layer have a variable Ge content over their layer thickness, the stability of these layers with time and temperature initially was a concern. In The work presented above gives ample evidence that both microcrystalline SiGe and CVD/PECVD multi-layer poly-SiGe films form excellent MEMS structural layers, especially of interest for low thermal budget applications. Excellent electrical and mechanical properties were obtained with extremely low strain gradients (<2 The work on 10