This study has been designed to investigate the effect of surface dissolution on the isotherm, kinetics, and thermodynamics of collector adsorption on the surface of ilmenite (IL) and its accompanied gangue minerals including olivine (Ol), pyroxene (Px), tremolite (Tr), and clinochlore (Cch). For this purpose, some laboratory techniques such as flotation experiments, adsorption tests, ICP-Mass analysis, UV–Visible spectroscopy, BET analysis, and scanning electron microscopy were employed. The flotation experiments showed that after surface dissolution, the selectivity of ilmenite flotation is improved by increasing its flotation recovery and by the decrease of gangue minerals floatabilities. As revealed by adsorption tests, this can be attributed to the more adsorption density of collector on the surface of treated ilmenite and its reduction on the modified surface of olivine-pyroxene (Ol-Px) and tremolite-clinochlore (Tr-Cch) having less surface active cations (Fe2+, Ca2+, and Mg2+) after surface modification by oxalic acid. Also, the equilibrium data analysis indicated that the Langmuir model is the most appropriate model to describe the adsorption of sodium oleate as a collector on the surface of studied minerals. The kinetics studies showed that unlike the gangue minerals, the adsorption kinetics of collector on the surface of modified ilmenite is significantly enhanced. According to the thermodynamic parameters, positive Enthalpy (ΔH), negative Gibbs free energy (ΔG), and positive Entropy (ΔS) were found for the collector adsorption process before and after treatment, showing the endothermic, spontaneous and more favorable nature of adsorption reaction at high temperatures. Also, the surface dissolution changes the ΔG and ΔS of ilmenite into the more negative and positive values, respectively, while it changes these thermodynamic parameters inversely for both gangue phase samples.Adsorption phenomenon is an important parameter in industrial processes. Mineral flotation, dewatering, flocculation/coagulation, blood clotting, and micellar flooding of oil wells are the processes which are controlled by the adsorption of molecules from solution to the solid surfaces [ Amankonah and Somasundaran suggested that the lower selectivity of oleate group as a collector in the flotation of a binary mixture of dolomite and francolite (with a weight ratio of 50:50) is due to the interactions among the dissolved ions from minerals and the oleate species as well as the formation of oleate precipitates [ As emphasized in some works, ilmenite has a relatively weak floatability, even using a large amount of reagents [ So, the objective of this study is to investigate the effect of surface dissolution pretreatment on the isotherm, kinetics, and thermodynamics of collector adsorption, which are essential factors in the efficiency of a flotation process. In this research, the experimental tests including flotation tests, UV–Visible, ICP-Mass, and BET analysis were performed to study the effect of surface dissolution on isotherm, equilibrium, kinetic, and thermodynamic behaviors of collector adsorption on the surface of ilmenite and its usual accompanied gangue minerals. In order to investigate the floatability of minerals and the collector adsorption behavior on their surfaces, it is necessary that the relatively pure samples would be prepared. The relatively pure samples of ilmenite and gangue minerals were prepared from the hand-picked samples taken from Qara-Aghaj titanium ore deposit located in the northwest of Iran. Ilmenite and magnetite are the major valuable minerals in this ore, and the main gangue minerals are olivine, pyroxene, tremolite and clinochlore [ The XRD patterns and chemical analysis (XRF) of the samples are shown in As shown in The surface dissolution of the samples prior to the tests was carried out by mechanical stirring in a 7.5% ( In each test, 1 X-ray fluorescence (XRF, Philips X Unique II) and the XPERT MPD diffractometer (with employing Cu Ka radiation) were used for determining the chemical composition and phase composition of the purified samples, respectively. The morphological studies of mineral particles before and after modification were carried out by Philips XL30 model scanning electron microscopy (SEM). The electron microprobe (EMP) analysis of the minerals was performed using Cameca SX 100 equipped with five wavelengths dispersive (WD) spectrometers. The NOVA-1000 instrument manufactured by Quantachrome Corporation with nitrogen gas as the absorbent was applied to measure the surface area of the minerals. In each test, a 0.5 The concentration of dissolved elements from the mineral surfaces through the surface dissolution process was determined using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-Mass). In each test, 5 Microflotation tests were conducted using a 300 Adsorption isotherms are commonly used for describing the adsorption processes and represent a functional relationship between the amount of adsorbed (mineral) and the activity of the adsorbate (collector) at a constant temperature. Some of the usual models for investigating the adsorption isotherms are Langmuir, Freundlich, and Temkin models. Langmuir adsorption isotherm is one of the famous isotherms which has been used to quantify and compare the performance of different bio-sorbents [ Freundlich isotherm describes the formation of both monolayer and multilayer adsorptions with non-uniform distribution of adsorption heat and affinities over the heterogeneous surface such as organic compounds [ The linear form for the Freundlich isotherm model is expressed as Eq. The Temkin isotherm model is used to investigate the interactions between the adsorbent-adsorbate. If the adsorption of collector occurs on the surface layer, the heat of molecular adsorption would be decreased. Distribution of binding energies recognizes the adsorption. Eq. Study of the adsorption kinetics is a vital factor which is governed by the rate of adsorbed oleate ion on the surface of minerals. Pseudo-first and second order models are the most common kinetic models which have been used for modeling the kinetic rates [ After the surface dissolution of all three samples, the liquid phases were separately analyzed by the ICP-Mass technique. As shown in The surface area is a significant factor for determining the collector adsorption densities on the surface of minerals. The surface area of ilmenite and two gangue phases was measured by the BET method before and after surface dissolution. The results are presented in In this regard, the morphology of particles for all three mineral phases was studied by SEM before and after surface modification. The results are illustrated in  The results indicate that before surface dissolution, the flotation recovery of Ol-Px is more than that of ilmenite in all pH ranges except for pH The aim of the kinetic adsorption experiments is the determination of the reaction time required for adsorption to reach equilibrium. The adsorption amount of sodium oleate on the surface of ilmenite, Ol-Px, and Tr-Cch as a function of time at a constant temperature of 25 After surface dissolution, the adsorption behavior of all mineral samples had the same trends, but the adsorption density of collector on the surface of ilmenite increases while it decreases for gangue minerals. The rise in collector adsorption on the surface of treated ilmenite can be due to the conversion of Fe The collector adsorption on the surface of minerals as a function of pH has been studied in various research works [ The adsorption density of collector on the surface of ilmenite and two gangue phases is measured as a function of the initial concentration of sodium oleate before and after surface dissolution ( As shown in The results of three isotherm models as a function of collector concentration at a pH of 6.3 and room temperature before and after surface dissolution are presented in As shown from The separation factors (R In order to achieve more information about the adsorption behavior of sodium oleate on the surface of minerals mentioned above, the adsorption densities of the collector are calculated at various temperatures before and after surface dissolution. The results are presented in Two important effects of temperature can be generally found from The results of oleate adsorption on the various minerals at different pHs are listed in  As seen from Eq. Negative activation energy indicates that the adsorption process is exothermic and spontaneous, while positive activation energy shows the amount of energy which should be overwhelmed for the occurrence of adsorption reaction. Plotting the LnK Scientific literature about the thermodynamics of surfaces and interfaces has been discussed by Gibbs equation [  The negative values of ΔG at all examined temperatures before and after surface dissolution indicate that the adsorption of oleate on the surface of ilmenite and both gangue minerals is to a large extent spontaneous. Also, the Gibbs free energy shifts toward more negative values before and after surface dissolution. It proves that the increase of temperature guarantees the spontaneous and feasible condition of adsorption process as well as a stronger adsorption force. Moreover, the Gibbs energies of treated ilmenite are more negative than that of untreated one at all temperatures, and in the case of gangue minerals, it is vice versa. The surface dissolution can affect the thermodynamic parameters of collector adsorption. Typically, Gibbs free energy for physical adsorption is in the range of −20 When the enthalpy change is >40 In the anionic flotation of minerals in which the adsorption of the collector is taken place through the chemisorptions mechanism, the activities of surface cations and also collector species as a function of pH are the most important factors. In this regard, the distribution of oleate species as a function of pH is illustrated in At acidic pHs where the oleate ions ( In the case of ilmenite, as shown by ICP-Mass analysis, the dissolution of surface ions by surface pretreatment is not significant. As demonstrated in the previous works [ Assuming a parking area of 33 The surface dissolution pretreatment improves the selectivity of ilmenite flotation from various gangue minerals such as olivine, pyroxene, tremolite, and clinochlore by creating more differences between the surface properties of ilmenite and gangue phases. These differences are mainly raised from the removal of some cations such as Fe