Ferromanganese ores with high contents of Mn and Fe are abundant worldwide. In this study, spinel-type MnFe2O4 nanoparticles (MFO-NPs) were first synthesized via a novel solid-state reaction process followed by ball-milling, magnetic separation, and nano-grinding. The synthetic MFO-NPs presented a stable spinel structure, fine granularity, and large specific surface; these characteristics highlight their potential in the preparation of thermochemical catalysts. We additionally conducted H2 reduction (HR) and CO2 decomposition reaction (CDR) cyclic tests to investigate the catalytic performance of MFO-NPs. The MFO-NPs showed excellent recyclability and thermal stability during CO2 decomposition; moreover, oxygen-defect MFO-NPs were able to completely decompose CO2 into carbon quantum dots. The mechanism of CO2 decomposition on the MFO-NPs’ surfaces was analysed in detail by XRD, SEM, TEM, TG, Raman, XPS.CO Thermochemistry methods are getting attention in view of CO Magnetic nano spinel ferrites are generally acknowledged as most of the promise materials for environmental governance because of their low cost, nontoxicity, chemical stability and interesting magnetic behaviours [ MnFe In this study, ferromanganese ores were used as raw materials to synthesize high-purity spinel-type MFO-NPs: a solid-state reaction process was followed by grinding, magnetic separation, and nano-grinding. The MFO-NPs’ behaviour during CO The ferromanganese ores used in this study came from the Jiangxi Province (China) (composition: 30.35 wt% Fe, 14.30 wt% Mn) and the Republic of South Africa (composition: 38.75 wt% Fe, 19.58 wt% Mn). The synthesis flowsheet of the MFO-NPs ( Subsequently, the mixtures were briquetted into 10 × 10 mm cylinders and roasted at 1250 °C for 4 h in air atmosphere [ The phase composition of synthetic product carriers was conducted using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD, Cu-target Bruker D8 Advance). The XRD patterns were collected between 10° and 80° and at scanning rate of 2°/min. The specific surface area of the MFO-NPs was measured by the Brunauer-Emmett-Teller method (BET, Micromeritics-ASAP 2020), while the samples' morphology was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM-EDS, Quanta 650 FEG). An X-ray photoelectron spectra analysis (XPS, ESCALAB250Xi, 1253.6eV, 150W) was conducted to reveal the chemical shift and valence of elements on the surface; moreover, the microstructure was analysed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Tecnai G2 Spirit and JEOL 2100 Cryo). The MFO-NPs’ activity was demonstrated by H H During each test, the total flow rate of the inlet gas was of 20 ml/min and the temperature fluctuated by ±0.1 °C. The consumptions of H As described in Section Both products showed a high purity and a good match with the information on the PDF standard card; moreover, no diffraction peaks associated with impurities were observed. The MFO-NPs’ XRD peak positions and intensities remained almost unchanged, indicating that the spinel structure of MnFe In order to further investigate the microstructure size of the MFO and MFO-NPs, we conducted BET and laser particle size analyses. The MFO and MFO-NPs had specific surface areas of 13.9 m The H As shown in Moreover, it is known that gas-solid reaction catalysts need to have a stable structure and a high specific surface area [ The results illustrated in Section  The XRD analysis of the reaction products ( The TG analysis was conducted to investigate any changes in the mass of the MFO-NPs during the HR-CDR process. The correspondent results are shown in  An obvious mass increase, which reflected the transformation of MnFe In order to study the cycle stability of the CO  Changes in the oxygen-defect value and CO The results of the cyclic tests ( Two clear peaks occurred in the mass spectrum of the gas components ( Raman analyses can be applied very effectively to the identification of different forms of carbon in solid materials. Here, this technique was used to test the MFO-NPs sample obtained after 100 cycles; The cumulative carbon content during the cyclic HR-CDR tests was calculated based on the CO A TEM analysis was additionally carried out to research possible structure changes of the MFO-NPs after the cyclic tests; the correspondent results are shown in XPS was used to check the chemical state of Mn, Fe, O in the raw, HR, and CDR MFO-NPs; the correspondent results are shown in An obvious increase of the C1s photoelectron peak was observed for the CDR MFO-NPs ( The O1s high-resolution XPS spectra in Based on the above analysis, we created a schematic diagram of the CO  In this study, we developed a novel process for the preparation of MFO-NPs from ferromanganese ores by mean of oxidation roasting, ball-milling, magnetic separation, and nano-grinding processing. We hence obtained MFO-NPs having a purity of 99.7%, a median particle diameter of 56.3 nm, and a specific surface area of 124.5 m A maximum oxygen-defect value of 0.323 was registered during the H The H The authors declare no competing interests. No experiments on live vertebrates and/or higher invertebrates were performed in this manuscript. The authors are grateful to the