The authors tested a chipper prototype adopting a new comminution device, designed to produce high quality chips when processing delimbed logs. The machine was fitted with innovative tubular blades, mounted on a flywheel. The prototype was powered by a 55kW farm tractor through the standard power take-off. The machine appeared as efficient as most conventional disc or drum chippers in the same size class, but offered a much better chip quality. Chips were free from any particles longer than 45mm, and with a very limited content of fine particles (max. 2.5%). Of course, this was achieved when using premium wood raw material, such as delimbed small logs. Performance varied with tree species: poplar was the softest and easiest to chip, whereas robinia was the hardest and required a much larger effort. Diesel fuel consumption varied between 3.4 and 4.3dm3 per oven-dry tonne.The European greenhouse gas mitigation strategy includes a massive use of wood biomass for energy conversion The CRM chipper is a trailer-mounted device, weighing 1500 The study was conducted on 1 to 2 The machine was fed one log at a time, each log representing one repetition. The test included 35 repetitions per species, for a total of 105 repetitions. All logs were weighed with a portable load cell. Individual log volume was determined by measuring the total length and the diameter at mid-length with a tape and a calliper, respectively. Logs were fed to the chipper in a random sequence, in order to spread the effect of blade wear randomly on all three species Diesel fuel consumption was determined by installing a volumetric flow metre on the fuel supply line of the engine. The flow metre had a frequency output of 2000 pulses per dm Effective time consumption was determined on the fuel consumption graphs ( A single one-kg sample was collected from each repetition for determining moisture content and particle size distribution. The former was obtained with the gravimetric method, according to European standard CEN/TS 14774-2; the latter with the oscillating screen method, using four sieves to separate the following five chip length classes: > Data were analyzed with the Statview advanced statistics software. In particular, the software was used for performing a typical analysis of variance (ANOVA), especially suited to the factorial experiment just described. ANOVA tables were drawn, in order to see how the sum of squares was divided between main effects and residuals The average power requirement varied between 14 and 17 Average productivity varied between 2.6 and 4 Average fuel consumption was compatible with the small engine, and varied between 7 and 7.8  Wood species was already known to affect the power required for comminution The new machine adopts an innovative comminution principle capable of producing high quality chips, if fed with first-class raw material. This product could be used by simplified boilers, without preliminary screening. Few studies have recorded the same work parameters for conventional chippers, which reduces the accuracy of the eventual comparisons. In particular, available studies refer to much larger machines, whose hourly consumption and productivity are inherently higher, regardless of comminution principle. However, the new device appears as efficient as the discs or drums installed on conventional chippers, at least in terms of power requirement, fuel consumption and productivity. This machine could be ideal for small-scale users, due to its low investment cost and to the capacity of producing suitable chips for small scale boilers. That makes it very attractive for farms interested in achieving energy independence. The authors gratefully thank CRM for making available the chipper, the tractor and the most competent operators. Special thanks are also offered to Giuseppe Paletto (CNR IMAMOTER — Turin, Italy), Ruben Laina (UPM — Madrid, Spain) and Henrique Venturinelli (UNESP — Botucatu, Brazil) for their assistance with data collection and laboratory work. This study was also made possible thanks to the funding obtained from the