The present research deals with the influence of sulfur on gray cast iron machinability. Tupy Fundições produced the workpiece materials in usual commercial manufacturing conditions with sulfur levels raging from 0.065 to 0.18%. The influence of different of sulfur contents on gray cast iron machinability was studied for turning operation at 100, 150 and 200m/min cutting speeds. Uncoated cemented carbide tools were used, and ‘flank wear’ assessment criterion was applied. The sulfur increase from 0.065 to 0.18% did not produce significant alteration on mechanical properties nor on material microstructures. It was verified that for an effective reduction of the adhesive wear during the machining the smallest area occupied by the manganese sulfide must be (18±6)×10−3%. The machinability of gray cast iron FC25 with 0.12, 0.15 and 0.18% of sulfur does not differ significantly when machined at 150 and 200m/min. In relation to gray cast iron FC25 with 0.12% of sulfur, the material with 0.065% S presented a tool life reduction of 24, 32 and 38%, for the speeds 100, 150 and 200m/min, respectively. From this research, important results were obtained, becoming viable the use of a higher sulfur percentage on gray cast iron FC25 production, without the detriment of mechanical properties, microstructure and machinability.The expenses for removing material from a workpiece, during manufacture, reach more than US$ 100 billions, yearly at USA Machinability may improve with the proper choice of machining parameters (depth of cut, feed, cutting speed, cutting fluid, tool insert geometry and tool material) or through workpiece material adjustments. Manufacture improvements involve two aspects: technical and economic. Among technical aspects are: the possibility of producing a part according to restrictive specifications, the easiness of chip removing and the better performance of chip formation mechanism, etc. The economic improvements can be associated to: low wear for the tool, small cutting forces and low energy consumption, which combined can lead to shorter machining times and lower cost per part. An extensively used method to improve machinability, without changing materials mechanical properties and microstructure, is the addition of certain inclusions. Such inclusions, named engineering inclusions, make possible the reduction of cutting forces and tool wear. Opitz Manganese sulfide is among the machining favorable inclusions. Depending on adequate conditions, the inclusions build a protective layer on the tool surface, named built-up layer (BUL), which promotes wear reduction of the tool and diminishes the cutting force Differently from steels, where manganese sulfide inclusions are intentionally obtained to improve machinability, gray cast iron presents these inclusions as a natural result of the foundry process in cupola furnaces. To avoid the combination of sulfur (embedded in coke and scrap steel) with iron, which results in iron sulfide with low melting point, manganese is added to promote the development of more stable manganese sulfide inclusions. The manganese sulfide inclusions generate good results with respect to costs and productivity, motivating constant studies aiming to machinability improvements. The presence of manganese sulfide inclusion in gray cast iron is able to reduce the coefficient of friction up to five times at the chip–tool interface, thus increasing tool life Therefore, the goal of this work is to analyze the machinability of gray cast iron FC25 for a large range of sulfur contents. The effects on properties are to be inspected, specially the influence of manganese sulfide on machinability. The sulfur influence and the role of manganese sulfide inclusions on gray cast iron machining are shown in the flowchart of Increasing sulfur contents in gray cast iron alters the morphology of manganese sulfide inclusions and increases inclusions size. This explains the better results obtained by Erickson and Hardy The manganese sulfide inclusions are more ductile than the matrix. Thus, the MnS inclusions are intensely deformed in primary and secondary shear zone, generating micro-cracks which promote chip breaking ( In the secondary shear zone the manganese sulfide inclusions are deformed inside the matrix, decreasing the shear stress The interaction between MnS inclusion and matrix, at primary shear zone, create heavy stress concentration regions around manganese sulfide inclusions, inducing decohesion through interface matrix-inclusion, then originating micro-cracks into primary shear zone. The micro-cracks cause reductions of cutting force and energy consumption The alloy was prepared in a two tons medium frequency induction furnace. After melting the feed materials – scrap steel and cast iron from cupola – graphite and FeMn were added in order to reach the base iron with 3.4% C and 2.15% Si. Sulfur was added as pyrite to produce four different final sulfur contents: 0.065, 0.12, 0.15 and 0.18%. After jet inoculation with FeSiCaAl, the liquid metal was poured in molds to generate the workpieces. The workpieces are cylindrical, with 400 Longitudinal turning process was used for machinability tests. A conventional lathe was used and SNMA120408 carbide tools, class KR3015, manufactured by Sandvik. The cutting speeds used are 100, 150 and 200 Results and discussion are arranged in two parts. The first one focuses mechanical properties and microstructure characterization. The second one discusses the machinability results and related factors, connecting them to the first part. The chemical analysis results showing elements contents for the studied materials can be observed in The results of measured values for hardness, tensile strength and number of eutectic cells can be seen in Using variance analysis For all percentages of sulfur contents studied, only type A graphite is in the matrix, as shown in The effect of sulfur on microstructure is shown in The morphology of manganese sulfide inclusions, for the gray cast irons FC25 tested, are shown in The correlation of the manganese sulfide inclusions area with the sulfur contents of the material is shown in In order to reduce the possibility of including oxides and carbon nitrides for the evaluation of the manganese sulfide inclusions, the minimum inclusion length was taken as 3 For statistical analysis was used the Nested Design delineation presented by Montgomery After analysis and characterization of gray cast iron FC25 microstructure, with 0.065, 0.12, 0.15 and 0.18% sulfur contents, the machinability results are presented bellow. The intention is to inspect the correlation of the microstructure sulfur contents with machinability. The correlation of the results demonstrated on previous sections with the machinability is presented in this section. The tool wear curves are shown in Among the four sulfur contents studied, only the material with 0.065% sulfur presented an intense adherence to the tool. For this sulfur percentage, frequently were observed chips on the tool face, see Some machining tests were performed in order to analyze possible influences of tool and workpiece materials on the adherence. A carbide tool SNMA 12408, class GC 4015, coated with titanium carbonitride, aluminum oxide and titanium nitride through CDV process was used. The chip adherence to the tool surface is shown in Besides the adherences wear, the diffusion wear was inspected (see Considering the technical limitations of the investigation and the set of results obtained, conclusions have been established and presented in the next section. One of the important conclusions from the research is that the increase in sulfur contents from 0.12 to 0.18% in the production of gray cast iron FC25 does not worsen machinability. Also: In order to effectively reduce the adherence wear, a minimum percentage of the matrix area must by occupied by manganese sulfide inclusions. Only the gray iron FC25 with 0.065% sulfur content has shown intense adherence. Therefore, it can be said that the area occupied by manganese sulfide must stay around (18 For a 95% confidence level, it was found that the machinability of gray cast irons FC25 with 0.12 and 0.18% sulfur contents do not differ significantly at 100 Similarly, for a confidence level of 95%, the machinability of the gray cast irons FC25 with 0.12, 0.15 and 0.18% sulfur contents do not differ significantly, when machined at 150 and 200 The best machinability of gray cast iron FC25, with manganese sulfide inclusions of type III (0.18% S) – as compared to material with inclusions of type I (0.065%) – indicates that the machinability is not significantly affected by the morphology, but by the percentage area of the inclusions instead. Compared to the gray iron FC25 with 0.12% sulfur content, the material with 0.065% S presented a reduction of 24, 32 and 38% for the tool life, at speeds of 100, 150 and 200 The authors wish to thank the Mechanical Engineering Graduate Course of Federal University at Santa Catarina for financial support, to Capes, which sponsored a scholarship and to Tupy Fundições for technical and material support.