The growth behavior and microstructure of Co–Ge/GaAs films prepared by the high-temperature sequential deposition (HTSD) method have been investigated using X-ray diffraction, cross-sectional transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron sepectroscopy and atomic force microscopy. Three germanides were formed in the films at temperatures ranging from 300 to 600°C. Polycrystalline CoGe with poor crystallinity was formed at 300°C. On the other hand, epitaxial Co5Ge7 were formed at 400 and 500°C. The epitaxial orientations for the Co5Ge7 films formed at 400 and 500°C are [001] (100) Co5Ge7∥[110] (001) Ge∥[110] (001) GaAs and [100] (001) Co5Ge7∥[110] (001) Ge∥[110] (001) GaAs, respectively. Then, at 600°C polycrystalline CoGe2 was formed in the film. Based on the experimental results, the solid-state reaction mechanism for Co–Ge binary system and the epitaxial growth mode for Co5Ge7 are discussed.Thin film growth by solid-state reactions between metals and semiconductors has attracted much attention because such a process is very important for integrated circuit fabrication, mainly to form contacts or interconnections on semiconductor substrates. Silicide formation by solid-state reactions between Co and Si has been studied extensively for this purpose, and cobalt disilicide (CoSi For a contact, it is beneficial to have good crystalline quality or even to be an epitaxial contact, because this will reduce the structural defects inside the contact and thus lower the resistivity of the contact remarkably. It has been reported The substrates used in this study were (1   The XTEM image and SAD pattern of the Co–Ge/GaAs films deposited at 500°C are given in The XTEM image of the film deposited at 600°C is shown in The above XTEM results confirm that except for CoGe, cobalt germanides (Co The XPS depth profiles of the above three films are given in The surface morphology of the films was studied by atomic force microscopy, and the results are shown in Three cobalt germanides, CoGe, Co An important feature for the Co–Ge films developed by HTSD method is the epitaxial alignment of Co The growth mode for epitaxial films grown by solid-state reactions, in which substrate material is a reactant, has not been established to date. Such growth process involves not only the movement of atoms on the surface of the growing film, but also the movement of atoms across the interface between the growing film and the substrate. Therefore the well-established epitaxial growth modes, Volmer–Weber growth, Stranski–Krastanov growth and Frank–van der Merwe growth, cannot be applied because interdiffusion across the interface is not permitted for such growth modes Ge and Co were sequentially deposited onto the (1