A phase mixture model was employed to simulate the deformation behavior of metallic materials covering a wide grain size range from micrometer to nanometer scale. In this model a polycrystalline material is treated as a mixture of two phases: grain interior material whose plastic deformation is governed by dislocation and diffusion mechanisms and grain boundary ‘phase’ whose plastic flow is controlled by a boundary diffusion mechanism. The main target of this study was the effect of grain size on the flow stress and its strain rate sensitivity as well as on the strain hardening. Conventional Hall–Petch behavior in coarse grained materials at high strain rates governed by the dislocation glide mechanism was shown to be replaced with inverse Hall–Petch behavior in ultrafine grained materials at low strain rates, when both phases deform predominantly by diffusion controlled mechanisms. A deformation mechanism map representing the ranges of predominance of the dislocation glide and the diffusion controlled plastic flow is presented. The model predictions are illustrated with examples from the literature.Due to their unusual mechanical and physical properties, nanostructured materials (NSMs), defined as polycrystalline materials with average grain size less than 100 nm, are currently attracting a great deal of attention from the materials research community. In contrast to conventional coarse grained materials, which are either strong or ductile, but rarely both at the same time, it is expected that with NSMs both high strength and ductility can be achieved, cf. Valiev’s ‘paradoxon’ There are several well referenced reports on the general mechanical behavior of NSMs GB related phenomena, such as diffusion and grain boundary sliding, are considered as the main deformation mechanisms in NSMs by other researchers. Thus, Yamakov et al. In our view, modeling approaches which combine in a simulation both dislocation glide and diffusion controlled plasticity are essential for understanding mechanical behavior of NSMs. In this regard the phase mixture model Despite the interest in the mechanical properties of NSMs and the significant efforts put into studying them, the effect of strain rate is not well established as yet, especially in terms of the operating deformation mechanisms. In this paper, the effect of strain rate on the mechanical properties of NSMs was investigated by employing the phase mixture modeling whose capacity to provide a conclusive description of the deformation mechanisms and the mechanical properties of NSMs has been proved in earlier exercises. The constitutive description of the deformation behavior provided by the phase mixture model is represented schematically in Plastic flow of the other phase, viz. the crystalline GI, is considered to be carried by the dislocation glide mechanism (contributing the plastic strain rate The dislocation glide contribution to the plastic strain rate of the GI phase is described in terms of a model The evolution equation for the dislocation density reads It is further assumed that the strain in both phases is the same (and equal to the macroscopic strain The set of Eqs. Numerical simulations based on the aforementioned model were carried out for the case of copper, taken as a “prototype” material. We start with the observation that the flow stress levels are generally lower in coarse grain sized materials than in the fine grained materials (Hall–Petch behavior), except at very low strain rates (<10 The obvious reason for the inverse Hall–Petch behavior is a contribution of diffusion driven processes to the overall deformation. Formally, the role of this contribution is seen from Eqs. It is of interest to compare the role of the two diffusion controlled mechanisms that, of course, changes with the grain size. In the limit of very small grain size, when the role of the dislocation glide is negligible and the Coble mechanism contribution outstrips that of the Nabarro–Herring mechanism in the diffusion controlled plastic flow, the constitutive behavior is reduced to a simple Newtonian viscous flow law: The stress is then governed by the grain size Another issue of interest is the relative role of the dislocation glide mechanism and the combination of both diffusion mechanisms in the deformation of the grain interior phase for conditions where these mechanisms are relevant. A diagram showing the varying relative magnitudes of the dislocation These results can also be presented in the form of a deformation mechanism map, Let us now return to analyzing the results in What can also be recognized in Two particular cases considered (strain rate jumps from 10 Finally, we address the strain hardening behavior. Again, we turn to The occurrence of the ascending branches of the curves corresponding to high strain rates of 1 and 10 s The grain size dependence of the strain rate sensitivity and the strain hardening coefficient calculated in this paper provides a useful resource in optimizing ductility, as the conditions for the onset Strain hardening behavior of nanostructured materials was simulated using the phase mixture model. The effects of the strain rate and the grain size on the strain hardening behavior and the strain rate sensitivity were investigated. A transition from the usual Hall–Petch behavior of the grain size dependent stress to an inverse dependence was obtained by numerical simulations. The contribution of the diffusion controlled mechanisms to the total deformation that increases with grain refinement and decreasing strain rate was evaluated quantitatively. Strain rate sensitivity of stress was found to increase with decreasing grain size due to the growing role of the diffusion controlled mechanisms, both in the grain interior and in grain boundaries whose volume fraction grows on grain refinement. This leads to the effective SRS approaching the value of one, signifying a tendency to Newtonian viscous flow. A useful outcome of this work is a deformation mechanism map on which the relative role of the deformation mechanisms involved can be visualized for different ranges of strain rates and grain sizes. The numerical assessment of the grain size dependence of strain hardening and strain rate sensitivity of stress provides a useful tool in determining a strategy for ductility improvement. While the simulations were made for copper, the qualitative findings are applicable to a broad range of single phase metallic materials, particularly the fcc ones. This work was supported through the Korea Research Foundation Grant (KRF-2003-041-D00266). Most of the calculations were performed using the supercomputing resources of the Korea Institute of Science and Technology Information (KISTI). One of the authors (HSK) acknowledges the support of his study leave at TU Clausthal through the KOSEF-DFG visiting fellowship.