Introduction
                  Asymmetrical callus formation and incomplete bone formation underneath stiff locking plates have been reported recently in clinical and experimental fracture healing studies. After similar effects were observed in the outcome of high tibial osteotomy (HTO) patients, a retrospective study was performed to quantify the frequency and level of such incomplete healing cases.
               
                  Material and methods
                  Twenty-three patients treated with medial open wedge HTO and locking plate (Tomofix™) for posttraumatic or congenital genu varum were investigated. No bone grafts were applied to fill the osteotomy gap. The median correction angle was 8° (5–18°). Elective hardware removal was performed after a median of 19.5 months (12–58 months) following an uneventful clinical course. The most recent postoperative X-ray available (median 21 months; 13–56 months) was evaluated for consolidation of the osteotomy. We performed an in vitro biomechanical experiment using the same HTO on a loaded cadaver knee joint to compare interfragmentary movements (IFMs) when using regular locking screws with the Tomofix™ plate and screws that enabled dynamic stabilisation of this plate.
               
                  Results
                  Fifteen patients (65%) displayed incomplete consolidation of the osteotomy underneath the locking plate (10.9% of the osteotomy length) and cortical deficiency. The time to implant removal for these patients of 27 months was longer than the 21 months for the patients with a complete osteotomy gap healing. The biomechanical experiment demonstrated that very low IFMs and corresponding interfragmentary strain occur underneath the plate when using regular locking screws. Replacement with dynamic screws resulted in an increased IFM.
               
                  Discussion and conclusions
                  These results support the hypothesis that low bone formation underneath locking plates is induced by increased stiffness. This high stiffness situation could be altered by replacing the standard screws with dynamic screws which allow for a movement of 0.35mm perpendicular to the screw axis. This resulted in an approximately threefold increase in the IFM and may be a potential concept to avoid incomplete bone healing under stiff plate fixations.The introduction of locking plates led to fundamental changes in fracture treatment through focusing on two aspects: mechanics and biology. While conventional compression plates gain stability through the frictional force between the plate and the bone, the angle stable screws in locking plates are loaded perpendicular to their axes in compression. Therefore, locking plates provide a much greater contact area between the screws and the bone, and a more even load distribution between the several screws in one fragment, ultimately leading to greater stability We hypothesise that locking plates result in delayed bone healing in high tibial osteotomy (HTO) patients because of low IFM and tissue strain underneath a stiff plate, and that by using screws which enable greater motion, the IFM close to the plate can be increased. We reviewed retrospectively the X-rays of 74 consecutive patients who underwent HTO for congenital or posttraumatic varus deformity between 2003 and 2012 after obtaining consent from the local ethics committee (12/13 Ethics Committee, Ulm University). Only patients who underwent elective hardware removal in our clinic without any complications and after an uneventful course were included because this allowed sufficient evaluation of X-rays with respect to cortical deficiency underneath the plate. In total, 23 patients (18 males, 5 females; median age 44 years, range 20–66 years) were included. The right leg was affected in 12 patients and the left in 11 patients. Prior to surgery, all patients underwent digital deformity analysis (mediCAD, Hectec, Landshut, Germany) to confirm the presence of a deformity and the indication for surgery based on the previously published criteria HTO was performed using the medial open wedge technique as described by Floerkemeier et al. Whereas it is clear that the IFM close to the surface of a stiff plate is small, there were no quantitative data available previously for the HTO A human cadaver knee specimen (male, 57 years, left side) was used. An X-ray (Faxitron 43805N, Hewlett-Packard, Palo Alto, USA) was taken to ensure the absence of deformity, prior fracture, and cysts (45 In the second experiment, the four bicortical screws below the osteotomy gap were replaced using screws enabling control of the rigidity of plating constructs (Dynamic Locking Screw DLS, Synthes, Oberdor, Switzerland) ( Fifteen patients (65%) displayed varying degrees of incomplete consolidation according to the method described in the present paper ( The IFM underneath the stiff interlocking plate was 0.05 We found incomplete osteotomy healing in 65% of a cohort of 23 patients treated with HTO and locking plate for posttraumatic or congenital genu varum. The osteotomy gap remained open near the plate and all patients displayed a cortical deficiency. These results support our hypothesis that very stiff locking plates prevent sufficient micromotion for the stimulation of new bone formation in the osteotomy adjacent to the plate. We found that the HTO patients were well suited to investigate the effect of high implant stiffness resulting in diminished bone formation because the HTO is a more standardised clinical scenario compared to patients with a fracture. The open wedge technique creates a larger interfragmentary gap, which is often the situation for the fixation of metaphyseal comminuted fractures, where an exact anatomical reduction is frequently impossible. On the other hand, is has to be considered that our sample represents non-trauma patients with surgical osteotomies which neglects the impact of the trauma on the bone and its surrounding soft-tissues including its’ potential effects on fracture healing. These aspects have to be taken into consideration when comparing our study with results in fracture populations. The combination of large interfragmentary gaps, which induce delayed bone healing, and low IFMs, which suppress bone formation underneath stiff plates and thus diminish bone healing capacity, potentially result in increased complication rates In contrast to the inconsistent or asymmetric callus formation found in the previous study described above, in the present HTO study a low IFM resulted in incomplete filling of the osteotomy gap because the stable bony support of the medial site of the osteotomy did not induce callus formation The present study provides new evidence that stiff locking plates suppress bone healing underneath the plate. The biomechanical explanation is a lack of micromotion near the plate. In a metaphyseal osteotomy healing model in sheep, it was demonstrated that with low IFMs healing of the osteotomy gap did not occur A potential solution to address this problem may be the use of specifically designed screws which allow for a more flexible fixation, as was shown in the present biomechanical test. In this biomechanical test, the IFM underneath the plate could be increased approximately threefold when using the DLS screw instead of the standard locking screw. Taking into consideration the average osteotomy gap size in the HTO near the plate (10 To confirm the clinical relevance of this mechano-biological analysis, a prospective study comparing the HTO treatment with a standard stiff interlocking plate and a DLS screw fixation should be performed. The loads acting on locking plates are carried exclusively by the screws and the plate, which requires these plates to be rather thick to avoid fatigue fracture. However, this results in increased stiffness of the implant, causing reduced tissue strains and IFM underneath the plate. Asymmetric callus formation in fracture healing studies is attributed to this because a more even distribution of micromotion along the fracture site is required for normal healing. The present study supports this concept by demonstrating delayed consolidation in HTO patients treated with a standard locking plate. A potential solution to this problem could be the use of dynamic screws which allow for controlled micromotion, as demonstrated in the biomechanical section of the present study. The authors are not compensated and there are no other institutional subsidies, corporate affiliations, or funding sources supporting this work unless clearly documented and disclosed. The authors would like to thank Synthes for providing the implants for the biomechanical test.