A complete characterization was carried out on a jarositic residue from the zinc industry. This residue consists of ammonium jarosite, with some contents of H3O+, Ag+, Pb2+, Na+ and K+ in the alkaline “sites” and, Cu2+ and Zn2+ as a partial substitution of iron. The formula is: [Ag0.001Na0.07K0.02Pb0.007(NH4)0.59(H3O)0.31]Fe3(SO4)2(OH)6. Some contents of franklinite (ZnO·Fe2O3), gunninguite (ZnSO4·H2O) and quartz were also detected. The jarosite is interconnected rhombohedral crystals of 1–2 μm, with a size distribution of particles of 2–100 μm, which could be described by the Rosin–Rammler model.
                  The alkaline decomposition curves exhibit an induction period followed by a progressive conversion period; the experimental data are consistent with the spherical particle with shrinking core model for chemical control. The alkaline decomposition of the ammonium jarosite can be shown by the following stoichiometric formula:
                        
                           
                              NH
                              4
                              Fe
                              3(SO
                              4)2(OH)6(s)+3OH
                              (aq)
                              −→(NH)4(aq)
                              ++3Fe(OH)
                              3(s)+2SO
                              4(aq)
                              2−.
                        
                     
                  
                  The decomposition (NaOH) presents an order of reaction of 1.1 with respect to the [OH−] and an activation energy of 77 kJ mol−1. In NaOH/CN− media, the process is of 0.8 order with respect to the OH− and 0.15 with respect to the CN−. The activation energy was 46 kJ mol−1. Products obtained are amorphous. Franklinite was not affected during the decomposition process. The presence of this phase is indicative that the franklinite acted like a nucleus during the ammonium jarosite precipitation.One of the major problems in the zinc industry is the iron content in the calcine fed to the leaching circuits. Iron is present as franklinite formed during the roasting of sulphides at high temperatures and is not soluble in relatively dilute sulphuric acid Several studies The method leads to better zinc recoveries by removing the iron and impurities such as As, Pb, P, etc., content in the leach solution. However, the use of calcine as a neutralising agent during the jarosite precipitation involves losses of Zn, Pb and Ag, which may be present in the jarosite structure and/or co-precipitate as sulphates. The jarosites belong to the alunite family Zinc production world-wide involves the generation of large amounts of jarosite type compounds (ammonium jarosite and sodium jarosite due to the lower cost of their salts) for iron control, which are sent to residue ponds For these reasons, research related to the alkaline reactivity of various jarosite type compounds has been carried out. The first studies were based on Pb, Ag and Au recovery using several methods and processes This paper includes a complete study of the kinetics of alkaline decomposition and cyanidation processes of the ammonium jarosite precipitated in the zinc industry. For the kinetics study, a sample of ammonium jarosite residue produced in a Zinc Plant (Industrial Minera—México, San Luis Potosı́, México) was used. This sample was characterized by X-ray Fluorescence (XRF), chemical analysis, X-ray diffraction (XRD), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDS), electron microprobe (EPMA) and granulometric analysis. The experimental procedure was similar to that used in previous investigations In the experiments of alkaline decomposition, the progress of the reaction was followed by taking samples of the solution (1–5 mL) throughout the experiments at different times and testing for S by emission spectrometry by inductively coupled plasma (ICP). For the cyanidation experiments, the same technique was used but in this case, the reaction progress was followed by testing for Ag using atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS). Variations due to sampling and reagent addition were corrected for by mass balance. Solids obtained at different conversion values were characterized by XRD, SEM and EDS to observe their evolution. The characterization performed by XRD, SEM and EDS confirmed that the jarosite residue consists of an ammonium jarosite, with some contents of H The density was 3070 kg m By microanalysis (EPMA), the chemical composition of individual crystals of the jarosite and franklinite were determined The morphology of the jarosite is spheroid and semi-spheroid aggregates of 1.0–2.0 μm rhombohedral crystals forming a compact structure similar to synthetic jarosites  The comparative study of the alkaline decomposition and cyanidation of the industrial ammonium jarosite was carried out to determine the influence of CN  In this process, an induction period The analysis by XRD  During the decomposition process, silver is retained in the solid decomposition products. In the cyanidation process, silver passes to the solution as [Ag(CN) In the decomposition and cyanidation in NaOH media, the plot of log (1/ The effect of the [NaOH] on the reaction rate is shown in  For the progressive conversion period in both media (NaOH and NaOH/CN All the results obtained by the alkaline decomposition and cyanidation are consistent with the shrinking core model for chemical rate control. The kinetic expressions for the alkaline decomposition and cyanidation of industrial ammonium jarosite in NaOH media can be written according to the observed dependencies for the experimental constants as: NaOH: NaOH/CN  (1) The industrial jarosite residue basically consists of an ammonium jarosite, with some contents of H (2) By EPMA, the individual chemical composition of the jarosite crystals was found and according to these results, the approximate complex formula for the industrial jarosite is: (3) The alkaline decomposition presents an induction period followed by a progressive conversion period. In the induction period, neither morphological changes nor composition variations were detected. The progressive conversion period is characterized by the liberation of sulphate and ammonium ions from the jarosite lattice and their rapid diffusion through the solution, leaving an amorphous product of iron hydroxide. (4) The alkaline decomposition of the ammonium jarosite in NaOH and NaOH/CN (5) The experimental data obtained during the progressive conversion period are in satisfactory agreement with the shrinking core model for chemical control. (6) The solid decomposition products obtained in the alkaline decomposition and cyanidation of industrial ammonium jarosite are amorphous and show zinc ferrite (franklinite) in the core of particles. Franklinite acts as a nucleus in the jarosite precipitation during iron removal in zinc industry. (7) In the alkaline decomposition in NaOH medium, the process is of 1.1 order with respect to the OH (8) In the alkaline cyanidation in NaOH media, the process is of 0.8 with respect to the OH The authors wish to thank the “Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologı́a” of the Mexican Government for the financial support. Thanks are also due to the “Serveis Cientı́fic—Tècnics de la Universitat de Barcelona” for their assistance in this work. Finally, thanks are directed to the “Unidad Central de Laboratorios (X-Ray Diffraction) de la Universidad Autónoma del Estado de Hidalgo” for its support in this work.