This article reviews direct and indirect effects of glucocorticoids on osteoclast development and function. Osteoclasts are specialized bone-degrading multinucleated cells that differentiate from macrophage-family precursors. In adults, osteoclasts are coupled with osteoblasts to modulate bone turnover in a bone remodeling cycle. Normal functions of this remodeling cycle include bone repair and adaptive response of bone to bio-mechanical forces. The normal coupling of bone formation and breakdown is modified by aging, menopause, medications, and other processes. In particular, glucocorticoids have a major impact on bone turnover by modulating activity and lifespan of the bone cells including osteoblasts and osteoclasts. In effect, glucocorticoids typically uncouple the normal bone remodeling cycle by increasing osteoclast lifespan and causing osteoblast apoptosis, particularly at high concentrations of glucocorticoids, although there is wide variation in effects at lower concentrations and with species. In most cases, glucocorticoids at pharmacologic concentrations cause rapid bone loss, in some cases glucocorticoid-induced osteonecrosis, and increase fracture rates.Decreased apoptotic rates Decreased osteoclastic progenitor formation rates although osteoclast number not decreased Increased Pyk2 activity resulting in increased podosome activity and attachment increasing lifespan Increased ROS accumulation and autophagy Downregulation of miR17/20a promoting osteoclast differentiation Altered resorption cycle with increased duration of resorptive phase and decreased migration Increased apoptotic rate Decrease in osteoblast colony forming units (CFU-OB) Decreased osteoid synthesis with decreases in osteocalcin and collagen type I synthesis Decrease in miR-29a with increase expression of the Wnt inhibitors Dkk-1 and sclerostin Increase in miR146a and dowregulation of Bcl2 Increased apoptotic rate Increased production of RANKL and decrease in OPG Increased marrow adiposity Increased RANKL expression Dr. Isales is funded by the National Institutes on Aging P01AG036675. Dr. Blair's work is supported in part by BX002490 from the Department of Veterans Affairs (USA) and AR065407 and AR076146 from the National Institutes of Arthritis and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases. The osteoclast is specialized for bone degradation by multinucleation and expression of bone binding and bone degrading proteins ( Osteoclast differentiation from hematopoietic precursors requires action by cytokines, most commonly receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappaB ligand (RANKL) and macrophage colony stimulating factor (M-CSF). Other related cytokines, such as TNFα can contribute to osteoclast differentiation, however ( RANKL is a tumor necrosis factor family protein. It was discovered in lymphocytes, and is active in other tissues including mammary gland ( Because osteoclasts play an essential role in bone development, their formation, activity and duration are tightly regulated. In addition to RANKL and CSF-1, other pathways are involved including the Hippo signaling pathway ( In more detail, apoptosis for both osteoblasts and osteoclasts is regulated at the level of death receptors (CD95 (Fas) and TNF) and the Bcl-2 family of proteins (both pro- and anti-apoptotic) ( It is important to distinguish pharmacological effects from the normal physiological role of glucocorticoids in bone, which are mainly to promote osteoprogenitor cell differentiation versus pharmacologic effects on bone which are mainly to promote decreases in bone mass ( The physiologic role for glucocorticoids appears to predominantly involve the early osteoblastic stages rather than at later stages or osteocytes. The full physiologic spectrum of glucocorticoid action is still incompletely understood but include energy balance (in particular as a counter regulatory hormone and energy balance), immune modulator and volume and electrolyte regulation. Glucocorticoid effects on energy balance may involve the skeleton, at least in part since disruption of GR in osteoblasts prevents glucocorticoid inhibition of osteocalcin synthesis and prevents the development of insulin resistance and weight gain associated with glucocorticoid administration ( Glucocorticoid receptors (Nuclear receptor subfamily 3, group C, member 1; NR3C1) are widely expressed in all cells and in all bone cells specifically including osteoclasts, osteoblasts and osteocytes ( Glucocorticoids also modulate the transcription activity of other transcription factors through monomeric glucocorticoid receptors by directly binding to these factors through a protein-protein interaction. These actions result either in the upregulation or down-regulation of anti-inflammatory or inflammatory factors. A major anti-inflammatory glucocorticoid's action is to inhibit the NF- Although this article is focused on glucocorticoid effects on osteoclasts, bone turnover is tightly coupled and thus glucocorticoid effects on osteoblasts have multiple indirect effects on osteoclasts. Glucocorticoid effects on bone involve both trabecular and cortical bone and are characterized by decreased bone formation. Thus, glucocorticoid effects on osteoblasts/osteocytes will be briefly discussed. Bone formation and maintenance is a multistep process involving osteoblast differentiation from osteogenic precursors, matrix deposition predominantly of collagen type I and matrix organizing proteins and a mineralization process consisting of hydroxyapatite deposition. The mineralization process itself involves active proton transport since mineralization occurs at a slightly alkaline pH (  Wnt signaling is a key regulator of bone formation through increasing the expression of osterix thus promoting osteoblast differentiation and increasing expression of OPG thus favoring the balance toward anabolism ( A number of investigators have examined potential roles for micro RNAs as mediators of glucocorticoid action in bone. The full role or the interactions between these various micro RNASs glucocorticoids have been shown to increase the expression of Dkk-1 and sclerostin, Wnt antagonists, possibly through inhibition of miR-29a ( It is important to note that rodents are not uniformly good models for glucocorticoid effects on human bone. Osteonecrosis in rodents does not occur in the same sequence or pattern as in humans. In rodents, unlike humans, bone mass often increases with glucocorticoid treatment at moderate levels ( Glucocorticoid receptors are expressed in all bone cell types including osteoclasts. Glucocorticoids may have multiple mechanisms of action on osteoclasts. At least some portion of glucocorticoid effects on osteoclasts are indirect, mediated through alterations in the OPG/RANKL ratio. Using a number of primary or osteoblastic cell lines, As already discussed, there are potential concerns with the use of the mouse model to demonstrate glucocorticoid effects on bone, since they lack osteons. Rabbit bone shares a number of similarities to human bone and high dose dexamethasone effects have also been evaluated in this model. As shown by Osteoclasts derived from mice in which the glucocorticoid receptor was conditionally deleted showed both decreased proliferation and apoptosis resulting in no net decrease in osteoclast number. In addition, steroids disrupt osteoclastic Rho GTPases, blocking RhoA, Rac and Vav3 activation and resulting in altered cytoskeleton function and disruption of the actin ring. In view of the tight coupling of osteoblasts and osteoclasts, it's possible that altered osteoclastic activity in turn negatively affects osteoblastic activity (  Glucocorticoid effects on promoting osteoblast/osteocyte apoptosis while inhibiting osteoclast apoptosis may be mediated by proline-rich tyrosine kinase 2 (Pyk2) a member of the focal adhesion kinase family ( The impact of glucocorticoids on the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) and autophagy has also been explored as a potential pathophysiological mechanism. Using osteoclast precursors isolated from the long bones of mice, MicroRNA changes in osteoblasts and effects on bone formation in response to glucocorticoids was discussed in the previous section. However, microRNAs can also indirectly impact osteoclasts. Based on a bioinformatics approach, In addition to direct glucocorticoid effects on OC number and function steroids may also have an impact on mechanical failure by altering resorption pit geometry and osteoclastic resorption cycles. Osteoclasts normally go through a resorption cycle characterized by attachment-resorption-migration. Glucocorticoid effects on the resorption cycles was evaluated using isolated human osteoclasts seeded on bovine cortical bone discs which were then treated with prednisolone. These investigators ( Glucocorticoids are widely used because of their anti-inflammatory properties and have thus become one of the major causes of osteoporosis. In a meta-analysis of 42,500 men and women, it was found that fracture risk for corticosteroid related osteoporosis was greater than that for post-menopausal osteoporosis at equivalent bone mineral densities ( Glucocorticoid effects on bone can be divided into two phases, an early rapid bone loss followed by a second more sustained loss. Glucocorticoid-induced bone loss is greatest in the first year of use (estimates vary between 2 and 12 percent loss) but loss continues as long as supra-physiologic doses of glucocorticoids are administered (up to 3 percent/year thereafter) ( Long term corticosteroid use is associated with a greatly increased fracture risk especially at some sites (vertebra and proximal femur) and correlates with corticosteroid dose and duration (