Particle size distribution (PSD) is an important parameter in gas-solid fluidized bed. The change in PSD due to particle attrition can affect the long-term performance of fluidized bed. In this study, artificial neural network (ANN) with genetic algorithm (GA) as a meta-modeling tool was employed to model the change in PSD during fluidization. Experiments were conducted using incineration bottom ash (IBA) as the fluidizing particles and different mass percentage of large and small glass beads were used as the grinding medium. Rosin–Rammler (RR) distribution was used to describe the IBA PSD. The ANN-GA models developed were subsequently used to study the effect of fluidization time, mass percentage of glass beads and size of glass beads used on the IBA particle attrition during fluidization.For more than 70 years, many industries in chemical, petrochemical, food and pharmaceutical fields have been using fluidized beds due to the versatility and ease of operation. Understanding the behavior of fluidization is crucial to the development of proper control and optimization strategies. Parameters such as fluid velocity, particle and fluid properties, temperature, pressure, height and diameter of reactor, voidage and particle size distribution (PSD) are all important properties required to mathematically model a fluidized bed ( Many computational studies of fluidized beds make use of mathematical relations ( Over the past decades, many research efforts were put into understanding particle attrition processes in fluidized beds. Due to a large range of operating conditions involved, it is difficult to rely solely on experimental results ( In this study, the change in PSD due to particle attrition with and without the use of glass beads as grinding medium in a co-fluidization process was investigated. Due to the complexity of the particle attrition process, artificial neural network (ANN) was used to model the change in PSD at various operating conditions. Genetic algorithm (GA) was applied to determine the ANN parameters. A Rosin–Rammler (RR) distribution function was used to describe the PSD. ANN being a tool of meta-modeling allows a comprehensive understanding of process behavior when multiple parameters are involved ( Experiments were conducted in an acrylic fluidized bed that was reported in our previous study ( Various distribution functions, such as normal distribution, log-normal distribution, Rosin–Rammler distribution, Johnson's distribution, etc. have been developed to describe PSD. It was reported in the literature that RR distribution can provide a good description of PSD in comminution processes such as grinding, milling, and crushing ( Meta-modeling is an approximation method developed for prediction, calibration, and optimization of the process behavior. Selection of a suitable model usually requires the use of empirical evidence in the data, knowledge of the process and some trial-and-error experimentation. It should be noted that model building is always an iterative process ( ANN is an excellent surrogate model for systems that are difficult to express by physical equations. An ANN structure generally contains interconnected neurons that link the input, output and hidden layers ( Back-propagation (BP) algorithm is known as one of the most classical training algorithms ( The datasets used in this study was collected experimentally using the setup described in the experimental section. The In this study, a five-layer (namely, one input layer, three hidden layers, and one output layer) network was used. The optimum number of hidden layers was found by trial and error following the general concept that the number of hidden layers should be between number of input and output variables. A publicly available Matlab SUMO toolbox ( The accuracy of built meta-models was tested using 14 test samples. Root-mean-square error (RMSE) and The goodness of fit was presented in terms of R-square and RMSE values. In the building of the meta-models, 267 training points were used 14 testing points were reserved for validation. For successful construction of the meta-models by ANN, there is a minimum requirement for the number of training points needed, which depends on the number of weights and biases used in the network. An increase in the number of weights and biases can reduce the model error but encourage overfitting. It is a challenge to balance between minimizing error and prevent overfitting. In general, the number of training data needs to be larger than the number of weights and biases in the network to prevent overfitting ( Validation of the meta-models developed is also performed using 14 testing points and the R-square and RSME results for both training points and testing points are shown in In order to study the inter-relationship between the glass beads size and the glass beads percentage, three-dimensional surface plots were developed based on the ANN models to depict the effect of glass beads on particle attrition. Particle attrition is represented by the change in PSD based on the PSD function parameters, The comparison of the effect of small and large glass beads as grinding medium are also shown in It was found in ball milling process that the use of grinding medium can enhance particle attrition. However, this enhancement in particle attrition was not observed when large glass beads were used in the co-fluidization process, as illustrated in In this work, artificial neural network (ANN) was applied to predict the particle size distribution in a gas-solid fluidized bed. Experiments were conducted using incineration ash particles (IBA) as the solid particles with glass beads of two different size ranges as the grinding medium in a co-fluidization process. Rosin–Rammler distribution function was proposed to describe the particle size distribution and the RR distribution parameters were used for the development of ANN meta-models. The results showed that the RR distribution is able to describe the PSD reasonably well. Two ANN models were developed based on the parameters of RR distributions ( This work is funded by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found in the online version at 