Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) are multipotent adult stem cells capable to differentiate into osteoblasts. Therefore, they represent attractive cell sources for tissue engineering applications, especially for bone replacement. Proteoglycans (PGs) exhibit a crucial role for matrix assembly and remodeling. Nevertheless, since bone development is a highly dynamic and complex process, the regulation of the extracellular matrix (ECM) formation remains elusive. Consequently, the aim of this study was to investigate the mRNA expression levels of genes involved in PG assembly in different stages of osteogenesis. For the rate-limiting enzyme in glycosaminoglycan (GAG) biosynthesis xylosyltransferase I (XT-I), maximal mRNA expression levels (3.89±0.83-fold increase) and elevated enzyme activities (285±17 dpm/μg DNA) were observed 10 days after osteogenic induction, simultaneously to the beginning mineralization of the ECM, whereas the highly homologous protein XT-II showed no specific alterations. The differential expression of chondroitin sulfate, dermatan sulfate and heparan sulfate chains was determined by analyzing the mRNA expression of EXTL2 (α-1,4-N-acetylhexosaminyltransferase), GalNAcT (β-1,4-N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase), and GlcAC5E (glucuronyl C5-epimerase) as they represent crucial enzymes in GAG biosynthesis. Besides GlcAC5E, all key enzymes showed upregulated mRNA contents (up to 3.6-fold) around day 10. Except for decorin, which exhibited heightened mRNA levels even in the early stages of osteogenesis, we found similar upregulated mRNA contents (up to 14.6-fold) for all investigated PG core proteins. The synchronized expression profiles demonstrate the coordinated biosynthesis of the PGs during bone formation and osteogenic stem cell differentiation occurring in parallel to the mineralization of the extracellular matrix.The differentiation of adult mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) Proteoglycans (PGs), which are composed of a core protein with at least one glycosaminoglycan chain attached, are crucial for building up a distinct ECM during osteogenesis of MSCs, and especially for the process of mineralization ( We turned our attention to the core proteins of versican, decorin and biglycan, which are modified by chondroitin sulfate (CS) or dermatan sulfate (DS) GAG chains, and to the core proteins of glypican-3 and syndecan-2 that are mostly linked to heparan sulfate (HS) chains. Biglycan and decorin belong to the group of small leucine-rich PGs (SLRP) and are known to be highly expressed in bone, to be crucial for interactions with type I collagen and to have been implicated in regulating mineral deposition and crystal morphology ( The biosynthesis of GAG chains, which are responsible for most of the interactions of PGs, occurs successively by a complex interaction of different enzymes. The initial and rate-limiting step in GAG biosynthesis in both HS and CS/DS chains is accomplished by the xylosyltransferases I and II (XT-I, XT-II), which catalyze the transfer of xylose from UDP-xylose to selected serine residues of the core protein and which are located in early Golgi compartments ( Osteogenic differentiation was achieved in all MSCs tested by culturing the cells under osteogenic differentiation conditions. When seeded and adhered to the plastic surface of the cell culture dishes, the MSCs showed a fibroblast-like morphology ( The progress of osteogenesis was further proven by an increase in the calcium concentration within the well and the phosphate concentration in the supernatant ( The mRNA levels of XT-I and XT-II during the osteogenic differentiation were detected by real-time quantitative PCR and are shown in The enzymatic activity of XT-I in the cell culture supernatant was determined on days 0, 2, 6, 10, 14 and 18 by radiochemical xylosyltransferase assay after induction of the osteogenic differentiation process. We found an increased secretion of XT-I in the later stages of the osteogenic differentiation, corresponding to the heightened mRNA content, whereas the maximum was also detected on day 10 (285 For both EXTL2 as a marker of HS synthesis, as well as GalNAcT as an indicator of CS/DS synthesis, we found significantly upregulated mRNA levels upon osteogenic induction ( The SLRP decorin is well known for being highly expressed in extracellular bone matrix. The N-terminal of decorin provides the attachment site for one GAG chain, either CS or DS. Within the first 3 days after osteogenic induction, a considerable augmentation of the mRNA abundance (9.7 During osteogenic differentiation, the assembly and remodeling of the ECM with a distinct deposition of PGs is a critical factor for the development of bone cultivated XT-I and XT-II represent key enzymes in ECM assembly which are both capable of initiating the biosynthesis of HS and CS GAGs ( For XT-I and XT-II we found considerable differences in the transcriptional regulation of these two homologous proteins. Although both enzymes exhibit an almost equal mRNA base expression level, only XT-I showed noteworthy alterations in the mRNA amount. Here we could demonstrate for the first time that increased levels of XT-I mRNA and enzymatic activity occur in parallel in the late stages of osteogenesis during early mineralization of ECM. Since XT-I is secreted from the Golgi apparatus into the extracellular space together with PGs, XT-I could accumulate in the supernatant, which also resulted in an increased enzymatic activity ( With regard to the mRNA results obtained for XT-II, and in contrast to the chondrogenesis of MSCs, where intermediately upregulated XT-II mRNA levels were detected ( Additionally, our present results gained emphasize the essential role of XT-I as the initiating enzyme of the GAG biosynthesis and imply a crucial function of XT-I in building up a distinct ECM characteristically for bone formation during osteogenic differentiation. Besides XT-I, the action of further enzymes is warranted for the biosynthesis of GAG chains. GalNacT is the first enzyme which catalyzes the transfer of GalNAc from UDP-GalNAc to the core tetrasaccharide and is therefore responsible for initiation of the CS and DS biosynthesis ( Additionally to GalNAcT, we investigated the alterations of the mRNA content of versican as well as the mRNA levels of the SLRPs decorin and biglycan. Although both, decorin and biglycan, are supposed to have essential functions in the mineralization process, they show a quite divergent localization within tissues. Biglycan seems to be localized more closely around cells, whereas decorin can be predominantly detected in the extracellular matrix, bound to type I collagen ( Contrary to decorin, we detected high amounts of biglycan mRNA only in the late stages of osteogenesis comparable to the augmentation of the GalNAcT mRNA. In this context the mRNA expression of GlcAC5E, which catalyzes the epimerization of GlcA to IduA, is an interesting parameter. Comparable to XT-II there were no significant alterations in the mRNA amount of this enzyme detectable, although all other investigated PG core proteins and anabolic enzymes showed upregulated mRNA levels. This is consistent with the fact that decorin and biglycan within mineralized matrices of bone have been described to be predominantly substituted with CS instead of DS ( Besides the CS/DS PGs decorin, biglycan and versican, we examined the regulation of glypican-3 and syndecan-2. Both belong to the group of cell surface HS PGs and are involved in the initiation and support of osteogenic development ( Both HS PGs showed a similar transcriptional regulation with maximal mRNA levels between days 8 and 10 respectively. In addition, the proportion of transcriptional increase in both HS PGs and EXTL2, as well as the regulation of XT-I, was very similar, indicating a coordinated biosynthesis between the key enzymes involved in GAG and especially HS chain elongation and their targets. Although the transcriptional regulation of EXTL2 was in parallel to GalNAcT with increased mRNA levels in late stages of osteogenesis, the maximum mRNA expression of GalNAcT was detected four days later. This indicates that during the latter phases of osteogenic morphogenesis lower amounts of HS, and to a higher degree CS/DS, chains might be synthesized. This is in accordance with the highest mRNA levels for decorin and biglycan, which were both detected on day 14 as well. In addition, both PGs have been previously described to be predominantly substituted with CS chains within mineralized matrices of bone ( In summary, in this study we could demonstrate that all investigated PG core proteins and essential enzymes involved in the GAG biosynthesis show tightly synchronized mRNA expression patterns. Furthermore, all key enzymes and PG core proteins exhibit significantly higher mRNA amounts in the late stages of osteogenesis and are also in parallel to the mineralization of the ECM during osteogenic differentiation of MSCs. Moreover, we could emphasize the essential role of XT-I as the rate-limiting enzyme in GAG biosynthesis. We could further demonstrate that XT-II might play a less important role in osteogenesis compared to chondrogenesis, since no regulation in the mRNA amount of this enzyme could be detected. Cryopreserved, human bone marrow-derived MSCs were purchased from Cambrex Bio Science (Walkersville, Inc., For osteogenic differentiation, MSCs from the third passage were seeded at 3.1 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity was determined as recommended by the manufacturer's instructions contained in Sigma Leukocyte Alkaline Phophatase Kit #85 (Sigma, The extent of calcium deposition was determined as previously described with some modifications ( The concentration of inorganic phosphate in the cell culture supernatant was detected by a spectrophotometric method using the ARCHITECT Total RNA was extracted from cells within the osteogenic differentiation using the The method for determining xylosyltransferase activity is based on the incorporation of [ Statistical evaluation was performed using the ANOVA test, followed by the Mann Whitney test. A We thank Sarah L. Kirkby for her linguistic advice and Alexandra Adam and Anne-Kathrin Vollmer for their technical assistance. This work was supported by the Stiftung für Pathobiochemie und Molekulare Diagnostik of the Deutsche Vereinte Gesellschaft für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsmedizin and the Forschungsförderung an der Medizinischen Fakultät der Ruhr-Universität Bochum (FoRUM), Grant F414-2004.