The deleterious effects of clays on flotation performance are widely acknowledged but the mechanisms involved are not clearly established. Moreover, the concentrations beyond which clay minerals become problematic are not clearly defined. One major parameter is the difference between swelling and non-swelling clays which is evaluated in this study. The ore slurry pulp rheology and froth stability were monitored in the absence and presence of different clay minerals. It was found that swelling clays can adversely affect the flotation performance mainly via adsorbing water which changes the rheology and froth stability, reducing both flotation grade and recovery. Non-swelling clays had a lower effect on the rheology. Kaolinite increases the froth stability and reduces the flotation grade but illite showed the least effect on the flotation performance in this study. The potential mechanisms and critical concentrations are discussed.The mineral processing industries are facing finely disseminated and low grade ores. The processing of these ores is hindered by the presence of clay minerals. A comprehensive review on the effect of clays on mineral processing has been published recently ( Clay minerals are phyllosilicates which are made up of various combinations of sheets stacked on each other and bonded together. A tetrahedral sheet is made up of silicon-oxygen tetrahedrons with shared basal oxygen molecules (T layer). An octahedral sheet is made up of aluminium-oxygen octahedrons with shared apical and basal oxygen (O layer). These tetrahedral or octahedral sheets bond together through hydrogen bonding. The 1:1 clay minerals are formed by bonding of one tetrahedral and one octahedral sheet. They are electrically neutral therefore they will not attract positively or negatively charged species, and they do not swell in water. On the other hand, 2:1 clay minerals are formed by bonding of two tetrahedral and one octahedral sheet. Due to ion substitution in the layers, some of these clay minerals have a negative charge on the surface and will attract water or hydrated cations. The negatively charged surfaces of 2:1 clays attract positively charged water molecules, allowing the water molecules to enter between the layers. It should be noted that swelling is related to the hydration of clays but not all clays swell when hydrated. For example, while kaolinite shows little or no swelling on hydration, montmorillonite considerably swells when presents in water (up to 1500%, Froth stability is known to play an important role in determining mineral flotation recovery and selectivity ( Rheology has been recognized as an important factor in different aspects of mineral processing, including flotation (e.g. ( The aim of this study is to understand the differing effects of swelling and non-swelling clays on the flotation of a copper ore through examining the grade and recovery, pulp rheology, and froth characteristics. The findings could be beneficial towards ongoing studies to manage high clay containing ores in flotation which has been referred as “a mineral processing nightmare” ( A copper ore from Australia was used as the baseline in this investigation. The chemical assays of the ore sample contains 0.5% Cu, 3.8% Fe and 0.3% S. The mineralogy of the ore using XRD analysis has showed that it has 2.3% sulfides (chalcopyrite 0.7%, bornite 1.3%, and pyrite 0.3%), 39.4% quartz, 44.4% feldspar, 4.2% amphibole, 3.2% oxides, and 7.7% carbonates. The clay minerals used in this study were illite, kaolinite and montmorillonite. Kaolinite Q38 was provided by Unimin Australia Limited. All other clay samples were obtained in a pre-ground form from Ward’s Minerals. The particle size distribution of clay samples were measured by wet size light scattering technology using a Malvern Mastersizer (Malvern, UK). In each case, 0.5 The ore was ground by wet milling at 60% solid in a laboratory rod mill to achieve the P During flotation, froth images were taken and analysed using VisioFroth software developed by Metso Minerals Cisa for bubble size distribution. The camera was positioned directly above the flotation cell. The image capture area for bubble size measurement was 11.4 The copper flotation rate constants in the presence of different clays, at two levels of low and high concentrations were calculated on the basis of the first order flotation rate constant models (Eq. A 0.1% MIBC solution by weight was prepared with distilled water in a conical flask using a magnetic stirrer. For each sample, 5 The effects of the different clay minerals on froth stability were investigated using a specially designed column. Rheological measurements were performed using an AR1500EX (Thermal Analysis, Germany), with a standard 4-panel vane rotor geometry (with 18 The rheological analyses were conducted on slurries obtained from the feed material to the flotation tests. Slurries comprising the ore doped with increasing concentrations of clay minerals (0–30  The copper grade decreased to about 1% in the presence of 30% or 15% of kaolinite or montmorillonite, respectively and to about 5% in the presence of 30% illite. This may be due to the transportation or entrainment of clay fine particles to the froth phase and/or the rheological effects which affect the hydrodynamics within the cell. These very small particles can move upwards to the froth layer reducing the copper grade. Recently, it has been reported that the addition of 25% kaolinite has caused the flotation grade of a copper ore to be reduced from 4% to 1.5% (about 60% reduction) (  Montmorillonite was also found to have the most significant effect on the copper recovery. The final recovery decreased from 90% to about 80% in the presence of 15% montmorillonite. However, with the addition of the maximum tested amount of illite and kaolinite (i.e. 30%), the final copper recovery only slightly changed to 88%. A similar trend has been reported recently for the effect of clay minerals on the copper flotation using chalcopyrite ( From a practical view point, the overall flotation process is generally represented by the first order system with lumped parameters, assuming the collection zone is perfectly mixed. To better understand the behaviour of clay minerals on the flotation, the flotation products were assayed for Al The adsorption of frother by the ore and/or clay minerals were tested. The remaining concentration of MIBC after adsorption tests for the ore, and different clays is presented in  In the presence of only 15% montmorillonite, the froth height increased from 20 to 40 In addition to froth stability measurement using the froth column, the surface structure of the froth and (surface) bubble size during flotation was also analysed using froth images. The bubble size distribution of the froth surface in different conditions is also presented in In summary, the effect of different clay minerals on the froth stability is ranked as montmorillonite  In summary, the rheological behaviour of the ore suspensions is altered and becomes more complex with the addition of clays (within the tested range). The degree of complexity decreases in the order of montmorillonite In general, a common agreement was found between the flotation performance and swelling property of clays. Montmorillonite has considerable effect on the flotation grade and recovery due to its high swelling behaviour. Although the effect of slime coating and/or entrainment should not be ignored. On the other hand, it is possible to manage the deleterious effect of illite and kaolinite (within the tested loading levels). Kaolinite and illite, which do not significantly reduce the copper recovery, contaminate the copper concentrate by entrainment (at higher loading of illite compared to kaolinite). The calculated change in the flotation rate constant also suggests physical adsorption, or slime coating, of clays. In conclusion, one should carefully consider the type and amount of the clays in the ore through systematic mineralogy analysis, as well as the critical concentrations at which the clays may cause problem. It should be highlighted that whether or not clays are “mineral processing nightmare” also depends on their type and concentration. However, this statement is certainly more applicable for swelling clays. This paper showed the deleterious effects of swelling and non-swelling clays in flotation, with discussing some possible mechanisms. However, how to minimize these deleterious effects is another question. Further investigations in this area are undoubtedly warranted. Ms. Elin Tranvik from Lulea University is acknowledged for her contribution to this project during her training at the JKMRC.