In this study, char image analysis techniques have been employed to investigate the morphology of chars obtained from a Drop-Tube furnace. Char image analysis results have been incorporated as inputs to a char burnout model based on Hurt's CBK model. It has been observed that the char combustion rate was strongly affected by char structural parameters and the inclusion of char morphology has led to a better prediction of char burnout. It has also been suggested by the model that the inclusion of ash inhibition overestimates the resistance attributed by ash film and the consideration of ash film resistance should be undertaken in a different way to give a better prediction at the later stages of char combustion.Emissivity of char particle Stefan-Boltzmann constant Density of char, kg/m Gas thermal conductivity, J/m Viscosity of gas, kg/m/s Pre-exponential constant Oxygen concentration, mol/m Bulk diffusion coefficient of A in a mixture of A and B, m Effective diffusion coefficient in porous structures, m Knudsen diffusion coefficient, m Activation energy of char combustion, J/mol Heat transfer by convection, J Heat transfer by radiation, J Heat change of C+0.5O Heat of change of CO+0.5O Chemical reaction rate constant, mol/m Mass transfer coefficient of the gas film, mol/m Mass of char particles, kg Molecular weight of carbon, kg/mol Molecular weight of CO, kg/mol Mass of gases, kg Nusselt number Ideal gas law constant, J/mol Instant the char radius, m Initial char radius, m Time, s Ambient temperature, k Gas temperature, k Char particle temperature, k Relative gas velocity, m/s Fraction of oxygen in gas phase Coal is the most abundant fossil fuel resource in the world and has played and will continue to play an essential role in the supply of energy. During pulverised fuel (pf) combustion the coal particles are rapidly pyrolysed to yield char particles. Char combustion then occurs and the rate of char combustion in utility boilers plays a very important role in determining the carbon loss in ash and the design of the boiler. Of particular interest is the prediction of char combustion from original coal properties and char structural parameters. Because of coal's diversity in rank, variation in composition, and the complexity of the combustion process such work presents many challenges. Chars produced under rapid pyrolysis condition are mainly porous solids. Char morphology is an empirical description of char size and its appearance, its wall thickness, macroporosity, and optical anisotropy. Char particle size and its distribution are necessary in calculating the aerodynamic and heat transfer properties of the particles during burning. In most models of char combustion, particles are normally assumed to be spherical, uniformly porous solids. However, this is not the case in practice, and chars from the same coal can exhibit a range of morphologies and porosities. Many investigations have focused on how to describe the different structural types of char particles and assign them into specific categories A representation of these morphotypes, which have been captured under a microscope, is shown in Char burnout models have been developed to predict the burnout for different coals. For example, the model developed by Hurt and his coworkers Four coals were picked out for this study: Bijao, El Cerrejon, Caypa, and Ashland. Results of proximate and ultimate analyses together with petrographic characteristics of these coals are shown in A liquid resin (Estratil 2195, provided by Cray Valley Ltd Spain) mixed with Methyl-ethyl-ketone (50%w/w) in a proportion of 6 parts by 100 parts was employed in mounting char samples. About 0.10–0.15 g of char were mixed with 2 g previously mixed resin in a plastic mould with a diameter of 25 mm. The mould was then put in a desiccator connected to a vacuum pump. Once set, 7 to 8 g of pure resin were added on the top of the dried layer to form the bottom of the char block ready for polishing. After polishing, the samples were ready for examination under a microscope. Polished char blocks were put under a microscope (Leitz Ortholux II POL-BK, with 32× oil immersion objective), which is attached to a very flexible high performance Zeiss AxioCam digital camera. The camera was connected to a PC with a KS400 image analysis system (provided by Imaging Associates Ltd, the United Kingdom). These facilities allow char images to be captured by the digital camera, stored in the PC RAM for analysis, and saved onto a hard disk for further use. To investigate char structures, chars sampled from a drop tube furnace were studied and described quantitatively by using image analysis techniques. For each char particle, geometric parameters such as wall-thickness, char porosity, particle size, the proportion of unfused material, and pore number were measured. Chars are then assigned to different char morphotype groups. The general procedure for char image analysis is shown in The original char image was captured using a Leitz Ortholux II POL-BK Microscope through a Zeiss AxionCam digital camera, and transferred to a computer with the KS400 Image Analysis System installed. The initial image was then converted into a binary image. Small char fragments were scraped using the ‘binscrap’ function. The image is now ready for further processing and measurements. Maintaining the integrity of an individual char is a problem, which needs to be overcome when performing automatic char image analysis. Many char particles, after polishing, are broken or in fragments. Therefore, the reconstruction of char integrity is a very important step in char image analysis. Generally, there are two methods to reconstruct char particles. Using a mouse, char walls can be recreated. However, there are two major drawbacks to this approach. If the gap between two fragments is large, the risk of distorting the original char shape is significant and manual reconstruction of char boundaries is also time consuming and tedious. Another approach in reconstructing char walls is to do it automatically, using a combination of image processing functions. Lester et al The comparison of the dilation-erosion combination in different directions shows that for the char investigated, dilation in 8 directions, followed by erosion in 8 directions provides a char shape much closer to the original char shape. As far as the close function is concerned, the same trend happens. Close in 8 directions gives a better approach in char wall reconstruction than close in 12 directions. However, as has been pointed out by Lester et al After the reconstruction of the char boundary, the main issue is to find the geometric centre of gravity of the char in order that char-wall thickness measurements can be carried out. The KS400 system provides functions (MSmeasregion and MSmeasmask) for this. Having found the centre of gravity for the char, char-wall thickness can be measured. A series of chords (72 chords in this study) are drawn from the gravity centre. The overlaps of these chords and char boundary are locations where a char-wall thickness measurement will be taken. In order to get a more reliable description of the char wall-thickness, more chords can be drawn. However, because it is a for-loop in the image analysis program, more chords mean more iterations, which need more processing time. Occasionally, touching particles may be found in a field under the microscope. However, though it might be clear to the observer that they are separate particles, the image analysis system may see those touching objects as a single large particle. Consequently, it might introduce some errors into the results. Hence, the separation of these touching particles becomes vital in getting reliable information about individual particles. Manual operation is again the first choice to do this, but it is tedious and time consuming. With the KS400 system, this task can be done automatically after some criteria have been set. There are two feasible methods to do this. The first approach is the use of the ‘  Generally, char morphology is related to its parent coal rank, maceral composition, operating conditions, and its size range. Hence, different coals show different morphological features under the same operating conditions. The measurements of char equivalent diameters of Ashland chars (shown in In this study the char particles from the DTF were classified into three main categories: cenospheres, networks and mixed particles. Tenuispherical and crassispherical particles were classified as cenospheres in the char morphological submodel, while network, mixed-dense and mixed porous particles were categorized as networks, inertoid, solid, fusinoid and mineroid as mixed particles. Char size distribution was described by 8 size groups, ranging from −30 to +150 μm. The modelling of char combustion has been done by numerous workers, and the CBK model developed by Hurt et al In this burnout model, the char particles and gas flow along one geometrical coordinate with the same velocity. Chars were classified into three morphotypes. The balance equations for certain morphotype in each size group will be solved under the following assumptions: Particles are spherical and have identical physical and chemical properties, Heat exchange among char particles, the surrounding gas and furnace walls with constant temperature are considered by means of convection and radiation heat transfer, Particles burn with constant density at the particle surface, which covers the burn on the internal surface and external surface, producing primarily CO, and then within the gaseous phase, the CO combustion reaction takes place. The surrounding gaseous components are assumed O Commonly, char is represented as a spherical particle with a certain char porosity and an average particle size. The reactivities for chars from different char morpho-groups are assumed the same. However, char structure has a significant influence on char burnout through its impact on oxygen transport and char reactivity. To more accurately simulate the gas transport while char burning, it is essential to treat various chars in different ways. In this study, to account for the morphological parameters' influence on oxygen transport and char global reactivity, gas film resistance, ash film resistance and chemical reaction rate should be taken into consideration in a char burnout model as shown in In order to predict char burnout for a range of coals under conditions relevant to pulverized coal-fired combustion, A Moreover, in this study, a char morphological sub-model has been included in the char combustion model to consider the transport of oxygen from bulk flow to char external and internal pores. Char image analysis results shown in  Energy balance for char particles Energy balance for gas phase   Char image analysis results are shown in The predicted combustion profiles, using the model, for different char morphotypes are shown in Typical char burnout temperature profiles for different kinds of coals are presented in For most large char particles, the burnout temperature increases quickly initially, then slows down and finally levels off. However, for particles of some coals with diameter less than 40 μm, particle temperatures might rise quickly to a peak temperature, and then during the further char burning, the temperatures decrease. While carbon conversion reached a high level, the temperatures remain almost constant. The reason for that is probably that small particles undergo a very quick combustion period and the particles are more likely to be undergoing very short adiabatic combustion process, which leads to very high peak temperatures. Because of volatile combustion, when char burning starts, gas temperatures are about 100–200 °C higher than char particle temperatures. Shortly after the char begins to burn, gas temperatures undergo a short period of temperature decrease because of the heat transfer from gas phase to char particles by radiation and convection, and then increase slightly due to the heat release during the char combustion. At the later stages of char burnout, gas temperatures are slightly lower than mean char particle temperatures. It is generally accepted that under very high temperature combustion, transport effects are very important. In order to accurately describe the char burnout, in this model, three kinds of resistance for char combustion rate have been considered: chemical reaction rate; bulk diffusion and ash inhibition, which accounts for the resistance caused by ash film surrounding char particles. It is observed from the simulation that, initially, char chemical reaction rate was almost the same magnitude as the rate of bulk diffusion of oxygen to the external particle surface. At late stages, ash inhibition may dominate the whole combustion process.  Different char morphotypes showed different burnout profiles and different temperature histories. It is therefore necessary to treat chars in different ways in char combustion modelling to improve the prediction. Char image analysis results can be used as inputs to a char burnout model. In this work the inclusion of char morphology has led to a better prediction of char burnout. The char combustion rate was strongly affected by char structural parameters, which increased with temperature and then remained nearly constant after the temperature reached a certain point. The inclusion of ash inhibition in this model overestimated the resistance attributed by ash film. The pile-up of ash film surrounding char particle and its blowing off should be considered in a proper way to avoid the overestimation at the late stage of char combustion. Acknowledgement is made to BCURA, UK DTI, Powergen plc, TXU Europe Power Ltd for financial support. The views expressed are those of the authors not necessarily those of the funding bodies.