Two novel macrocycles, L1 and L2, containing a N3O4-donor set, have been synthesised, and their complexation potential towards Ln(III) ions have been investigated. The cyclocondensation reaction between 2,6-bis(2-formylphenoxymethyl)pyridine and 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)butane in the absence of metal ions, yields the macrocycle L1 as the main product. The diamine macrocycle L2 is formed by reaction of the diamine and dicarbonyl precursors followed by an in situ reduction with NaBH4. The interaction of lanthanide(III) ions with both ligands has been investigated.Macrocyclic ligands form stable complexes with lanthanides, offering a wide range of possibilities to explore the special properties of these complexes in areas ranging from medicine to hydrometallurgy Elemental analyses were carried out by the University of Santiago de Compostela Microanalytical Service on a Carlo Erba 1108 and a Leco CNHS-932 microanalysers. IR spectra were recorded as KBr discs using a Bio-Rad FTS 135 and a FTS 175 C spectrophotometers. NMR spectra were recorded using a Bruker DPX-250 and a AM-500 spectrometers. Positive ion FAB mass spectra were recorded on a Kratos MS50TC spectrometer using a 3-nitrobenzyl alcohol matrix. Melting points were carried out using a BÜCHI melting point apparatus. Conductivity measurements were carried out in ca. 10 2,6-Bis(2-formylphenoxymethyl)pyridine CAUTION: Perchlorates are potentially explosive. A solution of 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)butane (1 mmol) in absolute ethanol (50 cm L To a refluxing solution of 2,6-bis(2-formylphenoxymethyl)pyridine (1 mmol) in absolute ethanol (50 cm This ligand was prepared following a method previously reported for similar macrocycles L To a refluxing solution of L We have found that in the reaction between 2,6-bis(2-formylphenoxymethyl)pyridine and 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)butane the [1+1] Schiff-base macrocycle L The FAB mass spectra of both macrocycles play an important role in confirming the monomeric [1+1] nature of the ligands. They show the highest molecular weight peaks at The Perchlorate complexes of both ligands have been obtained in a good yield. In the case of L The molar conductivities of the complexes in dimethylformamide are in the range reported for 2:1 electrolytes in this solvent The IR spectra of all complexes were recorded in KBr. The absence of carbonyl and amine bands in the di-iminic complexes, together with the appearance of an imine band at 1631–1640 cm The UV/visible spectra of the metal complexes of PrL The cyclocondensation reaction between 2,6-bis(2-formylphenoxymethyl)pyridine and 1,2-bis(2-aminophenoxy)butane yields the Schiff-base macrocycle L We thank A Xunta de Galicia (PGIDT99PXI20902B) for financial support.