Reagent usage and type of reagent are important factors in froth flotation. The recovery and purity of the final product obtained depend on various parameters such as the type and the amount of reagent, the nature and the particle size of solids, the adsorption of reagent on solid particle surface. The froth flotation tests of bituminous coal fines were carried out using only one of three non-ionic reagents; Triton x-100, Brij-35, methyl isobuthyl carbinol (MIBC) and sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and the mixture of Triton x-100 or Brij-35 with MIBC in various ratios. The froth flotation performance was changed significantly according to addition of the reagent or reagent mixtures. The highest recoveries (>90%) were achieved in the presence of conventional reagents, MIBC or SDS. However, the ash rejection values were lower in the use of the same reagents. The ash rejection was considerably improved by using the mixture of reagents. A strong relationship was observed between the solid fraction in the concentrate and the type and amount of the reagent or the reagent mixture. The combustible solid recovery and the ash rejection strongly depend on the finer particle fraction in the feed.Coals are complex mixtures of organic and inorganic materials. The inorganic fraction is primarily composed of mineral matter and, to a lesser extent, associations of inorganic elements with organic material, e.g. organometallic compounds and exchangeable cations. The mineral matter and sulfur, which are present in varying amounts in all coals, are a major problem. Coal preparation or cleaning is the process of removing inert non-combustible mineral matter from the raw coal as mined. Most attempts to modify existing gravity-based coal cleaning processes, such as heavy media separation, shaking tables, washing cyclones, oil agglomeration and so on, reaped only partial success. Due to this limited success of coal cleaning processes, studies have shifted increasingly towards the use of froth flotation as a fine particle processing methodology. The advantages of froth flotation in coal processing are its relatively low capital and space requirements, as well as the relatively high recovery achievable under a wide range of operating conditions. Particles are carried into the froth by bubbles rising through the pulp phase. These bubbles, with their load of particles, accumulate at the pulp/froth interface. A variable amount of the material, which is carried into the froth, returns to the pulp by drainage. The re-entry of particles into the pulp occurs because of the continuous drainage of liquid from the froth associated with bubble coalescence. The selective drainage of gangue particles is desirable, as it will enrich the grade of the resulting froth concentrate. Studies focused on determining the effects of parameters such as particle size The studies showed a strong relationship between froth structure and flotation performance The effect of collector emulsification was investigated by   A detailed work was conducted on the effects of collectors on the flotation of oxidised and low-rank coal by Researches on the effects of reagent mixtures on the froth flotation performance are limited to kerosene and conventional reagent (MIBC, 2-ethyl hexanol, etc.) mixtures. A research program was started to determine the effects of the reagent and reagent mixtures on the froth flotation performance and froth structure. In this first study, the effects of pure reagents and reagent mixtures on the froth flotation performance were determined. Therefore, laboratory froth flotation tests were carried out using a bituminous coal (−53 μm in size) with high ash content. The reagents chosen were polyethylene glycol A Turkish bituminous coal, sampled from the Zonguldak colliery, was chosen for the study. The reagents used were Triton x-100 (Merck), Brij-35 (Merck), MIBC (Merck), SDS (Merck) and their mixtures with MIBC at given ratios. Some physical properties of the reagents are given in Size reduction of the coal was carried out using a crusher and a ball mill to maximise the liberation of mineral matter. First, the coal was crushed in the crusher, which produced material of less than 5 mm in diameter. The crushed product was then milled in the ball mill for further particle size reduction. The milled sample taken from the ball mill was sieved and particles of less than 53-μm diameter were collected and stored in sealed plastic bags. Some of the fraction of the feed coal (−53 μm) was re-milled in order to clarify the effects of finer particle size on froth flotation performance and reagent consumption. The ash and moisture contents of all the samples were determined according to ASTM standards. Combustible solid recovery and ash rejection values were calculated for the cumulative concentrate of the samples. The performance values are defined as: Flotation tests were carried out in a Denver laboratory flotation machine. The cell has approximately 1 dm Firstly, the required amount of distilled water was poured into the cell to prevent the dry coal feed sticking to the bottom and walls of the cell. The water in the cell was agitated at 1250 rpm by the impeller. The 30-g coal sample to be floated was added to the cell whilst the water was being agitated. This operation was performed over a short time period. The slurry was mixed well for 1 min (wetting time) and then the desired amount of the surfactant was added to the slurry as a solution. The slurry containing a known amount of surfactant was conditioned for a further 2 min. At the end of this conditioning period, bubbles induced by the agitator passed through the pulp forming froth on the upper pulp surface. The froth overflowed a weir on the recess side of the cell and was collected in the evaporating dishes at various time intervals until the overflow ceased. The froth concentrates were weighed and dried in the evaporating dishes. Solid and water contents of the concentrates were calculated. The ash contents of the concentrates were determined separately to obtain the recovery and ash content of the final product. The tailings were filtered and then dried and stored in small glass jars for subsequent particle size and ash content analysis. The particle size distributions of the solid samples were determined using a Malvern Mastersizer 2000 (Hydro 2000 MU) particle analyser, which utilises the principle of laser ensemble light scattering. The BET surface area of the coal sample was determined using a Quantachrome NOVA 2200 series volumetric gas adsorption instrument. The determination is based on the measurements of the adsorption isotherms of nitrogen at 77 K. Before measurements were started, moisture and gases such as nitrogen, oxygen which were adsorbed on the solid surface or held in the open pores, were removed under reduced pressure at 130°C for 5 h. Particle characterisation parameters of the samples are reported in The Denver cell flotation tests were performed with −53 μm size fraction of the coal and re-milled coal using varying amounts of surface active agents and their mixtures. All the tests performed were batch and with single-stage reagent addition. The Denver cell flotation tests were classified as follows: experiments using Triton x-100, Brij-35, MIBC, SDS and the reagent mixtures, respectively. Ash rejection, combustible solid recovery and solid contents of the concentrates were individually evaluated using experimental data for each test. The tests were performed in the presence of various initial Triton x-100 loadings. Initial loadings were between 0.45 and 1.5 mg/g. coal. The combustible solid recovery and ash rejection values are shown in It is important to report a decrease in the combustible solid recovery after a value of initial Triton x-100 (1.2 mg/g coal) loading. The reason for this may be directly related to the adsorption of the reagent on the external surface of the hydrophobic solid particles or the reagent remaining in water. Excess amount of the reagent on the surface of solids affects floatability of the particles to be separated, changing their hydrophobic character. Most probably the particles show less hydrophobic properties due to higher amount of Triton x-100 adsorption on the surface. The higher amount of Triton x-100 adsorption on the solid surface may also reduce the selectivity of the process; as a result of this the attachment probability of conditioned carbonaceous solid particle decreases. As reported by    When the initial SDS loading is increased up to 0.9 mg/g coal, there is a noticeable difference in the flotation performance as seen in the figure. The curves of the combustible solid recovery and the ash rejection show markedly different trends with the initial reagent loadings. This is an important factor in representing the effect of the initial reagent loading on the performance parameters. The combustible solid recovery sharply increased with increasing initial reagent concentrations, whereas the ash rejection declines steeply. For instance, if the initial concentration of SDS is increased from 0.133 to 0.9 mg/g coal, the ash rejection decreases from 88.9% to 68.11%; however, the recovery increases from 56.53% to 94.24%. This is most likely due to some hydrophilic solid particles entrained during the flotation process. As a result of this the ash content of the concentrates increased with the higher reagent concentrations. The results show that the performance data may vary from reagent to reagent. It is interesting to compare the runs individually performed in the presence of Triton x-100, Brij-35, MIBC and SDS; these four runs were carried out using the same coal and the amount of initial reagent concentration, 0.9 mg/g coal. Noticeable changes in the performance were observed in the use of the four different reagents. As can be seen in In order to determine the effects of the reagent mixtures on the performance parameters, a series of experiments were conducted using Triton x-100+MIBC and Brij-35+MIBC mixtures. The highest ash rejection was obtained using Brij-35 as mentioned previously. Since MIBC improves the collection ability of hydrophobic combustible solid particles in the slurry, as reported above, the tests were performed in the presence of Brij-35+MIBC mixtures containing various amount of MIBC  The solids in the concentrates were different for the experiments performed using pure reagents although the initial reagent loadings for the most of runs were the same. As seen from the figure, the water contents of the concentrates increased with increasing initial reagent loadings. Similar results have been reported in several studies The higher solid contents were obtained from the experiments performed in the presence of Brij-35 and Triton x-100. The lines for MIBC and SDS, which are commonly used, stayed well below the lines obtained from the use of Triton x-100 and Brij-35. High solid content in the concentrate is related to the drainage of water in the froth phase during the process. In the use of Triton x-100 or Brij-35, drainage of water in the froth phase occurs much better than tests performed in the presence of MIBC or SDS. This is most probably due to low surface tension in the use of Triton x-100 or Brij-35 improving the drainage of the water. Due to low surface tension (and viscosity) the drainage of water in the froth phase is improved. Thus, water and mineral contents of the final concentrate are reduced.  The solid content of the concentrate was approximately 32% for the run conducted in the presence of Triton x-100, in which the initial reagent loading was 0.9 mg/g coal. However, the solid content was about 26% in the use Triton x-100 (50%)+MIBC (50%) mixture. The −53 μm size fraction of the coal was re-milled to achieve a further size reduction. The mixture of the −53 μm size fraction and the finer (re-milled) fraction were prepared for the froth flotation tests. Consequently, three samples having different amounts of the finer solid particles were prepared for the experiments. The percentages of the finer coal fraction were 25%, 50% and 75%, respectively. The mixture of Triton x-100 (95%) and MIBC (5%) was chosen as the flotation reagent and the total initial loading was 0.9 mg/g coal. The performance values are shown in As stated in the The study shows that there is a strong relationship between the initial reagent loading and the combustible recovery, the ash rejection and solids in the concentrate. Low initial reagent addition increases the ash rejection and reduces the combustible solid recovery of the final product. When the initial reagent loading is increased, the water and particles (coal and minerals) entrained in the froth phase increase, and the solid contents of the concentrate decrease. Consequently, the process becomes non-selective and causes the grade to decrease sharply, while the recovery increases with the increased stability and mobility of the froth. The type and amount of the reagent are the key factors in determining the performance parameters, the combustible solid recovery and purity (grade) of the concentrate. The use of the mixture of MIBC with Triton x-100 or Brij-35 in the froth flotation of the coal used in this study caused considerable increases in the combustible solid recoveries due to the perfect collecting ability of MIBC. The ash rejection and combustible solid recovery obtained from the froth flotation of finer particles were adversely affected by the decrease in particle size. Due to ultra fine particle size, some of the mineral particles in the bulk may demonstrate a hydrophobic rather than a hydrophilic behaviour; as a result, the ultra fine mineral particles may also be floated along with the coal particles increasing the ash content of the concentrates. The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the State Planning Organisation (DPT), Turkey, for this research (project no: 98K120740).