Incorporating recycled aggregate concrete (RAC) into steel tubes provides a value-added and promising solution that can reduce environmental impact of waste concrete and meanwhile increase mechanical performances and durability of RAC material. Composite elastic modulus (CEM) is one of the most essential structural properties in the design and evaluation of recycled aggregate concrete-filled steel tubes (RACFST); however, it is found that available design provisions developed for conventional concrete members fail to predict the CEM of RACFST with good accuracy.
                  This paper proposes a set of novel models to address this both research and engineering gap. A reliable experimental database is first established containing test results of circular RACFST beam and column specimens under axial and/or flexural loading. Based on this work, a mathematical approach, i.e., the grey correlation analysis, is used to evaluate the sensitivity influence of key parameters on the CEM of circular RACFST. It is demonstrated that the replacement ratio of recycled concrete aggregate (RCA) is less decisive on CEM than some other parameters such as the steel tube yield strength and the diameter-to-thickness ratio, but the RCA replacement ratio is still significant and should be considered for better representing the elastic stiffness of circular RACFST. Derivations based on elasticity theory are then presented to obtain an elastic stress-strain relationship and hence the expression of CEM of concentrically-loaded circular RACFST. A comparison between the theoretical results and the experimental ones is made to validate the proposed model. For easy use in routine design, two empirical models in compliance with design codes based on the superposition principle are also provided to estimate respectively the composite elastic compressive stiffness and flexural stiffness of circular RACFST. A good agreement between the predictions using the empirical models and the test data is exhibited.Cross-sectional area of CFST Cross-sectional area of concrete Cross-sectional area of steel tube Stress coefficient Stress coefficient Stress coefficient Stress coefficient External diameter of steel tube Diameter-to-thickness ratio Elastic modulus of RAC Composite elastic modulus of RACFST Elastic modulus of steel Cylinder concrete strength of RAC Composite shear modulus of RACFST Cross-sectional moment of inertia of concrete Cross-sectional moment of inertia of steel tube Composite elastic axial-flexural stiffness Effective length of beam/column Length-to-diameter ratio Axial load ratio Axial compressive load Wall pressure generated in the steel tube when the inner concrete is pressed RCA replacement ratio Wall thickness of steel tube Radial displacement of inner concrete Longitudinal displacement of inner concrete Radial displacement of outer steel tube Longitudinal displacement of outer steel tube Radial displacement Displacement along the longitudinal direction Poisson's ratio of RAC Composite Poisson's ratio of RACFST Poisson's ratio of steel tube Effective water-to-cement ratio Radius of the arbitrary cross section in the polar coordinates Angle from the horizontal axis to Longitudinal stress of inner concrete Longitudinal stress of outer steel tube Radial stress of inner concrete Hoop stress of inner concrete Radial stress of outer steel tube Hoop stress of outer steel tube Radial stress Hoop stress Composite nominal longitudinal stress of RACFST Shear stress Longitudinal strain of inner concrete Longitudinal strain of outer steel tube Radial strain of inner concrete Hoop strain of inner concrete Radial strain of outer steel tube Hoop strain of outer steel tube Radial strain Hoop strain Longitudinal strain Shear strain Area steel ratio Comprehensive influence coefficient of RAC in RACFST beam Comprehensive influence coefficient of RAC in RACFST column Grey correlation factor Grey correlation coefficient Recycled concrete aggregates (RCAs) produced by crushing old concrete elements from construction and demolition (C&D) wastes can be reused as an alternative to natural aggregates in new concrete [ Concrete-filled steel tubes (CFST) have been widely used in high-rise buildings, large-span bridges and transmission towers due to their favorable compression, bending and seismic behaviors [ For the purpose of understanding the structural behavior of RACFST, Konno et al. [ Further, Yang et al. [ The composite elastic modulus (CEM in short), This paper presents novel prediction models for the estimation of CEM of circular RACFST using elasticity theory and superposition principle. At the outset, a reliable experimental database is established through an extensive literature review. Based on the collected experimental database, a grey correlation analysis is then conducted to evaluate the sensitivity influence of key parameters influencing the values of CEM of circular RACFST. Subsequently, a mathematic derivation is presented in the framework of elasticity to obtain an explicit elastic stress-strain relationship and a formula to determine the CEM of concentrically-loaded circular RACFST columns. In addition, two design-oriented empirical models are proposed to estimate respectively the composite elastic compressive stiffness of RACFST columns and the composite elastic flexural stiffness of RACFST beams. A database concerning the elastic stiffness of circular RACFST given in The database consists of 54 composite elastic compressive stiffnesses ( The database presented in A comprehensive parametric study investigated by the authors [ It should be highlighted that all of the measured compressive strength of RAC presented in Grey correlation analysis (GCA) is a mathematical approach to compute the degrees of correlation between the independent variables and the dependent variables [ The experimental elastic stiffness including In order to reduce the numerical fluctuation, normalization can be conducted as follows: The grey correlation coefficient In the GCA, the grey correlation factor ( It is worth noting that as a correlation indicator,  Based on the above-mentioned results, it can be concluded that: To determine the CEM of circular RACFST, elasticity theory is utilized to derive the elastic stress-strain relationship of concentrically-loaded stub columns. A three-dimensional polar coordinate system is established that is attached to the column with the origin located at the center of the column's bottom section, and Note that in the case of small deformation, the longitudinal strain of steel tube ( It should be highlighted that Eqs Thus for the different elements in the RACFST (i.e., the inner concrete and the outer steel tube), the following expressions can be obtained: For the inner concrete, i.e., For the outer steel tube, i.e., Its stress components are: In the above formulas, At the column end, the following equilibrium equation can be established based on the axial resistance contributions from steel tube and infilled RAC: In particular, the composite nominal longitudinal stress of RACFST, Consequently, the composite nominal longitudinal stress is determined by substituting Eq. For the steel tube, the following equation can be obtained based on the stress boundary condition: In the elastic state, it is assumed that the steel tube is perfectly bonded to the infilled RAC. As a result, at the steel-concrete interface the following equations hold: These equations mean that: After a series of manipulations, the stress coefficients of Evidently, the above equations are too complex to be applied in daily practice. To circumvent this difficulty, some simplified expressions are introduced, that is: Then, The composite nominal longitudinal stress can be calculated by substituting Eqs. From the above equation, it can be seen that the relationship between It should be highlighted that the equations derived from the first principles (i.e., Eqs. The experimental database established previously was used to validate the theoretical model for estimating the CEM of circular RACFST under axial loading. It is noteworthy that the composite elastic axial-flexural stiffness in Ref. [ As illustrated before, the theoretical model proposed is capable of predicting the CEM of circular RACFST. However, the form of that model is complex overall. To accommodate routine design demand, a simplification is much needed. The current design code (e.g., Ref. [ Based on the superposition principle, the composite elastic compressive stiffness  Similarly, the composite elastic flexural stiffness With the same approach, A comparison between the predictions using the empirical models and the theoretical model is presented in For an additional and closer inspection, the most recently-conducted experimental responses of the axially-loaded stub columns [ This paper presented a set of new prediction models for the CEM of circular RACFST using elasticity theory and superposition principle. The following conclusions can be drawn from this study: After having compiled test database, the grey correlation analysis was conducted to evaluate the sensitivity influence of a set of parameters (i.e., steel yield strength, diameter-to-thickness, effective water-to-cement ratio, RCA replacement ratio, eccentricity ratio, length-to-diameter ratio and axial load ratio) on the elastic stiffness of RACFST. The evaluation results show that the steel yield strength and the diameter-to-thickness ratio exhibit major impact on the elastic stiffness of circular RACFST. Comparatively, the RCA replacement ratio on the elastic stiffness of RACFST is less critical but this influence should be incorporated in modeling the elastic stiffness of RACFST. A theoretical model was derived in the framework of elasticity theory to establish the elastic relationship between axial stress and axial strain of concentrically-loaded RACFST columns. The composite elastic modulus was accordingly obtained. The comparison between theoretical predictions and experimental ones demonstrates that the proposed theoretical model can reasonably predict the CEM of circular RACFST. To meet the needs of the daily design practice, two empirical models in compliance with current design codes based on the superposition principle were developed considering the effect of RCA replacement ratio. This offers simple yet practical means for estimating the composite elastic compressive stiffness of circular RACFST columns and the composite elastic flexural stiffness of circular RACFST beams, respectively. The authors are fully aware that although the models proposed herein are generally able to approximate the elastic stiffness of RACFST structural members, a large scatter is still shown when correlating the predictions with the limited experimental results in the available literature. This is mainly due to the inherent uncertainty prevalent in the deformation characteristics of RAC-based materials as well as structural members (even though the strains are at magnitudes that warrant an infinitesimal strain approximation). At this point, more test data is called for to characterize the mechanical response of RACFST beams and columns. With more test data covering a wider spectrum of influential parameters, a statistical method in combination with damage mechanics is expected to derive more rational and accurate prediction models for representing the stiffness of RACFST structural members. The research reported in this paper was supported by The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at    