XPS, SEM and contact angle measurements were used to indicate the changes in surface properties of anthracite coal before and after inside/outside weathering processes. Weathering processes of anthracite coal were conducted on the roof and in the room respectively. XPS results showed that the content of CC and CH groups on the surface of anthracite coal was decreased after weathering processes while the content of CO, CO and OCO groups was increased. SEM results showed that the surface roughness of anthracite coal was increased after the weathering processes. Contact angle measurements showed that the contact angle of weathered coal was lower than that of fresh coal. Throughout this paper, it was found that inside weathering processes were less intense than outside weathering processes. The hydrophobicity of anthracite coal was less changed by inside weathering processes than outside weathering processes. Hydrophobic coal surface should be more useful for the flotation processes of fine coals than hydrophilic coal surface. It was recommended that storing coal inside, such as in the room or in the raw coal barns could avoid the heavy weathering processes.Anthracite coal usually has a good natural hydrophobic property. Base on this hydrophobic property, anthracite coal is easy to float with only a little collectors. However, the weathering processes can break this natural hydrophobicity of anthracite coal. In many conditions, the weathering processes are usually considered as low temperature oxidation processes in order to investigate the weathering processes of coal in the lab. Low temperature oxidation processes have been widely investigated and it has been found that the surface chemical properties of coal could be changed by low temperature oxidation processes It is well known that the weathering processes can be divided into two primary types, inside weathering processes (in the room) and outside weathering processes. Outside weathering processes of coal usually occur outside and coal should suffer the breakdowns from the sun, wind and rain. During outside weathering processes, the surface chemical properties of coal should be changed greatly. The surface topography of coal surface b after outside weathering processes may be also changed obviously. However, inside weathering processes usually occur in the room condition, such as coal is stored in the raw coal barns. The surface properties of coal weathered in the coal barns have not been studied well compared with low temperature oxidation or outside weathering processes. Therefore, this paper attempted to investigate the changes in surface properties of coal during both inside and outside weathering processes. In addition, the changes in surface topography of coal before and after weathering processes should be also investigated. In this investigation, we made a comparison of changes in surface properties of anthracite coal between inside and outside weathering processes. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopic (XPS), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and contact angle measurements were used to indicate these changes and make this comparison. Samples of anthracite coal were supplied by Ningxia Province of China. Coal samples were dry-ground in a laboratory mill. Then, fine coals were screened to select the size fraction of 0.074–0.125 Outside weathering processes of anthracite coal were conducted on the roof for 3 months and inside weathering processes were conducted in the room for 2 years. The XPS experiments were carried out at room temperature in an ultra high vacuum (UHV) system with the surface analysis system (ESCALAB 250Xi, America). The base pressure of the analysis chamber during the measurements was lower than 1.0 The FEI Quanta 250 SEM was used to analyze the surface morphology of coal samples. Coal samples were prepared by surface cleaning using absolute ethyl alcohol. After surface cleaning, coal samples were dried in air. Before SEM measurements, coal samples were sputter-coated with a layer of gold. Coal samples before and after weathering processes were firstly pressed to plates. The plates of coal samples were measured using water contact angle analyzer (JC2000D), such as a water droplet on the surface of coal plate in air. The contact angles were obtained while the water droplet contacts with the coal plate at the exact moment. C1s peak is near 285 For outside weathering processes, the content of atomic carbon on coal surface was decreased from 93.09% to 92.79% while the content of atomic oxygen was increased from 6.91% to 7.21% after outside weathering processes. Both the content of atomic silicium and the content of atomic aluminum were zero. The surface C/O atomic ratio was decreased from 13.47 to 12.87. It seemed that some C But for inside weathering processes, the content of atomic carbon on coal surface was decreased from 93.09% to 73.54% while the content of atomic oxygen was increased from 6.91% to 21.80% after outside weathering processes. The content of atomic silicium was increased from 0% to 2.46% and the content of atomic aluminum was increased from 0% to 2.20%. After outside weathering processes, the content of inorganic materials (aluminum and silicium) on coal surface was obviously increased. It seemed that a part of organic materials (C, O, H) might shed from coal surface and this part of organic materials might be also oxidized to gas fractions (CO and CO  The content of C Both the outside and inside weathering processes made C Inside weathering processes should be much more moderate than outside weathering processes. The content of C During the weathering processes, the content of oxygen containing functional groups on anthracite coal surface was increased while the content of hydrophobic functional groups was decreased. The C As shown in During weathering processes, the organic materials might be oxidized while the inorganic materials were difficult to be oxidized. A part of organic materials might release some gas components (CO and CO As shown in  Both the inside and outside weathering processes can change the surface properties of anthracite coal. The content of C Inside weathering processes was much more moderate than outside weathering processes. In other words, outside weathering processes were more intense than inside weathering processes. The hydrophilicity of inside weathered coal was little changed while the hydrophilicity of outside weathered coal was obviously changed. Outside weathering processes not only changed the surface chemical properties of anthracite coal but also changed the surface morphology of anthracite coal. However, inside weathering processes changed the surface chemical properties of anthracite coal only a little and could not changed the surface morphology of anthracite coal. Throughout this paper, it was recommended that storing the coal in the room or in the raw coal barns could avoid the heavy weathering processes. Storing the coal in the room can hold the natural hydrophilicity of coal. As a result, storing the coal in the room may be suitable for the flotation processing of coal in industry. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51304192, 51374207). We also want to thank the Project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2014M550317).