This study investigated the effects of simulated soil aging on the thermal and wear properties of rice husk fiber/polyvinyl chloride (PVC) composites reinforced with three inorganic fibers (aluminum silicate fiber (AS); basalt fiber (BF) and zirconia fiber (ZF)). The thermal and wear behavior of the composites exhibited a downward trend during the simulated soil aging process; weak interface (pulling out of fiber) resulted in the induction of strength and anti-aging properties. However, the addition of inorganic fibers improved the anti-aging properties of the composites. When the simulated soil aging time was up to 21 d, ZF reinforced composites (ZFRC) exhibited high thermal and wear resistance properties due to superior interfacial adhesion between the fiber and PVC matrix. The average friction coefficient (μ) and specific wear rate (K) of ZFRC were reduced by 12.1% and 40.7%, respectively, compared to the unreinforced composites.As recyclable materials, wood plastic composites (WPCs) are often used for outdoor construction and plank roads [ There have been numerous investigations on common inorganic fiber-reinforced composites. Mahmoud et al. studied the effect of continuous glass fiber-reinforced composites. They reported an increase in the flexural strength of these composites by 58% compared with unreinforced composites and the highest density reduced of 14% [ Research on inorganic fiber-reinforced composites is widespread. However, investigations on the thermal and wear behavior of the three inorganic fibers (Basalt fiber (BF), Zirconia fiber (ZF) and Aluminum silicate fiber (AS)) reinforced WPCs in simulated soil aging conditions are limited. The aim of this study is to investigate the thermal properties and wear behavior of reinforced WPCs using three inorganic fibers. The thermal analysis was focused on changes in the thermo-gravimetric and linear thermal expansion coefficient, whereas the analysis of the wear behavior considered friction coefficient and wear rate. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was used to characterize the interfacial adhesion and wear surface structure. Moreover, the change of the physic-mechanical properties can be defined by 24-h water absorption, mass loss rate, and the flexural and impact strength. Rice husk fibers were obtained from Hebei Pengyue Minerals Trading Co., Ltd., China and SG-5 PVC (100 mesh) was purchased from Wenzhou Zhengbang Chemical Co., Ltd., China. Chemical reagents were procured from Nanjing Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. China. The three inorganic fibers were obtained from Hebei Lingshou Shunbo minerals processing factory, China and the maleic anhydride, H-108 PE wax and non-toxic 603 Ca/Zn composite stabilizers were from Shanghai Wenhua Chemical Pigment Co., Ltd., China. To achieve superior dispersion, basalt fiber (BF), zirconia fiber (ZF) and aluminum silicate fiber (AS) should be treated before extrusion molding. The three inorganic fibers were immersed in a solution that consisted of silane coupling agent KH-550 and anhydrous ethanol with a mass ratio of 1:5. The mixture was then placed in a JP-040S ultrasonic cleaning machine (Shenzhen Jiemeng Cleaning Co., Ltd., China). After 15 min, the mixture was placed in a DHC-9053A type electric thermostatic blast drying oven (Nanjing Dongmai Technology Instrument Co., Ltd., China) to eliminate ethanol. The treatment of the inorganic fiber was then complete. Firstly, the proportion of rice husk fibers, PVC, the stabilizer, the PE wax and the maleic anhydride used is shown in The simulated soil aging tests were performed according to ASTM To analyze the decomposition temperature, thermo-gravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed using an STA449 F3 synchronized thermal analyzer (NETZSCH Scientific Instrument Trading Co., Ltd., Germany). A sample mass of 10 mg was placed into an Al The linear thermal expansion coefficient (LCTE) was determined using a PCY-D Low-Temperature Expansion Tester (Xiangtan Xiangyi Instrument Co., Ltd., Germany). The size of the samples was 100 × 10 × 7 mm and the temperature range was -30–60 °C. The LCTE can be obtained using equation Wear tests were performed using an M-2000A abrasion tester (Zhangjiakou Xuanhua Kehua Machine Manufacturing Co., Ltd., China), the temperature was controlled at 25 ± 1 °C. The “ring-block” configuration was measured in dry sliding conditions and the sizes of the samples were 6 × 7 × 30 mm The friction coefficient was calculated based on the equation for the specific wear rate ( The mass loss rate of the samples was measured using a FA1004 electronic analytical balance (Shanghai Hengping Scientific Instrument Co., Ltd., China), which can maintain an accuracy of 0.1 mg. The density of the samples was measured using a DH-300 direct-reading electronic densimeter (Dongguan Dahometer Instrument Co., Ltd., China). The water absorption was measured in accordance with GB/T17657-2013. The dried and weighed samples were placed in an HH-600 thermostatic water tank (Shanghai Baidian Instrument Equipment Co., Ltd) at a temperature of 23 ± 1 °C and duration of 24 h. Samples were then removed from this instrument and re-weighed. The water absorption was calculated as follows: The tensile, flexural and impact strength of the composites were measured according to the Chinese standards GB/T 1040.4 (2006), GB/T 9341 (2008), and GB/T 1043.1 (2008), respectively. The tensile and flexural strength testing were performed using a CMT6104 electronic universal testing machine (MTS Industrial Systems Co., Ltd., China) and the impact strength was measured using a beam impact testing machine (XJJ-5, Chengde Jinjian Testing Instrument Co., Ltd., China) at a test speed of 2 mm/min and was room temperature. Hardness tests were performed using an XHR-150 plastic Rockwell hardness tester (Shanghai Joint Seoul Test Equipment Co., Ltd., China), according to the Chinese standard GB/T 3398.1 (2008). The load time interval was set to 5 s and the indenter diameter was 12.7 mm. The unloading time was set to 15 s. The morphological analysis and wear surface microstructure were performed by using an S-4800 scanning electron microscope (Hitachi., Ltd., Japan). The samples were gold treated prior to imaging using an E−1010 ion sputter coater. TGA data of the three inorganic fiber-reinforced composites are shown in In all cases, the composites showed two main pyrolysis steps as can be seen from the TG curves in The measured LCTE values of ZF/AS/BF reinforced composites over the temperature range (-30–60 °C) are shown in Interfacial adhesion was studied using SEM and the micrographs are presented in The average friction coefficient ( An analysis of Many fiber debris and furrows can be clearly observed in The 24 h water absorption and mass loss rate are shown in The tensile strength, tensile modulus, flexural strength and flexural modulus of the composites under simulated soil aging conditions are shown in The thermal and wear behavior of three inorganic fiber-reinforced composites were investigated under simulated soil accelerated aging. It was determined that the ultimate properties of the composites are closely linked to interfacial adhesion between the fiber and PVC matrix. It is evident that ZF reinforced composites have superior thermal and wear resistance properties compared to the other two inorganic fiber (AS and BF) reinforced composites. It was determined that ZFRC has high-quality interfacial adhesion. Moreover, a tight interface led to superior properties (physic-mechanical properties) at each simulated soil aging period. The three inorganic fibers (ZF/AS/BF) also improved the anti-aging and wear resistance properties, and the enhancement order of the three inorganic fibers is ZF > AS > BF. During the soil aging period, the thermal stability of the composites was reduced. This is mainly due to the poor interfacial adhesion of the fiber and matrix, as an increasing number of fibers is pulled out from the matrix under high temperature and loading conditions. An increase in the number of micro-cracks means that the composites cannot absorb more energy, bare fibers are separated from the polymer during the wear process, and the real-contact area is increased. Poor thermal conductivity (accumulated heat) exacerbated the degree of wear. In addition, a weak interface resulting in the deterioration of the physical and mechanical properties of the composites. This work was financially supported by the The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at