Background:
                  Neer 2 fractures of the distal clavicle are notorious for their high rates of non-union and numerous methods of fixation are recommended. We review a simple method of fixation of these fractures with an intramedullary AO/ASIF malleolar screw.
               
                  Method:
                  Ten patients with Neer type 2 fractures of the distal clavicle were treated between 1996 and 2002. All had open reduction and internal fixation with an intramedullary 4.5mm AO/ASIF malleolar screw. In all cases the coraco-clavicular ligaments were not repaired, and the screws were removed once the fractures had united.
               
                  Results:
                  All fractures united at between 6 and 12 weeks. All patients had a good functional result, with an excellent to good Oxford Shoulder score.
               
                  Conclusion:
                  This is a simple technique with a universally available implant and good fracture healing. We report no cases of screw breakage or migration and we question the necessity to repair the coraco-clavicular ligaments.The Neer 2 fracture which involves the distal clavicle, accounts for nearly half of all clavicular non-unions. In the literature there are many methods described for the fixation of these fractures, including hook plates, Most of these procedures involve the use of implants not readily available. This paper reviews the results of intramedullary fixation of Neer 2 fractures with an AO/ASIF malleolar screw—a simple procedure with a universally available device. The notes and X-rays were reviewed of ten patients, who had had Neer 2 Fractures of the distal clavicle, between 1996 and 2002. The diagnosis was made by X-ray and an independent observer confirmed the classification. All patients reviewed had been treated with an intramedullary AO/ASIF 4.5 Operations were performed under general anaesthetic; the patient was in a beach chair position, with a sand bag behind the shoulder. A sabre incision was made in the Langer line, over the distal clavicle ( In all patients, the fractures were initially immobilised in a collar and cuff for 2–3 weeks, before mobilisation was started. All of the patients were initially seen at 6 weeks and at 3 months. All patients were scored using the Oxford Shoulder Score, which was obtained at review or telephonically at between 2 and 4 years post-op. The mean age at fixation was 29.3 years, ranging from 18 to 84 years. Eight of the 10 cases were male and half were right sided. All were isolated injuries, seven as the result of a fall on an outstretched hand and three due to sporting injuries. The patients presented at between 1 and 6 weeks. All fractures united which was confirmed both clinically and radiographically ( The screws were removed in all patients via a stab incision under local anaesthetic at between 8 and 14 weeks. The mean Oxford Shoulder Score from the patients was 21.4 (range 17–32). The Oxford shoulder score is from 12 to 60, excellent scores are between 12 and 23 and good between 23 and 33. There were no screw breakages, or incidents of screw migration. All of those patients who were initially in employment returned to work. Neer 2 fractures of the distal clavicle that require fixation are rare. Zenni et al. reported on 800 fractured clavicles of which only five were fractures of the distal third requiring fixation. It has previously been reported that fixation of these fractures with an intramedullary device has a high complication rate, this includes screw migration and breakage. In our series of 10 patients between 1996 and 2002, we report no complications and are able to demonstrate excellent clinical results with good bone healing. This was reflected by excellent to good Oxford Shoulder Scores. Our review demonstrates that the AO/ASIF malleolar screws are robust enough to withstand the forces generated across the fracture site during union. The position of the implant does not interfere with the acromio-clavicular or acromio-humoral joint, thus problems with impingement and stiffness are avoided. Neither the coronoid or trapeziod ligaments were repaired nor was there a need to augment the fixation with wires or slings around the coronoid process. As this did not adversely affect the outcome in our series we question whether these added procedures are necessary. The Synthes AO/ASIF screws are available in most orthopaedic units so this obviates need to purchase expensive equipment for these rare fractures. In our series none of the patients had comminution of the distal fragment, however if this occurs it may be a contra-indication to intramedullary fixation as would a narrow intermedullary canal. We feel that the use of the Synthes AO/ASIF malleolar screws to achieve intramedullary fixation of Neer 2 fractures of the distal clavicle is a simple technique, with a high union rate and good clinical outcome.