Critical elements, including rare earth elements, have attracted significant attention in recent years due to their increasing prevalence in consumer and industrial technologies. In a world where critical elements are used in a wide range of products, including electronics, optics, magnets, and catalysts, among others, maintaining the supply of these elements is vital. In In their overview paper, Dai and Finkelman highlight cases where industrial utilization of critical elements from coal has been successful, such as for Ga, Ge, Se, and V, and consider prospects for the recovery of a range of other elements, including U, Nb, Au, Ag, Re, Al, and Mg, in addition to the REE. With each of these elements, prospects for their recovery rise and fall with the interconnected constraints of supply and demand. Current interest in recovery of critical elements from secondary sources such as coal results from dominance of the supply chain by a single international source (China) combined with the utility of these elements in products essential to modern society. In two papers by Lin, Soong, and Granite, the U.S. Geological Survey's COALQUAL database on U.S. coals is used to examine the distribution of REE and many non-REE critical elements. For the REE, these authors found that the Central Appalachian coalfield (southern West Virginia, eastern Kentucky, Virginia, and northern Tennessee) has the highest probability of REE recovery, with eastern Kentucky having the most promise, based on REE enrichment in the Fire Clay coal of eastern Kentucky. For the non-REE, they found Appalachian coals to have the highest Li, Ga, Be, Se, and Sb concentrations while Eastern and Western Interior Basin coals had the highest Ge concentrations. In each paper, non-detected values in COALQUAL are adjusted to obtain estimates of mean concentrations of critical elements in U.S. coals. Application of analytical techniques is aimed primarily at characterizing how critical elements occur, in order to facilitate their extraction. Two contributions by Hower, Berti, Hochella, and colleagues describe studies using transmission electron microscopy/energy-dispersive spectroscopy/selected area electron diffraction to characterize minerals in two eastern Kentucky coals at a scale of 10s of nanometers to several micrometers. In both cases, La-Ce-Nd-bearing monazites were found to be major hosts of the REE. Other phases, generally not observed at larger scales, include a variety of Cd, Ag, Nb, Bi, Co, and Ge minerals. In a transmission electron microscopy/energy-dispersive spectroscopy study of a high-REE combustion ash, Hower, Qian, Briot, and colleagues found monazite, CePO Several authors examined the leaching behavior of REE from coals and combustion ashes. The trend, known from previous studies, for U.S. eastern bituminous coal and coal ash to have higher REE concentrations that are less readily leachable than lower rank U.S. western coals and coal ash, was confirmed. But in a series of studies, new approaches that account for, or take advantage of these differences, were introduced. For example, Laudal et al. performed sequential leaching on North Dakota lignites. They found that a majority of the REE, including heavy REE in organic complexes, was extracted by relatively dilute acids. Zhang and Honaker demonstrated that NaOH solutions of varying pH could remove REE from coal beneficiation refuse. Their study also includes an economic analysis of the potential for REE recovery from coal waste. King et al. and Taggart, Hower, and Hsu-Kim found that acid leaching is sufficient for recovering REE from western U.S. subbituminous-coal-derived fly ashes while eastern U.S. bituminous-coal-derived fly ashes required a NaOH roasting step followed by HNO International sources of REE and other elements were investigated by Yossifova, Dimitrova, and Ivanova for Bulgarian lignites; by Fiket et al. for the Croatian Raša bituminous coal; and by Wagner and Matiane for South African coals and combustion ashes. In each case results fall short of minimum REE exploration interest levels set by the U.S. Department of Energy (300 mg kg This special issue is intended to help bridge the gap between basic science and implementation of extraction procedures for critical elements. A new approach exists to improve the economics, supply chain stability, and environmental sustainability of critical element production by recovering resources from industrial waste streams. New data presented through this special issue will provide insight into the chemical and physical conditions that govern the presence of critical elements in coal and coal residual feedstock materials and will lay the groundwork for designing future extraction applications. Finally, we sincerely thank Editor-in-Chief Shifeng Dai for his invitation to serve as Guest Editors for a Special Issue of the