The presence of municipal wastewater at the intake of a major drinking water treatment facility located on Lake Ontario was examined using fluorescence data collected during a period of continuous monitoring. In addition, controlled mixing of lake water and wastewater sampled from a local treatment facility were conducted using a bench-scale fluorescence system to quantify observed changes in natural organic matter. Multivariate linear regression was applied to components derived from parallel factors analysis. The resulting mean absolute error for predicted wastewater level was 0.22% (V/V, wastewater/lake water), indicating that wastewater detection at below 1.0% (V/V) was possible. Analyses of sucralose, a wastewater indicator, were conducted for treated wastewater as well as surface water collected at two intake locations on Lake Ontario. Results suggested minimal wastewater contribution at the drinking water intake. A wastewater detection model using a moving baseline was developed and applied to continuous fluorescence data collected at one of the drinking water intakes, which agreed well with sucralose results. Furthermore, the simulated addition of 1.0% (V/V) of wastewater/wastewater was detectable in 89% of samples analyzed, demonstrating the utility of fluorescence-based wastewater monitoring.The presence of municipal wastewater in surface waters is a source of concern to consumer health. Exposure to wastewater is commonly thought to be a result of unexpected events and system malfunctions ( Fluorescence spectroscopy is often cited as a method that can be used to better characterize NOM and provide rapid assessments of water quality ( This study investigated the use of an online capable fluorescence system for the detection of wastewater in surface waters which serve as a major source of drinking water. Using data collected from controlled mixing experiments, PARAFAC was applied to characterize NOM composition and determine changes associated with wastewater addition. Furthermore, this work demonstrates an approach for estimating the level of wastewater presence using a calibration model derived from PARAFAC and MLR. The presence of wastewater was estimated using data collected over three weeks of continuous fluorescence monitoring in parallel with monitoring of sucralose concentrations, allowing a comparison between a chemical and a fluorescence surrogate. A moving baseline was applied to continuous monitoring data; comparisons between various time-steps and thresholds were developed to offer insight regarding the streamlined application of more complex calibration algorithms in a fluorescence-based online wastewater detection system. Unchlorinated Lake Ontario water (TOC: 2.08–2.51 mg/L) was collected over three weeks from the intakes of two conventional water treatment plants (WTP) in Ontario, Canada. Chlorinated wastewater final effluent samples (TOC: 7.22–9.03 mg/L) were collected during the same period from the outfall of a wastewater treatment plant (WWTP) which discharges into the same lake. The intake of WTP1 (depth: 18 m, 2.5 km from shore) is approximately 4 km away from the outfall of the WWTP (depth: 20 m, 1.1 km from shore). It is uncertain whether the intake water is influenced by the discharge of treated wastewater. The intake of WTP2 (depth 18 m, 3.2 km from shore), is not known to be located near any wastewater treatment facilities (< TOC analyses, based on standard method 5310 D ( Fluorescence analyses were performed using a Cary Eclipse Fluorescence Spectrometer (Agilent Technologies, Mississauga, Canada), equipped with a silica quartz flow-through cell which has an internal dimension of 5 × 10 mm with an incident path length of 10 mm. EEMs were collected across excitation and emission wavelengths of 220–360 nm (5 nm increments) and 280–500 nm (2 nm increments), respectively. Instrument settings were optimized with preliminary tests, according to an approach presented by Mixing experiments were conducted periodically with lake water collected from WTP1 and final wastewater effluent collected from the WWTP. These involved collecting EEMs of lake water spiked with wastewater effluent at randomized ratios between 0.1%–2.0% ( Background signals associated with instrumentation were accounted for daily by subtracting EEMs of Milli-Q® water. Raman correction was applied according to a method described by PARAFAC analysis was implemented using the drEEM toolbox ( Multivariate linear regression was applied to the component scores derived from PARAFAC using R (v3.4.0) ( The appearance of the EEMs for the sampled lake water and wastewater effluent are typical of their respective sources. The lake water sample exhibited overall much lower intensity than wastewater effluent samples. In addition, EEMs of the wastewater samples showed shifted humic-like fluorescence peaks as well as more prominent protein-like fluorescence, all typical of samples from similar sources where high microbial activity is expected. When considering fluorescence analyses of natural waters, peak-picking is the most commonly applied technique. However, as noted by Data collected from controlled mixing experiments ( Pearson's correlation coefficients ( Scores of all five components were fit using a multivariate linear regression model which described the presence of wastewater in Lake Ontario water at WTP1. All data were randomly split into training and test data at a ratio of 80:20, respectively. Test data were fit to the model constructed with training data; and MAE and RMSE were calculated. To account for the randomized split, regression coefficients, MAE, and RMSE were averaged over 100 runs (Appendix A Table S2). The averaged MAE for the training and test data sets were 0.19% and 0.22% ( From a review of regression results, the best positive predictor of the presence of wastewater is the microbial humic-like component C2 (β = 1.9, Sucralose analyses were conducted on samples from the two WTPs and one WWTP using LC/MS/MS, with concentration in Lake Ontario water of < Fluorescence data collected continuously over three weeks were fit to the PARAFAC model; Component scores of the continuous fluorescence data were fit to the MLR model as described in the methods section. While detection of wastewater using fluorescence-based approaches can be more selective when compared to conventional online parameters, baseline fluorescence must be established through calibration. As such, quantification would be challenging due to the unknown level of background influences, as was the case for the waters examined. Results showed that the percentage of “correctly detected” increased with time-steps for an addition of 0.25% ( The detection of wastewater presence using fluorescence spectroscopy and advanced data analysis was investigated for lake water. Results of sucralose analysis, a reference method for detecting anthropogenic inputs, showed relatively low fluctuations in both Lake Ontario water samples and wastewater effluent samples, neither proving nor disproving that water quality at the drinking water intakes was directly influenced by wastewater discharge. A maximum wastewater presence of < This work was funded by the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at