Background
                  Odontoid fractures are the most common upper cervical spine fracture in adults over 70 years of age. Hence, treatment of these fractures has public health implications.
               
                  Objectives
                  Evaluate the early complications, bone healing and mortality in patients above 75 years of age who undergo surgical treatment of an odontoid fracture. Compare the results between patients operated with the Harms technique or anterior screw fixation.
               
                  Methods
                  This was a retrospective study of 70 patients with an odontoid fracture who were treated surgically between 2000 and 2015 at the Hôpital de la Timone in France. The age at the time of diagnosis, comorbidities, ASA score and autonomy were evaluated. Bone healing was determined using computed tomography.
               
                  Results
                  In the cohort, 22 patients underwent anterior screw fixation, 38 were treated using the Harms technique and 10 with other procedures. The average age was 85.1 years. Fifty-four percent of patients had an ASA score above 3. The average follow-up was 23.4 months. An Anderson type II fracture was present in 80.6% of patients. In the anterior screw fixation group, the operative time was significantly shorter than in the Harms group and no blood transfusions were needed. However, 13.6% of these patients had to be re-operated because the initial construct was unstable; no patients in the Harms group underwent revision surgery. There were more complications in the anterior screw fixation group than in the Harms group: 41% versus 13.2% (P
                     <0.02). The fractures had healed in all patients reviewed after 1 year. The 3-month survival in the anterior screw fixation group was 64.7% and it was 81.3% in the Harms group. These rates were stable at 1 year with no statistical differences between groups.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Surgical treatment of odontoid fractures in the elderly results in an excellent union rate. The mortality rate is stable after 3 months. In our experience, the Harms technique has a lower risk of complications and better mechanical stability than anterior screw fixation. Despite the steep learning curve, we believe the Harms technique is probably the best choice for treating odontoid fractures in the elderly.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  IV.Industrialized nations have an increasingly older population that is expanding in size and continues to be active. In the United States, patients older than 85 The optimal care of these fractures is complex. It should rapidly restore adequate autonomy while limiting morbidity and mortality associated with inactivity and/or prolonged hospitalization. Various techniques have been described for treating these injuries, ranging from conservative treatment by immobilization to surgical fracture fixation techniques. The local anatomy of the upper cervical spine, the often-compromised bone quality in the elderly, and the surgical skills required mean there is currently no strong consensus on how to treat these fractures. Recent studies have shown a theoretical advantage of surgical treatment for odontoid fractures in patients older than 65 The aim of this single-centre retrospective study was to report how our surgical management of odontoid fractures has changed over time in patients above 75 All the patients 75 The imaging work-up in every patient consisted of a computed tomography (CT) scan of the cervical spine with reconstruction and injection of contrast product. The CT scan was used to evaluate the location of the fracture line based on the Anderson and Alonzo classification, its orientation based on the Roy–Camille classification for type II fractures, the presence of other vertebral fractures, and the degree of C2 osteoporosis according to Lakshmanan's classification The chosen surgical technique was analyzed retrospectively and was based on various factors, such as fracture type, fracture line orientation and surgeon experience, particularly when the Harms technique was used. The patients’ autonomy level was analyzed based on their living arrangements prior to the fracture (at home or in nursing home) and the activities of daily living (ADL) scale described by Katz et al. All patients were reviewed at 3 months and 1 year postoperative, and then every 2 years. During each follow-up visit, the results of the clinical examination, autonomy level and the results of the cervical spine CT assessment of fracture healing were recorded. In May 2015, all living patients were contacted by telephone and were asked to answer questions restating the various ADL scale criteria. The duration of follow-up was defined as the time elapsed between the diagnosis of the odontoid fracture and the date of last contact with the patient or his/her death. In patients with less than 1 year of follow-up, fracture union was evaluated on the 3-month CT scan. Lastly, patients with less than 3 months’ follow-up were excluded in the analysis unless they had died within this time frame. Bone union was evaluated on a CT scan with reconstruction at 3 The differences between paired variables were compared using Student's The main characteristics of the study population are given in The main features of the odontoid fractures in this study are summarized in In the 70-patient cohort, 55% were operated using the Harms technique, 31% with anterior screw fixation and 14% using other techniques: Magerl fusion, occipital-cervical fusion and C1–C2 hook fusion. After 3      Multiple studies have described the treatment of odontoid fractures in the elderly. However, many of these studies use 65 years of age as a threshold for an elderly patient We chose to breakdown our cases into two subgroups (Harms and ASF) based on the type of surgical technique used. This allowed us to compare the outcomes of two well-known surgical techniques: posterior C1–C2 fusion according to Harms and Melcher and anterior screw fixation of the odontoid. The most common clinical presentation was a head injury with neck pain following low-energy trauma, highlighting the need for a cervical CT scan if there is any uncertainty about the diagnosis initially, to avoid discovering a fracture in the non-union stage and the development of neurological deficits. The type of fracture in this study is similar to published data with most being type II oblique linear fractures in which the fracture line slopes backward Before 2010, only one patient in our practice was operated using Harms technique. Starting in 2010, the number of procedures increased considerably with all patients being operated using this technique between 2011 and 2013. This change can be attributed to several factors, such as the description by Harms and Melcher of their technique in 2001 The choice of surgical technique depends on several parameters. An oblique posterior fracture line is typically considered an indication for ASF because the perpendicular trajectory of the screw through the fracture line will compress the fracture site. However, when the fracture is considerably displaced or C1-C2 subluxation is present, it can be difficult to reduce the fracture with the patient supine. By using a MAYFIELD All patients in our study had C2 osteoporosis based on the CT scan criteria of Lakshmanan There is no consensus on the preferred surgical technique for odontoid fractures. Thus, the technique selected greatly depends on the surgeon's skills and experience. Posterior C1–C2 fusion is a demanding technique with a long learning curve. The main technical challenge is related to bleeding due to the abundance of venous plexuses around the C2 root and over the entry point for the C1 lateral masses. Subperiosteal dissection and the use of burrs can help to control bleeding. In cases of persistent venous bleeding, extensive packing will often suppress it. Moreover, the proximity of the C2 root, which is not protected by a bone structure, means that bipolar forceps are preferred over monopolar electrocautery. In a 2013 literature review by Jubert et al., the early complication rate ranged from 0% to 44% in patients above 60 years of age who underwent upper cervical spine surgery. Most of these complications were respiratory disorders and dysphagia Osti et al. reported a 64% fusion rate in patients over 65 years of age who underwent ASF. The development of non-union is correlated with degenerative changes in the atlantoaxial joint, the degree of odontoid osteoporosis, a posterior oblique fracture line orientation, the quality of fracture reduction, the position of the screws and the degree of comminution The survivorship of the entire cohort revealed a high early mortality rate: nearly 25% of patients died within 3 The survivorship of our entire cohort was stable out to 2 Surgical treatment of odontoid fractures in elderly patients is justified by the excellent fusion rate, which allows the patients to quickly regain their pre-injury autonomy, and a mortality rate comparable to patients operated because of femoral neck fracture. In our study, anterior screw fixation resulted in three times more complications than the posterior C1–C2 fusion technique described by Harms, and had a higher revision rate due to mechanical instability. However, the Harms technique has a steep learning curve before the procedure can be done in a reasonable time, given the typical fragile general health of these elderly patients. This is now our preferred technique for treating odontoid fractures in the elderly; it may evolve into minimally invasive techniques using new intraoperative CT techniques paired with a navigation system. B. Blondel: consultant in Medicrea International/Implanet/Spineguard; S. Fuentes: consultant in Medicrea International/Medtronic/Stryker; S. Pesenti: consultant in Implanet; P. Tropiano: consultant in Depuy-Synthes, royalties in LDR Medical and Board in Medtronic. The other authors declare that they have no competing interest.