The morphology and causes of a big landslide in the Pyrenees (Northeastern Spain), reactivated by the excavation of a parkinglot on the base of the landslide area, have been analysed. Through reconnaissance and instrumentation techniques and monitoring the morphology and failure terrain of the area are defined approximately and these results are checked by numerical modelling.The landslide, as a form of mass movement, is one of the principal processes of hillslope erosion The susceptibility of a slope to failure is dependent on many factors, including the gradient of the slope, the geotechnical properties of the material involved and the presence of discontinuities. The amount of water entering a slope, which is a function of the vegetation cover, drainage, soil type and rock structure, is also a very important factor indicating the significant linkage between geomorphological hazards and the processes and conditions in the atmosphere and hydrosphere. Human activities can also play an important role in affecting the susceptibility of a slope to failure. Landslides are always associated with a disturbance of the equilibrium relationship that exists between stress and strength in material resting on a slope. The relationship is determined by factors, such as the height and inclination of the slope and the density, strength cohesion and friction of those materials that form the slope The slope angle is an essential component of slope stability analysis. As the slope angle increases, the shear stress in soil or other unconsolidated material generally increases as well. Gentle slopes are expected to have a low frequency of landslides because of the generally lower shear stresses associated with low gradients Clay soils, the weathering product of rock mass, contribute to landslide occurrence because of their chemical and physical properties. The properties of clays have been investigated for their effects on landslides because clay presents problems for geotechnical engineers owing to its complex nature. This derives from its plasticity, its low permeability and thus, the time dependency of pore water pressure change and volume change, its structure, chemistry and mineralogy. It is clear that weathering and agricultural activity alter the nature and topography of the ground surface. Adverse human activities have also contributed to the creation of landslides; these include excavation works, irregular agricultural activity, embankments and in particular, drainage works. Water is one of the most predominant factors that cause landslides, which usually occur during periods of high precipitation. Therefore, in natural slope areas, it is important to construct drainage systems for collecting water, such that movement on the slopes can be reduced. This paper focuses on the study of an important landslide that occurred in the Portalet area, which is located on the upper part of the Gállego River valley, in the Pyrenees Axial Zone (Sallent de Gállego, Huesca). This is mainly made of Devonian and Carboniferous materials, characterised by intense weathering and high plasticity. Excavation at the foot of the slope, carried out to build a parkinglot area in the summer of 2004, reactivated two existing landslides generating new sliding surfaces that affected the connecting road to France. Measurements of the displacements, performed with conventional and advanced remote monitoring techniques, revealed that the moving mass was still active after constructive solutions were undertaken. A paper published three years ago analysed the same landslide According to previous studies made in the area, it is thought that there exists a double problem of superimposed phenomena, which are: “Creep” surface movements; seasonal and probably linked to ice-meltwater processes. Deep movement; slower than creep and caused by the landslide of materials, such as colluvium, shales and clays above the rocky substratum. With the aim of analysing these phenomena, the following work has been undertaken: Analysis of results. A morphological characterisation of the landslide according to instrumentation data from many reconnaissance campaigns Numerical modelling of the generated landslide by The area under study is situated near El Portalet, at an altitude of 1974 Several active landslides affect the Portalet area, which is located in the upper part of the Gállego River valley. These landslides are situated on a southwest-facing hillside of Petrasos Peak, close to the ski resort of Formigal. In this zone, there is a great density of landslides that are reactivated owing to the constant erosive action of the river Gállego The river descends through the valley following a WNW–ESE direction from 2000 to 1200 According to the records available from the Sallent de Gállego weather station, the temperature varies from +36 to −21 The study area encompasses the magmatic and Paleozoic complex of the axial Pyrenees, affected by the Hercinian folding phase. A geological map As said previously, in recent years, hillside movements have been registered in the area study. They have been caused by the ice/meltwater action cycle and by excavation works for the construction of a parkinglot in the area. Both factors have caused many creep areas, cracks and flooded areas ( From a geomorphological point of view, the studied landslide is of the roto-translational kind with unidirectional movement, which has generated several blocks sliding between each other along pre-existing slip surfaces. Spring water emerges on the slope and infiltrates where it is less steep, creatingsmall depressed pools, which show different terraced and inclined surfaces towards the slope. The excavation at the foot of the slope, carried out to build a parkinglot area in the summer of 2004, reactivated existing slide surfaces and generating new fissures and cracks. The most important set of cracks is observed halfway up the slope and others are seen on the cut slope benches of the parkinglot construction. The occurrence of this landslide prevented the completion of the digging and part of the removed material was replaced immediately at the landslide’s foot in order to arrest the process. As soon as this emergency measure was over, constructive solutions were performed to stabilise the hillside without interfering with the construction of the parkinglot. These solutions involved reprofiling the landslide toe and adding weight and building benches to stabilise the slope. Small retaining walls and drainage were also built where the slip surface outcrops. In 2009, with the aim of analysing these phenomena, a campaign of on-site testing and the instrumentation of the site wereundertaken: Execution of on-site penetration tests with hydraulic cylinders to determine the strength and deformational parameters of the materials of the area. Installation of 12 wire extensometers that measure by continuous register, in real time, the approach and separation of two holders fixed to the terrain; they allow an estimation of the magnitude and speed of surface movements. Execution of seven boreholes: Three geotechnical boreholes (GB) equipped with inclinometer pipes for periodic reconnaissance with extensometric and inclinometer probes, in order to detect vertical and horizontal movements of the subsoil. Four piezometric boreholes (PzB) implemented with pressure gauges and temperature sensors, to analyse water table variations and the freezing state of the subsoil. Also, two boreholes drilled in 2005 A penetration test using a hydraulic cylinder Previously, to execute the test, it was necessary to make a trench on the terrain and to place the cylinder inside; such the ends of the cylinder are placed perpendicularly to the walls of the trench, as can be seen in Once the cylinder is placed into the trench, pressure is applied and increased gradually. This pressure is transmitted to the terrain, perpendicularly through a cylindrical pin owing to the ball joint. In most tests, the pressure increases until terrain failure occurs. This type of test allows the stress–strain curve of the terrain to be determined because the failure pressure in each analysed material can be calculated and a residual pressure estimated. It can also be estimated the penetration experimented by the hydraulic cylinder when it is in charge, until the failure terrain is produced. Thirteen tests were made along seven trenches. The first four trenches were excavated in the slope with the objective of analysing the properties of the materials involved in creep surface movements. The remaining trenches were made in one of the slopes of the parkinglot, where the base of the largest depth of slip surface could be located.   In order to analyse the magnitude and speed of the surface level (creep) terrain movements in July of 2012, 12 wire extensometers were installed in the studied slope. These extensometers have a uniaxial displacement sensor that is able to collect data of length variation, measured in millimetres, between two holders fixed to the terrain and joined by a steel cable. These extensometers were installed in four sequences, with lengths of between 40 and 48 To analyse the results obtained from all the instrumentation installed in 2005  As can be seen, there is a double displacement at different levels: A superficial movement (creep) (discontinuity yellow line, A deeper movement caused by the displacement of materials, such as colluvium, shales and clays above the rocky substratum that explains the displacement of the five instrumented boreholes (green discontinuity line, Therefore, the surface of the main failure (deeper) would start at a higher height than borehole PzB1, passing below all the boreholes and below the A-136 road and probably finishing at the same level as the parkinglot. This estimation is made by taking into account the state of the asphalt ( Once the morphology of the slip surface is defined according to the installed instrumentation and the observations of the study area, a numerical model of this displacement is developed in order to check whether the collected data of geotechnical properties could reproduce the slip surface with the observed morphology.  The model is based on a mechanical and geotechnical approach for which the main physical characteristics of the medium are quantified and used by a mathematical model calculating a safety factor The probabilistic approach used in the software allows the consideration of uncertainties by giving probabilistic distributions to some of the model parameters The software uses the Morgenstern and Price method Pedological and geological characteristics are taken into account thanks to the altitude maps of the interfaces between each soil layer ( Variability and uncertainty of the geotechnical parameters are introduced into the software by means of probabilistic distributions (normal, uniform, triangular or trapezoidal). A distribution is attributed to each soil characteristic (cohesion ( The safety factor calculation also requires the landslide type (rotational or translational) and its length. These parameters are defined for the entire studied area. The water table level is set by determining two piezometric maps: one for the maximal water table level and the other for the minimal. The water table is then generated automatically between these piezometric levels by setting a filling ratio. On each profile of the studied area, the software calculates the safety factors for several landslide positions ( The probability of having the safety factor below one represents the probability of the occurrence of a landslide for a given triggering scenario (i.e., landslide geometry and water table level). The dispersion of the distribution gives the uncertainty of the result. The calculated probability of occurrence is then attributed to all the pixels of the resulting raster located on the profile and intersecting the landslide geometry. Thus, a pixel receives as many probabilities as landslide positions it is included in. Finally, a map is created, displaying the highest calculated probability of occurrence for each pixel of the studied area. The two cross sections (see The topographic profile (DEM) of the study zone changed with time. The depth of the boundaries between two geotechnical units for the two profiles have been extrapolated over a strip around 10-m wide, in order to obtain several calculating profiles for the They have been chosen according to the on-site geotechnical tests done on the Portalet landslide materials and completed with the expertise of the IGME engineers. Normal distributions have been chosen because few tests were available for the study area and the difference between the highest and lowest values is narrow ( According to the available data, the water table level has been modelled with a filling rate of 90% between 1740 Next, the process followed in order to determine the morphology and probability of the occurrence of the slip of El Portalet, according to the information reached in successive reconnaissance and control campaigns, is described. Possible displacements were modelled before and after the end of the parkinglot excavation in 2004. As the landslides are wide (length greater than 200 The probabilities of occurrence calculated by the software are presented in Two landslides with different lengths have been modelled along profile P2. The first one of 500 A landslide of 270 The same depth for the geotechnical units have been used for the modelling with the DEM realised in 2007, as for the first modelling. The results are presented in Probabilities of occurrence along profile P1 have almost doubled from 0.15 to near 0.3. Along profile P2, the probabilities of occurrence have dropped from 0 to around 0.2 for both landslide lengths (500 and 200 The computed profiles of The modelling results agree with the hypothesis that the excavation undertaken to build the parkinglot influenced the landslide reactivation. However, the low probabilities of occurrence obtained along profile P2 with the DEM built in 2004, shows that even before the parkinglot excavation began, the slope was suitable for landslide activity (even if it looked like it was stable). The modelling is also consistent with: (1) two imbricated landslides, one of 500 This work was funded by the project “Développementd’Outils pour le Suivi des Mouvements de Sol pour lagestion durable de SUDOE” DO-SMS (SUDOE INTERREG IV B).