Bioactive glass–ceramic scaffolds with interconnected pore networks suitable for bone regeneration were produced through rapid prototyping techniques by a photosensitive resin mold. The 45S5 Bioglass® was used in this study with a composition (wt%): 45% SiO2, 24.5% CaO, 24.5% Na2O and 6% P2O5. All variables in the process were investigated systematically to devise an optimal process. Characterization methods such as XRD, FTIR and FESEM were used for determination of the in vitro bioactivity of the scaffolds after immersion in SBF. The results show that hydroxycarbonate apatite crystals formed and to be a layer in 14 days. The compressive strength of the scaffolds was approximately 12.37 ± 1.25 MPa for the well-defined interconnected pores with a mean diameter of 900 μm, which is thought to be a suitable porous network for vascularized bone regeneration. This scaffold has the potential to bond to bone for application in bone repair and regeneration.In the past few decades, the development of artificial scaffolds for applications in bone repair and regeneration are attracting interest. An ideal scaffold should exhibit good biocompatibility, biodegradability and capability of guiding the growth of bone cells during the repair and regeneration process Structural characteristics of scaffold materials including porosity, pore size and interconnectivity play an important role in biological delivery and tissue regeneration. The ability to rigorously control scaffold architecture can provide significant insights into the issue how scaffold architecture and material affect tissue regeneration. Among all the fabrication methods so far studied, rapid prototyping (RP) is quite unique because the structure of the materials can be concisely manipulated by layer-by-layer plotting under mild conditions. RP is known as automated fabrication and free-form fabrication, has significantly improved the control over the whole design of three-dimensional solid and porous structures This work was aimed to fabricate a stiff mesoporous scaffold with high porosity and abundant interconnected pores. Herein bioactive glass–ceramic material was chosen as an example scaffold because of its excellent performance to enhance bone formation and to bond to surrounding tissues The rapid prototyping method used in this study is laser rapid prototyping (RS600SS, Shanghai Union Technology Co. Ltd China. Type of resin: 14120 photosensitive resin SOMOS Company U.S). The photosensitive resin template fabricated via 3D rapid prototyping was an open-cell cubic block with the dimension of 10 mm ( The fabricated bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold was characterized using several analytical tools. The obtained bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold was grinded into powers and the crystal phase was identified by X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) technique, using a PANalytical X'Pert PRO X-ray diffractometer (Netherlands) with Cu Kα (  Herein we employed rapid prototyping method to fabricate 3D photosensitive resin material and then used it as a template to prepare bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold. The pore size in photosensitive resin (see The porous structure of bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold was analyzed using μCT. The XRD patterns of the 45S5 bioactive glass precursor and bioactive glass-ceramic scaffolds after heat-treatment are shown in The compressive strength of the bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold was 12.37 ± 1.25 MPa. Results demonstrate that the 3D bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold possesses significantly improved mechanical strength, compared to other scaffold materials such as, hydroxyapatite (HAp) (lower than 0.29 MPa), 45S5 Bioglass The advantage of bioactive glass-based scaffold materials is their ability to gradually convert to HCA quickly, the main mineral constituent of bone, upon implantation. Therefore, FTIR spectra of the compounds scrapped from the scaffolds surfaces after immersion were illustrated in In order to directly and vividly describe the process of HCA formation on bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold surface after SBF immersion, the surface morphology of the scaffold was examined by FESEM. Weight loss is another characteristic of mineralization behavior of bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold. The scaffolds were washed with distilled water and air-dried. The weight loss was determined by an electronic balance. In this paper, a macro-porous bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold was fabricated via a photosensitive resin template with the structure defined by 3D rapid prototyping method. Results prove that the bioactive glass–ceramic scaffold possess not only high porosity and interconnectivity but also improved mechanical strength (12.37 ± 1.25 MPa). Besides, This work was financially supported by the