Coal is generally accepted to be a heterogeneous resource where coal properties can vary extensively between geographical sites or within a mine. However, detail coal characteristics are essential to predict gasification performance. Mineral matter transformation and slag formation are specific properties of a coal source that provide more information on the suitability for combustion or gasification purposes. Therefore, the chemistry and mineral interaction have to be understood in order to determine the suitability for fixed bed gasification purposes with regards to mineral matter transformations and slagging properties.
                  The principle aim of this paper is to understand the chemistry and interpret mineral matter transformation during Sasol-Lurgi fixed bed dry bottom (S-L FBDB) gasification by means of high temperature X-ray diffraction (HT-XRD), in combination with FactSage modelling.
                  Conventional ash fusion temperature (AFT) analyses are currently used to predict slagging properties of coal sources. Normal AFT analyses give an average flow property and do not indicate exactly at what temperature the first melt/slag is occurring. Operating experience indicates that even when the gasifiers are operated at temperatures above the flow temperature as given by AFT analysis, a low percentage of slag is formed. The HT-XRD findings were further supported with FactSage thermochemical modelling of the gasifier, and indicated that feldspar formation (including anorthite) correlated with slag formation at temperatures around 1000°C.
                  It can be concluded that HT-XRD and FactSage modelling supply insight into specific mineral reactions and slag formation. Although the amount of melt was fairly low at 1000°C, a percentage of melt is definitely present, which at this temperature is not reflected by AFT analyses. The specific value for Sasol in using FactSage, in combination with HT-XRD is that it can be used to analyse equilibrium conditions for reactions occurring between inorganic and organic materials together, as well as provide insight into mineral transformation and slag formation. This can improve the interpretation of flow properties of the reacted mineral matter in coal and assist in identifying and quantifying slag formation in gasifier operation at temperatures not reflected by normal AFT analyses.Coal is generally accepted to be a heterogeneous resource where coal properties can vary extensively between geographical sites or within a mine. However, detail coal characteristics are essential to predict gasification performance. Mineral matter transformation and slag formation are specific properties of a coal source that provide more information on the suitability for combustion or gasification purposes. Therefore, the chemistry and mineral interaction have to be understood in order to determine the suitability for fixed bed gasification purposes with regards to mineral matter transformations and slagging properties. Agglomeration of ash particles provides the desired porosity of the ash bed for adequate agent (steam and oxygen) flow and distribution, whereas excessive slagging inside the gasifier can cause channel burning, pressure drop problems or unstable operation, resulting in cut backs on gasifier load, which implies a direct loss in gas production. Ash flow temperature (AFT) is one property that specifically gives more information on the suitability of a coal source for combustion or gasification purposes. Therefore the chemistry and mineral interaction have to be understood in order to determine the suitability for fixed bed gasification purposes with regards to ash flow properties. Various authors ( The principle aim of this paper is to understand the chemistry and interpret mineral matter transformation during Sasol-Lurgi fixed bed dry bottom (S-L FBDB) Gasification by means of high temperature X-ray diffraction (HT-XRD), in combination with FactSage modelling. As already mentioned and indicated, one property that specifically gives more information on the suitability of a coal source for gasification purposes is the AFT. Conventional AFT analyses (SABS/ISO methods) are currently used to predict slagging properties from mineral matter transformations of coal sources. Normal AFT analysis gives an average flow property but does not indicate exactly at what temperature the first melt/sinter occurs due to specific mineral matter transformations. Operating experience indicates that even when the gasifiers are operated at temperatures above the AFT as given by an AFT analysis, a percentage of slag (clinker) is formed. The principle aim of developing the HT-XRD analysis together with Sasol Technology’s Material Characterization Department and in collaboration with Corus R&D in The Netherlands, was to interpret mineral matter transformations during Sasol-Lurgi FBDB gasification in a temperature range which simulated the gasification process. The HT-XRD analysis were conducted by Corus R&D, The Netherlands ( The HT-XRD technique is a new advanced analytical technique for characterizing mineral matter transformations in coal and the investigation into this technique started off with Corus R&D. Corus R&D assisted in standardizing and setting up the technique at Sasol Technology R&D, and this is the reason why two analytical laboratories were used for characterization purposes. The base sample was first analyzed by Corus R&D where-after the results also served as a bench-mark for further work and development at Sasol Technology. A similar base case coal sample was submitted to Corus and Sasol Technology. The pre-preparation of the sample differ slightly between the two laboratories due to set-up and product analysis done on the equipment. The main difference is that Corus started off with the original coal sample, where Sasol Technology started with a sample ashed to 500 In summary the sample preparation and HT-XRD were prepared and conducted as follows: Firstly a representative sample with particle size distribution of −1 A summary of the experimental parameters used during the HT-XRD analysis were as follows ( All the scans at the different temperatures were evaluated and the net peak areas of intensity calculated in order to determine the concentration levels. GTT Technologies are the developer and databases administrator of thermodynamic software and packages, such as FactSage. FactSage is the fusion of two well-known software packages in the computational thermochemistry – Fact-Win and ChemSage. The Fact development, already started in the late 1970s, and is today the largest thermochemical package and database available. FactSage provides the opportunity to calculate and manipulate phase diagrams, but has been established mainly in the field of complex chemical equilibrium and process simulation. For example, with FactSage it is possible to access both Fact (slag, matte, salt, ceramic and aqueous) and alloy databases, import and export streams and mixtures and also import ChemSage data files. Another advantage of FactSage is that it can also handle carbon reactions together with the minerals whilst varying the gas composition and atmosphere. The specific value for Sasol in this study will be that these thermochemistry models can be used to analyze equilibrium conditions for reactions occurring between inorganic and/or organic materials, as well as providing insight into the mineral formation and slag formation speciation. The database will assist in understanding, as well as predicting, what can and will happen with specific coal and mineral sources inside the gasification process. For example, the areas in which thermochemistry are used today: In industry to help understand and improve extraction and manufacturing processes. In basic R&D to confirm experimental work by doing only the needed work thereby reducing the amount of experimental work. To improve energy production. To optimise yields. FactSage package runs on a PC operating system under Microsoft Windows The most used modules for this study were the “Equilib” and Phase Diagram modules. The following is a short description of the two modules as published by The “Equilib” module is the Gibbs energy minimization workhorse of FACTSAGE. It calculates the concentrations of chemical species when specific elements or compounds react or partially react to reach a state of chemical equilibrium. The Phase Diagram module is a generalized module that permits one to calculate, plot and edit unary, binary, ternary and multi component phase diagram sections where the axes can be various combinations of T, P, V composition, activity, chemical potential, etc. The resulting phase diagram is automatically plotted by the figure module. A new model simulating the gasification process was developed during this study using the FactSage thermochemical software package. HT-XRD results on the base case sample as supplied by Corus R&D and the results as supplied by Sasol Technology R&D will be discussed together, and compared, as this is a newly developed and set-up technique at Sasol Technology R&D. The predominant phases of the base case coal sample were quartz, muscovite, calcite, dolomite, hematite, anhydrite, rutile and kaolinite ( The mineral transformations from 500 Between 600 In the temperature range >500–900 The formation of anhydrite (CaSO At 1000 Above 1350 The theoretical FactSage 5.3 modelling program was used as modelling tool in this study to: (1) confirm the results obtained with regards to slagging and flow properties of mineral matter during gasification as obtained with HT-XRD, and (2) to start initiating a modelling tool which can accommodate changes or influences of organic and inorganic components simultaneously. The current ASPEN thermodynamic model used for gasification purposes only simulates the organic components. The purpose of using the FactSage model in this study will only be to confirm the slagging behaviour and changes in mineral composition affecting slag formation in the gasification process with and without feed manipulation. The emphasis in this study was only on the In order to simulate the gasification process as close as possible to the actual gasification process, similar flows (kg/h) and conditions (temperature, pressure and mass flows) were used in the modelling. Coal consists of moisture, fixed carbon, volatiles and minerals and the 51 The gasification process is schematicly given in For modelling purposes the gasifier is treated in three distinct zones: the drying and devolatilization zone, gasification zone and the combustion and ash zone. Each zone is treated as a separate zone for modelling purposes in FactSage. The model operates on the principle that the coal (inorganic and organic components) flow from the top downwards in the gasifier; and the gas from the zone below flows upwards into the zone that is being modelled, i.e. the coal that flows into the drying and devolatilization zone are brought into contact, to react with the gas that flows out of the gasification zone – thus a counter-current effect. Schematically this implies that the up-flowing gas from the gasification zone reacts with the down flowing coal and mineral matter into the gasifier as shown in The discussion of the results, although integrated as one unit, will be done in three sections (drying and devolatilization, gasification and combustion). The focus on the discussion of the results will be on the slag formation and the mineral species affecting the slag and liquid formation inside the gasifier. Although the results are discussed and presented as actual mass flows through a MKIV gasifier in kg/hr, the emphasis of the discussion of the results should be on the formation and deformation of mineral species, trends and variations, rather than on the actual flows. The drying and devolatilization zone only took into account the temperature range from 25 From The formation of sillimalite (Al The amount of metakaolinite and mullite that can be formed is directly correlated with the amount of kaolinite in the original coal sample. Mullite formation can also take place with the availability of free γ-Al The mechanistic formation of mullite under normal conditions as already referred to in for example the base case coal, can be described as the formation of mullite from kaolinite through a metastable phase called metakaolinite or sillimalite ( The gasification zone is in the temperature range of 690–1200 From The small amount of Al The combustion zone only took into account the temperature range from 1200 From Based on HT-XRD the predominant phases of the base case coal sample were quartz, muscovite, calcite, dolomite, hematite, anhydrite, rutile and kaolinite. Between 600 The HT-XRD findings were further supported with FactSage thermochemical modelling of the gasifier, and indicated that feldspar formation (including anorthite) correlated with slag formation at temperatures around 1000 It can be concluded that HT-XRD and FactSage modelling supply insight into specific mineral interactions and slag formation. Although the amount of melt was fairly low at 1000