The measurement of a particle size distribution (PSD) of a soluble salt, NaCl, dispersed in a saturated solution using laser light scattering (LLS) is fraught with difficulty since this apparatus and others like it do not have strict temperature control in the sample chamber. A slight increase or decrease in temperature produces conditions where the crystals grow or dissolve spontaneously from or into background solution during PSD analysis. The difficulties introduced in particle size analysis can be overcome by adding 100
                        ppm
                      CdCl2 to the saturated solution used to disperse the crystals for analysis. The Cd2+ ion is known to adsorb on the surface of NaCl in solution, thus inhibiting the crystal growth/dissolution rate by pinning steps of NaCl crystals (Growth Crystal 8, (1969), 3). With this additive the PSD of NaCl produced during the crystallization from a NaCl contaminated 38 wt% CaCl2 solution cooled from 70°C to 30°C in a 1.4 liter jacketed-baffled-stirred tank is stabilized so that it can be reproducibly measured with the LLS.Cabrera and Vermilyea Recently, use of atomic force microscopy (AFM) to investigate impurity-step interactions Based on the underlying assumptions of the model, it appears especially suited to describing systems containing tailor-made additives or otherwise chemically similar impurities that strongly interact with the product during crystallization. Such impurities characteristically contain functional groups that bear strong structural and chemically resemblance to the host crystalline phase, resulting in strong surface adsorption, high levels of incorporation, and completely blocked growth rate at high concentration. The use of A feed solution of CaCl The PSD was measured with Beckman Coulter LS230 For PSD measurement, a slurry sample ( To stabilize the PSD measurement cadmium impurities were introduced into the filtrate solution, which was kept at 30°C by adding precisely determined levels of Cd With the application of Cd Using this experimental protocol with its step immobilization additive and careful temperature control, accurate particle size distributions can be measured for materials that are unstable due to crystal growth/dissolution from/to the background solution of the light scattering apparatus. We have used this experimental protocol to measure the effluent of a crystallizer for various materials Measuring the PSD produced by crystallizers is often difficult due to the dissolution or growth of the particles during analysis in traditional light scattering instruments. If an inert liquid can not be found into which the particles can be dispersed the only technique available is to use a saturated solution. Even with dispersion in a saturated solution, the PSD measured can be affected by dissolution or growth of the particles due to slight variations in the temperature of the sample in the instrument. Dissolution and growth of the particles in a slightly under or over saturated solution can be arrested by the addition of step immobilizing additives. These additives effectively stabilize the crystals by opening up a window of saturation where the steps of the surface of the crystal lattice are immobile. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the U. S. Department of Energy — The Office of Industrial Technologies.