The feasibility and optimization of an enhanced boron and phosphorus extraction process, from metallurgical grade silicon (MG-Si), consisting of solvent refining and acid leaching were studied comprehensively. MG-Si was alloyed with copper (Cu), following which, the removal of boron and phosphorus from the Si–Cu alloy by acid leaching was investigated. The results showed that the Cu-alloying process led to the concentration of boron and phosphorus in the Si–Cu alloy phase, which was confirmed to be an important part of their removal. Based on the analysis of acid sensitivity of the Si–Cu alloy phase, it was found that aqua regia was an effective leaching agent for removing the Si–Cu alloy phases from Si grains compared to HCl and HNO3. Addition of copper resulted in the increase in the extraction yield of boron and phosphorus from MG-Si from 21.0 to 58.7% and 23.2 to 42.2%, respectively. The selected Si–Cu powders were within a size range 74–106μm and the leaching was conducted at 70°C for 5h via a three-step sequential acid leaching procedure. Furthermore, the leaching kinetics of boron and phosphorus using aqua regia was observed to be controlled by interfacial transfer and product layer diffusion.Solar energy is the most abundant and clean source of renewable energy. With the development of the photovoltaic industry, the production of solar cells is increasing rapidly. By far, the most prevalent bulk material for solar cells is crystalline silicon (c-Si), also known as solar grade Si. Over 80% of solar cells are made of polycrystalline Si ( Noteworthy, the impurity distribution depends on the segregation behavior of impurities in metallurgical grade Si (MG-Si), which directly affects their subsequent extraction. The metallic impurities, such as iron (Fe), aluminum (Al), and calcium (Ca), are primarily located at the Si grain boundaries or the grain surfaces owing to their small segregation coefficients ( Solvent refining, a purification process has been employed to overcome the above mentioned barriers. In this process, Si recrystallization takes place from the supersaturated melt depending on the segregation behavior of impurities ( The main objective of the current study was to demonstrate that Cu alloying in combination with acid leaching could be effectively used for purifying MG-Si, in particular, for removing B and P. In this study, MG-Si was first alloyed with Cu to trap B and P, and then the purified Si was recovered by acid leaching. Various parameters of the process including particle size of the alloy powder, leaching reagent, time, and temperature were comprehensively studied. Moreover, a modified cracking shrinking model was applied to analyze the acid leaching kinetics. The raw material, MG-Si lumps, with a purity of 99% was provided by Run Xiang Co., Ltd., China. The contents of the main impurities in MG-Si are listed in  As shown in Step 1: 2 Step 2: 2 Step 3: 1 The experimental variables included the leaching reagent (used in the first step), particle size, time, and temperature. After acid leaching, the solution was filtered and rinsed thoroughly with de-ionized water until the solution was neutral and then it was dried. Concentrations of impurities in the samples were measured by inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES, Optima 2000DV, PerkinElmer Inc., US). Moreover, distributions of the elements in MG-Si before and after alloying with Cu were studied by an electron probe micro analyzer (EPMA, JXA-8100, Japan Electronics Co., Ltd., Japan). Finally, the microstructural evolution in the Si–Cu alloy powders after the first step of leaching with HCl/HNO According to the research results reported by Santos et al., the composition of the MG-Si used in the acid leaching experiments affects on the extraction of impurities ( The microstructural evolution in the Si–Cu alloy powder after the first step of leaching with HCl/HNO Cu Our studies demonstrated that this extraction of B and P was feasible due to the unique microstructure of the Si–Cu alloy and the effective acid leaching procedure. A series of systematic leaching trials were performed in order to study the effects of particle size, time, and temperature on the degree of purification of the Si-50 In this step, five batches of the Si–Cu alloy with different particle size ranges were first treated with 2 For MG-Si, research results indicated that more friable phases containing impurities were concentrated in the finer fraction of particles during sieving. It is found that these could not be so easily removed by acid leaching ( A set of tests with different leaching times from 1 to 5 The effect of temperature on the extraction yield of B and P was investigated by conducting tests in the range 30 to 70 The morphology of the Si–Cu alloy briquette before and after leaching in aqua regia is shown in In the modified cracking shrinking model, the leaching process is controlled by chemical reaction at the particle surface, or diffusion through the product layer ( For chemical reaction control, For product layer diffusion control, Moreover, assuming that both the interfacial transfer and diffusion across the product layer affect the reaction rate, the following expression can be used to describe the process ( In this study, MG-Si was purified by a combination of Cu-alloying and aqua regia leaching. The behavior of B and P in MG-Si after Cu-alloying was studied. It was found that upon the addition of Cu, the segregation coefficients of B and P between solid Si phase and liquid alloy were lowered. The Si–Cu alloy behaved as the B and P getter in this system. Moreover, the leaching results showed that the total extraction yields of B and P were 58.7 and 42.2%, respectively, by the combination process. The formation of compounds between B/P and Si–Cu alloy during the Cu-alloying process was also found to be an important part of B and P removal. It was found that aqua regia provided a better extraction yield of B and P compared to HCl and HNO We gratefully acknowledge the support of the