A study was performed in order to elucidate the effects of the physical properties of small powder particles on binder liquid requirement and agglomerate growth mechanisms. Three grades of calcium carbonate having different particle size distribution, surface area, and particle shape but approximately the same median particle size (4–5 μm), were melt agglomerated with polyethylene glycol (PEG) 3000 or 20000 in an 8-l high shear mixer at three impeller speeds. The binder liquid requirement was found to be very dependent on the packing properties of the powder, a denser packing resulting in a lower binder liquid requirement. The densification of the agglomerates in the high shear mixer could be approximately predicted by compressing a powder sample in a compaction simulator. With the PEG having the highest viscosity (PEG 20000), the agglomerate formation and growth occurred primarily by the immersion mechanism, whereas PEG 3000 gave rise to agglomerate growth by coalescence. Powder particles with a rounded shape and a narrow size distribution resulted in breakage of agglomerates with PEG 3000, whereas no breakage was seen with PEG 20000. Powder particles having an irregular shape and surface structure could be agglomerated with PEG 20000, whereas agglomerate growth became uncontrollable with PEG 3000. When PEG 20000 was added as a powder instead of flakes, the resultant agglomerates became rounder and the size distribution narrower.In agglomeration processes, many problems in choosing the right formulation and process conditions as well as difficulties in controlling the process arise because of variations in the physical properties of the starting materials. Ideally, a comprehensive knowledge of the starting material properties should make it possible to predict the required amount of binder liquid and the process conditions necessary for successful agglomeration without having to perform costly and time-consuming preliminary experiments. However, knowledge of the effects of starting material properties on the binder liquid requirement and agglomerate growth is still sparse, and the need of additional research in this area is obvious. The mean particle size of the powder is the starting material property that has been most commonly examined in wet and melt agglomeration experiments in high shear mixers. However, systematic examinations of the effects of powder particle size are complicated due to limitations in the grades of excipients available from suppliers, and only a few systematic studies have been published ( In spite of the central role of the mean particle size in the agglomeration process, it cannot solely explain the effects of starting materials observed. Other properties, such as particle size distribution, particle shape, surface structure, surface area, and wettability also play a significant role with regard to binder liquid requirement and agglomerate growth. Systematic investigations of the effects of these starting material properties are difficult, however, because it is practically impossible to vary one of these properties without changing other particle properties. These complex interactions make it difficult to distinguish between the effects of different particle properties. Generally, a smaller size of the powder particles has been found to increase the binder liquid requirement in order to obtain agglomerates of a similar size ( Interlocking between particles of an irregular shape increases the agglomerate strength and might reduce the need for binder liquid ( Attempts have been made to predict binder liquid requirement from starting material properties. Some experiments have shown the optimum amount of binder liquid to be approximately proportional to the surface area of the powder mass ( The strength of the agglomerates determines the agglomerate growth mechanisms. Coalescence will be the dominant growth mechanism if the agglomerates possess high agglomerate strength ( Powders having a mean particle size below ∼10 μm will normally be difficult to agglomerate, because their cohesiveness causes agglomerates of a high strength ( The agglomerate strength is also affected by the particle size distribution of the powder. The aim of this work is to obtain further knowledge of the effects of the physical properties of powder particles on binder liquid requirement and agglomerate growth by comparing starting materials having different particle properties but approximately the same median particle size. The work is based upon the hypothesis that small powder particles having different properties can be agglomerated in a controllable way provided that the agglomerate strength and deformability are controlled by an appropriate choice of the amount and the viscosity of the binder liquid. Three different grades of calcium carbonate powders were used as starting material. Durcal 5 (Omya, France) and Eskal 500 (KSL Staubtechnik, Germany) were stated to be manufactured from a natural white marble and produced by comminution and classification. Sturcal F (Rhone Poulenc, France) was said to be produced by precipitation. The same batch of Durcal 5 was applied in previous experiments ( The size distribution by volume of the calcium carbonates was determined in triplicate by a Malvern Mastersizer S laser diffraction particle sizer (Malvern Instruments, UK). The span was calculated as the difference between the diameters at 90 and 10 percentage points relative to the median diameter, A Gemini 2375 Surface Area Analyzer (Micromeritics, USA) was used for the determination of the BET multipoint surface area of the calcium carbonates. Analyses were performed in duplicate. The true density of the calcium carbonates and of the solid PEGs was determined in duplicate by an Accupyc 1330 gas displacement pycnometer (Micromeritics, USA) using helium purge. The poured and tapped densities of the calcium carbonates were determined in duplicate according to the test for apparent volume ( The size distributions of the PEGs were estimated in duplicate by sieve analysis with a series of 12 ASTM standard sieves in the range of 75–4000 μm. A sample of ∼100 g was sieved for 5 min at low vibration level (flakes) or 10 min at high vibration level (powder) by a Fritsch analysette 3 vibrator (Fritsch, Germany). The mass median diameter and the span were calculated. The melting range and the peak temperature of the PEGs were estimated in duplicate by a Perkin-Elmer DSC 7 differential scanning calorimeter (Perkin-Elmer, USA) as previously described ( The densities of the molten PEGs were estimated at 70, 80, and 90°C as previously described ( The viscosities of the molten PEGs were estimated in duplicate at 70, 80, and 90°C by a Rotovisco RV 12 rotation viscometer (Haake, Germany) as previously described ( All data on material properties presented here are the mean values of the repeated estimations. Photographs of the calcium carbonates were taken by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Jeol JSM 5200, Japan). The agglomeration experiments were performed in an 8-l Pellmix PL 1/8 laboratory scale high shear mixer (Niro, Denmark) ( The heating jacket was preheated to 50°C. Samples of 1500 g of Durcal, 1500 g of Eskal, or 1000 g of Sturcal, the amount of PEG (% m/m of calcium carbonate), and 3% BHA (% m/m of PEG) were dry mixed at an impeller speed of 1300 rpm. Because of formation of frictional heat caused by the impeller rotation, the product temperature increased during mixing to a temperature exceeding the melting point of the PEG. The melting point was observed as an inflection point on the recorded product temperature curve. This inflection point was defined as the start of massing time. At 2 min after the melting point was observed on the temperature curve, the impeller speed was lowered to 500, 800, or 1100 rpm. After 8 min of additional massing time, the agglomeration procedure was terminated. The mixing was interrupted at 2, 4, 6, and 8 min after melting, and small samples (5–6 g) were randomly withdrawn from the mass with a spoon. At the end of each experiment, the agglomerates were sieved on a 4-mm Jel-Fix 50 vibration sieve (J. Engelsmann, Germany) for ∼10 s, until the fraction finer than 4 mm had passed. The agglomerates were then spread out in thin layers on trays allowing them to cool at ambient temperature. The adhesion of mass to the bowl was estimated as previously described ( The size distributions of the agglomerates were estimated by sieve analysis of a sample of ∼100 g prepared from the cooled fraction finer than 4 mm by a Laborette 27 automatic rotary cone sample divider (Fritsch, Germany). A series of 14 ASTM standard sieves in the range of 75–2000 μm was vibrated by a Fritsch analysette 3 vibrator (Fritsch, Germany) for 10 min. The mass median diameter and the span were calculated. The intragranular porosity of the agglomerates was estimated by a mercury immersion method similar to that described by The binder concentrations (% m/m of the calcium carbonate) of the fractions (250–2000 μm) were estimated from a quantitative determination of the content of calcium carbonate by titration ( Photographs of selected agglomerates were taken by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (Jeol JSM 5200, Japan). Eskal and Sturcal were agglomerated at three impeller speeds (500, 800, and 1100 rpm) applying three types of PEG (PEG 3000 and 20 All data on the agglomeration experiments presented in this paper are mean values of two experiments, unless otherwise stated. The range of the repeated experiments is indicated as ± in It is seen from The differences in particle shape and surface structure of the calcium carbonates are reflected in The poured and tapped densities ( The physical properties of the PEGs are shown in The solubility of calcium carbonate in PEG was previously found to be less than 0.1% at 90°C ( Preliminary agglomeration experiments were performed in order to establish the proper experimental conditions. The binder concentrations were generally chosen as ∼0.5% below the amount of PEG resulting in overwetted agglomerates at an impeller speed of 1100 rpm. However, for Durcal and Sturcal it was not possible to obtain agglomerates by applying the same binder concentration at 500, 800, and 1100 rpm. Consequently, the binder concentrations being applicable had to be estimated at each of the three impeller speeds. Preliminary experiments with Sturcal revealed that agglomeration with PEG 3000 flakes was not possible in a controllable way. The resulting product was powdery with a binder concentration of 38, 37, or 35% at 500, 800, or 1100 rpm, respectively. For all three impeller speeds, a 0.5% increase in the binder concentration resulted in overwetted agglomerates. Consequently, experiments with Sturcal and PEG 3000 had to be omitted from the final series. This uncontrollable growth indicates that the mechanisms of agglomerate formation and growth occurring with PEG 3000 are different from those occurring with PEG 20  As can be seen from The agglomerates formed with Durcal and PEG 3000 flakes at 1100 rpm became very small and contained a lot of unagglomerated powder. Consequently, a single supplementary experiment was performed at a binder concentration of 15.0% in order to obtain sufficient agglomeration. The span of the agglomerate size distributions is shown in The adhesion of mass to the bowl was found to vary between 4 and 9% with Eskal, 4 and 15% with Durcal, and 0 and 4% with Sturcal. The amount of agglomerates larger than 4 mm was 7.3 and 2.1% with Eskal agglomerated with PEG 3000 flakes at 500 and 800 rpm, respectively. In the rest of the experiments, the amount of agglomerates larger than 4 mm was less than 0.5%. From the specific surface areas of the calcium carbonates ( The interparticular bulk porosities of the powders ( The packing of the particles within the agglomerates is expressed by the corrected intragranular porosities ( It was investigated, therefore, whether the compaction simulator data could be used to predict the binder liquid requirement. It was assumed that the forces in the mixer correspond to a pressure range of 20–100 MPa in the compaction simulator. The amount of PEG necessary to saturate agglomerates, having corrected intragranular porosities corresponding to the range of interparticular bulk porosities mentioned above, to a liquid saturation of 100% were calculated. A liquid saturation of 100% was chosen, because experiments have shown that liquid saturation has to approach or even exceed 100% in order to obtain a sufficient agglomerate growth of small, cohesive particles ( For Eskal ( For Durcal ( Normally, a lower intragranular porosity and a higher liquid saturation are to be expected at a higher impeller speed due to the higher collisional forces promoting a densification of the agglomerates ( From the agglomerate size distributions obtained with Eskal and PEG 3000 flakes ( The agglomerate strength is increased by increasing binder viscosity (  The agglomerate size distributions obtained from Durcal agglomerated with PEG 3000 flakes ( Although the binder concentration was the same with PEG 3000 and PEG 20 As mentioned in There is considerable difference in the agglomerate size distributions of Sturcal agglomerated with PEG 20 The present work documents that the binder liquid requirement for agglomeration of starting materials having different particle properties but approximately the same median particle size varies considerably. It is shown that the packing properties of the powders are of great importance for liquid requirement. The results indicate that the compaction simulator might be useful as a method to predict the densification of powders and thus the binder liquid requirement during agglomeration process in a high shear mixer. There is a need for additional research using other powders in order to decide whether the compaction simulator will be generally applicable for such a prediction. Agglomerate formation by immersion of powder particles in droplets of a highly viscous binder liquid and subsequent agglomerate growth by immersion of particles in the surface of the agglomerates have been shown to be a favourable method for agglomeration of powders with a particle size being so small that agglomerate growth by coalescence is difficult to control. In order to produce pellets from small powder particles, it will be preferable to add a highly viscous meltable binder as a powder instead of flakes since a powder results in agglomerates of a more spherical shape and a narrower size distribution. It has further been demonstrated that the high agglomerate strength that is generally supposed to be associated with a small powder particle size becomes markedly reduced by a rounded shape and a narrow size distribution of the powder particles. For such particles, a highly viscous binder liquid might also be favourable in order to obtain an agglomerate strength sufficiently high to prevent breakage of the agglomerates. The authors wish to thank Omya, France, for supplying the Durcal 5 and Clariant GmbH, Germany, for supplying the PEGs. Jørn Møller-Sonnergaard is thanked for performing the compaction simulator experiments.