This paper presents a comparative investigation into behaviors of different damping terms of viscoelastic contact models, and introduces a novel damping term with dimensional reasoning analysis and by considering the effect of relaxation time of viscoelastic spheres. Behaviors of different contact models are compared in terms of predictions of non-dimensional variables, where the influence of damping parameters on behaviors of viscoelastic models is analyzed and the relationship between non-dimensional damping parameters and the coefficient of restitution is discussed. The damping parameter related to relaxation time is found to affect behaviors of the current viscoelastic contact model significantly. Viscoelastic models of different damping terms exhibit different behaviors, especially for a heavily damped case. Comparison between simulation and free fall impact test of viscoelastic balls demonstrates that the current contact model involving relaxation time fits experimental results better than other contact models.The Discrete Element Method (DEM) initially proposed by Cundall and Strack [ Numerous contact models applied in DEM applications can be found in [ Viscoelastic models are commonly represented with a spring and a dashpot in parallel. The spring is used to model the elasticity and account for the elastic force, while the dashpot is to model the energy dissipation and account for the dissipative force. The simplest viscoelastic model consists of a linear spring and a linear dashpot. Because of its simplicity, the linear model is usually used in early DEM studies. Nevertheless, this linear model has some drawbacks, such as non-zero contact forces at both the beginning and the end of collision [ From continuum mechanics theory, some researchers tried to derive the dissipative force of viscoelastic spheres analytically and to correlate damping parameters with material properties. Kuwabara and Kono [ Apart from the model by Hunt and Crossley [ As a core component of viscoelastic contact models, the damping term should be of critical importance to DEM simulation. Different damping terms result in different behaviors of models, such as the dissipation properties and mechanical behaviors, consequently leading to the differentiations in computational dynamics of particle systems. Therefore, it is meaningful to better model the dissipation properties of viscoelastic particles to improve the damping term from both theoretical and practical points of view. Considering the difficulty in measuring the physical dissipative properties of materials directly, a classical concept of the coefficient of restitution is extensively used to characterize the dissipation of objects. The coefficient of restitution is relatively easily obtained from impact experiments and can be used to determine or adjust the damping parameters of models. This paper aims to investigate and compare the behaviors of different damping terms of viscoelastic contact force models, and attempts to improve the damping term by including the effect of relaxation time of viscoelastic spheres. We try to correlate the coefficient of restitution with the non-dimensional damping parameters. Experimental results of viscoelastic balls are used as a benchmark to compare and assess these diverse viscoelastic contact models. The paper is organized as follows. In As shown in Assuming the mass center and the sphere center of each particle remains coincident during the entire period of contact, the motion equation of impact particles according to Newton's second law is In DEM, the normal contact between two particles is generally modelled by a spring and a dashpot connected in parallel, as shown in The simplest viscoelastic model is composed of a linear spring ( Submitting Eq. To proceed non-dimensional analysis, we introduce the non-dimensional time On the basis of Eqs. From Eq. By substituting the general form Eq. Using the definition of Lee and Hermann [ Tsuji et al. [ If the moment of displacement backing to zero is regarded as the end of contact, i.e. Kuwabara and Kono [ Lichtensteiger [ In a study of vibro-impact, Hunt and Grossley [ Note that there is an analytical Eq. Those viscoelastic contact models mentioned in However, it is reasonable that the dissipative force of viscoelastic spheres should reflect the influence of relaxation behavior on energy dissipation from an intuitive reasoning. Namely, the damping term related to viscoelasticity should include the effect of relaxation time besides viscosity, while those viscoelastic contact models mentioned above do not take into consideration relaxation time. It is instructive to see how the dissipative force grows during the contact of viscoelastic spheres on the basis of elementary dimensional reasoning. For a linear viscoelastic solid, the stress tensor may be combined of an elastic part and a dissipative part [ With the quasi-static approximation that the displacement field in a deformed viscoelastic solid completely coincides with that in an elastic solid [ At any time Provided that the ‘deformation’ within the contact zone is small at any time Making Take the derivative of Eq. It is reasonable for linear viscoelastic solids to assume the average strain Eq. If For spheres under our consideration, We assume that the relation between If a dashpot is used to dissipate energy of viscoelastic spheres, the displacement rate exponent Dimensional reasoning demonstrates that the displacement exponent Taking into account the effect of relaxation time When a dashpot is used to dissipate energy and to calculate the dissipative force of viscoelastic spheres, a novel damping term may be proposed from Eq. Through dimensional analysis similar to Eq. The By putting the non-dimensional variables of Eqs. With To compare these models of different damping terms and investigate their characteristics of  In  Except for the current model, a smaller We observed in The To explore the influences of As The   The initial slope of the Moreover, we find in To investigate the influence of relaxation time on behaviors of the current model, The influence of  The predicted As we regard the impact to be terminated when a zero force is reached firstly, we can obtain  In For the current model in The comparison against experimental results was implemented to assess the adequacy of these viscoelastic contact models to reality. Lichtensteiger et al. [ Since the aluminum plate is much more rigid than test spheres and contact duration reported by Lichtensteiger et al. [ The results of indoor lacrosse ball (ILB) and outdoor lacrosse ball (OLB) dropped from the reference drop height Using the test data of ILB and OLB in Appropriate values of One can specify Comparisons of simulation results against the experiment of ILB and OLB were respectively presented in Among these Hertz-type models, the current model can best match the experimental results of ILB in For those models regardless of relaxation time, there are a few unsuitable predictions of the force history in Comparing Since zero contact force instead of zero displacement is used as the contact ending criteria for the simulation, there should be a ‘residual’ displacement existing at the end of contact, aside from Model Hunt, as shown in As the simulation parameters of viscoelastic contact models, i.e. Using the parameters of  As shown in  The effect of In this work, dimensional reasoning demonstrates that the dissipative force of viscoelastic particles increases in proportion to the displacement rate and the square root of the displacement of particles, which is consistent with previous derivations from continuum mechanics. The viscoelastic contact force model involving the effect of relaxation time behaves quite differently from other models. Except for the Model Hunt, other contact models all predict attractive force before displacement backing to zero. To avoid unfeasible attraction, the collision end criterion of a zero force instead of a zero displacement makes the coefficient of restitution higher and the contact time shorter, and causes a ‘residual’ displacement at the end of contact. The resulting ‘residual’ displacement should eventually recover after a viscoelastic contact, which is different from the permanent deformation of plastic impacts. The following conclusions can be drawn: Involving the effect of relaxation time is to the advantage of the current damping term over others. The damping parameter At fixed values of simulation parameters like The simulation results of the current viscoelastic contact model match the impact test of ILB and OLB better than other models. This is due to that the damping term of the current model considers the effect of relaxation time, but others do not. So the current contact model is more appropriate to solving collisions of viscoelastic bodies. The authors declare no conflict of interest. This research is supported by the