Aluminum matrix composites used in the aerospace, military and automotive industries are typically fabricated by a stir casting method. However, when nanoparticles are used for reinforcement, fabrication of composite materials by this method leads to the formation of a large number of structural defects. In this study, copper coating of alumina reinforcement particles is investigated as a technique for improving the structure of Al-Al2O3 composites. Microstructural investigations by optical microscopy (OM), scanning electron microscopy (SEM) equipped with energy dispersion spectroscopy (EDS) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) showed that the alumina particles were coated uniformly with copper shells. Copper coating of the reinforcing particles significantly increased their wettability in the molten aluminum alloy, strengthened the matrix-particle interfaces and improved the distribution of reinforcing particles within the matrix. Due to these microstructural improvements, the hardness, compressive strength, yield stress, tensile strength and elongation of the composites were enhanced by copper coating of the alumina particles.Aluminum matrix composites are under consideration for use in the aerospace, automotive and military industries because of their low weight, high strength and excellent abrasion resistance. Stir casting is a preferred method for fabrication of aluminum matrix composites due to its low cost, simplicity, flexibility and amenability to mass production. However, an important and widely recognized drawback of this method is the formation of a large amount of structural defects in composite materials. Examples of some of the structural defects found in stir casted composites include, a non-uniform distribution of the reinforcing particles due to poor wettability, segregation and agglomeration of the reinforcement particles in the matrix, weak matrix-particle interfaces and the presence of porosity and other destructive phases Poor wettability of reinforcing particles in the melt means that the molten matrix cannot wet the surface of the particles. Consequently, when the reinforcement particles are added into the molten matrix, they float on the melt surface Various techniques are used to increase the wettability of reinforcing ceramic particles in molten metal. Modification of the surface oxide layer on the molten metal through the addition of alloying elements such as magnesium and calcium and heat-treating the particles to desorb gases adsorbed on the particle surfaces are appropriate techniques for improving the particle׳s wettability. Metal coating of the reinforcement particles, which modifies their surface tension in the molten metal, is perhaps the most favorable technique for improving the ceramic particle wettability Al After the alumina particles were electroless copper coated, they were rinsed in deionized water several times and dried in a vacuum oven at 80 A356 aluminum alloy with a chemical composition of 6.104 Si- 0.425 Mg- 0.18 Fe- Bal. Al was used as the matrix material. The alloy was melted in a graphite crucible placed in a resistance furnace. One to ten percent of uncoated and Cu-coated micro and nano alumina particles were injected into the aluminum alloy melt (T=700 Microstructural studies on the micro and nanocomposite samples were performed using an optical microscope (OM) equipped with an image analyzer and by a scanning electron microscope (SEM) equipped with energy dispersion spectroscopy (EDS). Brinell hardness testing was performed using a universal instrument (model UV.1) with a 2.5 Compressive and tensile tests of the composite samples were performed according to ASTM E9 and ASTM B557 standards, respectively, using a Zwick Z250 machine. Compression was applied at a strain rate of 5×10 Direct copper coating of Al SEM micrographs and EDS analysis of Cu-coated microparticles as well as TEM images of coated nanoparticles are shown in In addition to producing uniform thin layer coatings on the nanoparticles, the optimized electroless deposition process is also free from particle agglomeration and particle surface oxidation phenomena. The above considerations suggest that coated nanoparticles are suitable for using as composite reinforcing particles. The microstructures of composite samples reinforced with 10 Such microstructural images are useful for comparing the distribution of uncoated and Cu-coated Al More uniform distribution and decreasing the segregation and agglomeration of reinforcing particles in the matrix: The microstructure of as-cast composite samples reinforced with uncoated microparticles ( Particle segregation in the inter-dendritic eutectic regions is not seen in composite samples reinforced with Cu-coated microparticles ( Coating the Al Agglomerates and clusters of uncoated nanoparticles were also observed in specific areas of the microstructure presented in Improving the particle wettability: During the casting of A356-Al This causes the wettability factor (WF), which is the difference between the percentage of injected particles and the percentage of particles present in the composite, to be lower than 100 for such composite samples. The results of Floating and aggregation in the molten aluminum alloy was more obvious for uncoated Al However, Cu-coating the nanoparticles led to significant improvements in their wettability. Aggregation of Cu-coated nanoparticles was not observed at the surface of molten aluminum alloy when these composites were cast, and all of the particles wetted within the melt ( Better matrix- reinforcement interface: A weak interface between the matrix and uncoated microparticles, which was due to the presence of large quantities of gas bubbles around the alumina particles, can be observed in EDS analysis of the nanocomposite samples reinforced with uncoated particles (  For comparison, a plot of compressive strength versus weight percentage of the reinforcing alumina particles for the different composite samples is shown in In addition, the hardness and compressive strength of composites samples improved when coated particles were used as the reinforcements.  The increased strength in the composite samples can be attributed to different strengthening mechanisms, such as the high work hardening rate of the nanocomposites, the generation of dislocations due to mismatches in the elastic modulus and the coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE) between the matrix and particles, the load bearing mechanism and the Orowan strengthening mechanism. In other words, dislocations are increased around the reinforcing particles by increasing the amount of reinforcing particles. Consequently, barriers to dislocation motion are increased, which increases the strength of the composite materials Unexpectedly, the yield and tensile strengths of the composite samples decreased at higher particle percentages. The strength reduction at higher particle percentages could be due to the formation of structural defects, such as particle agglomeration, weakening of the matrix-particle interface, or the introduction of porosity at higher percentages.  The fracture mechanisms of the composite samples after tensile testing were studied from SEM images of the fracture surfaces. Small voids observed in both fracture surfaces showed drastic plastic deformation before fracture of metallic matrix. Additionally, because of local stress increases in some areas, small voids were gradually interconnected to form bigger ones. Sample fracture occurred due to the subsequent joining and growth of these voids Coating the reinforcing Al