Hypothesis
                  The goal of the present study was to compare minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis (MIPPO) technique and conventional open reduction with LCP for the treatment of clavicle midshaft fractures in adults in a randomized, controlled, clinical trial with a minimum of 1-year follow-up.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Between June 2006 and May 2008, 64 cases of open reduction and internal plate fixation were performed for clavicle midshaft fractures. The operative indications were complete displacement, severe comminution and marked shortening of the clavicle (>2cm). MIPPO and conventional open reduction surgery procedures with LCP were used in 32 and 32 cases, respectively.
               
                  Results
                  The mean time to union was 13 weeks in the open reduction group compared to 12 weeks in MIPPO group (P
                     >0.05). The MIPPO group had no significantly superior Constant shoulder scores or DASH scores at all time-points (P
                     >0.05). However, the complications in the open reduction group were dysesthesia in the area of the incision and directly below in 10 cases, hypertrophic scarring in five cases, painful shoulder in two cases and a limitation of shoulder motion in one case (P
                     >0.05). The complications in the MIPPO group were dysesthesia in two cases, no hypertrophic scarring, no painful shoulder, no limitation of shoulder motion were noted (P
                     <0.05). Patients in this operative group were more satisfied with cosmetic appearance and overall outcome than those in the conventional open reduction group.
               
                  Conclusions
                  Operative treatment with a LCP for clavicle shaft fractures can be used to obtain stable fixation. Particularly, MIPPO of displaced midshaft clavicular fractures resulted in a lower rate of dysesthesia, hypertrophic scarring, and a better cosmetic than conventional open reduction, although the functional outcomes (Constant and DASH) were no different between the two groups. Overall satisfaction was higher in the MIPPO group than conventional open reduction group.
               
                  Level of evidence
                  Level IV. Retrospective study.Clavicle fractures are common injuries in adults, accounting for 5% of all fractures and 44% of all shoulder fractures Inclusion criteria were: complete displacement; severe comminution; marked shortening of the clavicle (> Between June 2006 and May 2008, 64 cases of open reduction and internal plate fixation were performed for clavicle midshaft fractures. The operative indications were complete displacement, severe comminution and marked shortening of the clavicle (> In the MIPPO group, the mean follow-up period was 15 months (range, 12 to 24 months). There were 20 males and 12 females with a mean age of 40 years (range, 20 to 70 years). The cause of the injury was a traffic accident in 23 cases, fall down in four cases, a sport injury in five cases. There were 18 B1 type and 14 B2 type fractures according to Robinson classification In the conventional open reduction group, the mean follow up period was 15 months (range, 12 to 24 months). There were 20 males and 12 females with a mean age of 45 years (range, 18 to 69 years). The cause of the injury was a traffic accident in 25 cases, fall down in six cases, a sports injury in one case. There were 15 B1 type and 17 B2 type fractures. The mean interval from injury to surgery was 7 days (range, 1 to 15 days). Under general anesthesia, the patient was positioned in a beach-chair semi-sitting position. The involved shoulder was prepared and draped. In the MIPPO group, a small skin incision (approximately 3 In the conventional open reduction group, an oblique incision (approximately 8–10 Postoperatively, the patients were given a simple sling for approximately 2 weeks, and pendulum exercise and active range of motion exercise were then started. For a radiological assessment, the bone union period was compared using radiographic evidence, such as callus formation and trabecular bridging across the fracture site. Radiographs were taken after 1 week, 3 weeks, 6 weeks, and again after 3 months and 6 months. For the clinical assessment, Assessment included standardized clinical evaluation and completion of the Constant shoulder score Sixty-four patients volunteered to participate and signed written informed consent. All of them completed the study. Thirty-two patients were randomized to both the MIPPO and the conventional open reduction treatment groups, respectively. Demographic data are shown in ( Bony union was achieved in all cases after surgery at an average of 12 weeks (range, 8 to 20 weeks) in the MIPPO group and 13 weeks (range, 8 to 24 weeks) in the conventional open reduction group, respectively, indicating no significant intergroup difference ( However, postoperative complications were noted in both groups. The complications in the open reduction group were dysesthesia in the area of the incision and directly below in 10 cases, hypertrophic scarring in five cases, painful shoulder in two cases and a limitation of shoulder motion in zero case. The complications in the MIPPO group were dysesthesia in two cases, no hypertrophic scarring, no painful shoulder, no limitation of shoulder motion were noted. Patients were specifically questioned about their satisfaction or dissatisfaction regarding the appearance of the shoulder (and incision, if applicable) at 1-year following the injury. Patients in the MIPPO group were more likely to be satisfied with the appearance of the shoulder ( The clavicle acts as a strut, which transfers power from the trunk to the arm. The clavicle is S-shaped with a medial convexity and a lateral concavity. The middle third is the thinnest part of the clavicle and is located directly under the skin with no soft tissue or muscle attachment. Thus, it is vulnerable to direct and indirect trauma. This explains the high frequency of fractures in the middle third. Fractures of the clavicular shaft were considered to be a domain of non-operative treatment for a long time. This dogma was based on the studies conducted by NEER CS and Rowe CR in the 1960s The operative methods for the treatment of clavicle midshaft fractures involve intramedullary K-wire fixation or Steinmann pin fixation or elastic stable intramedullary nailing and plate fixation. The procedures using the former two materials result in low resistance to torque, carry risks of pin loosening and infection, and require a long-term fixation period Open reduction and internal fixation with plates (plate osteosynthesis) is still the standard method for the surgical treatment of clavicular shaft fractures Minimally invasive percutaneous plate osteosynthesis (MIPPO) has been widely applied to treat long bone shaft fractures in recent years because of its technical advantages and satisfactory clinical outcomes In summary, operative treatment with a LCP for clavicle shaft fractures can be used to obtain stable fixation. Particularly, MIPPO of displaced midshaft clavicular fractures resulted in a lower rate of dysesthesia, hypertrophic scarring, and a better cosmetic than conventional open reduction, although the functional outcomes (Constant and DASH) were no different between the two groups. Overall satisfaction was higher in the MIPPO group than conventional open reduction group. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest concerning this article.