Modern society is generating increasing quantities of waste printed circuit boards (PCBs). Together with the complicated components of high values, the treatment of waste PCBs has been a heavily researched and difficult topic in the disposal of waste electrical and electronic equipment (WEEE). The application of an air separation technology to produce comminuted PCB particles can achieve efficient separation of metal and nonmetallic fractions for further treatment and purification. With the advantages of a simple operation, environmental-soundness, and avoidance of secondary pollution, this technology is of great significance in the recycling of waste PCBs. In this paper, the air separation principles of waste PCB particles in a fluidized bed were mathematically analyzed. The shape factor of metal and non-metallic particles and the uneven airflow velocity distribution in the radial dimension were considered, and the formula for metal grade and yield were deduced. Experiments were designed and performed to obtain metal grade and yield data, which were compared with the calculation results. The calculated grade is in good agreement with the experimental results. The presented mathematical analysis can act as a guide for the engineering design and operating configuration of air separation for waste PCB particles in determining the terminal velocity and for selecting the particle size, feed volume, and discharging height.PCBs are widely used in various types of home appliances and consumer electronic products. With the rapid development of technology and the increase of human living standards, home appliances and consumer electronic products have exhibited a notable growth in the last several decades. Subsequently, this phenomenon has resulted in a huge amount of electronic waste containing PCBs. The manufacturing process of electronic products has also produced a large quantity of scrap PCBs. For improved sustainability, to recover high value materials, and in response to regulatory requirements, such as extended producer responsibility for WEEE, research of WEEE treatment and recovery has attracted considerable attention recently. The safe and effective treatment of waste PCBs, characterized by large quantities, complicated components, high potential value, and high hazards, has increasingly become a heavily researched topic and key technical problem in WEEE treatment. PCBs are normally composed of ~ The effective separation of these metallic and nonmetallic materials based on the differences in their properties is the key for developing a recycling methodology for waste PCBs. Considering separation principles, recycling technologies can be categorized into mechanical/physical methods, hydrometallurgical methods, heating methods, biological methods, and supercritical fluid methods. These technologies are very different in terms of the economic feasibility, operational complexity, recovery efficiency, and environmental impact. Before the 1990s, the main recycling methods for waste electronic equipment (including waste PCBs) in Europe and America were heating, the hydrometallurgical process, and electro-deposition Due to the combination of environmental-soundness, low energy consumption, and separation efficiency, mechanical/physical methods have become the mainstream techniques used to comprehensively recycle and reuse the components in waste PCBs After separation by the gas–solid fluidized bed technology, recycled metallic and nonmetallic fractions can be further purified and recycled. Metals, such as Cu, Al, Fe, Sn, Sb, and Pb, are sent to recovery operations, and these processes are already notably mature. The nonmetallic fraction can be pyrolyzed to obtain liquid and gas organic materials Although some research projects on the separation by gas–solid fluidized beds have been reported, very few reports have focused on the mathematical analysis of its process to provide an engineering guide of the air separation system. This study includes the theoretical analysis, mathematical calculation, and experiments designed to verify the calculated results, which aim to provide an engineering guide in the design and operation configuration of particle sizes, feeding volumes and discharging points. First, the separation principle of waste PCB particles in a fluidized bed is mathematically analyzed, and the formula of metal grade and yield are deduced under ideal operating conditions. Next, the influences of shape factor and airflow velocity radial distribution on air separation through the terminal velocity are considered and used to modify the formula of metal grade and yield. Finally, experiments are designed and conducted to obtain the metal grades and yields under various operating conditions, which are compared with the calculated results. The discrepancies between the experimental results and the calculated results are analyzed, and possible explanations are given. In the study, scrap PCBs of relatively uniform compositions generated during manufacturing were used. The nonmetallic components consisted primarily of a resin and a small amount of glass fiber, while the metallic components were predominately copper. A Taylor sieve was employed to screen the comminuted powders. The properties of comminuted powders in this study are shown in  The operation of the fluidized bed is as follows. First, a measured amount of PCB powder was charged into the fluidized bed via feed inlet 6. Blower 1 is turned on to convey air into the fluidized bed. The air flow rate was adjusted with valve 2 and measured by flow meter 3. The powder was fluidized and entered cyclone 7 when the air flow rate was increased to a certain level. PCB particles were collected in the cyclone. Very fine powders were captured by bag filter 8, and filtered air was emitted to the atmosphere. The pre and post separation samples were pretreated in a microwave digestion instrument, and then a flame atomic absorption spectrometer was employed to determine the metal content. Below are the main parameters of the spectrometer: Equipment model: AAnalyst 400 Equipment manufacturer: American PerkinElmer Inc. Limit of detection: ppm–ppb grade  For a particle at rest, there will be no drag force, which causes the particle to accelerate due to the gravity force. As the particle increases in velocity, the drag force and the pure gravity force will eventually become approximately equal, causing no further change in the particle's velocity. Eq. At this point, the particle is in a uniform motion state or suspension state. The forces are: For spherical particles, the gravity force, buoyancy force, and drag force can be respectively defined in the formulas below: When Eqs. diameter of particle density of particle and fluid, respectively drag coefficient of particle relative velocity between particle and fluid. Rearranging Eq. In an ideal condition, all particles to be separated are spherical. However, as shown in Th particle shape factor, also called the sphericity degree, represents the difference between the particle shape and a spherical shape. It is defined by the division of the surface area of a sphere with an equal volume by the particle surface area. That is: shape factor or sphericity degree (dimensionless) surface area of the sphere with an equal volume (m surface area of the particle (m Among the different shapes of particles with equal volumes, a sphere has the smallest surface area. Thus, for spherical particles, It is observed under the microscope that waste PCB metal particles in the range of 0.1–0.6 The empirical drag coefficients of non-spherical particles are shown in Under the experimental condition, the calculated Reynolds number is between 2 and 210 and 100 is taken approximately. Therefore, the drag coefficient can be obtained in From Eq. From Eq. The real air fluidized bed separation of particles is quite complex; thus, the following assumptions were made to facilitate the model development: The airflow velocity inside the fluidized bed is uniformly distributed, and the wall effect is negligible. The investigated subjects are dual-component (metal and nonmetallic) particles with a single particle size of d The voidage is uniform inside the fluidized bed.  Where: With Eq. Considering the moment when the non-metallic particle reaches the discharge point, where the local bed voidage is approximately 1, the velocity of the non-metallic particle is the terminal velocity u When the airflow velocity is lower than u When the airflow velocity is higher than u Nonmetallic quantity: Metal quantity: Metal yield: When the airflow velocity is higher than u The quantity of metal inside the fluidized bed is: The yield can therefore be defined as: When the airflow velocity is higher than u Therefore: In the separation analysis of the dual-component gas–solid fluidized bed presented in the previous section, it is assumed that the airflow velocity inside the fluidized bed is uniformly distributed, and the wall effect is negligible. This means that the airflow velocity is the same in the radial dimension, but this is not observed in reality. Due to retardation of the pipe wall, airflow velocity is the highest at the axis of the fluidized bed and decreases gradually radially, reaching zero at the pipe wall. Therefore, the velocity at and around the axis of the fluidized bed is higher than the average velocity used in the mathematical calculations. Hence, the radial distribution of the airflow velocity should be taken into account in the mathematical calculations. At the cross section of the fluidized bed, the gas velocity is higher than the average velocity around the axis. Therefore, when the airflow velocity is still lower than the average gas velocity, non-metallic particles have already begun to fly out of the fluidized bed and air separation has started in the area around the axis. In For a single component flow in the turbulent model, there is a method to calculate the velocity of flow in the radial dimension, as presented in Engineering Fluid Mechanics The equation is: In Eq. According to Eq. At the same time, according to Eq. Eqs. In the experimental conditions, the Reynolds number Re Eq.  Regarding the metal grade, as shown in In the calculated results for feed volumes of 50 Although the actual shape of metal and nonmetallic particles are considered, some characteristics of non-metallic particles can impact the terminal velocity further. Under a microscope, it can be observed that nonmetallic particles do not have a neat edge but are covered with many tiny burrs. This will result in a higher drag coefficient, and from Eq. In the mathematical analysis, the assumption is made that experimental particles are of a single particle size, i.e., d However, as shown in  As shown in A good separation result is characterized by a significant increase in the metal grade with a high yield. From As comminuting PCBs into fine particles such as 0.125–0.2  As shown in The cause of this phenomenon is that at a particular airflow velocity, the lower part of the fluidized bed is a dense-phase zone with a higher particle concentration, while the upper part is a dilute-phase zone where the particle concentration is lower. The interface between the dilute and dense phases rises with the increase of air velocity. When the discharge point height is varying above this interface, it will not impact the grade and yield much because in the upper part of the bed, the voidage is high and the particle density is low. Conversely, when the discharge point is varying below the interface, it will result in a significant impact on the grade and yield. For any fluidized bed, this interface can be obtained by plotting the experimental data and can act as an important engineering guide for design and operation, e.g., in selecting the proper height of the discharging point. In this paper, the air separation of metal and nonmetallic particles of waste PCBs using a fluidized bed was mathematically analyzed, and the particle shape factor and airflow velocity radial distribution were considered. The corresponding experiments were performed. The calculated and experimental results were compared in the metal grade and yield trends at different feed volumes, particle sizes, and discharge heights. The experiment results were in good agreements with the calculated metal grades but not with the yields. Both calculated and experimental results show that the feed volume must be chosen to avoid entrainment becoming prominent, proper size of particle and discharge height should be chosen for good separation results. By plotting the experimental data, this study can be used to determine the operating airflow velocity and select the proper feed volume, particle size to be comminuted, and discharging point for any fluidized bed for PCB particle air separation. Therefore, this study can be used as a guide for the engineering design and operating configuration of air separation for waste PCB particles. This work is supported by the