In this work, the hydrophobic agglomeration of apatite fines induced by sodium oleate in aqueous solutions has been investigated through the measurement of agglomeration degree and fractal dimension. The results showed that the agglomeration degree of apatite fines and agglomerates morphology was strongly depended on sodium oleate concentration, pH, stirring speed and time. Better agglomeration degree and more regular agglomerates were achieved at sodium oleate concentration of 5 × 10−5 mol/L under neutral condition. The critical stirring speed for agglomerates rupture was 1000 rev/min, above which, prolonged stirring time would cause breakage and restructure of the agglomerates after a certain stirring time, resulting in lower agglomeration degree and more regular agglomerates. The agglomeration degree of apatite fines could be greatly enhanced with the addition of emulsified kerosene, but only if the apatite surface was hydrophobic enough.Phosphorus is a vital raw material mainly consumed in fertilizer industry Flotation is used as the principal method to concentrate the phosphate bearing mineral, which accounts for more than half of world’s phosphate production In hydrophobic agglomeration, several parameters significantly influence the agglomeration behavior, namely, the hydrophobicity of the particles, the stirring strength, non-polar oil addition. It was found that the more hydrophobic the particle surface, the better the agglomeration degree, and less kinetic energy needed to achieve the same level of agglomeration degree As the increasing demand for food and continuously diminishing of phosphate grades of ores, it is imperative to treat the large quantity of apatite fines discarded. Hydrophobic agglomeration is a promising method which has been tested on particle fines such as galena, sphalerite, silica, hematite molybdenite and coal The pure mineral samples of apatite used in this study were obtained from the Madagascar, Africa. The samples were firstly crushed by hammer, followed by handpicking with the help of microscope, and then were ground in a ceramic ball mill to obtain a 100 wt% passing 38 µm. Analytical grade sodium oleate, sodium hydroxide and hydrochloric acid purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd, China were utilized in the experiments. Deionized water was used throughout all the experiments. Kerosene was added in the form of oil emulsion, which was prepared in the following procedure. The kerosene-water mixture (1 g kerosene and 80 ml distilled water) was first mechanically conditioned by high speed mixer at 12,000 rev/min for 10 min, then it was treated ultrasonically through an ultrasonic cleaner for 15 min. The hydrophobic agglomeration of apatite fines in aqueous solutions was conducted in a sealed 9.5 × 9.5 cm cylinder tank with four baffles of 8.2 × 0.95 cm. A six-blade and disk-mounted impeller connected to the mixer was positioned at 3 cm height of the tank bottom for slurry stirring. 1.5 g apatite sample with 620 ml water was first dispersed with magnetic stirrer for 5 min, while a give dosage of sodium oleate and HCl or NaOH solution was added. Then the suspension was dispersed by ultrasonic cleaner for 5 min. After that, the suspension was transferred into the stirring tank to be conditioned at a given speed for a given time. During the stirring, 30 ml of suspension was carefully taken out from the tank at given time intervals using a 5 mm diameter of Eppendorf pipette. It has been demonstrated that the pipette didn’t damage the agglomerate if its opening was more than 2 mm. Moreover, the agglomerates formed in hydrophobic agglomeration were very strong against rupture. Therefore, the disruption of the agglomerates could be negligible. The samples were collected for turbidity measurement and imaging immediately. Once the agglomerated suspension was taken out from the stirring tank, the turbidity of the suspension was measured by WTW Turb 555 IR turbidimeter off-line immediately, the agglomeration efficiency of the apatite fines was evaluated by agglomeration degree ( A drop of apatite suspension was carefully dropped on a flat glass slide, and then was observed by using Olympus optical microscope equipped with a digital camera. Images were recorded under the magnification of 100 and the same illumination. 20 digital images were acquired for each sample. The images were calibrated by using a slide marked at know intervals, and the number of pixels between two marks corresponding to a calibrate distance was recorded. The digital image analysis was carried out by using NI Vision assistant 2014. The cross-sectional projected area and perimeter of the agglomerates was measured. Before the measurement, the pixel values recorded in the original agglomerates images were first calibrated to appropriate length scale and these images were converted to RGB image into grey level images. The quality of gray images was then enhanced through the filtering function of the software. Once the digital images were improved, the threshold function of the software was used to separate particles from background and to filter out particles that not well focused. In addition, it should be pointed out that only the morphology of agglomerates was calculated, while un-agglomerated particles and boundary agglomerates were removed from the image by utilizing the function of removing small particles and removing boundary particles, respectively. In this work, the concept of average fractal dimension was used to evaluate quantitatively the morphology of irregular agglomerates. It was expressed as follow In order to obtain the fractal dimension of agglomerates, the results of the cross sectional area and perimeter of each agglomerate was used. First, the plot of logP vs. logA was established, then, a linear regression analysis was applied to the scattered point, from which the slope of the fitting line was obtained. The value of fractal dimension could be obtained by using the value of the slope according to Eq.  Hydrophobic agglomeration depends on the hydrophobicity of particle surfaces, higher hydrophobicity leads to better agglomeration degree and more regular agglomerates. The variation of agglomeration degree could be explained in terms of adsorption of sodium oleate on apatite surface. At low concentration, sodium oleate adsorbed on apatite surface as monolayer, so the apatite particles became more hydrophobic as the increase of sodium oleate concentration. However, the surface was saturated at about 5 × 10  The adsorption behavior of sodium oleate on apatite surface is influenced significantly by pH because it determines not only the solubility of apatite in solution but also the species distribution of sodium oleate in solutions. Species distribution diagram of sodium oleate as a function of pH at initial sodium oleate concentration of 5 × 10 The adsorption of sodium oleate on apatite surface mainly involved two different mechanisms: (1) chemisorption that resulted from the direct interaction between one oleate ion with one calcium site on the apatite surface to form calcium oleate. In this case, the adsorption of oleate relied on the oleate ions concentration and calcium sites on apatite surface; (2) surface precipitation and bulk precipitation whereby one Ca In this case, at pH 2, due to rapid dissociation of calcium from apatite surface and low C    It is clear that big differences existed between the agglomeration behaviors of apatite fines at the stirring speed of 1300 rev/min compared to that at the stirring speed of 800 rev/min. Although under both conditions, the hydrophobic agglomeration processes were dominated mainly by agglomeration formation mechanism before the first 3 min, agglomerates disruption occurred at the stirring speed of 1300 rev/min after the first 3 min, represented by the slightly declined agglomeration degree and fractal dimension for the stirring time of 5 min. As proposed by other authors   The agglomeration degree of apatite fines and agglomerates morphology was strongly dependent on sodium oleate concentration and the pH. Bigger agglomeration degree and more regular agglomerates were obtained at the sodium oleate concentration of 5 × 10 The hydrophobic agglomeration of apatite fines was closely correlated with the stirring speed and time. The critical stirring speed where agglomerates rupture effect dominated was 1000 rev/min, below which, prolonged stirring time didn’t influence neither the agglomeration degree of apatite fines nor the agglomerates morphology after a certain stirring time. While at higher stirring speed, prolonged stirring time would resulted in lower agglomeration degree and more regular agglomerates after a certain stirring time. The agglomeration degree of apatite fines could be greatly enhanced with the addition of kerosene, but only under the conditions where the apatite surface was hydrophobic enough. The financial support for this work from the