This paper investigates the substitutability between energy and capital in the manufacturing sectors of ten OECD countries since 1980 by applying a cost function approach that has been widely used to analyze industrial energy demand. First, we attempt to determine the source of the disagreement in the literature on the substitutability between energy and capital and reach a conclusion regarding the substitutability between energy and capital. Dividing energy and capital into sub-inputs, we analyze their substitutability. The empirical results indicate that fuel tends to complement capital in most countries, whereas electricity and capital are substitutes. Thus, this study confirms that heterogeneity in energy sources is a primary component of the systematic variation in the substitutability between energy and capital. Second, we examine asymmetric substitutability between energy and capital by estimating the Morishima elasticity of substitution. The estimates of the Morishima elasticity of substitution demonstrate that the substitution of energy for capital has dominated the substitution of capital for energy. This asymmetric substitutability is natural from the producer perspective because capital costs are much greater than energy costs in most countries. These results imply that the adoption of energy-saving technologies has not been induced in response to increased energy prices.Since the seminal study by There are two primary issues concerning substitutability between energy and capital. The first issue is whether energy and capital are substitutes for one another in the real economy. If so, capital purchases may reduce energy demand; if not, capital purchases will not guarantee a reduction in energy demand. Although many studies have investigated this issue, they have often arrived at contradictory answers to the question of whether energy and capital are substitutes or complements ( This study conducts an in-depth analysis of these two issues. Applying a cost function approach and utilizing data from 1980 onward, we analyze the substitutability between energy and capital within the manufacturing sectors of each of the following ten OECD countries: Australia, Austria, Denmark, Finland, Italy, Japan, (Republic of) Korea, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom (UK), and the United States (US). In this manner, we attempt to determine the source of the disagreement concerning the substitutability between energy and capital in previous studies and to generalize about the substitutability between energy and capital. We also examine the potential for asymmetric substitutability between energy and capital by estimating the Morishima elasticity of substitution (MES) for each country in our study. Utilizing these results, we derive policy implications for inducing the adoption of energy-saving technologies. Discussions concerning the first issue, whether energy and capital are substitutes or complements, began with Assumptions regarding input factors have been considered as potential source of this disagreement on substitutability ( Few studies have discussed the second issue, i.e., asymmetric substitutability, because most studies have focused on substitutability itself based on the estimated symmetric elasticity of substitution. Asymmetric substitutability between energy and capital is relevant to a producer's decision-making on capital purchases. Following This paper proceeds as follows. A cost function approach is a commonly applied means of analyzing industrial energy demand using an econometric methodology. Since the study of A non-homothetic cost function with non-neutral technical change is written as: For the purposes of estimation, a flexible functional form that imposes no a priori restrictions on the elasticities of substitution, i.e., a second-order approximation of the cost function, is employed for the approximation of Here, a symmetry condition is imposed by setting Here, Because of the adding-up conditions shown in Eq. Using the parameter estimates of Eq. The MES was developed independently by The MES measures the percentage change in the ratio of the The MES is sign asymmetric, and determining whether the inputs are substitutes or complements depends on which input price changes. That is, the MES can measure the asymmetric substitutability between two inputs, allowing us to determine whether the primary relationship is characterized by substitutability or complementarity. In general, studies concerning the substitutability between energy and capital have considered four inputs, such as capital, labor, energy, and materials ( First, we divide capital into capital that increases electricity demand (EK capital, Second, we divide energy into electricity (  To provide a generalized discussion of the two issues mentioned in Data for the cost shares for the five inputs In particular, we conducted the following two procedures to derive a fuel price index, which aggregates the prices of heterogeneous energy sources. First, we obtained the prices and quantities of coal, oil, and natural gas. The annual prices of the three energy sources were taken from The system of cost share equations shown in Eq. First, in general, the most price-responsive input is capital that increases electricity demand (EK capital). The magnitude of the own-price elasticities for EK capital are the smallest among the five inputs within the manufacturing sectors of Australia, Denmark, Italy, Korea, the Netherlands, the UK, and the US. In Austria and Finland, the own-price elasticity for EK capital is the second smallest. In addition, the sign of the own-price elasticities for EK capital is significantly negative in every country analyzed. Thus, it is likely that increases in the EK capital price always yield decreases in its own demand. This indicates that the manufacturing sector responds rather sensitively to changes in the EK capital price. Second, in general, the least price-responsive input is fuel. The own-price elasticities for fuel are the greatest, except for Korea and the UK, and are all positive, except for Australia and Korea. Even in the UK, it is the second largest own-price elasticity and positive. Taken together, these results indicate that fuel demand has increased even when its price has increased. That is, the law of demand is not strictly followed in fuel demand. These results can be explained by the argument in Third, most estimates of Fourth, the estimates of Fifth, we note the positive estimates of Sixth, all of the estimates of Seventh, the significant estimates of Eighth, the absolute values of most of the elasticity estimates are smaller than 1, meaning that the input demands exhibit inelastic responses to changes in their prices. There are exceptions. The estimates of From the above results, we can discern a reason why the previous literature has disagreed on “the energy–capital hypothesis”. The substitution of capital inputs for energy or vice versa does not substantially differ across capital types. However, the substitution of energy inputs for capital or vice versa differs by energy type. Specifically, the two capital inputs tend to act as substitutes for electricity demand, whereas they tend to act as complements for fuel demand. Thus, we find that heterogeneity in energy sources is a major source of systematic variation in the substitutability between energy and capital. Our estimates of the Morishima elasticity of substitution (MES) indicate that, since 1980, energy tends to substitute for capital but capital does not substitute for energy, particularly not for fuel, in the manufacturing sectors of the analyzed countries. To illustrate this asymmetry more clearly, we present the MES estimates between energy inputs and capital inputs in Applying In fact, these results reflect the difference in durability between energy inputs and capital inputs. The capital stock and its characteristics are fixed in the short-run but variable in the long-run ( In this context, our results of asymmetric substitutability between energy and capital provide an interesting intuition. We show that the substitution of energy for capital dominates the substitution of capital for energy, even though energy price increases are greater than capital price increases in the long run. That is, a producer's decision on capital purchases does not seem to help to reduce energy consumption, although he or she can take long-run energy price expectations into account. These results imply that despite expecting rapid energy price increases in the long-run, energy costs only play a modest role in producer decision-making. This producer decision-making behavior is reinforced by the report of The asymmetric substitutability between energy and capital that we found contradicts the results of Our results are applicable to establishing policies for industrial energy-saving. Based on the asymmetric substitutability in this study, it is hard to expect the substitution of capital for energy when energy prices more rapidly increase than capital prices. In other words, it is unlikely that capital purchases that contribute to reducing energy consumption will be made in response to increases in energy prices. Therefore, energy pricing that aims to reduce energy demand by increasing the price of energy may not promote the adoption of energy-saving capital inputs. This implication also corresponds to various studies on the effect of capital investment at the industry level ( This paper analyzes the substitutability between energy and capital using data from 1980 onward from the manufacturing sectors of 10 OECD countries. To determine the general and asymmetric substitutability between energy and capital, we consider the source of the disagreements in the previous studies on the substitutability between energy and capital, i.e., the input factors considered and the directions of substitutability between them. We considered five input factors, capital that increases electricity demand (EK capital), capital that does not increase electricity demand (NK capital), electricity, fuel, and the aggregate of labor and material (LM input). The Morishima elasticity of substitution (MES) is utilized to measure asymmetric interfactor substitution. To discover the source of the disagreement in previous studies on the substitutability between energy and capital, we divide capital and energy into sub-inputs. The empirical results indicate that both electricity and fuel substitute for NK capital and EK capital in most of the countries analyzed. Moreover, the substitution of EK capital and NK capital for electricity is dominant across the ten countries. However, in most cases, both EK capital and NK capital tend to complement fuel. That is, we showed that the disagreement over the substitutability between energy and capital results from heterogeneity in energy sources. This aspect of the debate has been referenced in the literature ( In addition, the MES estimates indicate asymmetric substitution between energy and capital; the substitution of energy for capital dominates the substitution of capital for energy despite that energy prices have increased to a greater extent than capital prices. We believe that this dominant substitution of energy for capital is natural from the perspective of a producer because, in most countries, capital costs are much higher than energy costs. These results confirm that the substitutability between energy and capital does not always imply the application of energy-saving technologies through capital purchases. Furthermore, our results suggest that energy pricing does not guarantee the immediate adoption of energy-efficient technologies. Combining our results with the discussions contained in prior studies on energy-saving policy options ( The results of this study may be reinforced by further study along the following lines. Because we assume that all input levels are variable, short- and long-run substitutability in response to changes input prices are mixed in our results. If the assumption of variability of input levels is alleviated, more accurate long- and short-run responses can be derived, separately. In addition, this study does not clearly reveal the differences in substitutability by capital type. The reason is that it is difficult to classify capital assets based on actual energy use because of data limitations. If capital assets are divided according to their energy consumption characteristics, the source of the disagreement over the substitutability between energy and capital will be more clear.  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at