The precipitation of metals from a synthetic laterite leach solution was studied within the pH range of 4–7 at 40°C with MgO and NaOH as neutralisation reagents. It was found that the precipitation order was Cr(III)>Al(III)>Cu(II)>Fe(III) as pH below 4.5, and the order changed to Cr(III)∼Fe(III)>Al(III)>Cu(II) as pH above 4.5. The precipitation of chromium was almost complete (<0.2mg/L) and only about 1mg/L Al remained in the neutralised solution at pH 5.2. The precipitation of iron was almost complete (<0.2mg/L) when the pH was 5.6, and the precipitation of copper and zinc was almost complete (<0.2mg/L) only at pH 7.0. It was found that nickel and cobalt were present in the precipitate even at a low pH of 4, which was much lower than their precipitation pH of 7.0. The presence of nickel and cobalt in the precipitate was assumed in two chemical forms, one as sulphate resulting from chemical adsorption, which is predominant below pH 5.7; and also as the hydroxide which resulted from co-precipitation and is predominant above pH 5.7. No significant precipitation was observed for manganese, magnesium and calcium within the pH range of 4.0–7.0.Nickel from laterite ore sources accounts for about 40% of primary production. They also represent an important source of cobalt. The recovery of nickel and cobalt from laterite ores has become more important in recent years due to the increase in nickel consumption ( CaO or MgO can be applied in the industry to pre-neutralise laterite leach solution before nickel and cobalt refining ( The synthetic pre-neutralised laterite leach solution was prepared by dissolving analytical grade sulphate salts of iron(III), aluminium(III), chromium(III), copper(II), nickel(II), cobalt(II), manganese(II), zinc(II) and magnesium(II) in deionised water, except for calcium(II) and silicon(IV), for which calcium chloride and sodium silicate was dissolved, respectively. The solution pH was adjusted to 3.05. The chemical composition of the synthetic solution is shown in In each precipitation test, 500 Light MgO (analytical grade) was used as a neutralisation reagent when the pH was lower than 5.5. Analytical grade NaOH was dissolved in deionised water to obtain 2.5 The dried samples were weighed on an analytical balance with the accuracy of ± The pre-neutralised synthetic laterite solution was further neutralised with MgO when the pH was below 5.5 and with the 2.5 The changes in concentrations of metals with equilibrium pH are shown in Based on the metal concentrations in the solution after precipitation with various equilibrium pH values at which metal precipitation formed, the apparent solubility products (p The contents of the metals and SO The quantity of total solids increased rapidly with increasing pH. The quantity of iron, aluminium and chromium did not increase significantly due to their less amount in the original solutions. The amount of nickel in the solids largely increased with increasing pH. For example, the amount of nickel increased from 6.3 A considerable amount of SO The precipitations of metals including iron, aluminium and chromium increased with the increasing pH up to pH 5.2. The concentrations of iron and chromium in the solution were less than the detection limit of 0.2 The high level of SO From Based on the assumption that manganese, magnesium and calcium were only present as their sulphates in the precipitate, and nickel and cobalt presented as both sulphates and hydroxides up to pH 6.5 ( The precipitation behaviour of metals of interest in a synthetic laterite leach solution was studied within the pH range of 4 to7 at 40 The authors would like to thank Dr Matthew Jeffrey for reviewing this paper and providing valuable comments. The support of the Parker CRC for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions (established and supported under the Australian Government's Cooperative Research Centres Program) is gratefully acknowledged.