The synthesis of a new series of bolaform- and gemini-type phosphorus acid surfactants is described. The Pudovik addition reaction of P–H bond tetraoxyspirophosphoranes to symmetrical, prochiral bis-imines bearing different more or less long and rigid linkers occurs instantaneously at room temperature. This reaction is diastereoselective and quantitatively leads to the corresponding alkyl-bis-[α-aminospirophosphoranes] in good to high diastereomeric ratio. Selective and one-pot hydrolysis of these P∗–C∗ bond bis-spirophosphoranes can be readily achieved either at room temperature by moist solvents giving the corresponding alkyl-bis-[α-aminophosphonocarboxylic acid] amphiphiles, or by a more drastic reaction of 20% aqueous hydrochloric acid under reflux affording free alkyl-bis-[α-aminophosphonic acid] surfactants in good yields.During the last decades much work has been done to study properties and functions of natural membranes. The aim of the present work was to find an efficient method for the preparation of bolaform- and gemini-type phosphorus acid surfactants. We have recently described the synthesis of new (α-hydroxyalkyl)- and (α-aminoalkyl)-phosphinic and phosphonic acid amphiphiles by Pudovik addition reaction of the P–H-labile phosphorus derivatives on long-chain aldehydes and imines, respectively. The basic synthetic strategy was first to prepare the diimines Diimines will be the skeleton of the hydrophobic linkers. With the aim to prepare bolaforms, three diimines have been synthetized by condensation of benzaldehyde with α,ω-diamines (flexible linkers), In the case of the diimine All these diimines The addition reaction of two equivalents of spirophosphorane As observed for single chain (α-aminoalkyl)spirophosphoranes, We have already described the selective hydrolysis of the P-C-spirophosphorane derivatives in the case of single-chain surfactants. The reaction occurs instantaneously at room temperature for compounds Obtention of polyfunctional bipolar surfactants Treatment of alkyl-bis-[(α-amino)phosphonocarboxylic acids]  This degradation could be surprising because ether cleavage usually requires more drastic conditions and the use of concentrated solutions of HI or HBr. However, hydrolysis of alkylarylethers with HBr in phase transfer catalysis (PTC) conditions or more recently by concentrated aqueous HCl in the presence of cationic surfactants (micellar catalysis) has been described. Synthesis of variously substituted bolaform- and gemini-type alkyl-bis(α-amino-phosphonic acid) surfactants and their monoesters can be readily performed by diastereoselective addition of P–H bond spirophosphoranes to the corresponding bis-imine precursors, followed by selective one-pot hydrolysis of the bis-spirophosphorane intermediates containing two P NMR spectra were obtained with Brucker AC200 or 250WM spectrometers. IR spectra were recorded on a Perkin–Elmer FT/IR-1600. Mass spectra were recorded on a Nermag R10-10H by chemical ionization (DCI/NH Benzaldehyde, α,α′- In order to readily interpret the Dry potassium carbonate (1.45 Benzaldehyde (2.12 Yellow oil (2.66 Yellow solid (2.72 Yellow solid (3.53 The same protocol that for the diimines ( White solid (1.90 Diimine     Diimine White solid (2.55 Pale yellow solid (2.95 Beige solid (2.35 Pale yellow solid (3.94 Their synthesis can be achieved either by acid hydrolysis of alkyl-bis-[carboxyisobutyl-(α-amino) phosphonic acid monoesters]   When this procedure was applied to compound White solid (0.41 White solid (0.53 Beige solid (0.68