The leaching of phosphate ores in acid medium is widely practiced in the chemical fertilizers industry. Several processes can take place in the reactor and the quantitative modeling of the reaction kinetics or thermodynamics is essential for the design and dimensioning of the industrial equipments. The aim of the present study is to develop a mathematical model to describe the behavior of phosphate particles into acidic solution under certain conditions. A new formalism based on the Noyes-Whitney equation (NWE) is presented in this paper. In this approach, simplified Lucas-Washburn's equation (LWE) is incorporated to evaluate the progression of reaction zone into the mesoporous phosphate rock. The reliability and validity of this new approach are tested on a large database. Results show that the model is predictive in the case of a solid dissolution without ash film and non predictive in the case of solid leaching with formation of a rushed in the mesoporous area follows. Furthermore, the values and physical significance of the parameters of this model are also discussed in the present work.To describe and predict certain physical phenomena that occur during leaching of solids into reactive medium, researchers and engineers propose numerical approaches. Such a mathematical formalism has the advantages of reducing the number of experiments, understanding mechanisms derived from internal changes in the reactive solid and determining the limiting step of the reaction. Recently, an exhaustive study on various solid-liquid models has been performed ( Over last years this integral equation has been widely used to describe the dissolution behavior of drugs ( Whenever the chemical reaction at the interface is fast, the liquid film reaches saturation immediately and the limiting step will be the diffusion through the liquid film to the liquid bulk phase. The major assumptions in NWE is that the surface area term remains constant throughout dissolution process and the solid-liquid interface reaches saturation concentration almost immediately. The concentration of dissolved substance at a given time can be obtained by integrating the NWE at  On the other hand, the movement of reaction zone especially in porous media did not receive much attention from researchers. To characterize the porous solid, Lucas-Washburn Equation (LWE) can be used to study the kinetic of liquid rise within the pore spaces ( The production of wet phosphoric acid from raw phosphate and acidic solution –production of fertilizers- can be considered as an interesting and relevant example of solid-liquid reactions encountered in industry. The main step in this process is the reaction between the phosphate particle and the acidic solution. Thereby, a detailed understanding of the reaction kinetics and thermodynamics in the reactor is crucial for optimizing new or already existing plants and processes. Moreover, nowadays the global demand for phosphate fertilizers has increased and the industrialists are called to exploit more quantities of minerals to satisfy this demand. In the past, some physical modeling approaches have been proposed in this regard ( In general, the lixiviation of phosphate particle in acid solution can be represented by one of the following equations: In phosphoric acid ( In mixture HCl/HOCl-i.e.- Cl In sulfuric acid H The paper proposes a mathematical model for acidic phosphate leaching based on NWE and incorporating LWE to describe the movement of reaction zone through the porous core of raw phosphate particle. This approach will be tested on different database. The extent of dissolution, α represents the converted amount of the sample at time, t, is defined in terms of the change in mass of the sample as follow: An arbitrary constant volume of interface, V The saturation concentration is defined according to this volume and the residual mass of the solid as following: The concentration of the dissolved substance is given by: Substuting Eqs. Rearrangement of Eq. The thickness, δ of the stagnant liquid film is given by the LWE, Eq. Eq. By denoting Eq. With the following conditions: The parameters are obtained by minimizing the sum of squares of the errors between the data and the model result. For this purpose, the software SOLVER program used with Microsoft Excel is employed. The objective function is given by the following equation: And the root mean square error (percentage deviation) function is calculated using: The iterative algorithm used for estimating the parameter vector is shown in The study has used multiple database sources and their conditions, which are summarized in The following assumptions are made for the model dissolution system: Internal diffusion of Ca Dissolution reaction is irreversible and instantaneous. Concentration of dissolved substance is homogeneous in the bulk medium. Particle size does not change during the dissolution at least until α = 50% as seen in The model Eq. The solid lines represent model prediction and the symbols are the experimental data. However, the predictions of Eq. The final values of adjusted parameters (a and b) are given in From In this study, pore diffusion model was proposed to describe the dissolution of phosphate rock into acidic solutions. The thickness of the reaction zone estimated by the modified Washburn's equation was introduced in the classical diffusion model equation. Close agreement between the prediction of the new model and experimental database is obtained. As a result, this new model is also predictive when the pores are clogged following a deposit of solid product. In conclusion, this approach will serve as a useful tool to provide a descriptive overview of the dissolution reaction zone of many porous reactive solids.  surface area, m parameter of Eq. parameter of Eq. diffusion coefficient, m mass fraction, dimensionless iteration number Molar mass, kg/mol mass of solid, kg number of dissolution data radius of pore, m root mean square error factor shape reaction time, s Volume, m  dissolution extent, dimensionless dimensionless number film thickness-zone reaction depth, m convergence value test dynamic viscosity of the liquid, N·s/m Contact angle,deg surface tension, N/m  calculated experimental unstirred liquid film dissolved substance residual initial solid58