This work summarises results of microbubble dispersion parameters in a controlled laboratory system. The effects of the temperature and frother concentration (MIBC) on the gas holdup (εg
                     ), superficial area flow density (Sb
                     ), superficial air velocity (Jg
                     ), bubble Sauter diameter (d
                     32) and air liberation efficiency were studied. The results obtained with natural water show that (a) increasing the temperature from 10 to 30°C significantly increased the bubble Sauter diameter from 80 to 150μm, improving the air liberation (bubble formation) and (b) increasing the superficial air velocity from 0.01 to 0.06cm/s enhanced the air holdup from 0.4% to 1.8%, the Sauter diameter from 60 to 120μm and the bubble surface area flux from 5 to 25s−1. The experimental results also showed that frother addition (MIBC) reduced the Sauter diameter, while increasing all other variables.In the last few decades, the use of microbubbles that are generated by depressurisation of dissolved air in water (DAF) has attracted interest due to its possible applications. In particular, in the mineral and liquid effluents treatments, and especially for the flotation of fine particle sizes ( For efficient mineral flotation recovery of coarse and fine particles, there must be an optimal bubble size and bubble size distribution whereby the number of particles “captured” by bubbles reaches a maximum ( According to some authors ( Conversely, the use of flotation is showing great potential in effluent treatment due to the high throughput of modern equipment, low sludge generation and the high efficiency of the separation schemes already available. Examples can be found in the treatment of contaminated water (oils, pigments, heavy metals removal), in the recovery of proteins, sugar impurities, inks and resins, as well as in microorganism separation and the treatment of sewage and sludge, turbidity, colour, suspended solids, and micro-organisms ( The micro-bubble generation equipment is well described in several papers ( Bubbles are formed by a reduction in pressure of water that has been pre-saturated with air and occurs at pressures higher than atmospheric. The supersaturated water is forced through needle valves or special orifices and clouds of bubbles 0.02–0.1 A disadvantage of the DAF process is the high cost of water saturation required for bubble formation. However, it has been shown that bubble generation is possible at working pressures lower than 3 These results were explained as cavity formation occurring as a result of a minimum energy, Δ Thus, less energy is required to generate micro-bubbles with a lower air/liquid interfacial tension, or with greater pressure differences between the liquid phase and atmosphere. Accordingly, in reducing Under light turbulent conditions, Another effect of the surfactant is the diminution of coalescence and the increase in the superficial area. However, not all surfactants prevent coalescence. An example is the use of non-ionic surfactants (commonly used as deformers), which are used to avoid bubble surface area generation ( The nucleation of air may be homogeneous or heterogeneous. In the case of homogeneous nucleation, the air nucleation around the molecular cavities precedes micro-bubble formation, and may be favoured by the presence of high concentrations of gas close to this cavity. Commonly, heterogeneous nucleation is present on the surface of the constrictor because the surface of the needle valve serves as a site for air nucleation. Additionally, the presence of particles favours air nucleation. In the last decade, the froth flotation industry has used a variety of sensors to evaluate the aeration quality of their processes. Conventional bubble sizes are used (500–2500  Gas holdup is the volume percentage or volume fraction of air within the collection zone. The experimental setup was composed of two principal parts: the air-saturation water reactor and the flotation column. The saturation reactor was made of polyvinyl chloride (PVC, 80; 30 To facilitate bubble visualisation, the experimental program was conducted with a biphasic system (air–water), and eventually with an aqueous solution with MIBC surfactant. This solution was agitated for 5 An important part of the experimental setup is the image acquisition system, composed of a digital camera equipped with a macro lens (1–5×) and a peephole placed at the centre of the collection zone to visualise the micro-bubbles. Even if the peephole is a small device, its proper functioning determines whether correct measurements of the bubble diameters can be obtained. To remove the adhered bubbles on the surface of the sampling window, a water jet was eventually injected. The peephole was inclined 20° with respect to the vertical plane, which made it possible to order the rising bubbles in a visual plane, increasing the image quality. Measurements of the bubble diameters were made with ImageJ® software, which was programmed with a macro-program to handle and process the images. ImageJ is a free and versatile program package for image processing and manipulation that runs under Java. To obtain reliable results, several steps must be followed: (1) calibration of the image magnification, (2) finding a threshold for the image, and (3) analysis of the particles. To calibrate the software, a thin wire made of stainless steel (0.3 The software reports a list of computed objects (bubbles) and their corresponding diameters. This software makes it possible to select the bubbles that will be measured and that satisfy the restrictions defined by the user (threshold sphericity, minimum and maximum size, etc.). The software also shows a mask of the photograph, indicating the computed bubbles with filled circles. Once each arithmetical bubble diameter (    The temperature and superficial air velocity increased the bubble size, as shown in    As shown in Also, it is observed that the effect of the frother is more significant at minor temperature. Thus, when the temperature was 10  Summarising, gas dispersion parameters were measured in a system with microbubbles in water only, as a part of a series on flotation of fine minerals with small bubbles (currently undergoing in our laboratory. It is believed that with the knowledge of these values, especially by enhancing the Microbubble dispersion parameters were measured in a well controlled laboratory system. Increasing the superficial air velocity from 0.01 to 0.06 The authors are grateful to CONACYT (Mexico) for the scholarship and financial support received.