Introduction
                  Orthodontic patients with malocclusion have significantly lower masticatory and gastrointestinal digestive function than persons with normal occlusion. Although several studies have suggested that masticatory function is improved after orthodontic treatment, the relationship between such improvement and change in gastrointestinal symptoms has not been quantitatively evaluated. In this study, we aimed to investigate the change in masticatory function and the gastric emptying rate in patients with malocclusion, before and after orthodontic treatment.
               
                  Methods
                  Seven women with malocclusion, before (pretreatment group) and after orthodontic treatment (posttreatment group), and 7 healthy dentate female volunteers (control group) underwent a 13C-acetate breath test (13CO2) with a liquid meal and the color changeable gum test, along with completing the frequency scale for symptoms of gastroesophageal reflux and a questionnaire on food intake. Between-group differences were evaluated.
               
                  Results
                  The pretreatment group had significantly longer maximum 13CO2 exhalation time and lower masticatory function, quantified using a higher red-color value on the gum test and the questionnaire on food intake, than did the posttreatment and control groups. No significant differences were identified between the posttreatment and the control groups.
               
                  Conclusions
                  We provide evidence of improvement of masticatory function after orthodontic treatment, which was associated with a faster rate of gastric emptying.In the oral cavity, food is processed into transportable and digestible pieces during mastication by the teeth. Simultaneously, the tongue and salivary glands moisten and lubricate the food particles and bind them into a coherent bolus that can be easily swallowed. Several studies have examined the relationship between mastication and digestion. Farrell Impairment of masticatory function in patients with malocclusion has been associated with higher rates of gastrointestinal tract symptoms. It is well known that orthodontic treatment can improve masticatory function. However, the relationship between orthodontic treatment and changes in gastrointestinal function has yet to be fully clarified. Therefore, we aimed to evaluate the change in gastrointestinal function, using the [ Seven Japanese women who visited the orthodontic clinic at Tokyo Medical and Dental University Dental Hospital for orthodontic treatment for malocclusion were randomly selected to form the malocclusion group. Prospective subjects were screened on the following inclusion criteria: 18 to 39 years old; normal body mass index (BMI); chief complaint of malocclusion, with a need for orthodontic treatment; no cleft lip or palate, or other craniofacial syndrome; no history of abdominal surgery; no use of medications, including gastrointestinal prokinetic agents, calcium antagonists, and selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors; absence of a current disease; no habitual heavy smoking or alcohol consumption; and no current or possible pregnancy. Based on these inclusion criteria, we recruited 7 subjects to form our malocclusion group, 26.7 ± 5.5 years old, with a BMI of 20.0 ± 2.9 kg per square meter. Using the same inclusion criteria, with the exception of the presence of malocclusion, 7 women were recruited to form the control group, 25.4 ± 1.0 years old, with a mean BMI of 19.2 ± 1.4 kg per square meter. Some subjects in our malocclusion and control groups were participating in another study. We chose to include only women in our study based on the findings of Hellmig et al Outcome variables were measured in the malocclusion group before the orthodontic treatment (pretreatment) and at 1 month after the end of active orthodontic treatment (posttreatment), with a duration of active orthodontic treatment of 28 ± 6.1 months. Outcomes were measured in the control group at 2 time points, 30 months apart. Measurements were taken as below, according to our previous study. Gastric emptying was assessed using the [ Masticatory function was assessed using color-changeable chewing gum (Masticatory Performance Evaluating Gum Xylitol; Lotte, Saitama, Japan; 70 × 20 × 1 mm, 3.0 g) and a self-report questionnaire on food intake. All subjects were instructed to chew the gum for 80 strokes, without restriction on chewing frequency. The gum was collected immediately after chewing and compressed with a thickness of 1.5 mm in a polyethylene film between 2 glass plates. The gum was then removed from the glass plates, and its color was measured through the polyethylene film at 5 points (at the center of the compressed gum and at approximately 3 mm above, below, and to the right and left) with a colorimeter (CR-13; Konica-Minolta, Tokyo, Japan). The CIE L*a*b* color system was used to record the color and, specifically, to measure the a* value representing the degree of red coloring. The questionnaire on food intake included 51 foods ( All subjects completed the FSSG, For the control group, values for all outcome variables obtained at the 2 time points of measurement were comparable; therefore, the mean value of the 2 measurements was used in the analysis. The Steel-Dwass test was used to evaluate between-group differences at the 2 time points of measurements for the malocclusion group: pretreatment/control and posttreatment/control. The Wilcoxon signed rank test was used to evaluate changes in gastric emptying rates, a*values, chewing difficulty score, and FSSG scores, before and after orthodontic treatment. All statistical analyses were performed using SPSS statistical software (version 20; IBM, Armonk, NY), with statistical significance established at a The classification of malocclusion (Angle Class I through Class III) for subjects who received active orthodontic treatment is summarized in The a*value was significantly lower for the pretreatment group (median, 16.3; range, 6.4-18.8) than the control group (median, 20; range, 17.8-27.0; Several techniques are currently available to assess digestive function, including esophageal pressure measurement, inspection of stomach secretions, gastric emptying rate test, measurement of gastroesophageal pH, diagnosis of The significant difference of maximum excretion time between the control and pretreatment groups disappeared after orthodontic treatment, with maximum excretion time significantly lower for the posttreatment than for the pretreatment groups. Moreover, the slope of the Evaluation of masticatory function using the color-changeable gum test confirmed a decline of masticatory function in patients with malocclusion, compared with the control group, with a significantly lower a*value for the pretreatment group than the control group. The improvement of masticatory function after orthodontic treatment was reflected in the significantly higher a*value at posttreatment than at pretreatment. The absence of differences in measured variables between the posttreatment and control groups indicates that masticatory function in subjects with malocclusion improved to the same level as the control group after orthodontic treatment. The timing of improvement of masticatory function after orthodontic treatment has been evaluated in several studies, with various timelines reported. As examples, Hirose et al According to a previous study using a questionnaire on food intake, patients with malocclusion reported remarkably high chewing difficulty scores, with difficulty in chewing various foods, compared with persons with normal occlusion. Although we used the FSSG to assess self-reported gastrointestinal symptoms, we identified the differences in FSSG scores between the pretreatment, posttreatment, and control groups. A previous study also did not identify a significant difference in FSSG scores among subjects with normal occlusion and those with malocclusion. This study had some limitations. First, it seems more reasonable and practical to require subjects to chew a solid food to test gastric emptying than a liquid meal to assess the daily masticatory and digestive function. However, when using solid food, breath samples need to be collected at 15-minute intervals over the 6-hour period postingestion because of the slower movement of solid food in the stomach. We provide evidence of improvement in masticatory function in subjects with malocclusion with an increase in gastric emptying rate after orthodontic treatment.