Part 1 of this study presented evidence of high voltage pulse (HVP) selective breakage induced by metalliferous grain-embedded synthetic particles in a two-particle system. However, in reality, there are multiple particles containing minerals of varying conductivity in a pulse treatment zone and questions remain as to how this type of situation affects the HVP breakage characteristics. Consequently, an experimental study was conducted in a three-particle treatment system, consisting of two mineralised particles embedded with metalliferous grains of different electrical conductivities and one barren particle with no metalliferous grain, subjected to one pulse loading. It was found that the electrical breakdown channel travels preferentially through the particles containing the highest conductivity minerals, resulting in a higher probability of selective breakage, a finer progeny size distribution and a greater energy transfer efficiency for these particles, but impairing the breakage probability of the particles containing the less conductive minerals. The presence of multiple mineralised particles in the pulse treatment zone reduces the probability of misclassification of the barren particles, which means it could enhance the waste rejection rate in a multiple-particle treatment configuration using HVP technology for ore pre-concentration.The literature has reported that the high voltage pulse (HVP) breakdown channel passes preferentially along the boundaries of minerals with different conductivities/permittivities within a mineralised particle, resulting in better mineral liberation and improved separation performance ( To understand the mechanisms of metalliferous grain-induced selective breakage between particles, a detailed study was conducted using synthetic particles containing various metalliferous minerals with higher electrical conductivity/permittivity than barren particles with the same mechanical properties (shape, size, mass, density and breakage strength). Part 1 of this study ( A question may be raised regarding the results obtained from the tests of two-particle paired configuration. In a multiple-particle treatment system in which more than one mineralised synthetic particle is presented, whether the increased number of metalliferous grains in the pulse treatment zone would enhance HVP selective breakage of the mineralised particles, or impair the HVP selectivity due to the competition between the mineralised particles to attract the domain electrical breakdown channel. Another question is related to the number of breakdown channels that can be generated with one pulse loading. These questions are particularly relevant to the potential application of the HVP pre-concentration technique in the mining industry, since multiple mineralised ore particles are expected to be presented simultaneously in the HVP treatment system to achieve the required throughput. Part 2 of this paper presents the outcomes of a study of the interactions between mineralised synthetic particles in a multiple-particle HVP treatment system. This section mainly introduces the experimental procedure and materials used in a series of three particle HVP tests. Since the results of the three-particle tests will be compared to results from two-particle tests previously presented in Part 1, a brief summary of the two-particle tests will also be provided for completeness. The same synthetic particles made of grout embedded with metalliferous mineral grains that were used in Part 1 of this study were utilised in Part 2. The synthetic particle casting procedures are described in Four types of mineral grains were used in the synthetic particle casting process: chalcopyrite, pyrite, magnetite and galena. A single grain (1.7–2.0 mm) of one mineral was embedded in each synthetic particle. The average mineral grade for a synthetic particle embedded with a single grain mineral is approximately 0.03% by volume, or 0.2% by mass. The four minerals used have different electrical properties compared to the major mineral species in the grout (quartz). To simplify the presentation of the results, single-letter codes were used to denote the synthetic particles embedded with the different mineral grains. Specifically, The HVP tests were conducted using the selFrag Lab equipment installed at the JKMRC. A schematic illustration of the set-up can be found in The experimental work in Part 2 was conducted with three synthetic particles presented together in the pulse treatment zone, either in a configuration of two particles embedded with different metalliferous grains and the third a barren particle with no metalliferous mineral grain embedded or with one pyrite-embedded particle grouped with two barren particles ( The particles were marked with different symbols: The electrodes and the particles of the designated configurations were immersed inside the processing vessel in deionised water. The electrical gap was kept at 30 mm and the applied voltage was set at 185 kV. These conditions were kept identical in both the Part 1 and Part 2 tests. For each set of particles, a single pulse was discharged and the spark energy was recorded from the selFrag Lab display panel. The recorded spark energy and the mean particle mass were used to calculate the specific energy, which will be presented in In Part 1 of this paper, only the particle pairs showing the expected selective breakage results, in which the mineralised particles were disintegrated and the barren particles remained largely intact, were selected for sizing analysis. Over 80% of the testing pairs showed the expected selective breakage trends and less than 20% of the tests were misclassified (both particles unbroken, both broken or the barren particle broken but the mineralised one unbroken). Since these misclassified particles were not generated from the genuine HVP selective breakage events, they were excluded from further analysis in order to demonstrate unambiguously the HVP selective breakage effect attributed to the metalliferous mineral grain-induced HVP breakage. The same method was applied in the three-particle tests presented in Part 2. As shown in Sizing involved placing the combined broken material associated with a particular type of synthetic particle in a set of sieves and sizing with a RO-TAP sieve shaker for 10 min. Screens used in the sieve series were 19 mm (just smaller than the parent size), 13.2 mm, 11.2 mm, 8 mm, 5.6 mm, 1.7 mm and 600 µm. It was demonstrated in Part 1 that, in a paired-particle treatment system with one mineralised particle and one barren particle, the discharge pulse will travel preferentially through the particle embedded with a metalliferous mineral. This study tests two sets of three-particle configurations, ( It is clear from It may also be seen that 13 Referring to the electrical properties of the minerals listed in   In contrast, the changes in the selective breakage probability for Another scenario of particle interactions was investigated to determine whether the number of barren particles affects the HVP breakage selectivity of mineralised particles. In a In summary, the breakage probability data suggest that a particle embedded with a mineral of higher electrical conductivity would have a greater propensity to attract electrical breakdown channels in the HVP treatment zone, resulting in a higher probability of selective breakage. This mechanism governs selective breakage in the two-particle system and can be applied in the multiple-particle system as well. When multiple mineralised particles are presented in the HVP treatment zone, the particle containing the mineral with the highest electrical conductivity would attract the HVP energy preferentially, and hence achieve a higher probability of selective breakage. The formation of the domain breakdown channel induced by the particle containing the mineral with the highest electrical conductivity would impair the selective breakage probability of the particles containing less conductive minerals, under the point-plane electrode configuration adopted in the selFrag Lab machine and the HVP testing conditions investigated in this study. As the HVP pre-concentration technique uses size-based separation following HVP selective breakage to split the treated ore sample into high-grade and low-grade products, it is important to investigate the effect of the interactions between mineralised particles in the multiple-particle system on the progeny size distributions. As shown in On the other hand, it is interesting to investigate whether or not the It is noticed from Comparing the two sets of three-particle tests in This observation suggests that when multiple mineralised particles presented in the pulse treatment zone are subjected to one pulse loading with a given specific energy, multiple breakdown channels can be generated, with the primary electrical breakdown channel travelling preferentially through the particles containing the mineral with the highest conductivity. The breakage results for individual mineralised particles may be different depending on their mechanical and electrical breakage properties, but the total fragmentation of all mineralised particles with the similar mechanical breakage properties (such as the synthetic particles with the same size, shape, strength, texture, etc.) is mainly governed by the pulse specific energy. This indicates that it might be possible to model the HVP breakage results using a size reduction-energy relationship. A preliminary investigation of modelling HVP breakage using the JK size-dependent breakage model ( The energy transfer efficiency is defined as the ratio of spark energy to generator energy. Literature has reported that in HVP breakage tests the energy transfer efficiency has a strong correlation with rock breakage results ( During an HVP test, the spark energy is obtained from the machine control panel, whereas the generator energy ( For each test, the applied voltage and the spark energy were recorded, and the progenies of the synthetic particles were bagged separately. The testing procedures allowed the identification of individual synthetic particles, which one was selected for breakage, and its associated spark energy consumption. The raw data collected were used to calculate the average spark energy and energy transfer efficiency for each type of mineralised synthetic particle and barren synthetic particle in the two-particle and three-particle systems (  There are eight (8) tests ( Since the spark energies and energy transfer efficiencies in the three-particle tests are all greater than those in the two-particle tests used in the t-tests, it is accepted with over 95% significance that the differences in the spark energies and energy transfer efficiencies between breaking the mineralised synthetic particles and the barren particles in the three-particle tests are real. Therefore, the following comparisons based on the data presented in The data in The two-particle tests show a 16% increase in the energy transfer efficiency (from 0.48 to 0.56) when the pulse energy was used to break the mineralised synthetic particles, compared to the benchmark. The energy transfer efficiency increases further to 0.70, a marked 46% increase when two mineralised particles were presented in the three-particle tests, with one of them being disintegrated. It is yet further increased to 0.78 (i.e. a 62% gain from the benchmark) when both the mineralised particles in the three-particle tests were disintegrated. This observation indicates that when more particles containing high conductivity minerals are presented in the pulse treatment zone, they preferentially attract the pulse energy to pass through these particles, which reduces the loss of the energy to the surrounding water, thereby enhancing the pulse energy transfer efficiency. In the pyrite fines-disseminated synthetic particle tests reported in Section 3.4 in Part 1 of this paper ( It is worth noting that the tests involving By integrating the various aspects of the investigation results, it would be reasonable to conclude that the The presence of multiple particles embedded with different metalliferous minerals has an interactive effect on the HVP selective breakage results. The electrical breakdown channel travels preferentially through the particles containing the highest conductive minerals (such as magnetite in this study) presented in the pulse treatment zone. The preferential electrical breakdown induced by the particles containing the highest conductive mineral results in a higher probability of selective breakage and a finer progeny size distribution of these particles. Since the majority of the pulse energy is used for the electrical breakdown of the particles, which reduces the loss of the energy to the surrounding water, a greater energy transfer efficiency can be expected. Although in a small number of cases multiple electrical breakdown channels break more than one mineralised particle with one pulse loading, the formation of the domain electrical breakdown channel induced by the particle containing the mineral with the highest conductivity would impair the selective breakage probability of particles containing less conductive minerals. However, it was observed from the preliminary data sets that the pulse specific energy mainly governs the total fragmentation combined from all mineralised particles. At a similar pulse specific energy, the combined fragments from the total mineralised particles in a given HVP treatment configuration exhibit similar progeny size distributions. The misclassification of barren particles being broken decreases markedly when they are presented simultaneously in the pulse discharge zone with multiple particles containing metalliferous minerals. The metalliferous grain-embedded synthetic particles attract more pulse energy when more mineralised particles are presented in the pulse treatment zone, leaving the barren particles less exposed to pulse discharge energy; hence, the barren particles are “protected” by the mineralised particles from being broken. The multiple-particle configuration is an advanced HVP treatment procedure to achieve an improved HVP pre-concentration result.  The financial support from the