Tank bioleaching of ore promises to give high yields due to the ability to control the leaching process. For that, various parameters like pH, EH and pO2 must be measured regularly. However, the measurement of oxygen is especially difficult to realise since oxygen probes are relatively expensive and possess only a low durability. Through the use of an optode system, we propose an easy and less expensive alternative for oxygen measurements. Furthermore, we demonstrate the optode achieves similar and possibly more accurate readings than the conventional electrode. Since we were able to fix the optode sensor at the lower end of a glass tube, this system is suitable for various reactor designs and hence allows for non-invasive, in-situ oxygen measurements.
                  The proof of concept was demonstrated by cultivating Escherichia coli, Rhodococcus erythropolis, Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans, and Sulfobacillus thermosulfidooxidans inside 2L bioreactors. Both optode and oxygen electrode showed similar concentration values, which demonstrates the optode is a reliable tool for oxygen measurements during bioreactor cultivation, especially of iron-oxidisers. Subsequent leaching tests, performed with fine grained residue from copper smelting and copper-rich black shale, demonstrated that the optode is resistant to mechanical wear. Therefore, the optode was found to be a suitable alternative to the amperometric oxygen probe.Tank bioleaching or biooxidation is becoming more and more relevant in mineral processing; however, it is mainly applied for the exploitation of gold or cobalt ( Therefore, a fast, easy and robust method for oxygen determination is needed. So far, the most common method for O Another method for measuring relative O For all experiments, 2 According to the several tasks described below, a diverse spectrum of organisms was used. While the cultivation of The function of the optode system and its comparison to the oxygen electrode was tested abiotically in a saline solution (0.9% NaCl). Consumption of oxygen was achieved by dropwise addition of 10 First, cultivations were performed with well-grown cultures of A 22-day leaching test was performed with A first general comparison between the oxygen electrodes, with which the reactors were equipped, and the optode system was performed in an abiotic system using a saline solution. To simulate respiration, an oxygen decrease was achieved by the addition of sodium sulphite which rapidly oxidises to sulphate in the presence of oxygen. However, the number of moles of oxygen which are consumed could not be calculated since only a minor part of the sulphite was oxidised without a metal catalyst ( Nevertheless, the addition of sulphite resulted in an oxygen decrease which was detected using both systems with only minor differences between them ( Due to its high growth rate as well as high metabolic activity, Based on these promising results, the following experiment was performed with the cultivation of an iron oxidising culture. After the addition of ferrous iron and without further aeration, the oxygen concentration decreased instantly and drastically ( The observations made during the cultivation of A first cultivation of the moderately thermophilic The start of the iron oxidation just after aeration is not surprising since it is well known, that for the same energy yield the oxygen demand for iron oxidation is by far higher than that for the respiration of organic compounds ( During a 22-day leaching test with fine grained In the durability test with 15% copper shale, the optode displayed over the whole period of time, with only minor variances, an O We have shown not only a principal applicability of the optode in bioreactors but also a general comparability to amperometric electrodes. Both systems can be used in cultivations of mesophilic and moderately thermophilic organisms for both heterotrophs, such as However, it appears that the optode is not only equivalent to the electrode but may be superior in some aspects. During the cultivation experiments the peaks of the optode were more pronounced compared to the electrode. Additionally, the optode responded well to air-flow shifts while the electrode showed only major changes. This led us to the conclusion that the optode reacts either faster or more precisely to oxygen fluctuations which suggests the optode is the more suitable instrument for controlling the air-flow. In terms of robustness, the optode has proven itself quite capable. During the leaching experiment with Lastly, it was shown that aeration coupled to oxygen measurements provides a way to control the O This paper originated from the Ecometals project, which is funded by the German