The galvanic effect between chalcopyrite and pyrite was investigated by solution studies, X-ray Diffraction (XRD), and synchrotron X-ray Absorption Near Edge Structure (XANES). The solution studies indicate chalcopyrite leaching efficiency was significant improved in galvanic assisted leaching with more than 90% of copper being dissolved in 31days in leaching at both 48°C and 30°C. In contrast, the addition of microorganism negatively affected the leaching efficiency at 30°C. XRD and iron K-edge XANES analysis indicate the presence of microorganisms decreased the chalcopyrite leaching selectivity, likely linked to the increased solution potential. Chalcopyrite was selectively leached in chemical leaching as a result of galvanic effect. On the other hand, dissolution rate of pyrite was fast in the case of bioleaching where the Eh was high.The understanding of dissolution behaviour of chalcopyrite is of significant interest because chalcopyrite is the most abundant copper source but also the most refractory of copper sulfides. Thus, low cost technologies, such as heap and in situ leaching, are the target of the mining industries. The disadvantage of heap and in situ leaching is the slow dissolution rate of chalcopyrite, which is affected by a range of parameters such as temperature, the addition of pyrite and iron ions and silver ions and activated carbon ( The effect of pyrite on chalcopyrite leaching is commonly explained as galvanic effect, which results in the preferential leaching of chalcopyrite in a chalcopyrite-pyrite system. Two commercial processes which make use of galvanic interaction are the Galvanox™ process ( In an ideal galvanic leaching scenario, the minerals of interest would be selectively leached while the other minerals can be recovered and recycled to the leaching circuit for further processing. However, the leaching selectivity of galvanic system has not been investigated in detail. In a chemical galvanic leaching, 98% or greater copper recoveries have been achieved in as little as 4 Bioleaching is affected by temperature and microorganisms in use. For instance, leaching thermophiles have better performance over mesophiles, which is mostly a result of increased kinetics of abiotical reaction and could also be partially related better iron and sulfur oxidation capacities ( The motivation of this work is to study and understand the influence of different microbes and temperatures on galvanic leaching behaviour of chalcopyrite concentrates. Quantitative phase analysis of XRD and XANES were used to understand the leaching selectivity and the leaching products formation. Three species of mesophiles were used in this work. Chalcopyrite and pyrite were obtained from Mt Lyll, Australia and North Dakota, USA, respectively. ICP studies indicate the chalcopyrite contained 33.7% Cu, 30.8 Fe% and 34.2% S, while the pyrite contained 45% Fe, 51% S, 0.47% Pb, 0.2% Zn, 0.18% Cu. ( Leaching tests were carried out in 250 Solution samples were periodically taken from flasks. The Solution tests were conducted by monitoring pH value, metal ion concentration (Fe Powder XRD data were collected in Bragg–Brentano geometry on finely ground samples using a Phillips X’Pert diffractometer fitted with a Co long-fine-focus tube operated at 40 X-ray absorption spectra were recorded at X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS) beamline of Australian synchrotron. The current of the storage ring was operated in top-up mode with a beam current approximately 200 Data was acquired in fluorescence mode with a Passivated Implanted Planar Silicon (PIPS) detector. The near edge part of the Fe K-edge X-ray absorption spectra that has been used in this paper was collected using a step of 0.25 The change of copper concentration as a function of time during leaching of chalcopyrite concentrates with or without pyrite is shown in  XRD patterns of leached Cp/Py mixture are displayed in The Fe K-edge XANES spectra of standard compounds (pyrite (FeS), chalcopyrite (CuFeS The To retrieve quantitative information from the spectra, a linear combination fitting was conducted and the results were summarised in The above observations could be explained by the difference of the solution Eh in different experiments. In this study, the Eh of chalcopyrite chemical leaching was much lower than bioleaching and the solution Eh in the case with Cp/Py mixture was lower than that with pure chalcopyrite ( It is notable that substantially higher amount of jarosite was produced in galvanic bioleaching than in chemical leaching at 48 In the chemical leaching of Py/Cp mixed ore, it can be found that the weight ratio of Py/Cp increased with leaching time. The final Py/Cp ratio was 6.8 at 30 This study suggests the presence of microorganism impaired galvanic effect and decreased the leaching selectivity at 30 The authors appreciate the CSIRO OCE Science Leader scheme. Synchrotron measurement was conducted at the XAS beamline of Australian Synchrotron under the proposal No. AS133/XAS/7200. The authors appreciate the support from the