A series of quasi-static and blast tests was conducted to investigate resistance capacity of concrete slabs in which conventional crushed granite aggregates were wholly replaced with oil palm shell (OPS) as a coarse aggregate. A control specimen using Normal Concrete (NC) using conventional aggregate of similar strength was also prepared and tested for comparison. Two types of OPS concrete (OPSC) slabs were developed-with and without steel fibres (SF) and tested. LVDTs, pressure transducers and accelerometers were used to record data of response of the slabs subjected to quasi-static load and blast loads of 1, 5 and 10kg TNT. The recorded data were then analysed and compared and conclusions were made on the effectiveness of OPS as a coarse aggregate. It has been found that OPSC outperformed NC slab when subjected to 10kg TNT as the ductile OPSC panel was intact and had no shrapnels. Through the ductility behaviour of OPSC, it exhibited multiple cracks and the impact resistance of OPS through its energy absorption due to fibrous content within OPS itself was visible both in crack pattern and in its propagation. Though OPS is of organic nature, its resistance to blast waves was observed as the huge fire ball created due to blast had no or little effect on the OPSC panels. The OPS Fibre Reinforced Concrete (OPSFRC) also exhibited blast resistance characteristics, but uneven distribution of fibres and harsh mix with 3% of steel fibres resulted in larger crack width and fibre pull-out failure. Overall, the behaviour of OPSC in blast resistance characteristics is noteworthy and further tests are required to envisage the use of appropriate fibre content in OPSC.During the last two decades, the world had witnessed dramatic rise in bomb attacks and there is growing trend of terrorist activities to blow up vital infrastructures and these threats are mainly linked with bombing. The protection of structures against terrorist attacks, explosions, and accidents is paramount task and in order to address this major issue research initiatives and significant changes in design are gaining prominence. In order to protect civilians and buildings against blast loading and other accidental explosions, there is a need for concrete structures to have resistance against blast waves and impacts. Furthermore, such structures should have a certain ductility performance to ensure that even in the event of blast loading, there is sufficient warning and time for civilians and occupants to escape from the buildings. Some of the current research in the development on blast resistance concrete includes ultra-high performance fibre reinforced concrete Thus, in addition to focussing on enhancing the ductility of the concrete through the use of fibres in high strength concrete, the use of appropriate aggregate that could absorb the energy during blast loading should be given due consideration. Since aggregates occupy about 50–75% of concrete volume, the selection of coarse aggregate which is one of the principal constituent materials, has to be effective in energy absorption and in turn to enhance the ductility of the concrete. One of the natural coarse aggregates from palm oil industry found to have 4–5 times higher aggregate impact resistance is oil palm shells (OPS). Since 1984 research works on utilizing this industrial waste material had led to many research works that included mechanical, structural and functional properties of Oil Shell Concrete (OPSC) Another significant reasoning behind the use of OPS as an alternative for coarse aggregate in manufacturing concrete is due to a desirable solution to deteriorating natural resources caused by using granite aggregate and environmental pollution due to stockpile of OPS in the factory yards in open-air As mentioned OPS, an agricultural by-product, is known to exhibit lower aggregate impact value (AIV) than normal granite aggregates, and this indicates good shock-absorbing properties of the OPS Similarly, Onoue et al. The addition of steel fibres is known to enhance the ductility performance of concrete, and this is of particular interest for structures subjected to blast and impact forces. While the improvement in blast and impact resistances of steel fibre reinforced normal weight concrete are known, there is no literature on blast resistant characteristic of steel fibre reinforced OPSC. Mo et al. Thus, based on the investigation on static behaviour of OPSC through bond, flexural and shear behaviour, the ductility characteristic of OPSC is well established and paved way for further investigation for dynamic response of OPSC. It is possible to make OPS as an effective material for the construction of structures to resist blast and impact loadings. Further, the use of OPS-naturally available abundant material could be considered as an alternate aggregate in blast resistant concrete to protect ever increasing threat to buildings and vital structures due to its strong impact resistance and ductility characteristics. In order to investigate the blast resistant characteristics of OPSC, University of Malaya designed the OPSC mixes with and without steel fibres and also fabricated the reinforced OPSC panels for a series of quasi-static and blast tests conducted jointly with Beijing Institute of Technology, Tianjin Chengjian University and the University of Adelaide. The objective of the test program is to investigate the effectiveness of OPS as a lightweight coarse aggregate to replace crushed granite aggregate in concrete when resisting static and blast loads. Further the effect of steel fibres along with OPS as coarse aggregates was also investigated. This paper discusses the results of this experiment program and conclusions are then drawn based on the results. In this experimental program, quasi-static (four point bending) and blast tests were performed on ten reinforced concrete slabs which were cast by three different types of concrete mixes including Normal Concrete (NC), Oil Palm Shell Concrete (OPSC) and Oil Palm Shell Fibre Reinforce Concrete (OPSFRC). Details of the material properties, design of the slab specimens and details of the experimental setups for both quasi-static and blast tests are discussed in this section. All the concrete slab panels were cast by Department of Civil Engineering, University of Malaya using locally available materials. Ordinary Portland cement which meets the ASTM: Mining sand was used as the fine aggregate in all mixtures. Hooked-end steel fibre was used in the mixtures with tensile strength 1250  For each mix 100  Totally, ten slabs were cast for both quasi-static and blast tests using three concrete mixtures. Three slabs for quasi-static tests and six slabs for blast tests, in total nine slabs were manufactured with dimensions of length 2.0 The reinforcement arrangement for all the slabs is shown in Four point bending tests were performed on three slabs to investigate their behaviours under quasi-static loads. The test set-up is shown in In total, ten blast events were performed on seven slabs. For each concrete type, 1 For the blast events, scaled distance (= Each specimen was tested on a steel supporting frame which effectively provided an upward restraint against the slab’s rebound to minimise any lateral movement. Two railing posts were anchored to the ground and the charge was suspended from a wire, connecting the posts as per the figure. The standoff distance was measured from top face of the slab to the charge, which was suspended over the centre of the slab. The standoff distance 1.5 Data acquisition devices used in this blast experiment program included LVDTs, Accelerometers and Pressure Transducers (PT). The LVDTs used for this testing program are able to measure up to 100 OPS have high water absorption due to micro-pores as shown in Force and deflection of the slabs were measured for all NC, OPSC and OPSFRC slabs. Summary of the quasi-static test results are given in table. OPSC and OPSFRC have load carrying capacity 13% and 38% respectively higher than NC (see As shown in figure multiple flexural cracks are distributed along all NC, OPSC and OPSFRC slabs. OPSC and OPSFRC recorded about twice the number of cracks compared to NC and this confirmed earlier findings on OPSC for beams tested in flexure Pressure-time, deflection-time and acceleration-time histories were measured for ten blast events in the testing program. Post-Blast (PB) inspection was conducted on the slabs after every explosion. These inspections were physical examinations at the blast test site. Based on the measured time histories and PB inspection results, the maximum deflections, permanent deflections, details of cracks and failure modes of each slab are discussed in this section. The LVDT data were not recorded for the NC slabs; however PB inspection showed NC-C1A slab had large deflection of about 20 The recorded deflection-time (DT) histories of C2A and C2B slabs are shown in   DT curves for OPSFRC slabs, C3A and C3B are shown in Slab C3A was severely damaged due to 10  OPSFRC slab C3C was subjected to 20  Due to 10 Flexural cracks were opened up along the length in all the slabs subject to 5 This is quite contradict to the response for 10 Because the test data was not recorded for NC slabs, test data from earlier blast tests with quite similar material and blast load properties conducted by the University of Adelaide was used for a comparison with OPSC slab test results Slab 2 in As given in Though OPS aggregates have been used in research as potential replacement to conventional aggregate, there has been no research work on its resistance to blast load. Thus, this research on the investigation of blast resistance of OPSC is quite significant as the need for blast resistant concrete is ever increasing. Thus, 10 concrete panels of NC, OPSC and OPSFRC were prepared and tested for quasi-static and blast loads of 1 In quasi-static tests, both OPSC and OPSFRC slabs had higher load carrying capacity compared to NC slab. OPS itself has high fibre content and hence it is able to absorb energy and its potential as impact resistant material has been visualized. OPSFRC slab has higher energy absorption capacity due to positive effect of steel fibres. For 1 The authors gratefully acknowledge