To date, surface structuring of metallic implants for use in load bearing bone implantation focuses on the coating of their surface with hydroxyapatite (HA) through plasma spraying. Despite the inherent disadvantages of this method, research on alternative coating techniques has been slow to yield suitable results, mostly due to the lack of surface tailoring for efficient osseointegration coupled with inefficient coating adhesion to the implant surface. Through the presented work we provide a new route for the formation of nanostructured functional coatings of HA onto titanium implant surfaces employing amino acids to not only potentially induce osteogenic cell activity, but to aid the attachment of HA onto the titanium surface. Briefly, crystalline, partially carbonated HA nanoparticles were synthesised through a novel sol–gel route employing CaCl2 and Na2HPO4 as precursors and l-arginine or l-lysine to facilitate nanoparticle formation and gellation and to control the viscosity of the slurries. The grafted amino acids were in turn used to attach the HA coating through covalent interactions between the amino acid carboxyl end groups and the TiOH groups on the titanium surface. The composites were characterised by SEM, TEM, powder XRD, FT-IR, scratch and roughness testing. Samples were also treated in an SBF solution to observe their bioactivity.Bone is a highly specialised, true organic–inorganic composite material, with synergistic structure and function. Implantable biomaterials for bone-grafting must possess characteristics mimicking those of natural bone in order to be successful in their application. It has recently been elucidated that the drive for new biomaterials should focus on their ability to induce specific cellular responses at a molecular level, Briefly, crystalline, partially carbonated HA nanoparticles were synthesised through a novel sol–gel route employing CaCl  Initial studies of the coatings consisted on XRD and SEM techniques. In order to study the effect of the initial Ti surface chemistry and topography on the resulting coating adhesion and morphology a series of Ti surface treatments was performed. The coatings obtained consisted on well dispersed carbonated HA-amino acid composite particles within an amino acid matrix. It is noted at this stage that no coatings obtained with the control sample will be shown as these completely lacked any adhesion to the surfaces and easily cracked and peeled. This, therefore, initially shows that the presence of the amino acids is required in order to obtain suitably adhered coatings. The above results should be discussed in conjunction with those of the scratch and roughness testing of the materials. Initial bioactivity testing was performed through immersion in a T-SBF solution for 5 days. Both HA/arginine and HA/lysine coatings remained relatively intact after immersion, with a clear appearance of a white precipitate on their surface. Nevertheless, upon observation with SEM ( Taking into consideration all of the above results it can be concluded that the HA/amino acid coatings are applicable following a range of Ti surface treatments, and that these treatments have no effect on the adhesion strength of the coatings. The only differences observed are those of the macroscopic morphology of the coatings, and are more related to the physical nature of the surface after each specific treatment rather than to their chemical nature. HA/arginine coatings have a greater strength of adhesion and have a property for self-repair, as well as showing efficient bioactivity with regard to apatite formation in T-SBF. HA/lysine on the other hand, produces brittle coatings and promotes calcium carbonate precipitation over apatite formation and therefore shows low bioactivity. Given that osteogenic cells are known to have a greater affinity for arginine than lysine, and further, that