Proximal humerus fractures continue to be a difficult and complicated problem to treat. Surgical treatment options have included fracture fixation versus hemiarthroplasty. Historically, elderly patients with metaphyseal and tuberosity comminution have had poor results after hemiarthroplasty with pain and substantial loss of motion. Multiple studies have shown that these results are due to tuberosity mal- or nonunion. Recently, reverse shoulder arthroplasty has become a viable salvage operation after failed hemiarthroplasty for fracture. Promising results from these operations may extend the indications for reverse shoulder arthroplasty to include proximal humerus fractures that will likely have tuberosity mal- or nonunion.Proximal humerus fractures are common, especially in the elderly. The incidence is approximately 73 per 100,000 with approximately 75% of these fractures occurring in patients older than 60 years. Hemiarthroplasty for proximal humerus fractures was popularized by Neer. Multiple investigators have had similar results. Approximately 25% of patients have little use of their arm after hemiarthroplasty for fracture. Most of these studies include small numbers of patients and report the mean range of motion rather than absolute numbers. One study out of Nottingham that included 27 patients showed that they only achieved a median forward elevation of 70°. More recently, it has become evident that tuberosity mal- or nonunion is the major factor leading to a poor functional outcome. Mighell and coworkers Until recently, there were few options for patients who had a poor functional outcome after hemiarthroplasty. European groups have had more experience with reverse ball-in-socket shoulder replacements and have been using them for both primary fractures and revision of failed hemiarthroplasty. Boileau and coworkers Since the release of reverse shoulder prostheses in the United States, there has been an interest the reverse for revision situations. Levy and coworkers Since 1955, we have gained a great deal of experience with hemiarthroplasty for proximal humerus fractures. Research has shown that results are not always predictably good and that hemiarthroplasty yields good results if the tuberosities heal reliably to the shaft. We know from multiple trials that approximately 25% of patients have poor tuberosity healing and dysfunctional shoulders. These are usually elderly patients with comminution and osteoporosis. Several studies have recently shown that a reverse ball-in-socket prosthesis can be utilized as a salvage procedure for those patients that fail a hemiarthroplasty. These results are encouraging, but they have a higher complication rate than primary reverses (45 versus 5%) and poorer results (113 versus 123° of forward elevation). In the last year, two studies have been published in which reverse shoulder arthroplasty was used as the primary procedure for proximal humerus fractures. Both were performed in elderly patients (mean ages 75 and 78 years, respectively). The first had only 16 patients for follow up (7 died) and the need for 2 reoperations. In 5 patients they were able to fix the tuberosities. Forward elevation was reported as 120°. Recently at our institution we have selectively used a reverse shoulder replacement for elderly patients with comminuted proximal humerus fractures. Patient 1 is a 76-year-old right hand–dominant smoker who fell on his left shoulder. He sustained a four-part proximal humerus fracture with tuberosity comminution ( Our current indications for a primary reverse for fracture include patients over 70 years of age, severe tuberosity or metaphyseal comminution, and osteopenia. The rationale is that a reverse seems to find a middle ground. Results of hemiarthroplasty if the tuberosities heal are better than those of a reverse. However, results of a failed hemiarthroplasty with tuberosity malunion or nonunion are worse than those of a hemiarthroplasty. The failed hemiarthroplasties are difficult to revise, and the surgeries are associated with a much higher complication rate than those of a primary reverse. We recommend repairing the tuberosities to the proximal shaft and reverse prosthesis because preservation of some infraspinatus and teres minor function may maintain external rotation. Even minimal external rotation ability improves the functional results after a reverse shoulder arthroplasty by preventing obligate internal rotation with arm elevation. Repair of the lesser tuberosity may reduce the incidence of postoperative dislocation. The most common argument against a primary reverse is the complication rate. One of the most concerning and the most common complications is a dislocation. While a dislocation is certainly disabling and has the potential need for a reoperation rate, fortunately, it is often solved with either closed reduction or increasing the thickness of the spacer. Either of these options are still better in the long run than the pain and dysfunction of a failed hemiarthroplasty. Proximal humerus fractures are difficult fractures to treat. When necessary, hemiarthroplasty is a viable alternative for appropriate patients. Younger patients with good bone stock and reparable tuberosities will reliably do well with hemiarthroplasty. Elderly patients with poor bone stock have unpredictable results, with a large percentage having a poor functional outcome. Conversion of a hemiarthroplasty to a reverse is possible, but has a higher complication rate than a primary reverse. Some preliminary data suggest that these patients may be better served with a primary reverse shoulder arthroplasty, which appears to have better functional outcomes than hemiarthroplasty in this group. It will also alleviate the need for a second surgery to convert the failed hemiarthroplasty to a reverse and avoid the high complication rates of revision surgery.