A metallic solution model with adjustable parameter k has been developed to predict thermodynamic properties of ternary systems from those of its constituent three binaries. In the present model, the excess Gibbs free energy for a ternary mixture is expressed as a weighted probability sum of those of binaries and the k value is determined based on an assumption that the ternary interaction generally strengthens the mixing effects for metallic solutions with weak interaction, making the Gibbs free energy of mixing of the ternary system more negative than that before considering the interaction. This point is never considered in the models currently reported, where the only difference in a geometrical definition of molar values of components is considered that do not involve thermodynamic principles but are completely empirical. The current model describes the results of experiments very well, and by adjusting the k value also agrees with those from models used widely in the literature. Three ternary systems, Mg–Cu–Ni, Zn–In–Cd, and Cd–Bi–Pb are recalculated to demonstrate the method of determining k and the precision of the model. The results of the calculations, especially those in Mg–Cu–Ni system, are better than those predicted by the current models in the literature.Predictions of the thermodynamic properties of ternary and multi-component alloys from their binary constituents based on models are very important in materials design and analysis in process metallurgy. Since the 1960s, dozens of models, which are used to calculate the thermodynamic properties, have been proposed. Among these are models by Kohler According to the regular solution model, the excess Gibbs free energy, It should be noted that the mole fractions In some previous models, an interaction parameter for the ternary, According to thermodynamic relationships A large number of calculated ternary systems shows that the model Using equation The excess Gibbs free energies of mixing of the ternary, Because prediction of the properties of a ternary system is completely based on those of the constituent binaries, the determination of the adjustable parameter Generally, there are two kinds of In order to select the preliminary value Let us choose the Mg–Cu–Ni and Zn–In–Cd systems as the example. For the Mg(1)–Cu(2)–Ni(3) system with For the Zn(1)–In(2)–Cd(3) system with different In order to acquire the It should be stated that the In the previous paper Although the evaluated results for a ternary system from its binary components are approximate for the ternary system, it can be seen from above examples that better values result than those from other models in literature. In the present paper, the parameter To take into account the ternary interaction between unlike particles (atoms or molecules) an additional term It is worth mentioning that in some previous models, an interaction parameter for the ternary, The previous models mentioned by our paper are categorized to be symmetric and asymmetric. The symmetric and asymmetric systems are a traditional category, where the composition choice and assignation of a probability weight for three binaries are contained. In the present model, because the parameter This new model can reduce to various kinds of a simple limiting form at the different limiting conditions. For instance, if three binaries are all an ideal solution, that is, A metallic solution model with adjustable parameter The author thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 50374077) and the state major basic research development programme (No. 2004CB619204) for financial support.