The SANI® process (Sulfate reduction, Autotrophic denitrification and Nitrification Integrated) is a treatment system with low energy demands. The major bioreactor of this new technology is a sulfate-reducing up-flow sludge bed (SRUSB) that converts organics and provides electron donors for subsequent autotrophic denitrification. This research characterizes the granules inside the SRUSB, with the aim of improving its efficiency, maximizing its operational flexibility, and minimizing its footprint. The unique sulfate-reducing bacteria (SRB) granules serving in the SRUSB were found to increase the resilience and compactness of the SRUSB. The granules, with a compact and porous structure, showed high cohesion resisting breakage with a shear force G > 3400 s−1. The hydrophobicity of the external surface of the mature granules remained stable at around 70% and acid volatile sulfide (AVS) accumulated at the bottom of the SRUSB. 16s rRNA gene analysis of the microbial communities revealed that Desulfobulbus (42.1%), Prosthecochloris (19%) and Trichococcus (12%) dominated the mature granular sludge. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) further showed that SRB organisms were located internally and then surrounded by non-SRB. According to the FISH results, the spatial distribution of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) displayed protein and α-polysaccharides in the exterior and β-polysaccharide in the core of the granules. Such biological structure suggests that each SRB granule acts as an efficient and independent unit, capable of achieving both fermentation and organic conversion. The present investigation sheds light on the physicochemical and biological characteristics of the SRB granulate. This information provides valuable information for scaling-up the SANI® process to treat real saline sewage in Hong Kong.A hybrid water supply system (i.e. 80% drinking water and 20% seawater, the latter for toilet flushing) has been used in Hong Kong since the 1950s saving 750,000 m Within the SANI Many biological treatment processes have been developed based on granular sludge such as methanogenic/hydrogen producing anaerobic process and anammox ( The present study thoroughly investigated the physical, chemical and biological properties of the SRB granules in a steady state lab-scale SRUSB, which has been operated more than 500 days to obtain in-depth understanding of the SRB granules. The physical parameters including settling property (e.g. sludge volume index (SVI), specific gravity, cohesion, surface area, porosity, and fractal dimension (FD) were analyzed. Regarding their chemical properties, the present study extended to the hydrophobicity and the extracellular polymeric substances (EPSs) content. In the biological characterization, the spatial distribution and the community structure of the microorganisms were analyzed. The observed characteristics are discussed with regards to granules performance, stability, and possible optimization of the granular sludge SRUSB in the SANI A number of interesting observations were made during the systematic characterization that requires further investigation. These include microbial interaction between SRB and acidogens and poly-S/elemental sulfur recovery by sulfide oxidation bacteria which if confirmed in subsequent work would allow new opportunities and improvements to the SRUSB. To simulate the characteristics of Hong Kong's saline sewage in terms of salinity and sulfate concentration, seawater was mixed with synthetic sewage and a stock solution containing the organics and trace elements as presented by Total suspended solids (TSS), volatile suspended solids (VSS), total chemical oxygen demand (COD), and soluble COD were measured according to the Standard Methods ( 20-μm sectioning of the sample was performed by using a cryomicrotome (CM 1850 UV, Leica) for the subsequent analysis. Prior to sectioning, the granule samples were washed 4 times in 1x phosphate buffered saline (PBS) before being embedded in optimum cutting temperature medium (Tissue-Tek OCT, Sakura) and frozen at −20 °C. Live and dead cell analysis of the granule sections was conducted by a cell-permeable nucleic acid dye (SYTO 9, Molecular Probes, INC., Eugene, U.S.; excitation 488 nm) and propidium iodide (PI) (Molecular Probes, INC., Eugene, U.S; excitation 630 nm), following the LIVE/DEAD For the above-mentioned characterizing parameters, the granular sludge was well mixed prior to sampling other than the measurement of AVS. Among them, the EPS, cohesion, specific gravity, settling velocity, porosity and the specific surface area were all determined between day 400–500 following the specific methods which are provided in The spatial distribution of different bacterial taxa in the SRB granules was visualized using fluorescence Bacterial genomic DNA was extracted from 5 mg of fresh granules using a PowerSoil DNA extraction kit (MO BIO Laboratories, Inc., Carlsbad, CA), following the manufacturer's instruction. The quality and quantity of the extracts were determined by a Nanodrop Raw sequence data was firstly processed by trimming barcode tags and primer sequences. FASTA files were generated from the resultant sequences according to the barcodes of individual samples. The sequences were then aligned using the software Mothur ver. 1.17.0 ( The SRB granular sludge was sampled after reaching steady state of the SRUSB operation with respect to COD removal and granule size. The settling ability of the sludge is responsible for the reactor's biomass retention, the solid–liquid separation, and the effluent turbidity. The parameters that describe the settling ability are the SVI The recorded SVI The settling velocity of the SRB granules ranged from 18 to 65 m/h. Although these values are lower than that of methanogenic granules (52.9 m/h) and anammox granules (41–79 m/h) ( The specific gravity or density of the granular sludge is one indicator of the settling ability, and it can be used to describe its structural compactness and stability. A high-density and compact structure facilitates the sludge separation from the effluent. The specific gravity of the SRB granules was determined to be 1.068–1.074, which is not only greater than the 1.002–1.006 of flocculent sludge ( Generally, higher specific gravity is accompanied by greater settling velocity, but was not observed in this study. The theoretical settling velocity of particles is calculated in the intermediate flow regime (110 > Re The cohesion of an aggregate depends on how a granule can resist shear and elongation forces as well as control surface detachment (erosion) and breakage. Following this, the detachment is responsible for the self-renewal and the stability of the granules. The mean particle size of the SRB sludge was 424 μm ± 142 (standard deviation). When the shear force was applied at G values of 250 s Knowing that the typical G-value of an aeration tank and membrane bioreactor ranges from 80 to 182 s The cohesion of granules can be affected by temperature, substrate type ( High granule strength is usually accompanied by low porosity ( The surface area (BET) and adsorption cumulative volume (BJH) of the granules were between 3.3 and 4.1 m The permeability and compactness of bio-aggregates can be indicated by their fractal dimension (FD). The fractal dimension of the SRB granules was 2.79 ± 0.36, which is similar to that of vigorously mixed granular sludge such as methanogenic granules (2.79; see Compared with flocculent sludge, the SRB granular sludge presents a clear and regular outline with a nearly spherical or elliptical shape and smooth porous surface throughout more than 300 days of operation ( Providing convergent evidence of the large pore volume of the SRB granules, some channel-like structures on the surface of the granules were observed under the optical microscope and by SEM and CLSM (  Metal sulfide precipitation naturally occurs in sulfidogenic system due to the activities of sulfate-reducing bacteria ( Sludge granulation is a self-immobilization process. According to the thermodynamic theory of adhesion, increasing the hydrophobicity of the cell surface can promote sludge aggregation via decreasing the excess Gibbs energy ( The hydrophobicity of aggregate/flocculent sludge can be significantly influenced by hydraulic conditions, aqueous composition of the influent, and surface EPS features of the granules ( Extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) are organic macromolecule polymers secreted by microorganisms (mainly bacteria) under certain environmental conditions ( The total EPS content observed in the mature SRB granules was significantly higher than those of methanogenic granules (10–91 mg EPS g The ratio of proteins/polysaccharides of the mature SRB granules presented a defined value compared to that of methanogenic granules (1.2–4.0) ( The CLSM analysis ( The EPS distribution pattern of SRB granules was different from previous reports on other granule types ( The spatial distribution of the SRB in the granular sludge was studied using FISH. The fluorescence signals from the cells hybridized with the SRB385 probe (red) showed a lower intensity around the outer edge, while the EUB showed a higher intensity throughout the granule sections ( Rarefaction analysis of OTUs defined at 3, 5 and 10% dissimilarity indicated that the diversity of the microbial communities was well represented by the sequencing depth in the three samples, with rarefaction curves approaching plateaus ( Altogether, 40 bacterial classes were recovered from the three samples ( At genus level, an obvious shift in the microbial community structure was observed; 16 genera were retrieved from the day 358 sample, meaning 12 genera were lost in comparison with the seeding sludge and the day 90 sample. The day 358 sample was dominated by The genus Comparing the bacterial communities present in the granules in the initial (day 90) from our previous study ( The abundance of SRB-related genus in the mature granules reached 43.6%, an increase from 38.6% in the day 90 granules. However, the diversity of SRB in the mature granules is lower than that of the day 90 samples (an early stage). For instance, 6 SRB genera were found in the day 90 granules ( Since methanogenic sequences were not detected in the mature granule samples, and the The SRB granules developed inside the SRUSB after more than 300 days of operation showed an average diameter of 400–500 μm, with a compact (FD = 2.79 ± 0.36, specific gravity = 1.068–1.074) and porous (pore volume = 0.022 ml/g) structure, and high cohesion (resisting breakage at shear rates of at least G = 3400 S The amount of protein and polysaccharides as well as their distribution pattern (protein and α-polysaccharides in the exterior and a β-polysaccharide core) assisted the SRB granules in building a stable and firm external structure and a hydrophilic internal core. The SRB population dominated the granule cross-section, although a thin outer shell of other bacteria was found. These unique and stable physicochemical properties and efficient organism structure of SRB granules resulted in the compactness, operational resilience, and efficiency of the SRUSB. The following is the supplementary data related to this article: Supplementary data related to this article can be found at