Crop residues are a vital organic resource and their extensive use in soil management for sustainable agriculture is widely advocated. The effects of soybean residue (SR) and wheat residue (WR) applied alone or in combination with fertilizer P (FP) on dynamics of labile P, distribution of P fractions and P sorption in a Vertisol (Typic Haplustert) were assessed in a 16 week long incubation study. The amount of P added through crop residues, FP or their combination was kept constant at 10
                        mgPkg
                        −1
                      soil. Addition of SR or WR resulted in net increase of labile inorganic (Pi) and organic (P
                        
                           o
                        )
                        P
                     , and microbial P throughout the incubation period, except that the WR decreased labile Pi during the first two weeks due to Pi immobilization. Integration of FP with SR had no added benefit compared to SR alone, while use of FP+WR proved better in ensuring short-term P availability by offsetting initial P immobilization associated with WR alone. Sequential fractionation of soil P at the end of 16 weeks showed that addition of SR and WR alone or in combination with FP favoured a build-up in labile Pi and Po (NaHCO3–Pi and –Po), and moderately labile Po (NaOH–Po) fractions at the expense of recalcitrant P (HCl–P). The P sorption capacity of soil and P required to maintain optimum solution P concentration of 0.2
                        mgPl
                        −1
                      also decreased with addition of these crop residues. The implication of the results of this study is that soybean and wheat residues can potentially improve soil P fertility by increasing labile Pi and Po, and moderately labile Po fractions, decreasing P sorption and concomitantly causing dissolution of recalcitrant P in soil.Phosphorus (P) deficiency is one of the major nutritional constraints to crop production on Indian Vertisols ( Crop residues are a renewable and vital organic resource for maintaining soil productivity. Not only are crop residues a primary substrate for the replenishment of soil organic matter, but they also serve as an important source of plant nutrients ( In recent years, the sequential extraction technique developed by Surface (0–0.15 m depth) soil used in this study represents a Vertisol (fine clay, montmorillonitic, hyperthermic, Typic Haplustert) and was collected from the research farm of Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal. The soil was air-dried and ground to pass through a 2 mm sieve. The soil had a pH of 8.1 (1:2.5 soil to water ratio) and cation exchange capacity of Soybean and wheat crop residues (comprising all aboveground portions except grains), referred to hereafter as soybean residue (SR) and wheat residue (WR), were collected at their harvesting stage, dried at 60°C and ground to pass through a 2 mm sieve. The contents of total C, N and P in residues were 40.1%, 1.54% and 0.27%, respectively for soybean and 44.6%, 0.58% and 0.08%, respectively for wheat. The soybean residue with high nutrient contents and narrow C:N (26:1) and C:P (149:1) ratios, would be classified as a high-quality organic material; while the wheat residue would be considered as low-quality material because of its lower nutrient contents and wider C:N (79:1) and C:P (558:1) ratios ( The effects of soybean and wheat crop residues and fertilizer P, added either alone or in combination, on soil P dynamics were investigated by an incubation experiment with a complete randomized design having four replications. The following six treatments were applied at an equal P rate of Bicarbonate extractable (labile; easily available) inorganic (P Soil samples collected at the end of the 16th week were subjected to sequential P fractionation using a modified version of the Phosphorus sorption characteristics of soil were determined on sub-samples drawn at 16 weeks of incubation by using the method of The sorption maximum ( The experimental data were subjected to the analysis of variance to test the significance of treatment effects on P fractions and P sorption parameters. When appropriate, the treatment means were compared using least significant difference (LSD, Changes in soil labile inorganic (P Labile P The sequential fractionation procedure employed in this study separated soil P into six different fractions of varying availability (  The changes in pattern of the P sorption isotherm of soil as a result of 16 week incubation with crop residues added alone or with fertilizer P are depicted in The P sorption data for different treatments were found best described by the classical Langmuir equation, with The present study demonstrated that soybean and wheat crop residues, added either alone or in combination with fertilizer P, could improve soil P fertility of Vertisols by (i) decreasing P sorption capacity and (ii) favouring a build-up in labile inorganic and organic P, and moderately labile organic P fractions at the expense of recalcitrant P forms (particularly calcium-bound P) in soil. Beneficial effects of crop residues in improving soil P fertility, however, were more pronounced if the residue added was of a legume such as soybean having a higher P content and narrow C:P ratio, rather than a cereal crop residue like wheat with a lower P content and wider C:P ratio. The P immobilization induced by WR during the early stages of its decomposition can be overcome by co-addition of fertilizer P with WR. The authors express sincere thanks to the Director, Indian Institute of Soil Science, Bhopal for extending all research facilities and to Mr. Deepak Kaul and D.R. Darwai for their technical assistance in the laboratory work.