Models of sodium oleate adsorption on siderite, hematite and quartz were investigated by molecular dynamic simulation, respectively. Surface energy was calculated to confirm the cleavage plan of hematite and quartz. Both natural cleavage plane of siderite and calculated plane were used to investigate the flotation of the three minerals. Based on the molecular simulation in solution with water as medium, adsorption quantity and interaction capability of oleate ions on the three minerals indicated that siderite could be collected efficiently by sodium oleate at neutral pH. Results of flotation experiments were further demonstrated by analysis of relative concentration of carbon atoms and oxygen atoms.Iron ores containing carbonate are considered as refractory resources. Even gravity separation, magnetizing roasting, surface magnetization and high intensity magnetic separation have been used to process them, those methods have defects of high cost and low efficiency Collector which serves as one of the most important factors in flotation process attracts more and more attentions However, few studies on interactions mechanism between oleate and siderite have been reported. Yin et al. Flotation theory mainly consists of flotation solution chemistry, interfacial chemistry and flotation kinetics As is known to all, flotation experiments are normally performed with water as medium. Several molecular simulations are undertaken under vacuum conditions, which ignored water effects on the position of the liquid-solid interface and reagent states in aqueous solution. In present work, oleate interaction with siderite, hematite and quartz in aqueous solution are investigated. The status of sodium oleate in aqueous solution was revealed based on flotation solution chemistry and molecular dynamics simulation. For further exploring different flotation behavior of siderite, hematite and quartz in iron ore carbonate containing, interaction differences of sodium oleate with the three minerals were researched through molecular simulation coupled with flotation experiments. Siderite, hematite and quartz mineral samples were achieved from Anshan Iron and Steel Group Corporation (AISG) in China. Siderite ore was hand-sorted and ground to −0.150 Single mineral flotation experiments were carried out with a laboratory XFD self-aeration flotation machine. 4.0 Absorption of sodium oleate on the three minerals was explored through the methods of molecular dynamic simulation, respectively. Models of mineral surfaces and mineral-reagent complex were established on Materials Visualizer module and Armorphous Cell module. Dynamic simulations were performed under COMPASS (condensed-phase optimized molecular potentials for atomistic simulation studies) force field in Forcite Plus module with the software package Materials Studio 7.0 (Accelrys, Inc., USA) Bulk siderite, hematite and quartz were modeled, based on structural database in Materials Studio 7.0. Siderite surface cell was built at the principle cleavage plan of (101) face w. Surface cells of hematite and quartz were determined by surface energies which were calculated using the formula Mineral supercell was established after geometry optimization of mineral face with bottom atoms being fixed with using smart algorithm with a convergence level of 0.001 The object was to explore the adsorption of sodium oleate on the three minerals. According to the proportion of molecular number, water boxes with sodium oleate in optimum reagent dose decided by flotation experiments were modeled on Armorphous Cell module ( Calculation of interaction energy was kept on configuration with the lowest energy which is the optimal model of adsorption. The interaction energy was obtained by following formula Effects of sodium oleate concentration on flotation recovery of siderite, hematite and quartz were investigated by single mineral flotation at neutral pH. As can be seen from Flotation experiments of the three minerals at different pH were investigated at sodium oleate concentration of 160 Sodium oleate severed as unsaturated fatty acid sodium salt produces a variety of hydrolysate in water. Component of hydrolysate depends on pH value. Molecular formula of sodium oleate (C It was found that oleate adsorbed on iron minerals through oxygen atoms acting with Fe atoms at the surfaces with the status of lowest energy Trend can also be explained by analyzing relative concentration of carbon and oxygen in sodium oleate on different minerals Compared with the same kinds of atom in the three models, distance of most oxygen atoms in oleate ions on siderite surface was the smallest. Oleate had the strongest interaction with siderite. But distance of carbon atoms on hematite was little bit small than that of siderite. Unlike atoms on siderite, distance of oxygen atoms on hematite was larger than the distance of carbon atoms. It may caused by joint action of weak interaction of oleate with hematite and steric effect of carbon chain. Therefore, oleate had a weaker intermolecular interaction with hematite than siderite. It could also be verified by the differences in interaction energy. In other words, both siderite and hematite could be collected by sodium oleate and the former had a better behavior. Interaction energy calculation and analysis of relative concentration were investigated to illustrate the flotation behavior of siderite, hematite and quartz in sodium oleate solution. The most stable adsorption model was oleate-siderite (101) complex containing water molecular with almost all the oleate ions adsorbing on siderite. Among the three minerals, oleate ions bound strongly on siderite followed by hematite. Sodium oleate hardly adsorbed on quartz. As a result, flotation recovery of quartz remained zero. Relative concentration of carbon and oxygen in oleate on mineral surface could reflect relative adsorption quantity and relative strength of interaction. It was also noted that interaction of oxygen with active site at mineral surfaces was the main driving force to make sodium oleate adsorb on surfaces. So active sites can be added to quartz factitiously to realize first stage of direct flotation to recover siderite and second stage of reverse flotation to recovery hematite. This work was supported by the