In this study, we evaluate for the first time the effect of ionic composition on the anodic production of hydroxyl radical (
                        
                     OHa) during electrocoagulation (EC) process in batch using carbon steel electrodes. Likewise, hydroxyl radical production from active chlorine (
                        
                     OHph) electrogenerated in EC photoassisted with UVA (λ = 365 nm) and UVC light (λ = 254 nm) was evaluated using car wash wastewater. Both, 
                        
                     OHa and 
                        
                     OHph, were analyzed by UV–Vis spectroscopy and fluorescence using coumarin as the probe. Under optimal conditions (j = 8 mA cm−2, 25 °C, 15 min, 6 rpm), turbidity, suspended solids and color were removed by 98.3%, 98.7% and 93.1%, respectively. However, total organic carbon (TOC) abatement only attained 27%. This can be related to the fact that 
                        
                     OHa and 
                        
                     OHph were not identified during EC, with or without UV irradiation. Hence, the organic matter is mainly removed by coagulation with Fe(OH)n species. Comparative treatment of the same wastewater by electrochemical oxidation (EO) with a Ti|IrO2-Ta2O5 anode in the presence of electrogenerated active chlorine and UVC light demonstrated the generation of 
                        
                     OHph, thus encouraging the potential coupling of EC with EO.Wastewater from car washes typically contains a high amount of suspended solids, organic matter, and numerous pollutants such as surfactants, oils, grease, hydrocarbons, plasticizers, microorganisms, Reported methods for car wash wastewater treatment include different physicochemical processes that, though efficient, do not completely solve the problem Lately, coexistence of predominant adsorption and precipitation mechanisms with multiple secondary reactions such as direct anodic oxidation, chlorine-mediated oxidation and cathodic reduction has been suggested. More rarely, some authors have hypothesized the possible role of Likewise, the addition of 1.0 mM Fe The identification of EC with Al or Fe anodes does not show great ability to promote active chlorine production, even when the treated solution contains a high amount of chloride ion. Nonetheless, some authors defend this possibility and, in some case, trace amounts have been reported Several studies on car wash wastewater treatment have been reported so far, focused on chemical Fenton and photo-Fenton When needed, the solution pH was adjusted with H A plastic bin was filled with 20 L of car wash wastewater obtained from a client and immediately refrigerated at 4 °C. To run each trial, sampling from that bin was made after vigorous stirring to ensure homogeneity. The pH and electrical conductivity (   A complete physicochemical characterization of the real wastewater is presented in Before performing the EC trials, the carbon steel plates (provided by CIDETEQ) used as sacrificial anodes were subjected to a surface activation process in 0.5 M H Once concluded, the electrodes were withdrawn from the electrochemical cell and rinsed with ultrapure water. Both electrodes were immersed in an ultrasonic bath for 20 min and were then rinsed with water. Afterwards, different EC experiments were performed during specific time intervals. All the electrolyses were performed at constant current using LKB Bromma power supply. During the activation process, detachment of black impurities from the anode was clearly observed. To evaluate the structural and morphological changes occurred on the electrode surface upon electrochemical polarization, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) were employed. Typical conditions for this type of analysis have been reported elsewhere The EC experiments with the car wash wastewater were performed using the same experimental procedure described for the activation (see setup in For the analysis of hydroxyl radicals formed via electrochemical oxidation ( In order to demonstrate the potential production of hydroxyl radicals via photoelectrochemical route (  It is important to keep in mind that at a car wash, large amounts of detergents and soaps are used, which mix with humic substances (HS) mainly attached to tires. It is thus logical to presuppose that these kinds of organic components account for a substantial TOC fraction not removed by EC at each Considering the low The samples were analyzed by UV–Vis spectroscopy to monitor the disappearance of coumarin, in the absence or presence of  It can be observed that the initial absorbance was quite stable during the electrolysis, which means that To confirm the results, the analysis was also carried out in a divided cell, using a salt bridge (agar, 3 M KCl). The 0.5 M H In conclusion, in typical EC treatments, the formation of hydroxyl radicals at the anode or cathode surface can be disregarded. However, the contribution of indirect oxidation processes in the bulk cannot be still ruled out.  As can be seen, EC treatment at pH 7.0 upon pH adjustment with H To investigate the photochemical formation of homogeneous hydroxyl radical from active chlorine activation, a set of electrolyses was carried out with a solution of 0.5 mM coumarin at different pH values (adjusted with HCl), at According to the results obtained for EC, and to demonstrate the potential use of active chlorine photoactivation with UV light to form At all pH values, irradiation with UVA light ( To confirm the evidence of A significant decrease of coumarin absorbance can be seen in The treatment of raw car wash wastewater by EC process with carbon steel electrodes has been proven very effective to remove more than 98% of TSS and turbidity, along with 93.1% of color in 15 min at 8 mA cm The authors would like to thank Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: