A study on the physical properties, liquid–liquid equilibrium and the performance of a pulsed sieve plate column was conducted using the system: Jordanian purified filter phosphoric acid (28% P2O5)–uranium–0.5 M DEPA–0.125 M TOPO diluted in kerosene. Density and surface tension were found to follow simple negative linear relationship with temperature while an Arrhenius type model was adequate to fit the viscosity dependence on temperature.
                  The effect of electromotive force (EMF) on the uranium distribution coefficient was studied and a practical limit of oxidation of the uranium was found to be in the range 400–410 mV. Vant Hoff equation was found to adequately describe the dependence of uranium distribution coefficient on temperature. Uranium distribution coefficients obtained for the Jordanian acid were higher than reported data for other acids, with distribution coefficients as high as 6.0 obtained at about 45°C.
                  A preliminary evaluation of the performance of a pulsed sieve plate column was conducted and yielded promising results for the application of such contactors in this field. Recoveries of 90% were obtained at moderate pulsation intensities. Solvent entrainment results indicate that about 1900 ppm of the solvent is lost to the acid, which is higher than that for mixer settlers.Phosphoric acid is produced by contacting phosphate ores with sulfuric acid. During this process, the uranium content of the phosphate ores is preferentially transferred to the phosphoric acid. Phosphate ores and phosphatic fertilizers manufactured using phosphoric acid exports contributes significantly to the economy of Jordan. Growing concerns and stringent regulations imposed on the content of heavy metals of fertilizers, pose a potential loss of important markets such as the European Union states. This led to devising ways to upgrade the quality of phosphoric acid by reducing the concentration of uranium and cadmium. Although a considerable amount of research and development work has been carried out on the extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid In this study, the phosphoric acid is the aqueous phase (A), 0.5 M DEPA–0.125 M TOPO diluted in kerosene is the organic phase (O), while uranium (VI) is the solute distributed between the two phases. We report the effect of temperature on the physical properties (density, viscosity and surface tension) of the phosphoric acid and the solvent. We also report the effect of temperature and electromotive force (EMF) on the extraction equilibrium isotherm and the results of a preliminary investigation of uranium extraction from phosphoric acid in a pulsed sieve plate extraction column. Phosphoric acid used in the study is produced by Jordan Phosphate Mines (JPMC) fertilizer complex located in Aqaba, south of Jordan. This acid is a dilute filter acid (28% P DEPA supplied by Fluka and TOPO from Hoechst having purities of 98.6% and 97.8%, respectively, were used without further purification. The diluent used is commercial kerosene having an API gravity of 45 and produced by Jordan Petroleum Refinery (JPRC). Density is determined for the two liquids using a 50-ml pycnometer, a water bath with a precision of ±0.2°C and an analytical balance with a precision of ±0.0001 g. The temperatures range for which the density of the acid was determined is 8–87°C; while for the solvent, it is 21–60°C. Viscosity for both the acid and the solvent was determined using a HAAKE falling ball viscometer. The viscosity of phosphoric acid was determined in the temperature range 16–50°C; while the viscosity of the solvent was determined in the range 15–55°C. Surface tension was determined using the capillary rise method for mutually saturated phosphoric acid and solvent at a phase ratio of 2.0. Surface tension for phosphoric acid and solvent was determined in the temperatures range 25–60°C. Liquid–liquid equilibrium (LLE) data were obtained as a function of variables relevant to this study; i.e., temperature and EMF, since all other parameters are kept constant; e.g., acid concentration is about 28% and the solvent composition is kept at 0.5 M DEPA–0.125 M TOPO diluted in kerosene. The range of temperature used in this study is from about 15–45°C, while the EMF varied from 350 to 410 mV. The phase ratio variation method was used to determine the uranium distribution coefficient using 100 ml liquid–liquid equilibrium cells equipped with agitators and temperature control. The two phases were mixed for 15 min to ensure that they have reached equilibrium, and then they were left to stand for a period of about 30 min to allow for phase separation. Preliminary experiments by Basheer The variation of the density of phosphoric acid and the solvent as a function of temperature in the relevant temperature range are shown in The change in density of the phosphoric acid (expressed in terms of % P Based on this equation, the change in density per degree centigrade for a 28% acid is calculated to be 0.604, which compares reasonably well with the slope of the straight line equation for the acid in this work. The density of the solvent is more sensitive to variations in temperature than that of the acid, which leads to an increase in density difference, which in turn enhances phase separation. The viscosities of the phosphoric acid and the solvent are plotted as a function of temperature in  The variation of surface tension for phosphoric acid and the solvent is shown in To quantify the effect of temperature on the surface tension, the normal practice in the literature is to assume a linear equation of the following form The extraction of uranium from phosphoric acid by DEPA–TOPO mixture may be represented by the simplified reaction (based on DEPA since TOPO reaction occurs within the organic phase): This constant can be assumed as a function of temperature only, therefore, it is fixed at a given temperature. Details of the dependence of equilibrium constant are to be discussed later. The distribution coefficient can be related to the equilibrium constant by substituting The DEPA in the system is present in excess, therefore, it is reasonable to assume that its concentration remains constant. Also, it is reasonable to assume that the hydrogen evolved from the reaction does not alter the pH of the system appreciably. Therefore, it can be seen from The effect of EMF on distribution coefficient at a constant temperature is presented in The distribution isotherms at EMF values of 400 and 410 mV are almost identical indicating that no appreciable change in distribution coefficient is obtained on further addition of oxidant to the acid. This suggests that almost all the uranium in the acid is in the hexavalent form at this level of EMF. This level of EMF may be considered as a practical level for the extraction of uranium from Jordanian phosphoric acid, considering the extra requirement necessary for achieving full oxidation of uranium, which may correspond to EMF levels as high as 600 mV or more as in the case of the Florida rock acid The effect of temperature on the distribution of uranium between the two phases is illustrated in The effect of temperature on the distribution coefficient can be quantified by making use of the Vant Hoff equation, which relates the chemical equilibrium constant with temperature: With the assumption of constant Δ If A more convenient method to determine the concentration of uranium in the solvent (or distribution coefficient) knowing that the concentration in the acid, EMF and temperature is given by the following equation, which can reproduce the experimental data to within 25% accuracy (it is more accurate for the distribution coefficient) The quantity of solvent available for the study was limited, therefore, only the pulsation intensity of the column was investigated using the phosphoric acid as the continuous phase to minimize solvent use, which result in a The pulsed column consists of a 50-mm i.d. Corning QVF glass section with a total length of about 100 cm containing 19 sieve plates with their holes arranged in a triangular pitch. The column is fitted to the upper and lower disengaging section by flanges. A Corning QVF glass tee connection was fitted to the heavy phase settler with a flange, the height of this connection was enlarged via an additional QVF glass section flanged to it. The effect of increasing pulsation intensity is to enhance column performance by creating smaller drops having high interfacial areas for mass transfer, but the enhancement is not always proportional since as long as drops get smaller, they become more susceptible to entrainment in the continuous phase resulting in increased backmixing and decreasing the performance of the column. The results of uranium recovery in the column and solvent entrainment are given in In this article, we presented the results of a preliminary investigation of uranium extraction from Jordanian phosphoric acid using the synergistic solvent: 0.5 M DEPA–0.125 M TOPO diluted in kerosene. Physical properties of both the acid and the solvent were determined as a function of temperature and appropriate equations were determined. The results indicate that the distribution coefficient of uranium is proportional to the EMF and is inversely proportional to temperature. The results from the pulsed column study show that such systems may provide a promising alternative to the conventional mixer-settler batteries in the removal of uranium from phosphoric acid. The authors wish to thank Engineer Arafat Ghousheh and Dr. Saleh Al-Basheer from the JPMC R&D labs for providing the materials and facilities to carry out this project. Also, we would like to thank Mr. Nabih Iriksousi from the instrumental analysis lab at the chemical engineering department of the University of Jordan for the help in analytical procedures and analysis. One of the authors (AA) wishes to thank his colleague Mark Nelson for helpful comments and discussions.