The stone surface treatment with water jet is a recently introduced method. It is used to increase the roughness to improve its antislip properties while preserving esthetic appearance of the stone without having thermal shock, mechanical stress and the production of fumes and dust. Nozzle angle is one of the important parameters affecting treatment of surface. This study is an attempt to assess the effect of nozzle angle on surface treatment quality with water jet and to determine the most suitable nozzle angle value. For this purpose, surfaces of Sardinian Basalt samples are treated with pure water jet in six different nozzle angles (15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90°). The roughness is measured on all the treated surfaces by various roughness parameters. The experimental studies showed that treatment with nozzle angle between 30° and 75° gives the surfaces with similar regular variation.Contemporary stone architecture philosophies have definitively consolidated the use of ornamental stones with treated surface, especially rough surfaces, for cladding/facing, paving/flooring and more and more frequently for urban fixtures and in design There are a number of methods of stone surface processing and finishing such as chiseling, bushhamering, sandblasting, scratching, flaming, grinding, water treatment. The choice of the method depends on the type and the conditions of the material, the esthetic effect, economics of the working, tradition and also market trends Surface treatment methods based on mechanical tools, sand blasting and flaming lead to undesirable features such as chromatic modifications, production of micro-cracks, mechanical alterations. Water jetting is a relatively new process of stone surface treatment based on the action of very high velocity water jets generated at constant pressure and water jet treated stone surfaces are of higher level of esthetical appearance than the other methods Researchers In all these studies, the nozzle angle 30° is considered only and the surface quality is assessed from the esthetic point of view. The purpose of this study is to investigate the effect of the nozzle angle in the range of 15–90° on the surface treatment and also to determine the most suitable nozzle angle. For this purpose, surface treatment operations with pure water jet are performed in six different nozzle angle values (15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75° and 90°) on Sardinian Basalt sample. The roughness measurements are performed in two perpendicular directions on all the treated surfaces and the surfaces are assessed by considering statistical and geostatistical criteria. Two main machines were used in this study; water-jet plant for the surface treatment operations and roughness measurement system to evaluate roughness of the treated surfaces. The equipment used in the experimental plan is a robot, numerically controlled on two axes, whose nozzle-bearing head is deliberately inclined to carry out the experiment ( 37 Nozzle-bearing head equipped with a slope-regulating device, carrying a convergent-section sapphire orifice 0.3 Numerical control robot dedicated to moving the water jet on two controlled axes ( A programmable unit to which setting and automatic controls of all the functions are committed. It is interfaced with the working table by a CAD–CAM programming system For surface treatment operations, six different nozzle angles (jet inclination angle) are used ( Surftest SJ-400 portable surface roughness tester system is used for the measurement of roughness values. The system has a recordable pin (stylus) which goes along a straight line on a flat surface and it moves up and down depending on the surface regularity. These vibrations are magnified 10–100,000 times and recorded. Thus roughness profile of the surface is obtained in micron level. The Surftest SJ-400 can evaluate 36 kinds of roughness parameters conforming to the standards such as ISO, DIN standards. The SJ-400 detector uses interchangeable nosepieces to allow skid or skidless measurements depending on the type of measurement required The first step of roughness analysis is to filter very high frequency data since it can often be attributed to vibrations or debris on the part of surface. Then the data is separated into roughness, waviness and shape. This can be accomplished using reference lines, envelope methods, digital filters, fractals or other techniques. Finally the data is summarized using a number of the roughness parameters There are two basic principles of operation used to measure surface roughness; skidded and non-skidded. In skidded probes, the sensitive, diamond-tipped stylus is supported by a metal skid that rests on the workpiece, thus it uses the workpiece itself as the reference surface. Non-skidded (or skidless) probes use an internal precision rail to provide the reference for the probe. This enables skidless probes to be used with high-end surface measuring systems for measurements of waviness. Skidless probes are indispensable for complex surface analysis but high-end systems cost more than small skidded gages Roughness is often closely related to the friction and wear properties of a surface. The typical example of the roughness profile is given in There are many roughness parameters in use, but absolute deviation from the mean ( It is the most used measure to describe surface roughness. Absolute deviation can be defined as average of the absolute deviations of height from the mean ( It is the square root of the variance of the heights ( Range is the difference between maximum and minimum height. The The above parameters for measuring roughness consider variability in height at single distance (i.e., zero distance). Assessment of roughness requires more than this. In particular, quantifying variability at various distances provides richer information than single distance. One way of measuring variability in several distances is to use variogram function. The variogram function is defined as variance of difference in height and is calculated as follows: The Sardinian Basalt (Basalto Sardo) rock was used for the surface treatment operations. Some of the physical and mechanical properties of the Sardinian Basalt sample are given in The mineralogical and petrographical properties of the rock were also determined by using thin sections. The thin section studies showed that the Basalt sample is olivin basalt in mostly apertured form and porphric texture. Phenocrystalle in mostly oxidized mineral signs and pseudomorphes (small amount of remnant considered as olivine with grain size between 0.24 The methodology used in this study is given as follows ( Select the samples used in surface treatment operations. Determine the values of the working parameters. The working parameters used in this study are the effective parameters in surface treatment using water jet. The parameters and the values of them were chosen based on the results obtained by Costa     Distance between water jet scanning lines (mm): 1.5. After each surface treatment operations, nozzle angle was changed. Nozzle angle and standoff distance are shown in Categorize the treated surface samples into the nozzle angle values ( Measure roughness in the specified directions by using Mitutoyo SJ-400 roughness measurement equipment. The directions and methodology used in roughness measurement operations are shown in Calculate the roughness parameters. Construct surface maps by using SURFER computer software Calculate experimental and model variograms for every nozzle angle. Determination of sill values and ranges for the profiles at six nozzle angle. The roughness is measured along with several profiles in  Experimental variograms of the profiles generated at each nozzle angle are calculated and then models are fitted to the experimental variograms.  The nozzle angles less than 30° lead to the groove formation due to widening effect and less sharp penetration on the whole surface. Moreover very sharp penetration at the nozzle angle greater than 75° is obtained due to deepening effect. All these effects are observed on the treated surfaces macroscopically. On the basis of these results we could say that the nozzle angle between 30° and 75° gives the desirable surfaces in terms of regularity. In this study, it is aimed to determine the effect of nozzle angle on roughness by using statistical and geostatistical measures. For this reason, some laboratory studies have been performed by using the water jet cutting-surface treatment machine on natural stone samples commercially named as Sardinian Basalt. The main conclusions drawn from this study are given below: Surface treatment quality with water jets depends on nozzle angle. The relationships between roughness parameters ( Variogram analysis of the profiles indicates the presence of high anisotropy ratios for low and high nozzle angles. This suggests that performing surface treatment operations with water jet between 30° and 75° angles yields better surfaces from the esthetic point of view.