I have listed in this chapter several of the most convenient addresses to obtain archived aerial photographs and order aerial photographic missions. They include U. S. Department of Agriculture, U. S. Department of Commerce, National Archives and Record Service, U. S. Department of the Interior, Canadian Aerial Photography, Mexican Aerial Photography, Foreign Aerial Photography, Google™ Earth, Municipal, county, and state geological surveys and web sites, County, state, and national park system resource archives, Municipal, county, and state water resources and flood management surveys and web sites, Municipal, county and state departments of transportation, Local aerial photography companies and many more. Previously there were several agencies within USDA that offered aerial photographic services. These have been consolidated into a single agency, which offers both archived aerial photographs and remote sensing images. One can also request new photo missions. Aerial photographs within the US Department of Commerce are handled by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration at  US Department of Interior remote sensing products, both archived and new projects, are handled by the US Geological Survey at  I could find no clearing house for aerial photographs of Mexico. Your best bet may be to check with mining companies, or local firms in Mexico. Also, Google Earth, and Landsat images may be helpful. Many foreign countries are sensitive about anyone besides their military collecting aerial photographs of their country. I have seen foreign aerial photographs on which “ A great resource for aerial images is Google™ Earth. Google™ Earth software can be downloaded free and provides images distributed worldwide. The images are satellite images supplemented with aerial photograph mosaics where available. I have used Google™ Earth images for projects in Papua, Indonesia, and Mexico where aerial photographs are difficult to procure. You don’t get stereo images, but you can get 3-D perspective views of buildings and terrain using the 3-D buildings layer on the viewer. Images are in color. I have included Google™ Earth images in this e-book as  Municipal, county, and state geological surveys and websites. County, state, and national park system resource archives. Municipal, county, and state water resources and flood management surveys and websites. Municipal, county, and state departments of transportation. College and university websites. Local aerial photography companies. Local and regional mining, petroleum, pipeline, railroad, and construction companies. Mineral extraction and pipeline companies