This paper discusses the relationships between the surface properties of the sub-bituminous and meta-bituminous coal and their flotation properties. Additionally, it was investigated whether the flotation kinetic constants, obtained using various flotation kinetic models, can be used for prediction of the flotation response. Both coal samples had the very similar amount and type of impurities as confirmed by XRD. FTIR, contact angle, zeta potential and SEM measurements were used to study the coal surface properties. It was found that the meta-bituminous coal was significantly more hydrophobic than the sub-bituminous coal and the coal surface roughness was significantly more pronounced in the case of the sub-bituminous coal than that in the case of the meta-bituminous coal. For these reasons, the recovery of the meta-bituminous coal by flotation was dramatically higher than that of the sub-bituminous coal even in the presence of collector. Six flotation kinetic models successfully predicted the flotation data. Nevertheless, the modified first-order model was the only model that can be used to explain the flotation responses under a wide range of the experimental conditions. The reason is that for most flotation kinetic models, used in this study, particularly in the case of the sub-bituminous coal, the flotation rate constants decreased with increasing in collector dosage while the opposite is true in the case of the flotation recoveries.Separation of various coals from ash by flotation is widely used in numerous coal plants. Several flotation models have been developed to understand the theory behind flotation processes, and for plant design and simulations The classical first-order model was found to successfully predict the flotation recoveries of ultrafine coal flotation and coking coal flotation at different size fractions A comprehensive literature review found that there is the very limited information about investigating the influence of hydrophobicity on flotation kinetics under a wide range of conditions. Moreover, in order to assess flotation kinetic models, relationships between flotation rate constants and flotation combustible recoveries have not been systematically investigated. Thus, the main objective of the present article is to investigate the surface hydrophobicity of sub-bituminous and meta-bituminous coal and their flotation kinetics. Surface characterization techniques (Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy, scanning electron microscopy, contact angle and zeta potential measurements) will also be used to systematically characterize the flotation behavior of the studied coals. The flotation performance of the coal types during flotation was characterized based on the combustible coal recovery, the ash recovery and the efficiency of separation. The sub-bituminous coal and the meta-bituminous coal samples were collected from the Shanxi province in China. The coal samples were crushed and screened to obtain −0.5 + 0.25 mm size fraction. This particle size range was chosen to reduce the entrainments of fine coal particles. Additionally, coarse coal flotation is successfully used in numerous coal plants. The moisture, volatile matter, carbon and ash contents of the air-dried coal samples are given in X-ray diffraction measurements were used to identify the mineral phases in coal samples. XRD technique was performed using a diffractometer Olympus with radiation Co-Kα in the range between 5 and 55° (2θ). For a typical XRD analysis, the powder samples for XRD measurements were −0.045 mm, and the software Xpowder was employed for the data analysis. The XRD diffractograms of the two coal samples considered in this study are given in A Vertex 80v (Bruker, Germany) Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) was used to determine the surface functional groups on the coal samples. The FITR spectrums of the sub-bituminous and meta-bituminous coals were obtained using the pellets prepared by mixing 200 mg KBr and 1 mg coal sample. The FEI Quanta Inspect F50 FESEM was used to analyze the surface morphology of the coal samples. The samples were first cleaned using absolute ethyl alcohol and then dried in air. Zeta potential measurements were conducted using a Zetasizer (Malvern Nano Z, UK). In this method, 0.05 g coals were conditioned in 100 ml of deionized water for 5 min. Following conditioning, the supernatant solution containing fine particles was used for the zeta potential measurements by discarding the settled particles. Each test was repeated at least four times and the mean value was used for further analysis. All the zeta-potential measurements were performed at 20 ± 2 °C. The sessile drop method (Drop Shape Analyzer DSA100, KRUSSGmbH, Germany) was used to determine the contact angles on the coal samples. Coarse coal particles (−0.5 + 0.25 mm) were first ground to −0.045 mm and then the plates were prepared by pressing about 2 g of each sample; the plates were prepared under the pressure of 50 MPa for 3 min. The contact angle measurements were carried out in the air as soon as the water droplets were placed on the coal surfaces. All measurements were repeated three times. Flotation experiments were carried out to investigate the flotation performance of the sub-bituminous coal and the meta-bituminous coal samples under various conditions. Before the microflotation tests, the coal sample was first deslimed in an ultrasonic cleaner and then the deslimed coal sample was conditioned for 5 min using a magnetic stirring apparatus in the presence of diesel collector (0 kg/t, 10 kg/t and 20 kg/t) and MIBC (2 kg/t). The conditioned pulp was transfered into a 300 ml flotation column. In each flotation test, the feed mass was 2.0 g and the air flow rate was set to 0.5 l/min. Considering that the mass of each sample was 2 g, each flotation test was performed by setting the reference time. For example, after 0.5 min, one concentrate was collected instead of collecting four concentrates (i.e. after 0.5, 1, 1.5 and 2 min) in one flotation test. Additionally, the amounts of all obtained concentrates were not enough for the ash measurements and thus the ash content of the coal concentrates was determined based on the mass balance calculations of feed, concentrates and tailings. The reproducibility of the flotation tests was acceptable since the maximum experimental error did not exceed 5% based on the repeated tests. The flotation performance was characterized by the combustible matter recovery, the ash recovery and the separation efficiency index using Eqs. (1)–)3). The hydrophobicity of two coal samples can be obtained using their contact angles. The FTIR spectra of the sub-bituminous coal and the meta-bituminous coal are shown in The FTIR results suggest that the intensity of the peak at 3400 cm The surface morphology of the coal samples was analyzed by SEM. The images of the sub-bituminous coal and the meta-bituminous coal particles are presented in As shown in The zeta potential is known to affect the bubble-particle attachment processes and the adsorption of collectors The changes in the zeta potential of the sub-bituminous coal, the meta-bituminous coal and air bubbles as a function of solution pH are shown in     Although all these flotation models can predict the experimental flotation data, the real value lies to demonstrate whether the calculated flotation rate constants can be used to explain the flotation performances (i.e. combustible recovery, ash recovery and separation efficiency index).  In the case of the meta-bituminous coal, when all models were used except for the model 4, it was found that the higher the collector dosage, the higher the flotation rate constants. It appears that the kinetic results, shown in In order to better explain these observations, the modified rate constant is used i.e. k/ In the case of the sub-bituminous coal, when the modified rate constant is between 0.00917 and 0.039, the combustible recovery follows the trend of In the case of the meta-bituminous coal, when the modified rate constant is between 0.05175 and 1, the combustible recovery also follows the trend of The model 6 is the only model that can successfully explain the influence of collector dosage on flotation of sub-bituminous coal and meta-bituminous coal under the experimental conditions used in this work. This is probably because the fitting parameters are  These results clearly showed that even though the difference between the experimental and the calculated flotation results might be small, it does not mean necessarily that the kinetic model should be used in design and optimization of flotation circuits. It was also found that the model 6 i.e. the modified-first order model is the only model that can be used to explain the flotation results obtained under a wide range of experimental conditions for two different coals. This paper presents a comparison of the flotation performances and kinetics of the sub-bituminous and meta-bituminous coals in a flotation column. The FTIR results indicate that the sub-bituminous coal surface had significantly more hydrophilic functional groups than the meta-bituminous coal. The contact angle of the sub-bituminous coal was much lower than that of the meta-bituminous coal. The XRD analyses show that the main mineral phases in both the sub-bituminous coal and meta-bituminous coal samples were similar. The zeta potential measurements indicated that bubble-particle attachment interactions were more favorable in the case of the meta-bituminous coal than that in the case of the sub-bituminous coal. The SEM image analysis revealed that there were more holes and cracks on the sub-bituminous coal surface than that on the meta-bituminous coal surface. The flotation and kinetic analyses indicated that the differences in flotation rate constants between the sub-bituminous and meta-bituminous coals can be explained using the modified first-order model rather than other models used in this study. This work contributes to better understanding of flotation behavior of bituminous coals. This study also found that the deviation between the experimental and calculated flotation data should not be the only criterion when selecting flotation kinetic models for design and optimization of flotation circuits. This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for Central Universities (grant number 2017XKZD04).