Liberation is a key driver in all mineral separation processes as it limits the maximum possible grade for a given recovery. In flotation, this is further complicated by the fact that it is surface exposure of the floatable minerals that determines the ultimate performance. Liberation, grade and surface exposure are commonly quantified using Scanning Electron Microscopy coupled to Energy Dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDX) analysis of polished sections. The intrinsically 2D nature of this technique can result in significant sampling errors and stereological effects that can affect the quantification of the ore’s textural characteristics. X-ray microCT (XMT) is an imaging method that can non-invasively and non-destructively delineate ore fragments in 3D, thus providing an alternative method that eliminates the need for stereological corrections and readily provides surface exposure. A methodology and automated algorithm were developed for extracting this information from images of closely packed particles. By dividing these particles into classes based on both their surface exposure and grade, the extent to which there is preferential breakage of the particles can be assessed—an important consideration if sufficient surface liberation for good flotation performance is to be achieved at coarser particle sizes. Using low energy scanning simple 3D mineral maps can be obtained via XMT, allowing for the assessment of liberation and surface exposure for each mineral species. The methodology was tested on low grade porphyry copper ore as this is representative of the most commonly treated ore types for copper production.Liberation is one of the two fundamental operations—alongside concentration—in mineral processing ( Liberation and surface exposure are commonly quantified using automated mineral analysers equipped with Scanning Electron Microscopy and Energy Dispersive X-ray Spectrometry analysis from particle’s polished sections ( The main issue with this kind of analysis is that the intrinsically 2D nature of automated mineralogy techniques results in significant stereological effects. Correcting for these effects is challenging as it requires knowledge of grain shape, often erroneously assumed to be spherical or ellipsoidal ( X-ray micro-CT (XMT) is an imaging method that can non-invasively and non-destructively delineate the rock and the mineral grains in 3D ( In this paper we proposed a similar approach to the one presented by A porphyry copper ore with a grade of 0.8 wt% copper was used to illustrate the capabilities of this method. Another representative sample of fragments were crushed in four stages using a Fritsch lab jaw crusher Pulverisette 1. The crushed material was sieved into eight size classes (particle size distribution shown in Sample preparation for scanning was performed by taking representative samples of each size class via coning and quartering. These samples were placed in layers in a 6 mm perplex column as shown in The sample was scanned using a Zeiss Xradia 510 Versa system. Three different energy levels (50, 60 and 70 kV) were tested together with different resolutions (1, 2.01, 3.1 and 6.2 µm). This was done in order to ascertain the best scanning conditions, as well as the best compromise between accuracy and scanning time. High energy scans can be carried out more quickly than low energy ones, but result in less contrast between different sulphide minerals, while lower resolution scans allow larger sample sizes to be scanned in a given time, but contain less spatial information. It was found that for this particular ore the highest energy level provided a good contrast between the gangue and the sulphide minerals. Spatial resolution was selected as the lowest value that provided no significant change in the results with a further increase in the resolution, so that scanning time is minimised, and the number of analysed particles is maximised. A summary of all the acquisition parameters are listed in To minimise the data collection time, the column sample was scanned such that two size classes fitted into a single field of view, thus allowing data for all size intervals to be obtained from 4 scan volumes. This can be observed in the slices shown in Handling of the images and the post-processing was performed in a combination of Avizo® and Matlab®. After cropping the image to remove the column, a global threshold was found that segmented the fragments from the air in between them. Object separation algorithms were then used to identify each individual fragment and to assign a unique identifier to each of them. A similar procedure was then carried out to identify each of the sulphide mineral grains in order to obtain a 3D image where each fragment is individually identified together with each of the mineral grains it contains. The next stage of the data analysis was to calculate the surface area of each of the particles, as well as the exposed surface area of each of the grains that intersects the particle surface. In order to obtain the exposed surface, a distance map for the particle is firstly calculated, which indicates the distance of each voxel from the air phase. This map can thus be used to obtain those voxels that are directly adjacent to the air (zero distance), together with both the particle and mineral grain ids associated with these voxels. In this way, the surface exposure of the whole particle and the mineral phases within it can be obtained. This can be done in a 2D (perimeter exposed) and 3D (surface exposed) fashion. The measured volumes, surface areas, and lengths of the particles and sulphide grains can then be used as the basis for analysing the grade and liberation distributions of the samples. Because XMT is able to scan a volume of packed particles, a comparatively large number of them can be analysed in a single scan. For the size classes examined, the total number of particles tracked is nearly 20,000, with approximately 70% of them being fully liberated gangue. The smallest particles, with less than 100 voxels in volume (around 12 µm in diameter) were discounted from the analysis due to the high uncertainty in their quantification (as pointed out by  In this work liberation and grade, in 2D and 3D, are defined as follows. The grades and liberation reported are for the total sulphide content unless otherwise indicated. Following the definitions from Eqs. In the case of surface exposure, measured using Eqs. As it analyses a 3D volume, microCT can be used to simultaneously measure a large number of particle fragments. Even though a large proportion of the particles in this sample consist of liberated gangue (over 70%, by number), there are still sufficient particles (1552 individual particles) for those that contain sulphides to be divided into a number of categories based on both the diameter of the fragments and their grade, with sufficient grains in each category to obtain not only a statistically valid mean, but also a distribution. Category boundaries for both parameters were chosen so that a similar amount of sample is present in all of the combinations (note that fully liberated gangue was excluded from this analysis). The variability of surface exposure in each of these categories is also of interest as a reasonable degree of surface exposure is required for good flotation performance and therefore even if the average surface exposure is sufficient for good flotation performance, losses in the category could still be experienced if there is a significant amount of material with exposure much less than the average. Considering a simple flotation model, where only particles with a certain degree of surface exposure are floated, a recovery curve can be plotted. Due to time and budget constraints, when performing traditional SEM analysis only a single slice will typically be obtained from each fragment. Lack of full information about the 3D properties of the particles creates a sampling error that affects both the quantification of grade and surface exposure. By creating a fixed number of random virtual slices on each fragment these effects can be studied and analysed. In the case of surface exposure, there is not only a sampling error, but also an unavoidable stereological discrepancy when using 2D data. Even when using all possible slices, 2D liberation does not converge to the actual 3D exposure. Well known stereological effects prevent this from happening and its effect can only be overcome by creating ore-specific correction models. Grain exposure can also be linked with the particle’s grade and, as expected, there is a direct relationship between them. This preferential breakage towards the gangue at high grade particles is most probably related to the ore used and the crushing methodology. This data demonstrates how this type of investigation could be used to quantify the effect of different comminution techniques in terms of the extent of any preferential breakage experienced for a specific ore. This is important to quantify as preferential breakage can help or hinder the flotation response for a given particle size and grade depending on which phase the fractures preferentially occur in. Some proposed new comminution techniques, such as microwave assisted comminution and high voltage pulsed electrical comminution (  A methodology for assessing liberation in terms of grade and surface exposure using microCT has been developed and tested using a typical porphyry copper ore. MicroCT has been shown to be a useful tool for assessing liberation in a non-destructive and more comprehensive way than can be achieved using traditional methods such as sectioning and scanning electron microscopy. Optimal acquisition parameters were obtained in order to minimise scanning time and to ensure that contrast between gangue and mineral phases were maximised, allowing for a simplified mineral map that distinguished between copper containing species and non-valuable grains (pyrite). The stereological effect, present in traditional SEM-EDS analyses, was also studied. A significant effect in both the estimation of grade and surface exposure was observed. 2D data from microCT analysis was shown to overestimate average surface exposure of the particles, while at the same time requiring a significantly larger number of fragments to be included in order to converge to the same grade. More importantly, even when using all possible 2D slices, grain surface exposure, a key factor in flotation, does not converge to the actual 3D surface exposure experienced by the particles. Surface exposure was also analysed for different fragment sizes and grades, showing a strong relationship with the latter. In the particular case of the ore and crushing method used, fragment size had no significant influence on surface exposure for a given grade. Furthermore, the ability to distinguish between copper ores and other mineral grains can also be used to analyse the mineral processing system in terms of preferential breakage, giving valuable insight about the efficiency of the crushing/milling process in liberating the surfaces of the valuable mineral for the specific ore (and ultimately texture) being crushed/milled. Information about the distribution of surface exposure for a given fragment size and grade and mineralogy can be used to develop more accurate probabilistic flotation models that can reflect the influence of comminution on flotation performance. This study was performed in the