A prototype instrument using magnetic resonance has been constructed for quantitative measurement of selected copper minerals, in bulk samples obtained from a number of commercial ore deposits. The instrument has been developed to provide rapid on-line determination of phase concentration. The on-line measurement of copper mineral phase would be of considerable assistance to the mineralogist or process engineer for process optimisation. Ultimately, the underlying method may be applied in ore streams on conveyors or batch samples. This paper describes the development of the instrument and measurement methods, with particular emphasis on chalcopyrite, focusing on the design route for instrument deployment. Quantitative results regarding detection limits and accuracy for dilute ore concentrations are presented. In addition, effects due to crushing and grinding are discussed. Owing to the very high selectivity of the technique, it has been possible to demonstrate mineral phase resolution of 0.1wt% in bulk samples.The significant driver for the research described here is to enable optimisation of mining and mineral recovery processes by use of an on-line measurement of mineralogy. This would provide the opportunity for improved ore blending, grade control and gangue rejection at both the mining and process stage. For example, on-line measurement would enable the input–output balance in a process to be determined accurately. Selected key mineral phases could be measured continuously, perhaps with process alarms implemented above a predefined detection level. Other possible applications include the measurement of oxides and sulphides in flotation circuits, since their ratio can affect reagent use, flotation control and mineral recovery. It would be of great benefit if feedstock mineralogy could be measured accurately and controlled for process optimisation since costly periods of process underperformance could be avoided. There exists a variety of methods used to determine mineral phase. For example, X-Ray Diffraction (XRD) and electron microprobe techniques are widely used for mineral characterisation and are capable of quantifying mineralogy for process optimisation. Other techniques such as Raman and Mossbauer spectroscopy, fluorescence and reflectance can also provide mineral specific information. Optical methods in particular have found use in rapid on-line ore sorting and characterisation ( In this paper we present the particular advantages of using magnetic resonance methods, which are especially amenable to copper and other transition metal minerals. The very high selectivity of the technique and the bulk measurement of kilogram-size samples are demonstrated in laboratory tests on a variety of natural ore samples. We describe the development of a spectrometer for the measurement of specific minerals, and as an example, estimate the direct bulk content of chalcopyrite in a copper concentrate diluted as low as 0.1 The response of materials to Radio Frequency (RF) electromagnetic fields covers a broad range of phenomena. Materials can often be characterised by the predominant interaction with either the electric or magnetic radio field components. The electric response of rocks and minerals, when considered over a broad range of radio frequencies, is often dominated by moisture content and density ( However, there are other classes of magnetic resonance that can be exploited for mineralogy measurement, where the application of a static magnetic field is not required. This is an important advantage, since the significant hardware associated with magnetic field generation and control is avoided. For example, Nuclear Quadrupole Resonance (NQR) ( Most resonances of interest occur below 100 Another significant advantage is that the resonances are rarely subject to interferences from other minerals. This is because resonances are relatively narrow and at the same time widely distributed throughout the spectrum. Sulphides and oxides like chalcopyrite, cuprite and tenorite are very easily distinguishable, allowing combinations of copper minerals in real ore samples to be measured. For example, we have successfully measured small levels of cubanite in chalcopyrite ores by exciting specific cubanite resonances. Typical gangue materials like aluminosilicates have resonances at much lower frequencies, and do not interfere. Even if there is overlap in the spectra, discrimination can be obtained by exploiting differences in dynamic response that are particular to each mineral species. These facts mean that NQR and antiferromagnetic NMR methods can provide very high levels of copper mineral phase discrimination. Another potential capability resulting from the absence of interferences is the detection of relatively low mineral concentration, compared to other methods. In principle, spectrometer noise may be reduced by sufficient signal averaging, allowing the resolution of very low concentration. It is anticipated that for most applications the methods described below will typically require several minutes of signal averaging time, acceptable in most on-line applications, such as a moving conveyer. CSIRO has developed a bench spectrometer for lab-scale bulk mineralogical investigation. Significant elements of the spectrometer shown in The sequence to obtain resonant signals from the spectrometer consists of several steps. Firstly, an RF pulse from a gated power amplifier is fed to the tuned sample coil, which produces a strong RF magnetic field inside the sample. The target nuclei inside the sample couple to the RF field by precessing, and after each pulse, re-radiate a weak RF field which is detected by the same coil. This resulting signal is transmitted via the transmit-receive switch into the preamplifier, and then into the detection system. These signals are averaged over many acquisitions and the magnitude is then calculated and processed for optimal noise rejection. To excite the resonances, pulse schemes typical of NMR are used. In minerals such as chalcopyrite with relatively short relaxation times, the Hahn echo sequence, illustrated in In most magnetic resonance experiments, the absolute value of received signal may not be of particular significance, and control of the absolute response is not paramount. However, for quantitative determination of mineralogy, the absolute response must be carefully controlled across different sample loading or sample presentations ( To demonstrate the quantitative capabilities of the technique, chalcopyrite powder was diluted with commercial grade powdered silica, across a range of concentrations, and the spectrometer tested for predictive capability. Natural chalcopyrite ore concentrate (greater than 90% purity, less than 100  In another set of measurements the detection limits and resolution were investigated. A second set of chalcopyrite samples diluted with silica were prepared, with chalcopyrite concentrations ranging from 0.1 The investigation of different mixtures of gangue and sulphide mineralogy on the resolution and detection limit is continuing. Initial experiments described here are encouraging, and there is reason to believe that similar resolution would be obtainable in other mixtures. For all measurements reported in this paper, the resolution remains dominated by spectrometer thermal noise. Also, as detailed in subsequent sections there has been no observation of any systematic interference from other sulphide minerals, even where these phases collectively have higher concentration than the chalcopyrite. While the demonstrated resolution and detection limits would be useful in mineral applications, there would be a benefit in reducing the acquisition time. It is anticipated that better than 0.1 As magnetic resonance is highly sensitive to local fields around nuclei, the question arises as to whether the technique will be overly sensitive to small changes in crystalline parameters. These changes may include structural defects, impurities or crystalline stress. Very strong changes in response may hamper instrument calibration. In order to determine the natural variation of magnetic resonance response, multiple chalcopyrite samples were obtained from eight different deposits. The samples consisted of six concentrates, plus a number of samples with large particle size (>10 An experiment was performed to assess line shape across selected samples. The spectrometer excitation frequency was scanned across the resonance frequency for each sample in 50 XRD analysis on most of the available concentrate samples has indicated the presence of other significant phases such as cubanite, bornite, pyrite, chalcanthite and quartz. Comparison against quantitative mineral phase and elemental analysis is currently being progressed to compare absolute response for chalcopyrite across the different samples. Given the relatively small variations in response of samples from widely differing ore deposits, it would appear from these early measurements that the calibration of magnetic resonance techniques for chalcopyrite will be straightforward in most applications. It would be advantageous to avoid significant processing or sample preparation procedures, especially for on-line or by-line measurements. It is therefore important to quantify the effects of particle size on signal response. As described in the previous section, it has been observed that multiple concentrate samples sourced from different deposits were successfully measured with a consistent response. The mean particle size for the samples, measured using laser diffraction methods, ranged between 17 and 24 Other studies have reported significant effects associated with high intensity grinding ( To investigate these effects on the echo signal, small samples of chalcopyrite concentrate were ground in a laboratory ring mill for several minutes. Microscopic inspection of the product revealed severe changes to particle morphology, with very irregular and darkened particles, and a large fraction of smaller fragments. The resonance in the ground sample was not observable due to excessive broadening. These results are in line with the other studies on the effect of high intensity grinding on magnetic resonance. However, it should be emphasised that strong echo signals are obtainable from all concentrate samples we have obtained from processing operations. Clearly, typical industrial grinding processes do not significantly affect the resonant response. This is very encouraging for wide application of this technique. It is well known that sample electrical conductivity can affect magnetic resonance measurements. For example, metals subjected to NMR measurement are typically firstly powdered to allow sufficient radio frequency field strength to be generated inside individual particles. It is the “skin depth” ( However, it should be noted that bulk powder composed of small conducting particles allow much better RF field penetration than single large pure ore masses of the same volume ( To assess large individual particle size limits, measurements were firstly performed on relatively pure samples of chalcopyrite having bright gold lustre and large visible crystals, with pieces up to 20 However, in many sulphide deposits, chalcopyrite coexists with other minerals which may have higher conductivity. To determine an indicative upper particle size limit, samples with relatively high conductivity (compared to the pure chalcopyrite samples) were specially selected from an Australian massive sulphide deposit, with known dominant minerals being chalcopyrite and pyrite. Several dark, fine grained homogeneous mineral lumps (size 10 by 15 by 25 To summarise expected particle size effects on the magnetic resonance technique, several different ore measurement scenarios may be considered. Firstly, it would appear that size effects will be minimal for ore streams with mineral particle size below a few millimetres, disseminated through larger mineral bearing rocks. Typical mineral bearing rock has much larger skin depth than the sulphide particles themselves, and so does not affect the magnetic resonance measurement. Secondly, the measurement of highly conductive copper sulphide mineral with particle size up to at least a few millimetres demonstrates that loosely packed sulphide minerals are amenable to the technique. Finally, there is the case of ore streams with mineral particles much larger than a few millimetres. Depending on the particle conductivity, this case could pose a difficulty for the magnetic resonance method. Smaller mineral particles would contribute preferentially to the measured signal, and the estimation of mineral concentration would become a function of both the mineral particle size distribution and segregation of particles presented to the magnetic resonance sensor. However, overall it is believed that a significant number of measurement applications would be suited to the magnetic resonance technique. RF detection of bulk mineralogy offers several potential advantages, such as true bulk material analysis on large volume samples, relatively simple hardware for signal generation and detection, and the avoidance of mechanical sampling and sample presentation procedures. The method can be very highly discriminating of mineral phase. The dilution experiments reported here demonstrate that resolution of chalcopyrite concentrations better than 0.1 The authors gratefully acknowledge Dr. Barry Whittington and Ms. Nicki Agron-Olshina, CSIRO Minerals, for provision of some of the samples and associated XRD analysis results.