Metal mining has significant impacts on the land it uses. With increasing demand for metals, these impacts will continue to intensify. One way to look at land use and related environmental impacts is the concept of ecosystem services (ES), defined as the benefits people derive from services provided by ecosystems. This paper estimates the costs of the reduction of ES due to metal mining`s global land use by analysing four key metal ores – bauxite (aluminium), copper, gold and iron, and by doing so, provides also novel information from which biomes those metals are extracted.
                  The overall ES cost caused by metal mining is estimated at about USD 5.4 billion/year (2016), with about two thirds in forested areas. If added to prices, it would lead to increases of between 0.8 % and 7.9 % for the four commodities studied.
                  The authors do not understand ES valuation as a market-based, stand-alone tool to lower the land impact of metal mining. Other policy tools would have to play a leading role, such as zoning regulations, environmental minimum standards or closure legislation. However, it would be a useful support for such policy tools in all stages of mining where land use aspects play a role.With the economic and population growth of recent decades, land use - and its implications on a wide range of issues such as biodiversity, climate change and agricultural productivity - has been recognized as a major, global area of concern (e.g. ( The global land occupied by mining is estimated to be between 0.3 % ( As stated above, in order to get mineral raw materials out of the ground, land is disturbed – as are ecosystems. One way of assessing ecosystems and of quantifying the impact of human activities on them is through the concept of ecosystem services (ES), which the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment defines as “ So far, a limited number of studies have looked into ES and mining. They focus on local and regional applications ( The objective of this paper is to develop and apply a methodology to estimate the ES costs of global metal mining`s land use. This is done for four key metal ores - bauxite (from which aluminium is processed), copper, gold and iron. Together they represent over 96 percent of all metals mined globally in terms of bulk tonnage and over 68 percent of financial value ( In Section To approach the question of the ES costs of global metal mining, the authors follow Computations are based on a sample of mines selected from the SNL metals & mining database provided by S&P Global Market Intelligence ( Calculate cumulative mine production of each metal (1990–2016) Allocate cumulative production (1990–2016) to biomes Estimate land use by metal per biome (2016) Calculate ES costs of land use by metal per biome (2016) Extrapolate from SNL sample to global production (2016) Assumptions underlying the method include i) no rehabilitation is done for active mines and ii) the distribution of mine production per biome in 1990–2011 equals historic distribution. First, the authors calculate the annual and cumulative ore and metal extracted in each mine during the period 1990–2016. The period is selected to start in 1990 because SNL data is very limited with regard to temporal coverage before and end in 2016 because it is the last year with data fully available. By that means the longest possible period is covered allowing to track changes in patterns. The authors use the historical global metal production numbers as informed by the For each mine, the authors download from the SNL database the name, geographic location, Sample sizes and their representation of overall global production vary, ranging from a low 20 % for iron ore in 1994 to a high 99 % for copper in 2002 ( The mine-specific data are linked by overlaying two layers to a geographical layer retrieved from Ecoregions 2017 ( In the following step, the production for each metal and year (1990–2016) is allocated to the respective biomes by adding up mine production per biome. The estimation of cumulative land use is based on work done by Murguia calculates the land used for 2011 for each metal. The results are used by the authors as a starting point to scale from global production provided by USGS to the SNL production percentage used in this study. The cumulative SNL production from 1990–2011 is then allocated to a biome as a percentage and thus gives the land used in each biome. For 2012–2016, the annual amount of hectares newly disturbed by mining is calculated using the WDRs ( WDR numbers refer to quantities of produced ore. For copper and gold, the SNL database provides production figures only for the metal content of the extracted ore. Not in all cases the underlying ore production figures are presented as well. In cases where ore data is only missing for certain years, gaps are filled using single imputation, based on metal content and ore production from previous or following years to calculate an ore grade, which is then used to calculate the ore production for the missing year(s). In the case where ore data is missing for all years, a search in mining-specialized databases is done to find ore grades for these mines. In some cases ore grades can be found on company websites, however the majority of data are retrieved from miningdataonline.com ( In addition, many of the copper and gold mines are polymetallic mines (see above), in which case the different metals have to be allocated to the ore production. This is done for the cumulative production of the 5 years (2012–2016) using economic value relationships following the Eurostat EWMFA Guide 2013 (Eurostat, 2013) and using the average metal prices of 2012–2016. Since the WDRs are only relevant for production from open pit and underground mines, production from dredging, from dumps and shown as “NA” is excluded. This represents 1.12 % of copper and 0.9 % of gold production in the SNL sample. The direct cumulative land use per biome in 2016 is then calculated for each metal by adding up the 1990–2011 and 2012–2016 figures. The estimation of the ES costs is based on figures provided by De Groot et al. in the ESVD database ( To calculate the ES costs for each metal, the costs from the ESVD, provided in 2007 international dollars (which equal purchasing power adjusted USD) per hectare per year, are adjusted for inflation, using an average 3.63 % global inflation rate as reported by the World Bank for 2007–2016 (The World Bank, 2018). The adjusted figures range from about 2,200 USD per hectare per year for “Woodlands” to over 267,000 USD per hectare per year for “Coastal wetlands”, with the values for all biomes shown in the supplementary data. In a final step the ES costs for each biome are multiplied by the land use for each ore in 2016 (as calculated in Step 3, see above). In a last step, the authors calculate the biome distribution and ES costs for the global production of each metal by doing an extrapolation of the above results based upon SNL data to global figures as presented by USGS. This is done at a country level, since this is the lowest level USGS provides data for. The authors compare SNL and USGS production figures for the periods 1990–2011 and 2012–2016 and calculate the differences between the two. A weighted, country-based extrapolation is then done, using the three to five countries with the largest differences, accounting for at least 50 % of the overall difference, and a “rest of the world” and their biome distribution calculated as explained above. This way, more weight is given to the biome distribution of the countries with the largest production differences as compared to a linear extrapolation. Two assumptions that have to be made are that the biome distribution and the ore grades for copper and gold within a country stay the same. The final result is again the land use for each ore per biome and the respective ES costs. The resulting ES costs per ton are compared with the average 2016 prices for each ore/metal.   The authors calculate the global cumulative land use in 2016 with 106,771 ha. The ES costs for the land used by bauxite mines amounts to almost USD 600 million, with over half of the costs resulting from mines in tropical forests. The ES costs estimated are USD 0.08/t of ore mined since 1900 and USD 2.21/t of global production in 2016. If ES costs were added to the average bauxite price of USD 28/t in 2016 ( Over one third of the cumulative copper production comes from mines in the “Deserts & Xeric Shrublands” biome (i.e. mainly from Chile, but also from Peru and USA) ( The cumulative land use for the copper mines is calculated at 470,839 ha in 2016 ( Over half of the cumulative gold production comes about equally from mines in two biome types “Montane Grasslands & Shrublands” (e.g. South Africa, Peru) and “Deserts & Xeric Shrublands” (e.g. Australia, China, Chile) ( The cumulative land use for global gold mining is calculated with 535,507 ha in 2016 as shown in Almost two thirds of iron ore comes from two biomes, “Deserts & Xeric Shrublands” and “Tropical & Subtropical Moist Broadleaf Forests” ( The authors estimate the cumulative land use of the iron ore mines with 315,394 ha in 2016. Overall, the ES costs for the four metals add up to about USD 5.4 billion/year in 2016, with gold being the largest contributor (40 %), followed by iron ore (25 %), copper (24 %) and bauxite (11 %). In terms of biomes, regarding the four metals, the largest land areas are used in “Grasslands” (30 %), followed by “Temperate forest” (24 %) and “Tropical forest” (16 %). The largest costs to ES come from “Grasslands” (32 %) and “Tropical forest” (31 %), followed by “Temperate forest” (26 %), re-iterating the point made above that mining in the “Tropical forest” biome comes at a high cost to ES. Overall, about two thirds of the ES costs come from mines in forested areas. For “Coastal wetlands” the 2016 ES costs exceed about 1.5 times the revenues achieved by mining gold and bauxite in these biomes. Again, the authors would like to point out that no ES costs are yet available for the “Desert” biome, which is especially relevant for copper. This study presents a novel way to look at the impact on land by large-scale industrial metal mining by placing the mines into biomes and estimating the impact on ecosystem services in monetary terms thus producing novel results and insights. It does so by building on work done by The concept of Data reliability and availability is a cause of concern for the mining data used, as described also in other publications (e.g. ( An assumption made for this study is that all ecosystem services on the land used directly by mining are completely reduced to zero. No literature could be found that quantifies this impact, but there is mentioning of “ Also, this study gives no consideration to ongoing rehabilitation and considers land use to be cumulative for active mines until their time of closure. Mining companies have for some years recognized a need for progressive, on-going rehabilitation to restore the land and ecosystems and thus also ES. Whilst this might not always be the case for certain types of mines (e.g. large open pit copper or gold mines), it is certainly possible for bauxite mining, where it has been recognized as part of the Sustainable Bauxite Mining Guidelines issued in 2018 by the International Aluminium Institute ( However, this is still a conservative estimate of the land area disturbed by large-scale metal mining since it only considers land used directly by mining. More work is needed on indirect land use induced by mining operations, which could have a far bigger impact on ES. For example, Sonter et al. find in their Brazilian Amazon focused study The implications of the price increases due to the additional ES costs described for each metal also need further research. Could a market-led price differentiation strategy lead to more funds for the conservation of ES? How could these extra funds be institutionally collected and distributed to fit their purpose and to ensure they are not mismanaged, i.e. how to deal with mismanagement, corruption or weak institutions? Any kind of instrument or mechanism created to strengthen the capacity (monetary, human resources, information, coordination, etc.) of those institutions also requires policy coherence with international commitments by governments framing the SDGs. The authors have chosen to develop their approach for four key metals due to their significance to the economy. Since the study, despite the limitations discussed, provides a useful way to quantify metal mining’s impact on land, it should be expanded to cover other raw materials and their impact on ES, i.e. construction materials such as sand and gravel and mineral fuels such as coal due to their high production numbers. Applying the concept of ES valuation to metal mining as proposed in this paper is a useful way to quantify, in monetary terms, metal mining’s impact on the land it uses. The overall ES cost of about USD 5.4 billion/year is little compared to the cost of global land use changes between 1997 and 2011 of between USD $4.3 and USD 20.2 trillion/year ( As a consequence, except for aluminium and the point raised above regarding “Coastal wetlands”, the authors therefore do not see ES valuation, applied for instance as a tax, as a stand-alone policy tool to lower the land impact of metal mining. Yet it can be seen as an important supplement of other country-specific policy tools such as zoning regulations, environmental minimum standards, or closure and post-closure legislation. It could also be part of globally harmonized best practices for responsible mineral resource development, described by It would be a useful support for such policy tools in all stages of mining where land use aspects play a role. Ores from “high value biomes” such as tropical rain forests have higher ES costs than ores from “low value biomes” and thus, following this approach of ES valuation, would be less competitive in comparison. In the planning and permitting phase as a requirement of (strategic) environmental impact assessments, it incentivises less land intensive options, both quantitatively (lower footprint areas) and qualitatively (mining methods with lower impact on ES). ES valuation also provides an incentive for companies for early, progressive, on-going rehabilitation since restoring ES services as quickly as possible would reduce land use and restore ES, and therefore reduce ES costs - as well as closure provisions in legislations where these are required. The concept supports Neves et al. (2016), as it allows calculating the impact of mining accidents on ecosystems and their services. Lastly, it also supports research by Murguia et al. (2016) which indicates that there is geological potential for opening new mines in areas of low biodiversity in the future. As demand for metals will continue to increase ( This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors would like to express their appreciation to the anonymous reviewers, who helped to improve this paper. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: