The hydrophile–lipophile balance (HLB) was used to characterize several naphtha-diluted bituminous froth and bitumen phases, extracted froth components, and commercial demulsifiers used to resolve the froth emulsions. The requirements for emulsification of the diluted froth and bitumen phases could be classified by the HLB system in terms of required HLB values. Although such classification was not effective in detecting gross changes in the interfacial components of the diluted froth and bitumen phases, meaningful HLB values were obtained for the water soluble natural surfactants (HLB 16±1) and asphaltenes (HLB 11±1) isolated from the froth. The HLB values for three commercial demulsifiers were found to change depending on the delivery medium, from 12±1 if the demulsifier was dissolved in naphtha to 7±1 if the demulsifier was dissolved in water. This difference in apparent HLB may arise from differences in interfacially active components in the diluent. It appears that demulsifier components delivered in naphtha and the water-soluble natural surfactants will seek to form O/W emulsions and, therefore, act to destabilize the W/O froth emulsions. Conversely, demulsifier components delivered in water and naturally occurring asphaltenes will act to stabilize the W/O froth emulsions.In order to extract bitumen from the oil sands found in northern Alberta, Canada, a hot water flotation process The tumbler step also ensures that the water/bitumen/solids slurry is sufficiently aerated. At the low interfacial tensions created by the natural surfactants, the freed bitumen globules are able to attach to the air bubbles and then spread over them, completely encapsulating the bubbles The froth viscosity is high, typically 2–3 Pa·s at 80 °C and is, therefore, diluted with naphtha (solvent to froth ratio of 0.7:1) to ease pumping and treatment processes such as centrifugation While production of the natural surfactants aids and is necessary for successful processing of the oil sand, it also increases the potential for emulsification of water into oil by lowering the interfacial tension between these phases Chemical treatment is often used to supplement the physical action of the centrifuges. Surface active demulsifier molecules will orient at the interface and displace the natural asphaltenes and/or surfactants, eliminating the barrier to coalescence and promoting destabilization of the emulsion. Demulsification, the removal of emulsified water and the solids associated with the diluted froth by both chemical and physical means, is practiced in commercial operations on a trial-and-error type basis. The commercial surfactants used by Syncrude Canada in the demulsification of bituminous froth are typically high molecular weight polymers intended to flocculate the emulsion droplets. It is thought that the droplets then coalesce due to increased collision frequency and under the influence of treatment processes such as centrifugation. The demulsifiers are typically diluted in naphtha before addition into the stream of diluted froth, after which the demulsifier concentration in the diluted froth is 25–40 ppm. Few details on these demulsifiers are available since most such proprietary demulsifier chemical information is kept confidential. In the present work, an attempt is made to analyze bituminous froth, its components and commercial demulsifiers in terms of the hydrophile–lipophile balance (HLB) system. The HLB concept was introduced by Griffin In this work, we describe the determination of required HLB values for emulsions involving naphtha-diluted froth, with and without its natural surfactants and asphaltenes. The emulsions formed for this purpose were concentrated or high-internal phase. There are several conditions needed to form a high-internal phase or concentrated emulsion. First, it is generally accepted that low shear mixing is required while the internal phase is slowly added to the continuous phase We have also determined HLB values for different fractions isolated from bituminous froth, including the natural surfactants and asphaltenes. Finally, the HLB values for several commercial demulsifiers were determined and used to establish connections among the effects of commercial demulsifiers and individual froth components on W/O emulsion stability. Naphtha, bituminous froth, coker feed bitumen, and hexane were used as received from Syncrude Canada's commercial oil sands mining and processing plant. The bituminous froth was stored at room temperature in epoxy-lined paint cans. At room temperature, a free water phase separates readily from the froth and was decanted before diluting the froth. The emulsified water content in the froth samples was 1.5–2.0% v/v. Throughout the duration of this study, changes with age in the interfacial properties, including the required HLB, of stored froth were insignificant with respect to the reproducibility associated with the measurements (additional details are given in Commercial surfactants Span 80 and Tween 80 (ICI Surfactants, USA) were used as received. Span 80 and Tween 80 are nonionic surfactants belonging to the class of sorbitan monooleates The concentrated emulsions formed in the present work had an oil/water ratio of either 20:80 or 80:20 (v/v). In either case, the emulsions were formed by premixing a designated quantity of surfactant with the 20% phase and then slowly adding the 80% phase under gentile stirring. Span 80 and Tween 80 were used as the standard surfactants and deionized water as the aqueous phase. All samples were mixed at ambient temperature in 125-ml glass jars and a magnetic stirplate/teflon-coated stir bar was used mix the various oil/water/surfactant samples. The procedure has been previously described elsewhere for kerosene/water/Span 80/Tween 80 systems The concentrated, viscous W/O emulsions made with naphtha-diluted froth exhibited the characteristic appearance of ‘chocolate mousse’ emulsions, similar to those encountered in marine oil spills Once the HLB requirements for emulsifying naphtha-diluted froth were determined, the individual froth components responsible for emulsification were isolated as follows. The procedure used to extract surface active components from froth was a modification of the method employed by Layrisse et al. The remaining sludge in the centrifuge tubes consisted only of water and surface active agents responsible for stabilizing the emulsion. This emulsion was thick, viscous and brown in colour. The emulsion was broken by the addition of approximately 300 ml of toluene. The resulting aqueous and oil phases were separated and individually evaporated under vacuum to remove all water and solvent, respectively. The water-soluble surfactants were redissolved and diluted to 250 ml. The recovered oil-soluble components of the emulsion are referred to as ‘extracted asphaltenes’ due to their insolubility in pentane. The collected decanted solvent/oil mixture was also evaporated under vacuum to remove all the heptane/xylene mixture. This recovered hydrocarbon phase is referred to as ‘surfactant-free’ froth. In order to create a hydrocarbon phase free of asphaltenes, 69 g of ‘surfactant-free’ froth was dissolved in 300 ml toluene and filtered to 2.5 μm to remove most of the fine solids. The toluene was then removed by evaporation under vacuum and the resulting hydrocarbon (66 g) dissolved in 66 g toluene before 3.08 l of pentane was added. The hydrocarbon/toluene/pentane mixture was allowed to sit for a minimum of 2 h to allow for asphaltene precipitation. The solution was then filtered to remove asphaltenes (referred to later on as ‘residual asphaltenes’) and the remaining solvent/hydrocarbon mixture evaporated under vacuum to remove all pentane and toluene. This recovered hydrocarbon phase is referred to as ‘surfactant-free/deasphalted’ froth. Deasphalted froth and deasphalted coker feed bitumen were also obtained in the same manner as just described except the initial material was a sample of bituminous froth or coker feed bitumen and not the ‘surfactant-free’ froth. The asphaltenes collected from the bituminous froth are termed ‘bulk asphaltenes’. The preceding discussion refers to the ‘surfactant-free’, ‘surfactant-free/deasphalted’ and ‘deasphalted’ samples as ‘froth’. Despite having so altered the samples, the term ‘froth’ has been maintained with reference to the origin of the samples. These fine solids were extracted according to the procedure of Shelfantook and Tipman The method for surfactant HLB determination is relatively straightforward once the required W/O or O/W HLB of the oil phase has been established. First, a blend of the unknown surfactant with either standard surfactant (Span 80 or Tween 80) in mass ratios ranging from 10:90 to 90:10 unknown/Span 80 or unknown/Tween 80 were formulated. These blends were then mixed with the 20% phase (water or kerosene) and the 80% phase (water or kerosene) was added under stirring. The unknown/Span 80 or unknown/Tween 80 ratio at which a viscous, concentrated, stable emulsion appeared was used to calculate the HLB of the unknown using either  The appearance of a stable W/O emulsion at an oil/water ratio of 20:80 is expected at low HLB values and under low shear (as seen in As shown in In summary, the HLB requirements for naphtha-diluted froth have been analyzed under low and high shear and an HLB of 5.4 was required for W/O emulsification. This value is important to further understand the conditions under which O/W or W/O emulsions form and for the development and selection of effective demulsifiers. Attempts were made to determine the HLB values for each of the potentially interfacially active fractions in froth in order to determine the emulsion type, if any, that each fraction may act to stabilize. The water-soluble natural surfactants were believed to be high HLB surfactants based on their high solubility in water. Consequently, these surfactants were blended with Span 80 in varying quantities to deionized water (20%) before the addition of kerosene (80%). The resulting concentrated oil-in-water emulsion was evaluated via The concentration of the natural surfactants used is of interest since dilution can affect solution HLB values. Since emulsification behaviour can be affected by the surfactant concentration relative to the cmc, the variation in surface tension with surfactant concentration was determined as shown in The shape of Fig. 6 indicates that the mixture of natural surfactants in solution behaves similarly to a single-component surfactant in that only one inflection point occurs, marking the formation of micelles. If significantly different molecules had formed individual micelles, several breaks in the curve may have appeared, although a general broadening of the cmc curve has also been previously noted upon the formation of different micelles To assess the change in HLB with concentration of the natural surfactants, a 100 ml portion of the diluted natural surfactants was concentrated to 10 ml. The HLB was then reevaluated and found to be 25.6, which is outside of the standard 0–20 HLB range. The high HLB value for the concentrated natural surfactants therefore indicates that the naturally occurring surfactants are extremely hydrophilic and fall outside of the usual HLB range at this concentration. These results were confirmed by the natural surfactants found in the free water taken from froth. At the natural surfactant concentration in free water, the HLB value was close to 16±1 and when 10 times more concentrated, the HLB was 25±1. Conversely, dilutions of the natural surfactants solution, by 10 or 100 times, did not significantly affect the HLB value of 16, indicating that the interfacial activity remained relatively constant over a wide range of lower concentrations. In particular, the HLB value and interfacial activity of the natural surfactant solution used in this study was similar to that of natural surfactants found in the free water associated with froth. The ‘extracted’ asphaltenes were the water insoluble portion of the surface active material found during the extraction procedure. Typically, this sample was less than 1% of the original 200 g of froth used in the extraction. Consequently, HLB determination of this fraction was not possible unless it was diluted. Several trials were conducted with asphaltenes dissolved in heptol (6.74 g/l). Stable kerosene/water emulsions were obtained with Span 80/heptol-diluted asphaltene solutions (concentrated W/O, oil/water ratio=20:80) and with Tween 80/heptol-diluted asphaltene solutions (concentrated O/W, oil/water ratio=80:20). The calculated HLB for the asphaltene solution was found from these stable emulsions to be 10.0 and 11.3, respectively. ‘Bulk’ asphaltenes were more plentiful and could be tested for their emulsification ability without the preceding dilutions. In an attempt to more accurately determine the bulk asphaltene HLB, it was blended with the dilute natural surfactant solution (HLB 16). The resulting concentrated W/O emulsion occurred over a narrower range of surfactant ratios but corresponded to an even lower asphaltene HLB value of 2–3.5. The effect of dilution on bulk asphaltene HLB was also tested. As with the diluted extracted asphaltene sample, the heptol diluted bulk asphaltene sample (6.74 g/l) had an HLB of 10–12. Therefore, the HLB value for predissolved asphaltenes was assigned at 11±1. We note that lower HLB values may be possible when the asphaltenes are not completely dissolved and/or when blended with the natural surfactants. These fine solids were not surface active in that whether alone or combined with a cosurfactant, no stable emulsions could be formed under low or high shear. Despite the apparent lack of interfacial activity, these solids can play a role in the stabilization of bituminous froth emulsions For comparison with the HLB results of naphtha-diluted froth, a number of other naphtha-diluted bitumen and ‘treated’ froth phases were analyzed for their required HLB values as identified in Although this table suggests that the removal of natural surfactants from froth may tend to decrease required HLB and that the removal of asphaltenes may tend to increase required HLB, such apparent changes are within the reproducibility of the measurements and may not be real. That the HLB values listed in For each of the bituminous phases listed in The ability of froth or bitumen to incorporate water under low shear appears to be directly linked to the presence of asphaltenes. In ‘surfactant-free’ froth and coker-feed bitumen, large amounts of asphaltenes are present, which encourage the uptake of the added water. In the absence of these asphaltenes, no extra water was taken-up into the oil phase. The recovered hydrocarbon from the hexane extraction also falls into this asphaltene-free category since the interfacially active asphaltene fraction is believed to be the stabilizing film in the emulsion rag layer. This idea is confirmed by the fact that the rag layer was broken by the addition of toluene, which would solubilize the asphaltenes. Once the aliphatic–aromatic solvent balance necessary for asphaltene stabilization has been upset, the emulsion is expected to be unstable One unusual result was the inability of bituminous froth to incorporate the added water. Although bituminous froth contains a large amount of asphaltenes, it also has a high water-soluble natural surfactant concentration (high HLB). A competition between these natural surfactants and the asphaltenes could inhibit excess water uptake. The water-soluble natural surfactants would not be present in any of the other froth or bitumen phases listed in The role of several commercial demulsifiers in combination with the froth was examined next. One demulsifier that showed preliminary positive results in Syncrude's evaluations for water and solids removal was product RC498-2. This surfactant was soluble in both water and naphtha and, therefore, the HLB was determined for the surfactant in both phases. As can be seen from This trend was confirmed by the analysis of two other demulsifiers, RC501-3 and X-897. In Syncrude's batch tests for these two demulsifiers, RC501-3 proved to be more effective at removing emulsified water and solids from the froth while X-897 allowed for greater hydrocarbon recovery. These two demulsifiers were assessed by the same conditions as presented in A summary of the HLB values found for natural surfactants, asphaltenes and commercial demulsifier RC498-2 is presented in One example of the combined influence of all four components can be illustrated through two experiments using naphtha-diluted froth/water systems. In both of the above experiments, stable, mousse-type W/O emulsions were produced over the entire range of Span 80/RC 498-2 ratios. Since it was expected that this surfactant combination would be dominated by Span 80, W/O emulsions were anticipated. However, the fact that emulsions developed over a large range of surfactant ratios indicated that the effect of Span 80 was boosted. This was also observed to a lesser degree with kerosene as the oil phase. This intensification of Span 80 behaviour could be a result of demulsifier migration to the aqueous phase in both the kerosene/water and diluted froth/water systems. In the diluted froth/water systems, asphaltenes could also increase the influence of Span 80. It is therefore likely that both low HLB demulsifier components and asphaltenes may enhance the Span 80 behaviour since no wide range of emulsion stabilities was noted for diluted froth/water systems when Span 80/Tween 80 blends were used (see In this work, the HLB system was used to classify various froth and bitumen phases in terms of a required HLB for emulsification. The required HLB for emulsification of these phases was 5.4±1. After inducing large compositional changes to the froth and bitumen phases, the required HLB values changed suggestively, but only slightly. It appears that the required HLB value alone is not a sufficiently sensitive parameter to accurately describe the emulsion forming surfactant requirements for these systems. The individual components of froth were also characterized by the HLB. Although further study is required in order to confirm that these HLB values are valid when synergistic effects between components may act to stabilize water-in-froth emulsions, the different emulsion stabilizing tendencies of the froth components was established. Several commercial demulsifiers were similarly classified in terms of HLB values. All of the HLB assessments presented here are consistent with interfacial tension measurements and microvisual observations reported elsewhere The physical picture that emerges from this work is one in which the water-soluble natural surfactants (generated in the commercial bitumen extraction process) act in opposition to the asphaltenes from the bitumen. The natural surfactants tend to stabilize O/W emulsions and therefore counteract the formation and stabilization of W/O emulsions. The dominance of asphaltenes, when present, at the interface explains the ubiquitous occurrence of W/O emulsions in the processing and treatment of bituminous froth. Effective demulsifiers for these W/O emulsions therefore impede the actions of the asphaltenes and act in concert with those of the water-soluble natural surfactants. The HLB approach to characterizing the components may provide a useful means of understanding and predicting the directional effects of such components and additives. The authors wish to express their thanks and appreciation to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, Syncrude Canada, and the Petroleum Recovery Institute for funding and other support of this research. They also thank Bob Shaw for helpful discussions and Randy Mikula and Vicente Munoz for access to, and assistance with, their confocal laser scanning microscope.