Transient pressure test of horizontal wells compared to vertical wells is more complicated due to the occurrence potential of different transient flow periods. Although various mathematical models were developed for horizontal well test analysis their evaluation in different well and reservoir conditions needs more investigation. In specific, in vertical wells non-Darcy flow which causes an extra pressure drop, has a significant impact on well test data but its impact on horizontal well test data needs more investigation.
                  The objective of this paper is to examine transient pressure behavior of horizontal gas wells under various conditions including high velocity flow.
                  For this purpose, a horizontal gas well in a finite rectangular reservoir with typical geometry is simulated using a commercial reservoir simulator. Synthetic well data are used to plot pseudo-pressure derivative curves which identify appeared flow regimes. Sensitivity study is done considering relative well lengths and well location with respect to horizontal boundaries as well as non-Darcy flow parameter.
                  The results show that the appearance of elliptical and pseudo-radial flow regimes depends on relative well length and formation thickness. In addition, the effect of off-centered wells with respect to upper and lower boundaries in transient pressure data is expressed. The results also show that non-Darcy flow can cause a significant skin in transient data of a horizontal gas well. Magnitude of the skin is mainly affected by reservoir permeability and production rate of the horizontal well. Contrary to the general belief regarding negligible effect of non-Darcy flow in analysis of horizontal gas well test, this study showed that it can cause a significant error in analysis of the well test data.total compressibility, psi reservoir thickness, ft reservoir length reservoir width permeability, md length of the well pseudopressure volumetric flow rate, Mscf/day wellbore radius, ft skin time, day coordinate, ft gas compressibility factor viscosity, cp density fluid velocity porosity, fraction Forchhiemer parameter reservoir dimensionless well During a horizontal well transient test several flow regimes may be observed because of the partially penetrated nature of horizontal wells and multiple boundary effects (   Although, due to less pressure drop in horizontal wells compared with vertical wells, it seems that non-Darcy flow does not have a significant impact on horizontal well pressure test,  In the following, a background regarding non-Darcy flow phenomenon is stated. Then, synthetic models of horizontal gas wells are produced in order to evaluate the effect of the well length and well distances from top and bottom boundaries on transient pressure behavior of a horizontal gas well. Using a set of analytical equations corresponding to different flow regimes, the simulated data are validated. By including Forchheimer parameter in the simulator, both the effect of non-Darcy phenomenon in transient pressure analysis of horizontal wells and the ability of non-Darcy term to consider this effect are expressed. In 1901, Reynolds observed that after some high flow rate in tubes, flow rate was no longer proportional to the pressure drop (  The non-Darcy coefficient in wells is usually determined by analysis of multi-rate pressure test results, but field-testing techniques are not always available. So, many theoretical and experimental correlations have been proposed to obtain To investigate challenges regarding the analysis of horizontal gas well data, we considered a horizontal well, producing at a constant rate, in a finite rectangular shape gas reservoir with impermeable boundaries as shown in Considering the physical model shown in To investigate flow regime segments of horizontal gas well data individually, in This set of equations is used to validate the simulated cases in sensitivity study sections. Relations to calculate  As shown in We express that the possibility to observe elliptical flow regime is directly related to relative thickness of the reservoir and indirectly is related to relative length of the well. The same dependency is defined for pseudo-radial. However, when reservoir length in comparison with reservoir thickness is so large, in other words relative thickness of the reservoir is so small ( To show the validation of the proposed set of indexes, among a large number of simulated cases, three synthetic cases with the parameters listed in The results of this study are summarized in Grid size selection, mainly for the grids near two ends of the well, is essential to identify all possible flow regimes especially elliptical flow regime. For a wide range of fluid properties, flow rate and reservoir permeability, the proposed parameters are evaluated based on different simulated models with reservoir thickness from 75 to 400 For this study we refer to Eq.  For a wide range of fluid properties, flow rate and reservoir permeability, the proposed parameter is evaluated based on different simulated models with reservoir thickness from 75 to 400 In order to investigate the impact of non-Darcy flow on transient pressure behavior of horizontal wells, two cases with the parameters listed in  In addition, In this part, application of analytical solutions to model turbulence flow is evaluated. A synthetic model is simulated with the parameters listed in For this purpose, the relations used by As can be seen from To evaluate the result from Non-Darcy skin acquired from each case is compared with non-Darcy skin calculated from the following equation: In all cases, RMSE is small and can be assumed as numerical error. It confirms that Eq. As can be seen from In this study, under various conditions including non-Darcy flows, fluid flow behavior of horizontal gas wells is investigated. Consequent on simulation of many synthetic models, a set of indexes is proposed to flow regime diagnostic. The impact of turbulent flow on transient pressure behavior of horizontal gas wells is investigated. A relation to determine The appearance of elliptical flow regime is directly related to the reservoir relative thickness and indirectly related to the well relative length, contrary to the first linear flow regime. The appearance of pseudo-radial flow regime is indirectly related to the well relative length. Although pseudo-radial flow usually follows elliptical flow regime, when relative reservoir thickness is so small, after linear flow pseudo-radial flow regime comes out. The appearance of hemi-radial flow depends on dimensionless vertical coordination of the well. Non-Darcy flow may cause a significant impact on fluid flow behavior of horizontal gas wells by making a considerable extra skin in high fluid velocity and low reservoir permeability. Non-Darcy flow does not make any change in flow regime diagnostic. Although flow regimes around horizontal wells are not constant, non-Darcy term can simply compensate the non-linearity encountered in fluid flow behavior in horizontal gas wells as well as verticals in the range of this study, permeability from 0.1 to 200 See