In this contribution, the separation of polyethylene terephthalate (PET)–polyethylene (PE) and polyethylene terephthalate (PET)–polypropylene (PP) mixtures was studied in order to improve the grade of the raw input used in PET bottle recycling. First, PET bottles and their caps (made of PE or PP) were shredded and the floatability of each polymer was tested. Even with the addition of the wetting reagents dodecylamine acetate (DAA) or polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), the results did not suggest that the required 99.995% purity of PET plastic could not be achieved by floatation. Second, the mixtures were separated with a sink–float process using a drum separator. Finally, as the required purity of PET could not be obtained by either technique alone, a system utilising a combination of the two processes was developed. This system easily achieved the desired PET grade.
                  At last, some sink–float experiments were performed with a medium of magnesium sulphate (dense medium separation).In 1997, the Japanese government approved a bill detailing the responsibilities that end-users, self-governing bodies and producers have in the recycling of municipal solid waste such as steel and aluminium cans, glass bins, soft-drink bottles and packing paper One of the weakest points in the recycling system is the reuse of waste plastic. Waste plastic amounted to more than 6 million tons and 1.6% of Japanese industrial waste in 1996. Only about 36% of this plastic was reused, a very low percentage when compared to the recovery percentages for metal, glass and waste paper Recently, plastics recycling technology has made good progress in developing different separation methods, including X-ray separation, electrostatic separation and flotation, to name a few. Electrostatic separation, a dry separation technique that utilises the triboelectrical charging of plastics, has been reported previously The aim of this research presented in this paper was to find a suitable wet process that can obtain the required PET-grade when separating PET from PET–PE or PET–PP mixtures. However, it was difficult to obtain a PET grade of more than 99% with either flotation or sink–float separation alone. Consequently, we have also developed a new drum separator combining both the sink–float and flotation techniques to recover PET from the two mixtures. The separation experiments were carried out on 50:50 artificial mixtures of PET and either PE or PP. Mixture samples were created by chopping PET bottles and their caps into flakes with a shredder provided by Nissui Kako of Japan. The flakes were of irregular shape and up to 8 mm in size. Dodecylamine acetate (DAA); C12H25NH2·CH3COOH; the molecular weight is 245.41, Polyvinyl alcohol (PVA); (–CH2CHOH–) The commercial frother, MIBC (4-methyl-2-pentanol; (CH After the separation, the collected products were washed, dried and weighed then the grade and the recovery were calculated based on the mass balance. The difference in colour allowed easy hand sorting and visual analysis of product streams. Since PET has a specific gravity of 1.35 and the specific gravity of PE or PP (0.95 or 0.89, respectively) is lower than the specific gravity of water (SG The flotation tests were conducted in a 0.006-m A drum separator was used for the sink–float separation experiments. Generally, the drum separators are very commonly used in the coal industry because of their simplicity, reliability, and relatively small maintenance needs The machine used for this paper (length=1.5 m, width=0.55 m and height=1 m) consisted of a drum (diameter=0.5 m and length=0.5 m) mounted on an inclined shaft. The rotation speed of the drum was 1 rpm. The aqueous solution flow rate inside the drum was 0.003 m During separation, lifters fixed to the inside surface of the rotating drum collect the sink product (i.e. PET flakes), and carry them to a position where they drop into the sink launder The float time of PE or PP component is a very important factor in order to obtain the highest possible grade of PET. With this in mind, the combination of sink–float and flotation technique was introduced and a high selectivity in the separation process can be expected. The buoyancy of the PE and PP components was manipulated by modifying the sink–float system so that it included an aeration tube that was immersed in the medium, inside the drum (air-flow rate=0.0054 m Prior to operation, the medium of the separator was conditioned with wetting reagent (DAA or PVA) at a concentration of 0.02 kg/m In an attempt to improve separation results by increasing the specific gravity of the medium, magnesium sulphate (MgSO The sink–float experiments were conducted by the same equipment and procedure as described above. The aqueous solution was treated with DAA or PVA of concentrations of up to 0.1 kg/m  The floatability of the polymers when various concentrations of PVA were added to the medium is shown in On the other hand, for both reagents, the floatability of the PET decreases monotonically with concentration until a relatively stable value is reached at approximately 0.02 kg/m In summary, the figure suggested that the introduction of the reagents can improve the zero concentration results when floatation was used as a separation technique. However, the improvement does not appear to be significant enough that the required PET-grade (99.995%) will be reliably obtained. This can be seen by noting that the maximum floatability that the PE and PP acquire never exceeds 99%. So that, at least 1% of the PE and PP will always be contaminating the sink-product. Therefore, if the ratio of PET to impurity is close to 1% in the initial mixture, the grade of the recovered PET cannot exceed the required level. One final point to note from the graph is that the decrease in the floatability of the PET means that the recovery percentage of PET will increase with the introduction of wetting reagents. For reasons that stem from the results of the next section, the influence that the pH level of the aqueous medium had on the floatability of the plastic was only tested for a wetting reagent concentration of 0.02 kg/m    Considering the results graphed in The experimental results for PET–PE mixture are depicted in Considering the results plotted in During the combination of sink–float separation and flotation In order to understand why the combination of sink–float separation and flotation gave better separation results than sink–float separation, the Subsequently, TVR of PE and PP flakes was derived using Newton equation: The plastic flake float easily while their TVR is determined as: Since the plastic flake and air bubbles are assumed to be spherical in shape, it follows that: Referring to Thus, the following densities are determined Furthermore, TVR for respective PET–PE and PET–PP mixtures is calculated It can be seen that TVR<1 is determined for both PET–PE Initially, in order to produce a suspension of sufficiently high density, with a reasonable low viscosity, the viscosity of the MgSO In view of the results reflected in The separation results for PET–PE and PET–PP as a function of the capacity of the drum separator are presented in The grade of 100% PET and the recovery of 92.072% PET were obtained for PET–PE mixture, while the capacity of the drum separator was maintained at 20 kg/h It is important to be noted that, after the heavy dense medium process, the cleaning of the products, to remove the magnesium sulphate from the surface of the separated flakes, was carried out.  The aim of this research was to find a suitable wet process to separate PET from PET–PE or PET–PP mixtures. The PET component on one side and PE or PP component on the other side with unmodified surfaces exhibit similar hydrophobicity and thus selective separation of PET from untreated PET–PE or PET–PP mixtures could not be achieved. Therefore, it was necessary to render one component of those mixtures hydrophilic while the other component could be maintained in a hydrophobic state in order to obtain a selective separation. This was accomplished by treating the medium with DAA or PVA wetting reagent (0.02 kg/m The results of the combination of sink–float separation and flotation technique, adding DAA in the medium, showed that to obtain the grade of 99.995% PET, the capacity of separation machine should be 0.667 t/h/m Taking into consideration the results of this paper, the PET component can economically and selectively be separated from PET–PE or PET–PP mixtures while DAA (0.002 kg/m drag coefficient, dimensionless, ∼0.4 equivalent diameter of flakes [m] acceleration due to gravity, mass [kg] mass of the air bubble [kg] mass of the plastic flake [kg] degree of polymerization average number of air bubbles attached by one plastic flake equivalent radius of air bubbles [m] equivalent radius of plastic flakes [m] equivalent radius of polyethylene flakes [m] equivalent radius of polypropylene flakes [m] specific gravity terminal velocity ratio terminal velocity ratio for PET–PE mixture terminal velocity ratio for PET–PP mixture terminal velocity of flakes [m/s] terminal velocity of flakes in the medium during sink–float separation [m/s] terminal velocity of flakes in the medium during the combination of sink–float separation and flotation technique [m/s] volume [m volume of the air bubble [m volume of the plastic flake [m contact angle [°] density of the air, density of the polymer (PE or PP) [kg/m density of the polyethylene, density of the polypropylene, density of plastic flakes attached by air bubbles [kg/m density of the water, The authors acknowledge the NISSUI KAKO of Japan for the support received to complete this study.