This study focuses on the mechanocatalytical process combining dilute acid pretreatment and mechanical processing driven by ball milling. Milled and hydrolyzed barley straw samples are subject to reducing sugar analysis by DNS assay and capillary electrophoresis. Optimization of the saccharification conditions was carried out with two different sulfuric acid concentrations, 0.5molkg−1 and 1.0molkg−1, and compared. A significant yield of total reducing sugar (53.4%) was obtained from barley straw impregnated with sulfuric acid (1.0molkg−1) after milling for only 20min. Glucose and xylose concentrations accounted for 3.5% and 11.3%, respectively. Strikingly, the present study indicates a significant impact of the internal milling vessel temperature in the mechanocatalytical conversion process of barley straw in addition to the mechanical parameters and the catalyst concentration.Lignocellulosic biomass is a domestic bioenergy source, abundantly available in high quantity throughout Europe, and is considered to be the most promising natural source for conversion to ethanol for biofuel and biochemical production, energy conversion and energy storage. Carbon materials obtained from renewable resources In here, we present mechanocatalysis as an effective pretreatment method for biomass depolymerization and conversion into reducing sugars. Mechanocatalysis combines mechanical treatment driven by milling and chemical catalysis. The biomass sample is impregnated with an acid catalyst and mechanically treated using a ball mill yielding the conversion of cellulose and hemicellulose and the release of water-soluble oligosaccharides. In a subsequent hydrolysis step, which does not require further catalyst addition, reducing sugars are formed, which are the starting material for valuable products such as ethanol The described mechanocatalytical process is of rising interest and has been pointed out as a key pretreatment in order to achieve optimal physical contact, which results in high conversion efficiency and enhanced hydrolysis rate without the formation of by-products Mechanocatalysis is yet a quite novel technique. Previous studies on the mechanocatalytical depolymerization of beechwood, pinewood and sugarcane bagasse yielded sugar yields of up to 98% Sulfuric acid (95%) was purchased from VWR. Other chemicals included: ethanol (99.5%, ETAX Barley straw ( The acid catalyst (∼0.98 Acid hydrolysis of the pretreated barley straw was carried out without any further addition of acid catalyst. Pretreated straw samples were hydrolyzed in distilled water in a weight ratio of 5% for one hour either by shaking at room temperature (RT) or by heating in an oil bath at 100 The amount of total reducing sugar (TRS) was determined by the DNS (dinitrosalicylic acid) method using a Shimadzu UV-1800 spectrometer The hydrolysates were filtered with a 0.45 Barley straw was impregnated with sulfuric acid, mechanically treated applying various ball mill conditions, and hydrolyzed at room temperature or 100 Barley straw was impregnated with sulfuric acid, 0.5 The results revealed that the TRS yield generally increased with time, showing a maximum yield after grinding for 60, 70 or 90 When the grinding time was halved to 5 Strikingly, the temperature, which evolved during the milling process due to the collision of the milling balls with the sample, the milling container and each other, appeared to be an important factor in terms of the extend TRS release. A kinetic study of sulfuric acid hydrolysis showed that the reaction rate is highly dependent on the temperature and the acid concentration Temperatures reached up to 85 A further mill condition E was tested, which displayed a reduction of grinding and pausing time, both to 2 In a second saccharification approach, the catalyst concentration was doubled in order to obtain higher reducing sugar release during shorter processing times and thus, decreasing energy consumption and costs. The results are shown in Strikingly, a high level of reducing sugars (53.4%) could be released under condition A after only 20 Almost the same level of saccharification was achieved regarding conditions D and F, however, these conditions required longer milling of 60 and 50 Grinding in 10 Two saccharification approaches, using different sulfuric acid concentrations, 0.5 The highest possible reducing sugar yield that could be obtained under the examined conditions, was 53.4%, almost as high as the reducing sugar yield (60.8%) that was released from wheat straw by a continuous dilute sulfuric acid hydrolysis method Generally, it can be noted that saccharification was significantly enhanced and the overall processing time decreased when 1.0 Milling condition E can be described as a rather mild milling method, in which the grinding and pausing time were both set at 2 Noticeably, the color of the filtrate solutions, which are depicted in Individual sugars of the hydrolysates for the milling condition The major sugars detected were xylose, glucose, galactose and arabinose. Strikingly, high dosages of xylose were released, which yielded a maximum of 4.1% after milling for 70 Doubling of the catalyst concentration (1.0 When TRS yields and the concentrations of individual sugars are compared, it is noticeable that individual sugar levels were relatively low. This observation might be a result of the presence of xylo-oligosaccharides and gluco-oligosaccharides, which are determined along with the monosaccharides following the DNS assay. These oligosaccharides have not been hydrolyzed completely due to processing limitations (sample burning), but represent a useful feedstock for the production of platform chemicals such as HMF and furfural It can be pointed out that mechanical treatment, driven by milling, is an effective method to break down the complex lignocellulosic matrix. Milling is a yet quite novel technique for the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass compared to commonly used methods such as dilute acid pretreatment and steam pretreatment including enzymatic hydrolysis. In comparison, Saha et al. generated 33.2% of glucose and 18.7% of xylose from wheat straw by dilute acid pretreatment, while Linde et al. produced 39.6% of glucose and 21.6% of xylose using steam pretreatment Mechanocatalytical pretreatment of barley straw impregnated with sulfuric acid showed high saccharification efficiency. The mechanocatalytical process generates valuable reducing sugars, which are subsequently available for ethanol generation. Optimization of the mechanical treatment in order to gain high conversion efficiency was performed. We found that not only the mechanical parameters, but also the internal temperature of the reaction vessel as well as the catalyst concentration, have an immense impact on the conversion rate and are crucial factors that play a key role in the catalytic conversion of barley straw. By adjusting grinding and pausing times of the milling process, harsh and mild conditions can be created. Under harsh conditions the internal vessel temperature rises and contributes to the release of reducing sugars. Doubling of the catalyst concentration increased the TRS yields by more than 10% and significantly reduced the milling time. This work was financially supported by the