In our latest study, surface dissolution of minerals has been found to be important in the flotation of spodumene. This study provides further information in the role of NaOH in the flotation separation of spodumene from feldspar and quartz using size distribution analysis, micro-flotation experiments, AFM imaging, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) measurements and density functional theory (DFT) calculations. NaOH pretreatment had no significant influence in the size distribution of minerals, while spodumene subjected to pretreatment with NaOH showed an increase in selective oleate adsorption. After being ground in NaOH solution, spodumene surface was smoother than feldspar and quartz surfaces as revealed by AFM imaging. ICP-AES results indicated that the dissolution of quartz was slight, and the concentration of dissolved species for spodumene and feldspar followed the order of Si ˃ Al ˃ Li, and Si ˃ K ˃ Al, respectively. The Al density at feldspar surface was smaller than that at spodumene surface. The increase in the relative concentration of Al at the feldspar surface with NaOH pretreatment was not large enough to significantly enhance oleate adsorption, and the decrease in the relative concentration of K and Na may be unfavorable for oleate adsorption. Increased relative concentrations of Al and Li at spodumene surface due to NaOH pretreatment accounted for the enhanced oleate adsorption. DFT calculation showed that elements at spodumene and feldspar surfaces were likely to dissolve, and OH− was more readily to interact with Si sites at spodumene surface and K sites at feldspar surface.Lithium and lithium based chemicals are used in many areas, such as batteries, glass and ceramics, lubricating greases, air pretreatment, among others ( As many beneficiation processes such as flotation are dependent on the surface chemical reactions occurring on the mineral surfaces ( Therefore, the role of alkaline pretreatment should be considered for improved spodumene flotation. The present study was aimed to examine the role and significance of NaOH in the flotation of spodumene ore. The effect of NaOH on the flotation behavior of spodumene, feldspar and quartz has been investigated, and the flotation separation of spodumene from feldspar and quartz was achieved using NaOH and a collector sodium oleate (NaOL). X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) were used to identify the elemental composition at surfaces and the dissolved species in solutions, respectively. Furthermore, the dissolution spontaneity of atoms (Li, Al, Si, and K) at surfaces was calculated using the density functional theory (DFT), an attempt to study the dissolution characteristics of spodumene, feldspar and quartz as influenced with NaOH pretreatment. It is hoped that the results will highlight the importance of NaOH in the flotation of spodumene ores, provide a better understanding of the existing flotation processes and contribute to the design of new spodumene flotation technology. Spodumene crystals were obtained from a rare First of all, the size distribution of ground samples was determined. The −1.6 mm samples were subjected to grinding experiments. Samples of 5 g, DI water of 15 ml and NaOH of a desired amount were put in a nylon ball mill (105 mm × 140 mm). Zirconia balls with a parameter ratio of 32 mm:16 mm:8mm = 35:5:1 (wt%) were used as grinding media. The rotation speed of the ball mill was 230 rpm. After each run, the ground sample was wet screened to obtain particle size ranges of −75 µm, −75 + 38 µm, and −38 µm. Then the samples with different size ranges were filtered, dried and weighted, and the size distribution of the samples was calculated. Then, ground samples with a particle size of −74 µm occupying 75% of the total weight of particles was used for subsequent experiments. After the grinding process, the samples were filtered and placed in a beaker filled with DI water. The system was stirred for 5 min and then stood for 2 min. Afterwards, the supernatant was dumped, and about 100 ml DI water was put in the beaker again for next rinsing treatment. This process was repeated for 4 times, and then the sample was filtered for subsequent experiments. Micro-flotation tests were carried out in a laboratory XFG flotation apparatus. 5 g of sample was put in a 40 ml cell filled with 40 ml of DI water. NaOH was used as a pH modifier. After pH adjustment, the system was conditioned for 3 min at an impeller speed of 2200 rpm, and then 6.5 × 10 A Tension meter 3S (GBX, French) was used for experiments. The spodumene, feldspar and quartz crystals were cleavaged using a slicing machine to obtained fresh cleavage surfaces for contact angle experiments. The crystal surfaces were polished using polishing paper and grinding fluid, and then cleaned with acetone, ethanol and DI water in sequence. In the case of the crystal surface with NaOH pretreatment, the crystals were placed in NaOH solutions, and the system was stirred using a magnetic stirrer for 20 min, then the crystals were cleaned with DI water, and dried with N Zeta potential measurements for ground samples were measured by a Nano ZS 90. 20 mg of ground sample and 40 ml of DI water were placed in a beaker, and NaOH or HCl were used to adjust the pulp pH. After the pH adjustment, the system was stirred for 5 min, and then stood for 3 min. The supernatant was used for zeta potential tests. For each test condition, the test was repeated for 3 times, and the average value was reported as the final result. A Multimode SPMAFM (Veeco Instruments Inc., USA) and silicon nitride probes with resonance frequencies of 18–65 KHz was used for the AFM imaging. One particle from the ground samples was selected at random and glued in the mica substrate. The mica with the particle was fixed on the sample holder mounted on a piezo scanner stage, and the cleavage surface of the particle was exposed for imaging. The tapping mode was used, and the maximum scanning range was 1 μm × 1 μm. The NanoScope Analysis software from Bruker Corporation was used for the AFM image analysis. The composition of ground sample surface was analyzed by XPS spectrometer modeled ESCALAB 250Xi from Thermo Fisher Scientific. For the collection of wide spectrum (1350–0 eV), the pass energy and step size was 30 eV and 1 eV, separately. In the case of high resolution scans of Al2p, Si2p, K1s, Na1s and Li1s, the pass energy was 100 eV. The amounts of dissolved species from ground samples in grinding solutions were determined by the inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) modeled ICAP Qc from Thermo Fisher Scientific. After the grinding process, the products (ground samples and grinding solutions) were filtered. Then the filtrate was centrifuged at a rotation speed of 9000 rpm for 10 min. The supernatant was diluted to prepare a neutral to weakly acidic solution for the measurement. The spodumene and feldspar crystal structures were obtained from the American Mineralogist Crystal Structure Database. The spodumene (1 Our previous study showed that particle size played a significant role in the flotation of spodumene ( The ground samples of single pure minerals with a particle size distribution of 75% passing 74 µm were used for micro-flotation experiments, and the results are shown in The contact angle results for spodumene, feldspar, and quartz treated in 1500 mg/L NaOH solution, in the presence and absence of NaOL (6.5 × 10 In the presence of NaOL, the contact angles at the surface of spodumene, feldspar, and quartz without NaOH pretreatment are 68.5°, 25.5° and 15.5°, respectively, indicating that oleate has preferential adsorption at the spodumene surface. After NaOH pretreatment, it is obvious that the contact angle at the spodumene surface grows to be 81.0°, while contact angles at the feldspar and quartz surfaces do not change much. This result indicates that NaOH pretreatment enhances oleate adsorption at the spodumene surface, but has little effect on oleate adsorption at the feldspar and quartz surfaces, which contributes to the flotation separation of spodumene from feldspar and quartz. Zeta potentials for spodumene, feldspar and quartz ground in DI water and 1500 mg/L NaOH solution as a function of pH are shown in In the case of feldspar, in the absence of NaOL, the point of zero charge (PZC) for feldspar ground in DI water is around 2.0, and zeta potentials are also negative over a wide pH range. The zeta potentials for feldspar ground in NaOH solution are similar to those for feldspar ground in DI water. In the presence of NaOL, there is a little decrease in the zeta potentials nearly over the whole pH range, indicative of weak oleate adsorption at feldspar surfaces. Furthermore, the decrease in the zeta potentials for feldspar ground in NaOH solution appears to be a little bit larger than that for feldspar ground in DI water, indicating that an increased oleate adsorption at the surface of feldspar ground in NaOH solution. However, according to the micro-flotation and contact angle results, feldspar ground in NaOH solution still has poor flotation response and low contact angles. This may be due to that the increase in oleate adsorption is too small to enhance the flotation response and contact angles of feldspar. In the case of quartz, in the absence of NaOL, similar to those for feldspar, the zeta potentials are negative over a wide pH range and the zeta potentials for quartz ground in NaOH solution and DI water are similar. In the presence of NaOL, there is a little decrease in the zeta potentials for both the quartz ground in NaOH solution and DI water, indicative of weak oleate adsorption. Furthermore, the decrease in the zeta potentials for quartz ground in NaOH solution and DI water is almost the same, indicating that there is approximately equivalent amount of oleate adsorption at these two surfaces, which shows that NaOH pretreatment has no significant effect on oleate adsorption at quartz surface. Surface topography is an important aspect that should be considered in mineral flotation. The surface dissolution may alter the surface topography of minerals. It is known that surface roughness of mineral particles has a significant influence on their flotation behaviors. Grinding media can influence minerals surface roughness, thus affecting the wettability of their surface and, consequently, the flotation performance ( The ICP-AES is used to determine the concentration of dissolved species (Li, Al, K, and Si) for spodumene, feldspar and quartz as a function of NaOH dosages, and the results are shown in It was demonstrated that oleate interacts with Al sites at the spodumene surface ( In order to further understand the difference in the Al site properties at the spodumene and feldspar surface, the densities of Al and Al-O broken bond at surface are calculated, and the results are listed in XPS results show that the surface composition as influenced by NaOH pretreatment can explain the flotation behavior of spodumene and feldspar. ICP-AES results show that there is a strong dissolution of spodumene, and the dissolution of elements at surface is not stoichiometric. In order to further study the spontaneity or tendency of the elements at surfaces of spodumene and feldspar in NaOH solution, the affinity of OH NaOH has no significant influence in the size distribution of spodumene, feldspar and quartz. NaOH is beneficial for the flotation of spodumene, but has no clear effect in the flotation of feldspar and quartz. The flotation separation of spodumene from feldspar and quartz can be achieved with NaOH pretreatment. While NaOH has no noteworthy effect on the natural hydrophobicity of the three minerals, it results in enhanced oleate adsorption at the spodumene surface with little effect on oleate adsorption at the feldspar and quartz surfaces. Zeta potential results confirm the preferential oleate adsorption at surfaces of spodumene with NaOH pretreatment. AFM imaging shows that both spodumene ground in NaOH solution and DI water have a smoother surface than feldspar and quartz ground in NaOH solution and DI water have rough surfaces. Surface roughness may affect the readsorption of dissolved species and the collector adsorption. The dissolution of quartz is slight, and the concentrations of dissolved species for spodumene and feldspar follow the order of Si ˃ Al ˃ Li and Si ˃ K ˃ Al, respectively. DFT calculation shows that OH  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors are thankful for the support of the