Mineralogical, geochemical and microbial characterization of tailings solids from the Greens Creek Mine, Juneau, Alaska, was performed to evaluate mechanisms controlling aqueous geochemistry of near-neutral pH pore water and drainage. Core samples of the tailings were collected from five boreholes ranging from 7 to 26m in depth. The majority of the 51 samples (77%) were collected from the vadose zone, which can extend >18m below the tailings surface. Mineralogical investigation indicates that the occurrence of sulfide minerals follows the general order: pyrite [FeS2]>>sphalerite [(Zn,Fe)S]>galena [PbS], tetrahedrite [(Fe,Zn,Cu,Ag)12Sb4S13]>arsenopyrite [FeAsS] and chalcopyrite [CuFeS2]. Pyrite constitutes <20 to >35 wt.% of the tailings mineral assemblage, whereas dolomite [CaMg(CO3)2] and calcite [CaCO3] are present at ⩽30 and 3 wt.%, respectively. The solid-phase geochemistry generally reflects the mineral assemblage. The presence of additional trace elements, including Cd, Cr, Co, Mo, Ni, Se and Tl, is attributed to substitution into sulfide phases. Results of acid–base accounting (ABA) underestimated both acid-generating potential (AP) and neutralization potential (NP). Recalculation of AP and NP based on solid-phase geochemistry and quantitative mineralogy yielded more representative results. Neutrophilic S-oxidizing bacteria (nSOB) and SO4-reducing bacteria (SRB) are present with populations up to 107
                     and 105 cells g−1, respectively. Acidophilic S-oxidizing bacteria (aSOB) and iron-reducing bacteria (IRB) were generally less abundant. Primary influences on aqueous geochemistry are sulfide oxidation and carbonate dissolution at the tailings surface, gypsum precipitation–dissolution reactions, as well as Fe reduction below the zone of sulfide oxidation. Pore-water pH values generally ranged from 6.5 to 7.5 near the tailings surface, and from approximately 7–8 below the oxidation zone. Elevated concentrations of dissolved SO4, S2O3, Fe, Zn, As, Sb and Tl persisted under these conditions.Sulfide deposits are an important source of base- and precious-metal bearing minerals. Mining and concentration of sulfidic ore generates waste rock and tailings which is inherently sulfide bearing. Deposition of these materials in subaerial storage facilities subjects residual sulfide phases to atmospheric O This reaction is catalyzed by S-oxidizing bacteria (SOB) such as Carbonate dissolution consumes protons and generates alkalinity, which in turn decreases the net acidity of pore water. Depletion of the neutralization capacity of tailings may be followed by development of acid mine drainage (AMD) conditions. However, aqueous geochemistry associated with neutral mine drainage (NMD) is also of interest in the context of water quality ( Aqueous geochemistry of tailings pore water and drainage is intrinsically linked to tailings mineralogy, geochemistry, microbiology, and hydrology. Rates of sulfide oxidation and the mobility of associated reaction products are depend on multiple (bio)geochemical processes, including precipitation–dissolution, redox, and sorption reactions. Under near-neutral pH conditions, several metals and trace elements, such as Fe, Zn, Sb, As, Cr, Co, Cu, Mn, Mo, Ni, Se and Tl, may remain soluble under appropriate redox conditions ( Characterization of the Greens Creek active tailings deposit, which exhibits near-neutral pH pore water and drainage, was performed between 2004 and 2007. Tailings pore water and drainage samples were collected at various times, while solid-phase core samples were collected in 2005. This study examines the mineralogy, geochemistry and microbiology of this sulfide- and carbonate-rich tailings deposit, and evaluates controls on near-neutral pH pore water and drainage. The Greens Creek Mine in located approximately 30 The mine site is located in a coastal temperate rainforest and mean annual precipitation at the tailings facility was 1380 Drainage emanating from the tailings facility is collected via basal under-drains and, prior to discharge, treated using a high-density sludge process. Nonetheless, tailings deposited at the Greens Creek mine provide the opportunity to examine geochemistry, mineralogy and microbiology of a tailings facility characterized by circumneutral pH drainage. Solid-phase samples were collected for mineralogical investigation, geochemical analysis, microbial enumerations, and determination of physical properties. Core samples were collected at regular depth intervals from four boreholes located along a west to east transect (A–A′) and one additional location at the SW corner of the tailings facility ( Mineralogical investigation was performed on sub-samples collected from refrigerated core samples. These samples were collected into 20 Particle-size distribution was determined using a Malvern Instruments Mastersizer S laser diffraction particle-size analyzer. This method provides distribution in terms of vol. Frozen samples were submitted to an external laboratory for C and S speciation, whole-rock digestion, aqua regia extraction, acid–base accounting, and particle-size distribution analysis. Carbon and S speciation was performed using an ELTRA CS 2000 induction and resistance furnace. Samples were combusted at 1350 Enumeration of neutrophilic S-oxidizing bacteria (nSOB), acidophilic S-oxidizing bacteria (aSOB), iron-oxidizing bacteria (IOB), iron-reducing bacteria (IRB), and SO Tension lysimeters (Campbell Monoflex) were installed to monitor the chemical composition of pore water in the vadose zone. Lysimeters were installed at 25–50 Measurements of pH and Eh were made on unfiltered samples using previously reported methods ( Optical investigation revealed that samples are megascopically sulfide- and carbonate-rich ( Pyrite grains generally range from >10 to <100 Particles of non-opaque phases were generally larger than sulfide grains ( Quantitative XRD analysis generally agreed with the optical assessment ( Tailings particles were consistently fine-grained, and ranged in classification from fine sand to clay ( A distribution of particle sizes ranging from <0.1 to >500 Gangue and residual ore minerals present in the tailings assemblage may contain a variety of metals and other trace elements. The occurrence of Fe, Zn, Pb, Sb, Ag, As and Cu are expected based on ideal stoichiometry of the sulfide assemblage ( The occurrence of major elements from the whole-rock analysis was found to follow the order: Si The relative abundance of metals and other trace trace elements in aqua regia digests of core samples generally follows the order: Zn, Pb The oxidation of pyrite, sphalerite and other sulfide phases will release these elements to pore water. The observed aqueous concentrations will depend on the trace element content of primary sulfides, the mass of sulfides within the tailings deposit, and the extent of secondary reactions occurring following dissolution. Near-neutral pH conditions are expected to limit the aqueous concentrations of Fe(III), Al, and Pb. However, concentrations of several elements may remain elevated under near-neutral pH and reducing conditions. Minor variations in C and S speciation were observed among boreholes; however, depth dependent trends were not observed ( Sulfide-S and SO Laboratory ABA data suggests that all samples were potentially net-acid generating (NAG). Paste pH values for these borehole core samples were consistently near neutral, exhibiting minimum and maximum values of 7.02 and 8.06, respectively. Ratios of AP to NP ranged from 0.26 to 0.80, while net neutralization potential (NNP) averaged −184 Autotrophic SOB, both neutrophilic and acidophilic, were observed throughout the tailings facility ( Populations of IRB and SRB were variable both among boreholes and with depth within individual boreholes. The presence of SRB was observed in 31 of 32 core samples for which MPN enumerations were performed. Populations of SRB ranged from <1 to >10 Vadose zone pore-water samples were collected from tension lysimeters installed in the upper 400 Decreases in DOC and S A maximum Fe concentration of 27 Zinc, Mn and Ni exhibited maximum concentrations 25 Several trace elements, including Cu, Se, As, Sb, Tl and Mo were observed in pore-water samples, however, Cd, Cr, Co and Pb concentrations were generally below analytical detection limits. Copper and Se were present in pore-water samples collected in 2005, but average concentrations subsequently decreased to < Water collected from the saturated zone wells and basal drain exhibited similar geochemistry to pore water collected from 200 to 400 Sulfide oxidation at the tailings surface has generated elevated concentrations of SO Mineralogical and geochemical investigation of tailings borehole core samples revealed complex sulfide mineralogy and the presence of a host of metals and other trace elements. Methodologies used for AP and NP determination in this study were ineffective for the mineralogy of the Greens Creek tailings, and resulted in underestimation of both values. Recalculation using solid-phase geochemical and quantitative mineralogical data yielded much higher AP and NP values which were consistent with previous results for Greens Creek tailings. The occurrence of nSOB and SRB varied with depth and among boreholes. The activity of both groups of bacteria is likely limited by localized availability of electron donors and acceptors. Static testing of NP and AP indicates that the tailings exhibit potential to generate acid. Solid-phase and aqueous geochemistry data suggest that near-neutral pH conditions may be maintained for many years. Nonetheless, elevated concentrations of SO Funding for this research was provided by Greens Creek Mining Company, Hecla Mining Company, and Rio Tinto Ltd. Additional support was awarded through a NSERC Industrial Postgraduate Scholarship and Canada Research Chair programs. We thank N. Ballou, D. Gould, T. Morales, C. Naus, B. Nelson, W. Oelklaus, E. Pani, M. Raudsepp, J. Saran, K. Sentance, C. Wallace and J. Whitlock for their contributions.