The oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite demands extreme conditions of temperature and solution potential or non-aqueous solvents because of the formation of recalcitrant passivation layers. Chalcopyrite reduction suffers much less from this phenomenon and therefore could provide a starting point as a pretreatment to facilitate the subsequent leach. However, even though the electro-assisted reduction reactions occur at ambient temperature and pressure, the kinetics are slow, and consequently the power requirements are too high, to compete with conventional technology. A further decrease in passivation for a given reduction time should enhance the formation of chalcocite and metallic copper, which should result in an improved copper extraction in the subsequent oxidative leaching stage. This would directly impact the economy of the process.
                  The use of complexing agents for iron(II), sulfide and copper(I) in sulfuric acid solutions increased the amount of chalcocite and metallic copper formed in the electro-assisted reduction pretreatment of chalcopyrite compared with the same leaching system with only H2SO4. The improvement in the copper extraction in the subsequent oxidative stage is probably due to the complexation of iron by the carboxylic acids and sulfur by the ethanolamines in the reductive pretreatment, thus avoiding the formation of a pyrrhotite (FeS) passivation layer on the chalcopyrite surface. On the other hand, ethylene glycol stabilizes copper as the cuprous ion, facilitating the chalcopyrite transformation and copper extraction; however, this action alone is not as effective as the carboxylic acids and the ethanolamines in diminishing passivation.Sulfide minerals are the main source of base metals. Approximately 70% of world's copper reserves are in the form of chalcopyrite (CuFeS Many research teams in the last 50 One option to avoid these problems is to employ the reductive route, specifically electro-assisted reductive pretreatments in which chalcopyrite is transformed into less refractory sulfides (chalcocite and djurleite) or copper metal. Generally, these processes do not show the same degree of passivation as the oxidative ones. However, there is very little information regarding the reduction mechanism. The nature of the chalcopyrite reduction reaction products is determined by the pH and composition of the electrolytic solution. The thermodynamic data in the form of E The electrons needed for this reaction may come from a reducing agent or from direct electrolytic reduction (because copper sulfides have semiconducting properties). Metals, such as aluminum, iron, lead or zinc have been used as reducing agents in acidic media ( Electro-assisted reduction of chalcopyrite is possible at ambient temperature and pressure, with an aluminum cathode and a lead-silver alloy anode ( where H In order to favor iron extraction and, consequently, lessen the passivation problem, the addition of carboxylic acids to the reduction pretreatment solution, as ligands for the ferrous ion, has been proposed, ( The same authors ( On the other hand, the copper in chalcopyrite occurs as Cu(I), but the cuprous ion is not stable in sulfate solution, requiring the potential to be high enough to oxidize it to Cu(II) state or, in the reduction route, to stabilize it in the cuprous form, and to avoid disproportionation. Regarding the chalcopyritic sulfide ion, aqueous solutions of triethanolamine (TEA) are widely employed in the petroleum industry to remove H As mentioned earlier, a high H In this investigation, the nature of the reactions in the reduction of chalcopyrite is studied, employing the following complexing media: ethylene glycol for Cu(I) stabilization, triethanolamine to sequester H Cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry were used to determine the nature of the reactions that take place at the chalcopyrite surface in the different leaching media and to characterize the solid products formed on the surface of the mineral. Because it has been reported that H The electrochemical simulations of the process were performed using cyclic voltammetry and chronoamperometry on chalcopyrite in the form of carbon paste electrodes, in a three-electrode cell. These experiments are the basis for determining the interaction between the chalcopyrite and the different media. Carbon pastes were prepared using the wet sieved − The carbon paste electrode (working electrode) was submerged in a 100 The electro-assisted reductive pretreatment experiments were performed in a single chamber electrolytic cell, which consisted of a 500 For the reduction experiments, the following procedure was used: 2.5 The oxidative leaching was performed on each reduced residue to quantify the degree of chalcopyrite transformation and to determine the products of this reduction. An aqueous, acidic acetonitrile solution with cupric sulfate was selected as the medium because of its ability to leach both metallic copper (fast) and chalcocite (slow) at room temperature ( To determine the reduction and oxidation behavior of the carbon–chalcopyrite paste in each of the electrolytic media, the scans were initiated in the negative (reduction) direction (from the OCP to − The voltammograms for the solutions with carboxylic acids and organic solvents, displayed in The peaks corresponding to the citric acid/H It can be concluded from the analysis of the voltammograms that, in comparison with pure H Because of the semiconductor nature of chalcopyrite, the leaching systems studied possibly have a high capacitive current at the electrode surface (which means that the current is being consumed as the system develops its charge, in addition to the chemical reaction). To eliminate this effect, chronoamperometric tests were carried out at − In the above reaction, n equals 2, according to reaction ( Ethylene glycol, tartaric acid and TEA showed the largest enhancement factors. This relationship is in concordance with the voltamperometric results, except for TEA, which was similar to H As was mentioned earlier, the formation of H In the step-wise reduction process, iron is extracted from chalcopyrite, forming bornite (reaction ( Regarding copper extraction in the oxidative step, In In the subsequent oxidation ( A more quantitative comparison between the different chemical systems can be appreciated with the current efficiency of each in the reduction stage. This was calculated by estimating the number of electrons required to produce the copper and chalcocite moles formed, observed in the subsequent oxidation step, divided by the number of electron moles supplied. These results are presented in Efficiencies between 6 and 9% can be observed in these experiments using 1% solids. The solid to liquid ratio is also an important factor in the improvement of the efficiency since the particle/cathode contact is important for the reduction reaction. In other tests with 5 and 10% solids (not shown here) using a different reactor design, greater efficiencies were obtained. Regarding the reduction time and consequently power consumption, it can be noted in X-ray diffractograms of the solid residues with the highest copper extractions (TEA and tartaric acid), were used to elucidate the chemical reactions occurring in the reduction stage. The diffractograms ( The use of complexing agents, such as TEA and tartaric acid, together with sulfuric acid was shown to increase the amount of metallic copper formed in the electro-assisted pretreatment of chalcopyrite; hence, the amount of copper extracted in the oxidative leach was enhanced by up to 90% when compared with that obtained from the residue pretreatment with H Finally, ethylene glycol stabilizes copper as the cuprous ion, facilitating the chalcopyrite transformation and copper extraction; however, this action alone is not as effective as the carboxylic acids and the ethanolamines in diminishing passivation. The authors wish to thank the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (