A technique using non-isothermal thermogravimetric analyser results was developed for the validation of reaction rate models together with associated parameters suitable for chemically controlled gas-solid reactions. The solution of the temperature integral which occurs in the calculation is achieved by numerical integration with respect to a dimensionless activation energy variable, y=E/RT, following a transformation of the temperature integral equation. The evaluation of the validity of the kinetic model and determination of all the constants is accomplished with a two-step regression procedure with experimental results from several thermogrammes with different linear heating rates. The technique was validated by comparing results obtained for the combustion of two coal-chars with corresponding isothermal results using a shrinking core model with a nth order surface reaction.heating rate, K activation energy, J mol reaction model pre-exponential factor, s power rate dependence index temperature integral partial pressure of oxygen, Pa reaction rate, s gas constant, J time, temperature, K reference temperature, K fractional carbon conversion dimensionless variable defined by Eq. Thermogravimetric-based methods using isothermal In this paper, a new method for the validation of kinetic models together with the determination of all relevant constants using thermogravimetic results for single-step gas-solid reactions is developed and discussed. The technique involves the numerical solution of the temperature integral after transformation with The method described below is applicable to chemically controlled reaction systems which in the case of coal-char combustion would include the random pore model for porous particles The non-isothermal method uses a linear heating rate such that Eq. For a constant oxygen partial pressure, a plot of the logarithm of the heating rate (B) against the logarithm of the parameter The evaluation of the overall reaction rate model and the corresponding reaction rate constants can be obtained from a second regression calculation using Eq. For a comparison of results obtained with the non-isothermal method against results calculated with an isothermal method the following equations are used. For a constant temperature Eq. All results reported were obtained from a Thermogravimetric Analyser (TGA) with coal-chars prepared in situ (at 973 Non-isothermal experiments results were obtained with heating rates of 1,2,3 and 4 Using the regression method described above a calculation was carried out using Eq. Following the evaluation of the activation energy, the parameter   Isothermal experiments were done at different temperatures with an air mixture. A non-isothermal method using multi-heating rates together with of a two-step regression procedure was developed and can be used for the validation of reaction models and the determination of reaction constants for gas-solid reactions. The method is confined to single-step reaction systems and involves determination of the average activation energy (first step) over a range of heating rates without knowledge of the reaction model (isoconversional). A full set of average reaction constants (second step) were obtained for the combustion of coal-chars derived from inertinite-rich coal (second stage) and was shown to predict isothermal combustion very well using an appropriate validated reaction model.