In this study, the flotation behavior of malachite was investigated using carboxyl-functionalized carbon black nanoparticles (CB-NPs) as collectors in a hydrodynamically simplified Hallimond tube. We found that malachite floatability increased with increasing CB-NP concentration in the low range (0.5–2 kg/ton). To understand the mechanism of this higher floatability for low CB-NP concentrations, we examined the amounts of deposited CB-NPs on the malachite surface and hydrophobicity of the surface with deposited CB-NPs according to changes in the initial CB-NP concentration. The increase in malachite floatability was likely associated with increases in the amounts of deposited CB-NPs on the malachite surface, which enhanced malachite floatability by altering the hydrophobicity of its surface. Meanwhile, malachite floatability sharply decreased at CB-NP concentrations exceeding 2 kg/ton. To understand this unusual flotation behavior for high CB-NP concentrations, we also examined the amounts of CB-NPs deposited on the malachite surface and contact angles. However, the decreased malachite floatability could not be fully explained by these experiments, implying that at least one additional mechanism is involved. Therefore, additional flotation experiments including filtration processes and different flotation times were conducted, revealing that the unusual flotation behavior was likely due to the presence of suspended CB-NP aggregates, which reduced the kinetic rates of attachment between malachite and bubbles.Flotation is a physicochemical technique that separates hydrophobic particles from a mixture of hydrophobic and hydrophilic particles ( Copper oxide is an important copper source. It is found in the weathered regions of most Cu sulfide ore bodies ( More recently, there have been attempts to investigate hydrophobic nanoparticles as a new class of flotation collectors ( In this study, to identify the feasibility of nanoparticle flotation using Cu oxide minerals and further advance the understanding of the roles of nanoparticles as collectors in flotation, malachite flotation was performed using carboxyl-functionalized carbon black nanoparticles (CB-NPs) as collectors. Malachite is a representative copper oxide-based mineral ( Malachite (CuCO An ultrasonic wave setup was used to disperse CB-NPs into suspensions. In detail, the setup consisted of an ultrasonic homogenizer with a horn tip of 10 mm in diameter (KNSN-RAB, KOEN, South Korea) and a reactor to accommodate the CB-NP suspension. The ultrasonic wave frequency was fixed at 20 kHz (intensity of 11 W/mL) for consistent irradiation. The cylinder-shaped reactor was in acrylic with a diameter and height of 3 and 10 cm, respectively. The reactor had double jackets for controlling the temperature. The 40 mg/L CB-NP suspension was prepared in Milli-Q water (Milli-Q Plus, Millipore Ltd., UK) and then dispersed for 10 min; this suspension was used as stock suspension. The suspension with desired CB-NP concentration was prepared by diluting the stock suspension for subsequent characterization, deposition, and flotation tests. To characterize the electrokinetic properties of malachite and CB-NPs, their electrophoretic mobilities were measured using ELS-Z equipment (Otsuka, Hirakata, Japan); the Smoluchowski equation was used to convert electrophoretic mobility to zeta potential ( To identify the concentration of CB-NPs deposited onto the surface of malachite and evaluate the change of the particle sizes of CB-NPs with different CB-NP concentrations during deposition, absorbance and hydrodynamic diameter measurements were performed. To prepare sample suspensions, 1 g of malachite with a desired CB-NP concentration was distributed in 50-mL plastic conical tubes. Then, the suspensions were rotated at 40 rpm for 30 min. After settling the suspension of deposited CB-NPs–malachite via gravity for 1 min, the remaining amounts of CB-NPs in the supernatant were obtained. First, the extent of CB-NP deposition on the malachite surface was determined by measuring the absorbance of the supernatant CB-NP dispersion at 600 nm before and after deposition (30 min) using a UV-spectrometer (HS-3300, Humas, South Korea). The quantity of deposited CB-NPs was calculated using a calibration curve of absorbance versus CB-NP concentration. These tests were performed in at least duplicate for each condition. Second, the change of the particle sizes of CB-NPs during deposition was determined by measuring the hydrodynamic diameter of the supernatant using the dynamic light scattering (DLS) method (ELS-Z). In addition, to visually identify CB-NP deposition onto the malachite surface, a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM) with an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) (SUPRA 40VP, Carl Zeiss, Germany) was also employed. Flotation experiments were conducted using a Hallimond tube with 140 rpm (PC-410D, Corning Life Sciences, Mexico) at pH 7. Nitrogen gas (99.999% purity) was injected with a fixed flow rate of 30 mL/min. DF-250 was used as a frother at a concentration of 100 mL/ton. The conditioning time was 1 min for each test. To identify the flotation behavior of malachite with different CB-NP concentrations and flotation times, the flotation experiments were performed with 0.5–12 kg/ton CB-NPs and a flotation time of 5–60 min. Note that all flotation tests were conducted using samples with residual CB-NPs in suspension after CB-NP deposition onto the malachite surface. Additional flotation experiments with filtration were conducted to identify the effects of the suspended CB-NP concentration on the flotation behavior of malachite. To eliminate residual CB-NPs after CB-NP deposition onto the malachite surface, filtration was conducted using cellulose acetate membrane filter (ADVANTEC, Toyo Roshi Kaisha, Japan) with a pore size of 5 μm and a small vacuum pump. Malachite remaining on the filter was collected and used for flotation tests. Both the floated and unfloated samples resulting from flotation were dried at 45 °C in a dryer (J-IB2, JICICO Co., Ltd., South Korea) for 24 h. The flotation experiments were performed in at least duplicate for each condition. To investigate their hydrophobicity, CB-NPs were collected via suction filtration onto a 0.22-μm pore size cellulose acetate membrane filter. After filtration, the contact angle of the collected CB-NPs was measured via the sessile drop method ( The physicochemical characteristics of the CB-NPs used in this study were examined. TEM analyses were conducted to confirm the shape and size of the CB-NPs. Zeta potential was measured as a function of pH to examine the electrokinetic behavior of malachite and CB-NPs, and the results are presented in The floatability of malachite was measured as a function of the CB-NP concentration (0.5–12 kg/ton) for a flotation time of 20 min at pH 7, and the results are presented in Meanwhile, malachite floatability decreased at CB-NP concentrations exceeding 2 kg/ton (3–12 kg/ton). To understand this interesting flotation behavior, we measured the deposited CB-NP concentration on the malachite surface over this range ( Previous studies found that the aggregation of hydrophobic nanoparticles had a negative impact on flotation performance ( As Interestingly, the suspended CB-NP concentration strongly affected the floatability of malachite ( To further clarify the cause of the different malachite floatability based on the presence of suspended CB-NPs, flotation experiments were performed using different flotation time and the results are presented in In this study, the influence of the concentration of CB-NPs as collectors in malachite flotation was systematically investigated. The key experimental findings from our study were as follows: Electrophoretic mobility measurements illustrated that malachite is positively charged at certain pH values, whereas the nanoparticles are negatively charged at these values, indicating that the electrostatic interaction between malachite and CB-NPs was favorable, resulting in CB-NP deposition onto the malachite surface. The amount of CB-NPs deposited on malachite surface increased with increasing CB-NP concentrations over the low range (0.5–2 kg/ton). The maximum amount of deposited CB-NPs was approximately 1.5 mg/g at 2 kg/ton CB-NPs, and at higher concentrations, CB-NPs no longer deposited onto the malachite surface. The trends for the amounts of deposited CB-NPs on the malachite surface were highly consistent with the contact angle measurements. These two experimental results indicate that the suspended CB-NP concentration continuously increased with increasing CB-NP concentrations exceeding 2 kg/ton. We found that the malachite floatability increased with increasing CB-NP concentrations over the low range (0.5–2 kg/ton). The amounts of CB-NPs deposited onto malachite surface increased as the CB-NP concentration increased, resulting in increased hydrophobicity of the malachite surface and enhanced malachite floatability. Meanwhile, malachite floatability sharply decreased at CB-NP concentrations exceeding 2 kg/ton. Our various experimental results including a filtration process and different flotation times suggested that this unusual flotation behavior of malachite can be explained by the presence of suspended CB-NP aggregates, which reduced the kinetic rates of attachment between CB-NP–deposited malachite and bubbles.