The second edition of the South African Minerals Review (1998–1999) is a soft covered, spiral bound book 108 pages in length with 61 pages of appended detail. This collaborative review by the non-governmental organisation Minerals and Energy Policy Centre (South Africa) and the Raw Materials Group (Sweden) examines the developments within and metamorphosis of the South African minerals industry during 1998 and 1999. The main topics covered in the review are: the ongoing structural change in traditional South African mining houses, the recent emergence of black entrepreneurship and modest foreign investment; the profile of South Africa's major mining houses, their exploration expenditures and associated activities; the problems and ramifications of South Africa's diamond industry, and; the policy issues surrounding South Africa's new minerals and mining policy and associated developments. A series of five maps showing the location and ownership of refineries as well as gold, platinum, diamond, ferrous and non-ferrous metal mines, as at 1998/1999 is provided at the end of Chapter 3. Appendix A provides production statistics and ownership structures for all of the major mining groups operating in South Africa. South African mining and production by commodity is listed in Appendix B. Corporate control in mining and refining in the Western World for the year 1998 is given in Appendix C. No references are provided for the sources of this information. Much of the information has been reworked from the webpage maintained by the Department of Minerals and Energy. It is likely that the array of weekly and monthly publications reporting events in the local and international industry were also used. A month by month chronicle of the events shaping the minerals and mining industry in the years 1998 and 1999 is presented in Chapter One. The details of the recorded events are a complex web of mergers and acquisitions, particularly among the larger gold, coal and platinum producers. The scope and intensity of activity is probably a combination of changes in strategic thinking among the larger companies and the proposed changes to the minerals policy as laid out by government in the White Paper. A significant change is that South African mineral production was predominately controlled by domestic owners a decade ago, but significant foreign ownership of South Africa's resources is now seen in the chrome, platinum, coal and gold industries. In addition significant new diamond, coal, chrome, base metal and platinum mining operations have been brought into production. The influx of foreign investment has been offset by the move off shore of several South African companies that have invested in foreign mining operations, particularly Australia. The strength of business law and the ability to enforce its will on companies in the international forum has been demonstrated by the European Commission during the 1998 to 1999 period. Chapter Two covers the restructuring and restitution of the mining industry. These changes were postponed for 3 years because of National Party control over minerals and agriculture in the Government of National Unity. Attempts to establish black empowerment in the minerals industry faltered because the sale of a major company at a premium was followed by a significant fall in the gold price, an exodus of top management, erosion of half the company share value and a period of poor governance by management. Opportunistic black mining companies and black fronts for white interests emerged but no meaningful black empowerment of the industry either from a policy perspective or in terms of redistribution and restitution was undertaken prior to 1998. In 1998 the rate of change increased dramatically and within eighteen months the ‘big six’ mining houses that had controlled 70% of the South African economy changed structures and names. ‘Unbundling’ the assets of larger companies transformed the traditional mining industry and Barlow Rand, Gold Fields of South Africa, JCI, Gencor and Anglovaal have been significantly reduced or disappeared. Attempts at black empowerment, dismantling, dilution and sales have reduced the companies to weak-interest management groups or holding companies. Commodity focussed, acquisitive and internationally competitive resource based organisations have replaced the old order. Removal of management contracts and delisting of individual mining companies has allowed holding companies to access cash flows of the mines. Exposure in international capital markets, insulation against the sliding Rand and the prospect of closing the valuation gap between South African and foreign resource companies motivated the emergence of this new breed of mining company. Acquisition of marginal mines shed by the larger companies showed dramatic results under entrepreneurial management. Changes in corporate culture and inter-company relationships have been a spin-off of the process with joint management of mines being the order of the day. The need to become internationally competitive, high inflation, prohibitive exchange controls, the low gold price and labour unionisation were among the economic reasons for restructuring. The constraint of access to foreign capital also provided the impetus for companies to move offshore. The move by Anglo American and Billiton to London means they are now global resource companies in the league of Rio Tinto and BHP. The restructuring has brought casualties with it, corporate culture and job security being amongst the first to go. Persistent ongoing retrenchments are chief amongst survival tactics of mining companies, even though some have explained it as an expression of confidence in the longer term political and economic stability of the country. Control over South African mining has shifted from South African, to London, Switzerland and Vancouver. In 1975, South African based mining companies controlled 22% of the total value of mineral production in the Western World, but this fell to 13% by 1995, and by 1999 had fallen to 5%. Control over iron ore production is the only area still effectively in the hands of South African companies. Chapter Three of the Review, entitled ‘The Corporate Landscape’ provides a profile of eighteen of South Africa's top mining companies. The history, current-operations, exploration and development of each are reviewed. Corporate expansion through mining and exploration activities is described and levels of metal and commodity production from the different mining operations are provided. By and large corporate developments are reported as positive value-adding events, but the brief chronicle of events that led to the demise of the Johannesburg Consolidated Investment Company hold warning about the mismanagement, company politics and personal agendas, for all mining companies. The emergence of the only black-owned and managed gold mining company in South Africa, African Rainbow Minerals (ARM), is of interest. The management structure, productivity, efficiency incentives and the grouping of operations into profit-focussed business units combine to allow ARM to produce 16 tonnes of gold per annum. The discovery of the platinum deposits in the Bushveld Complex and their exploitation by the companies owned by Anglo American Platinum Corporation Ltd (Amplats) is reviewed. Development of the Bafokeng-Rasimore platinum mine at Boschkoppie is significant in that it also includes the first meaningful compensation of an indigenous peoples group through a 1.2 billion ZAR lease of tribal land. Chapter Four reviews exploration activities and expenditures on the part of South African companies. Following four successive years of continuous growth, expenditure by South African exploration companies declined by 15% in 1998 to 325 MUSD or 9% of total exploration expenditure world-wide. A 30% downturn in global exploration expenditure is recorded for 1998. South African companies have preferred JV's with junior companies, waiting till the present phase of restructuring is completed. Over the last 2 to 3 years exploration by South African companies has been split between South Africa, Africa and Latin America, each attracting about a third of the total budget. The commodity spread for the exploration budget is dominated by gold (50%) followed by base metals (27%) and diamonds. Details of the exploration activities of Anglo-American, Anglovaal, Billiton, Gold Fields, Iscor, JCI Gold and Randgold Resources is provided. An enlightening table showing South African exploration expenditure in terms of budget, geographical spread and commodities in the period, 1992 to 1998 is also provided. Chapter Five is dedicated to an examination of the role players and institutional arrangements that govern the diamond and gold industries in South Africa. Under the section dealing with government institutions and requirements the function of statutory bodies including the Diamond Board, the Diamond Bourse, the Government Diamond Valuator and the Section 59 Committee are considered. The procedures and exclusions on diamond licensing of dealers and cutters is explained. The complexity of the international diamond business and the role and function of the CSO in controlling sales is explained. Demand in the eastern countries during 1998 diminished significantly due to the Asian economic crisis but this was offset by stronger than usual sales in the US and Europe. On the supply side the difficulties during 1998 led De Beers to impose a 74% delivery quota on production capacity of their own and CSO-linked companies. Increased stockpiling and imposition of quotas offset the possibility of price collapse at about 1 billion USD worth of stock was removed from circulation and trade inventories were significantly reduced. The crisis surrounding the falling gold price and its slump of 11 percent between May and July 1999, is due to threatened sales by the IMF and Britain. Gold producers and the World Gold Council quickly pointed out that such sales would hurt third world countries more than it would help them. Sentiment that gold was no longer a store of value is considered to be the largest contributor to the falling price. Appeals to Washington and Europe to rethink their strategies were followed by the central bank announcement to limit their activities in the gold market, and led to a marked recovery in the price. Chapter Six examines developments on the policy front. Background to the governments new minerals policy (details of which were released in the White Paper on Minerals Policy in October of 1998) is that mining was seen as the structure on which white economic power was built. Furthermore job reservation on mines and the disintegration of the cultural and social fabric of rural communities through employment of migrant labour were issues which the broader population needed to have addressed. The country's minerals and mining policy was reviewed through an inclusive consultative process involving government industry and labour. The White Paper addresses six main issues namely the Business Climate and Mineral Development, Participation in Ownership and Management People Issues, Environmental Management, Regional Co-operation and Governance. The possibility of introducing a tax on mineral rights is mooted. Productive use of mineral rights will not disadvantage owners or jeopardise their security of tenure. Holders of mineral rights who fail to utilise them in any way will have to face paying the tax or deferring ownership to the State. The State could then redistribute them for more efficient usage and encourage the turnover of mineral rights. A more controversial aspect of the policy document is the clear intention of government to facilitate the return of privately held unused mineral rights to the State. The policy of ‘use it or lose it’ and ‘use it and keep it’ is aimed at redressing exclusion of the black majority, promoting broader ownership, preventing hoarding and encouraging minerals development and investment. The underlying assumption is that minerals are a national patrimony and should therefore be held by the State on behalf of all citizens. The chief value of the publication lies in the fact that the numerous and complex details of the South African minerals industry are brought together under a single cover.