Recycling of thermoplastic composites has attracted considerable attention in the recent years. Several recycling solutions include shredding scrap to centimetre-sized flakes to retain long fibres, followed by a remanufacturing step that prevents fibre breakage. Determining the exact fibre length distribution (FLD) for these routes is crucial, as it is of importance for the processibility of the material as well as the mechanical performance of the recycled parts. In this paper, novel analysis methods are introduced to calculate FLDs based on photographs of flakes. The reliability of the method and of the sampling was found to be high. The relation between flake size and FLD was studied, showing that offcut layup barely influences the FLD in comparison to flake size. The effects of shredding settings and sieving were studied, showing a strong correlation between machine parameters and FLD, whereas the offcut size was found to have no effect on FLD.With the demand and production of continuous fibre thermoplastic composites (TPCs) rising in the aerospace industry, the volume of production scrap has also grown and is expected to continue to grow in the future   Additionally, industrial applications of this recycling route may require tailored materials with specific flow behaviour or a certain part performance, in order to manufacture of certify a particular part. The production of various FLDs, with short or long fibres, with narrow or wide distributions, is an important criterion here. It is therefore essential to understand which factors influence the FLD and how to tailor these to specific requirements. The literature already presents several methods to characterise the FLD, which can be categorised as direct and indirect. Methods are considered direct when all fibres in a sample are measured, whereas indirect methods only produce an estimated FLD. Direct measurements have been extensively used for short-fibre composites The objectives of this article are: 1. to develop and implement a reliable method that calculates the FLD based on a batch of multi-layered flakes; 2. to understand the relations between flakes and FLD to determine whether flake shape, size and layup affect the resulting FLDs; and 3. to understand whether and how offcut size, shredding settings and sieving can influence the FLD of the resulting flakes. The current paper will elaborate on these three issues. Firstly, details on the materials, shredding/sieving processes, and the implemented method will be presented, followed by a results and discussion section, which will answer the objectives of this article. The offcuts used in this article were collected at various manufacturing plants. For the purpose of this study, offcuts are defined as the remainders from the nesting or trimming stage of from prepregs or laminates (see   After shredding, a 6 kg batch of shredded flakes was sieved using multi-stage vibrating sieves (see Two alternative methods were developed to characterise the FLD of a batch of flakes. This section describes the various steps of the methods, which will later be used to characterise the FLD of shredded scrap in Section The steps of the two methods, named Specifically, the measured-orientation method requires knowledge about the offcut layup (for step 4) and the identification of the fibre orientation of the top layer (for step 2b). The identification can either be performed automatically using fibre detection tools and image analysis or manually. The purpose of this study was not to develop these fibre detection tools, which is why the fibre orientation was determined manually. Although such a measurement method indirectly estimates the FLD in each flake, it is considered to be the correct FLD by definition based on the following assumptions:   the flakes are flat; the crimp percentage, if any, is null; the edges of the flakes are sharp; the fibres are not bent or sheared in the flakes. The corrections required for these assumptions are not taken into account and may be time-consuming to implement or unknown to the user of the method. In the case of the Contrary to the measured-orientation method, the assumed-orientation method disregards fibre orientation in the flakes by selecting an arbitrary set of fibre orientations (step 4). This way, the assumed-orientation method calculates an FLD that is independent of the actual flake layup. It does not require prior knowledge of the layup of the flakes, nor detection of the fibre orientation of the top layer. For this study, an angular increment of The various C/PPS offcuts were shredded and sieved, using the settings as detailed in Section  Batches were sampled randomly for the two implemented methods. Since this may induce statistical variability, a reproducibility and repeatability study was performed first, using the measured-orientation method. Six kilogrammes of flakes were obtained from shredding  The FLDs of the seven batches were calculated using the measured-orientation method. Examples of such FLDs are shown in  Next, the assumed-orientation method was employed to calculate FLDs, which were compared to those computed with the measured-orientation method. As a reminder, the assumed-orientation method disregards the actual flake layup when computing FLDs. All the flakes in the current study are shredded quasi-isotropic offcuts. However, the industry uses or will use various layups to manufacture TPC components. Therefore, the accuracy of the assumed-orientation method must be tested against various flake layups. For that purpose, the actual layup of the seven batches of flakes was considered when analysing the flakes (the case presented in the previous paragraphs), or they were considered to have a virtual layup (cross-ply and unidirectional (UD)). The resulting FLDs for each layup configuration were then compared to the results of the assumed-orientation method. Correlation coefficients were calculated between the FLDs computed using the assumed-orientation method and the FLDs calculated with the measured-orientation method for each layup situation and for all seven batches. An expression of such a coefficient is defined as:  Two main results can be derived from this study of the assumed-orientation method. Firstly, the assumed-orientation method can be used instead of the measured-orientation method, as it characterises FLDs well when flakes have a quasi-isotropic layup, which is the case in this study (see Section  The possible origins of the influence of flake layup and shape on the FLD are discussed here. First, flakes obtained from multiple-shaft shredders mainly look like parallelograms, or possibly quadrilaterals, as shown in  Additionally, the argument for a single rectangular flake can be extended to explain the shape of the FLDs. As there are more fibres with a length close to the flake width and flake height, it is expected that the FLD can be obtained from the distribution of flake width and height. This statement becomes more accurate for flakes with a high aspect ratio as it strengthens the two phenomena. It also remains true for variations in flake size, as there are independent of flake size. However, changes in flake shape can diminish the effects. This should be studied case by case and probably depends on flake convexity and the number of edges of the flake in question. One of the possible representations is to use maximum and minimum Feret diameters, which correspond to the maximum and minimum lengths of a random shape that can be measured with a calliper Nevertheless, the assumed-orientation method was shown to reliably capture FLDs of quasi-isotropic flakes. The results of the previous section explained the development and reliability of the methods, especially the assumed-orientation method, which will be used for the rest of the study. These results enable us to proceed to the last aim of the paper: to understand whether and how, offcut size, shredding settings and sieving influence the FLD of the resulting flakes. Three cases are tested in this section.  The first considers offcuts of different sizes shredded with the same parameters, to determine whether offcut size influences the FLD of the shredded flakes. Three offcut sizes were used for this purpose. The second case tests the influence of varying shredding parameters, namely blade width and screen size, on the FLD. Shredding experiments with four combinations of blade width and screen size were performed. The third case involves the sieving of shredded flakes, to determine the relation between sieve size and FLD. A set of different sieves was used to sieve one batch of flakes. First, offcuts of the various sizes listed in  Overall, the seven FLDs in  The objective of this paper was to develop and implement a new method that calculates FLD from a batch of multi-layered flakes. Recycling routes, such as those presented in In this study, an image processing method that disregards the actual flake layup was successfully implemented and used to calculate FLDs from pictures of flakes. It was found that FLD is closely related to flake size and is barely affected by offcut layup, if the offcuts are fed into the shredder at random orientations. This characteristic extends the validity of the method to shredded composites when there is no prior knowledge of the layup. However, the methods and the results remain valid only if flakes do not delaminate during the shredding process. Additionally, the researchers noticed that production scrap can vary in size. However, this was shown to have no influence on FLD/PSD, which is a significant result when setting up a pilot plant or production line to recycle collected scrap. Along the same lines, it was demonstrated that sampling batches from a population of shredded flakes is reproducible even when batches are as small as 60 flakes. Such a stable FLD/PSD, from batch to batch or in a continuous process, will be a minimum prerequisite for any application requiring reproducible part performance. Finally, it was shown that changing the blade width and screen shifted FLD location and peak, as well as modifying the overall scatter of FLDs. Sieving provides a simple way to separate fine and coarse particles. It was also found that the aperture size of the sieves is closely correlated to the FLD of flakes resting on each sieve. These results were obtained with flakes shredded from quasi-isotropic offcuts but the authors believe that similar results can be expected if the scrap layup varies. This study focused on TPCs, but the results presented here, as well as the assumed-orientation method, can be easily used for the recycling of thermoset composites. Although recycling solutions for thermoset composites are different from those for TPCs, the comminution step can be similar, which results in similar needs to characterise FLDs. This project was financed by the Dutch Organisation of Applied Research –