The effect of friction stir processing (FSP) on the spatial homogeneity of SiC particles in discontinuously reinforced aluminum (DRA) metal matrix composites is investigated. DRA composites were produced with microstructures having controlled degrees of clustering, by carefully varying the particle size ratios (PSR) of the powders used in their fabrication. In this contribution, the spatial heterogeneity of these DRA microstructures is characterized by careful measurement of statistical two-point correlation functions and also via the multi-scalar analysis of area fractions (MSAAF) technique, at length scales up to 1mm, by the use of high-resolution, large-area image montaging. These complimentary techniques yield similar results for the spatial heterogeneity of the DRA materials, both before and after FSP. The microstructural data suggest that significant microstructural modifications are imparted by FSP, including reductions in the measured spatial heterogeneity and microstructural anisotropy, as well as re-orientation of the reinforcement particles due to the stirring action. These microstructural modifications have a strong influence on the experimentally-measured tensile strengths and ductilities of the DRA composites. A general relationship exists between the measured tensile ductility and the microstructural parameters of homogeneous length scale (L
                     H) and cluster size (d
                     clus), independent of the DRA processing history.Discontinuously reinforced aluminum (DRA) metal matrix composites often exhibit non-uniformities in spatial and orientation distributions of the reinforcement particles. The degree of this microstructural heterogeneity depends on numerous factors including particle size ratio (PSR) of the matrix and the reinforcement powder particles, particle shape, alloy composition, and extrusion ratio. Numerous experimental observations have shown that microstructural heterogeneity deleteriously affects the strength Secondary processing techniques such as friction stir processing (FSP) can significantly affect the microstructure of DRA. Quantitative characterization of these microstructural changes can lead to a better understanding of microstructural evolution during FSP, and elucidation of the microstructure–properties relationships existing in this class of materials. In this contribution, effects of FSP on the spatial clustering of the SiC particles in DRA composites are quantified via measurements of statistical two-point correlation functions using the methodology reported in an earlier contribution Two-point, three-point, and higher order correlation functions are an important class of statistical distribution functions that are useful for characterization of clustering and heterogeneity of microstructural features In general, the probability that a randomly located line of length As a complementary technique to the two-point correlation functions described above, the MSAAF technique of Spowart and co-workers Although the technique does provide microstructural information over many length scales, from roughly the particle size upwards, it is often convenient to characterize the level of spatial heterogeneity in the microstructure by assigning a single parameter, the DRA composites were fabricated by UES Inc., at the Air Force Research Laboratory, Materials and Manufacturing Directorate, using standard powder-metallurgy techniques of powder blending, canning, vacuum degassing, and hot extrusion. Spherical, gas-atomized matrix alloy powders of nominal composition Al–0.27 Cu–0.26 Fe–0.97 Mg–0.56 Si (wt.%, 6061 aluminum alloy) were classified into three powder lots with average particle sizes of 26.4, 42.0 and 108.6 FSP was carried out at University of Missouri-Rolla, on 12.5 Tensile testing was carried out at room temperature, using miniature test specimens that were ED machined from the lower and upper regions of the friction stirred buttons, representing the as-extruded and as-processed DRA, respectively. The specimens were tested at a strain rate of 1 Particle orientations were measured on longitudinal metallographic sections obtained from each composite specimen using standard grinding and polishing techniques. Automatic particle segmentation and quantification was available, using a digital image analysis system. The distributions of the particle orientations were quantitatively characterized before and after FSP, where the orientation of an individual SiC particle is defined as the angle between its major axis and the extrusion direction. For each specimen, orientation angles were measured for more than 15,000 particles to maintain adequate statistics. The direction-dependent two-point correlation function Similarly, the microstructural images used for MSAAF were also obtained from large seamless montages (∼3   Typical morphologies of the SiC particles used in the extruded DRA materials are shown in It is observed that these non-equiaxed particles have preferred orientations with respect to the extrusion direction, resulting from non-uniform matrix flow during deformation (extrusion) processing ( Preferential orientation and rotation of the particles can lead to differences between the load-transfer characteristics in the longitudinal and transverse directions, resulting in anisotropic mechanical properties, similar to those observed in long-fiber and aligned short fiber composites    In an earlier contribution The results of the MSAAF procedure carried out on the as-extruded and as-processed DRA microstructures are shown in Also shown on the plots are estimates of The effect of friction stir processing on the redistribution of particles is clearly not the same for each of the starting microstructures. For example, the PSR The parameter However, the real utility of the MSAAF technique resides in descriptions of microstructural heterogeneity at length scales much larger than the particle size, up to the size scale of the specimen itself, in the regime where Eqs. An additional approach for characterizing homogeneity which accounts for clustering behavior amongst the reinforcement particles is to use the measured values of homogeneous length scale to calculate an effective “cluster size”, The microstructural data suggests that FSP affects the DRA composite microstructure in a number of ways. The MSAAF analysis and two-point correlation data both indicate a decrease in spatial heterogeneity, via disruption of the elongated particle clusters. Similarly, the particle orientation distribution data suggests that significant particle rotation also occurs during FSP. The effects of FSP on the mechanical behavior of the DRA composites must therefore be interpreted in the light of the combined effects of each of these microstructural changes. For example, recent work by Ganesh and Chawla Corson In the context of the present work,  Additional mechanical property data is also presented in High-resolution, large-area image montages have been used to obtain detailed microstructural data for P/M-processed 6061/SiC DRA composite materials made with different size matrix powders, both before and after single friction stir processing step. The microstructural data consistently indicate that significant microstructural modifications occur during FSP, including re-orientation of the reinforcement particles, and a significant reduction in the levels of microstructural heterogeneity and microstructural anisotropy. In general, the SiC reinforcement particles are found to be non-equiaxed, with an average aspect ratio around 1.6–1.8. Particle orientation statistics clearly indicate that there are preferred orientations for the non-equiaxed particles after extrusion processing (i.e. alignment parallel to the extrusion direction). These preferred orientations are modified during passage of the friction stir tool, realigning the particles at ∼45° to the extrusion and transverse directions. The realignment of particles is found not to be dependent on PSR. Microstructural heterogeneity has been quantified by two different but complementary analyses: (i) the calculation of two-point correlation functions Microstructural modifications from FSP also have a strong effect on the mechanical properties of the DRA materials. The two microstructural parameters which come from the MSAAF analysis, This research was supported through the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) grant number F49620-01-0045 (Dr. C.S. Hartley, Program Manager). Two of the authors (J.E.S., D.B.M.) are also supported through the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR) grant number 01ML05-COR (Dr. C.S. Hartley, Program Manager). The financial support is gratefully acknowledged.