This paper develops a correlation for predicting the critical impeller speed, N
                     js as a function of operating conditions in a mechanical flotation cell. Understanding solids suspension has become increasingly important in recent years due to dramatic increases in flotation cell sizes. The critical impeller speed is commonly used to indicate the effectiveness of solids suspension in stirred tanks. In previous publications, the authors have found the critical impeller speed to be a very useful benchmark for evaluating the effectiveness of solids suspension in a mechanical flotation cell. This study develops a ‘Zwietering-type’ correlation for the critical impeller speed, N
                     js in terms of particle size, solids density, solids concentration, liquid viscosity and air flow rate. The study was conducted in a 125 ℓ Batequip flotation cell using sized fractions of silica, rutile and zircon at various solids concentrations, liquid viscosities and air flow rates. The critical impeller speed was found to be proportional to the particle size, solids density and solids mass concentration to the exponents of 0.33, 0.70 and 0.17 and to increase linearly with air flow rate. Liquid viscosity was found to have a negligible effect. These findings are similar to those observed in stirred tanks, but indicate that particle size and solids density has more significant influences on the critical impeller speed in mechanical flotation cells. To the authors’ knowledge, this is the first time a ‘Zwietering-type’ correlation, originally developed for stirred tanks, has been presented for solids suspension in a mechanical flotation cell. This correlation can be used to predict how the impeller speed should be adjusted in order to maintain the same level of solids suspension (percentage of critical impeller speed) with changes in variables such as particle size, solids density, solids concentration and air flow rate in mechanical flotation cells. In addition, the power draw at the critical impeller speed, P/V
                     js, was found to be proportional to the particle size, solids density and solids concentration to the exponents of 0.88, 1.9 and 0.52 and to increase slightly with air flow rate. The proportionality exponents for power are approximately three times larger than those for impeller speed, as would be predicted by the power number relation. However, the power predictions are not as accurate as those for the critical impeller speed.aeration constant, solid–liquid mass ratio: impeller clearance – midpoint (m) impeller clearance – bottom (m) coefficient of drag impeller diameter (m) particle size (μm) acceleration of gravity (m surface-based air addition rate or superficial gas velocity (m arbitrary equation constant impeller speed (rpm) critical impeller speed (rpm) impeller power number: impeller Reynolds number: particle Reynolds number: shaft power (kW) specific power for complete suspension (kW volume based or specific air addition rate (min parameter used in Zwietering’s correlation tank diameter (m) terminal settling velocity (m solids mass fraction, slurry surface height from base (m) viscosity, kinematic (m density (kg air gas gassed conditions just suspended condition for solids liquid solid ungassed conditions The central step in flotation is particle collection, following successful particle–bubble interaction under favourable chemical and hydrodynamic conditions ( Solids suspension occurs as two overlapping steps, the primary step being off-bottom solids suspension, and the secondary step being solids dispersion or distribution throughout the vessel ( The critical impeller speed, The correlation constant, The critical impeller speed is the most widely used measure for describing the effectiveness of solids suspension in stirred tanks. In a recent study, the authors argue that the critical impeller speed is also the most appropriate measure for describing and/or benchmarking solids suspension in mechanical flotation cells ( A Batequip (Bateman) pilot flotation cell was used in this testwork as shown in A video camera was fitted below the tank to observe the suspension of solids from the cell bottom through the clear tank. The critical impeller speed, Experiments were conducted in three-phases. Phase 1 investigated the effects of particle size, solids concentration and air flow rate. This was done using five sieved particle size fractions of silica sand, varying between 75 and 850 Solids suspension is complex, but can intuitively be visualised as the result of two opposing mechanisms. The first mechanism is a suspension mechanism and is mainly influenced by the impeller action and geometry. The suspension mechanism is related to a combination of bulk flow effects, which depend on impeller pumping capacity, and turbulent eddies, which depend on local energy dissipation rates ( Eq. The effects of particle size, solids concentration, solids density, liquid viscosity and aeration rate (air flow rate) on the critical impeller speed are discussed in the following sections (cf. Particle size is expected to have a relatively strong influence on solids suspension due to its strong influence on terminal settling velocities. Using five screened size fractions varying between 75 and 850  Solids concentration is expected to influence solids suspension due to its effects on hindered settling, turbulence dampening, and (possibly) viscosity effects. Using solids concentrations varying between 5% and 20% by weight, the effect of solids concentration on the critical impeller speed was determined for various aeration rates and particle size fractions.  From the force balance on a particle to derive the terminal settling velocity equation (Eq.  Liquid viscosity only plays an indirect role in the settling of a particle due to its effect on the drag coefficient, as influenced by the particle Reynolds number. However, liquid viscosity may also influence the suspension mechanism through turbulence dampening. Using water and three sugar solutions to vary the liquid kinematic viscosity approximately eight-fold, the effect of liquid viscosity on the critical impeller speed was tested. The results obtained for two particle size fractions under both ungassed and gassed conditions are given in  The effect of aeration on the suspension and sedimentation mechanisms is complex and difficult to evaluate from purely mechanistic grounds. Air addition leads to large reductions in power draw and a general deterioration in solids suspension. Using superficial gas velocities (   A different approach of incorporating the effect of air has also been explored ( The overall ‘Zwietering-type’ correlation(s) for predicting the critical impeller speed in terms of particle size, solids concentration, solids density, liquid viscosity and aeration rate are given in Eqs. Or,  The critical impeller speed, Eq.  Power numbers for the mechanical flotation cell used in this study were found to be relatively constant under turbulent solid–liquid conditions ( From this figure it is clear that Eq. This paper developed a ‘Zwietering-type’ correlation for predicting the critical impeller speed,