Iron ore tailing—a waste material of mineral beneficiation plants, is used as a source of iron for synthesizing magnetite powder. Iron ore tailings containing 15.98% Fe2O3, 83.36% SiO2 and 0.44% Al2O3 have been subjected to HCl digestion on a hot plate to extract the entire amount of Fe2O3 as FeCl3. A portion of extracted FeCl3 solution has been used to convert it to FeCl2 via metallic iron formation by using NaBH4 as a reducing reagent. Then, the left out FeCl3 solution and derived FeCl2 solutions (from FeCl3) are mixed in an appropriate molar ratio (2:1) for synthesizing magnetite powder by the addition of alkali solution. The magnetite powder samples have been characterized by means of powder XRD, SEM, vibrating sample magnetometer and laser particle size analyzer. XRD study confirms the formation of magnetite phase. The magnetite particles synthesized in different ways show varying degrees of magnetization behavior which is attributed to the change in their particle size induced by the use of different precipitating reagents.Tailings refer to waste material of beneficiation processes. With the increased demand on iron and steel and commensurate processing of iron ore, the proportion of iron ore tailings as solid waste is growing faster. Presently iron ore tailings are mainly used with very little intervention of high technology and moreover value addition is low. However, the iron values present in the tailing ponds could be recovered as magnetite powder, pigment grade iron oxide, building/construction material, etc. Here we assess the potential of synthesizing magnetite powder from iron ore tailings. Magnetite (Fe Generally, magnetite particles are prepared by the addition of alkali to a solution containing both ferrous and ferric ions. The particle size of magnetite can be controlled by pH adjustment and its coagulation can be prevented by introducing a suitable surfactant The starting material as a source of iron was obtained from the tailing ponds of iron ore industries. Chemicals used such as HCl, NaOH, 25%NH  The magnetite particles were aged in the mother liquor for 20 The powder samples were characterized for phase identification by using an X-ray powder diffractometer (Philips X'Pert Pro, PANalytical) that uses Mo–Kα radiation and was operated at 40 The chemical composition of low grade iron ore used for beneficiation processing is given in The crystallinity of Mag-MS is improved when heat-treated at 60 A different procedure was adopted in order to confirm the existence of Fe(II) in the Mag-MA and Mag-MS samples. Two types of powder samples were dissolved in HCl and the ferroin complex was developed using 1, 10 phenanthroline and Fe(II) was quantitatively estimated at 510 Scanning electron microscopic pictures of different magnetite samples are shown in The particle size distribution of the two magnetite powder samples and the intermediate iron/goethite samples is shown in The magnetic property of the samples has been examined qualitatively after carefully dispersing in hexane and subjecting to a magnetic field using a bar magnet. We conclude that it is possible to prepare a good quality magnetite from iron ore tailings, which are waste materials of the iron ore industry. The required composition of an Fe(III)/Fe(II) ratio of 2:1 for the preparation of magnetite can be obtained from the acid extracted FeCl Financial assistance from CSIR, Govt. of India, in the form of network project to the authors is gratefully acknowledged.