This experimental work on sphalerite flotation investigated the effect on flotation performance of three particle size fractions, namely, coarse (d
                     80
                     =100μm), medium (d
                     80
                     =39μm) and fine (d
                     80
                     =15μm), bubble size distribution, superficial air velocity, and collector dosage. Bubble size distributions were characterized with the image analysis technique. The two-phase (liquid–gas) centrifugal pump and frother addition (MIBC, 5–30ppm) allowed generating bubble diameters between 150 and 1050μm, and air holdup ranging from 0.2% and 1.3%. Main results showed that each particle-size distribution required an optimal bubble-size profile, and that sphalerite recovery proceeded from mechanisms involving true flotation (when Jg
                     
                     =0.04cm/s and 1.9×10−4 M SIPX). However, cluster-flotation occurs at high collector dosage (when Jg
                     
                     =0.04cm/s and d
                     32 between 285 and 1030μm), and requiring further investigation.The future of mineral processing appears to be residing in treating low-grade, multi-components, and complex mineral deposits, for which adjusting flotation operations for both coarse and fine particles at the same time becomes a forefront issue ( Processing challenging ores through separate flotation circuits for coarse and fine particles would reduce the impact of the abovementioned issues. This however, is generally not an option, and other options have to be explored such as optimizing operating conditions, or combining flotation with elutriation using an upward water flow, like in a hydroseparator ( On a surface area standpoint, the collector coverage may be uniform with fine and coarse particles, and with this regard, the poorer recovery of coarse particles may mean that larger particles need to be more hydrophobic than fine to be recovered (  The authors also claim that the results are in accordance with most of the reported models showing that improved particle collection (magnitude and kinetics) is the main challenge in flotation of fine particles (  Studying the effect of the bubble size in air dissolved flotation (DAF) using a mathematical model (trajectories analyses), The objective of this paper is to study the flotation of coarse, medium and fine sphalerite particles with bubbles generated using a two phases (liquid–gas) centrifugal pump, and assess the combined effect of the collector dosage, bubble/particle size distributions, and gas dispersion properties. The feed material, consisting in sphalerite lumps (enriched ore) from a Mexican plant (59.2% Zn, 6.2% Fe, 0.08% Cu, 0.03% Pb, 30.1% S, 4.4% ins.), was ground to obtain three sub-samples, each one exhibiting a different size distribution (determined by laser diffraction Coulter LS100), i.e. following  Commercial spargers typically generate relatively coarse bubbles (between 1 and 3 Inside the squared column (wide: 23.4 A three-way valve mounted on the feed line allows taking samples for particle size analysis. The bubble size distribution is measured by image analysis. A digital camera (Canon The bubble size distribution was determined beforehand, i.e. the pre-characterization stage, for a given frother dosage (methyl isobutyl carbinol, MIBC) in aqueous solution to avoid the problems, due to the turbidity, of bubble visualization in a slurry. Image acquisition started after feeding the bubble-solution (2-phase operation) to the column for 15 The difference of pulp level between normal ( Images require being pre-processed to update the format and resolution (using VSO Image Resizer). A specialised software program (Northern Eclipse Flotation tests were conducted in a 23-cm square section per 175-cm high laboratory flotation. Sodium isopropyl xanthate (SIPX) and copper sulfate (1.9 Overflowing froth was broken with an auxiliary system for removal or recycling to the feed tank (200 The trials were conducted with 2.5% (w/w) solids content and appropriate MIBC dosage (5, 10, 20, 30 and 40    Flotation of sphalerite was studied as a function of bubble diameter, air superficial velocity, collector concentration, and particle size ( Results presented assume that the bubble size does not significantly change with solids content (  The following discussion is divided in three parts, according to the SIPX concentration (low, medium, and high).    This situation slightly changes at higher  A bubble attaches to a coarse particle forming a primary nucleus. Other particles and bubbles colliding with the primary nucleus initiate the growth of the cluster. As the available area increases, all types of particles are being capture (attach or entrain) by the cluster.   On the other hand,  This empirical study investigated the effect on sphalerite flotation of the feed and bubble size distributions, superficial air velocity, and collector dosage. Results showed that At high SIPX concentration and low The authors are grateful to CONACYT (Mexico) for providing a scholarship and other financial support. Jorge Rubio wants to acknowledge CNPq for financial assistance.