Commonly used pretreatment method of alkaline solubilization (using NaOH) and a relatively new technology of microwave (MW) irradiation (160°C) were combined as a pretreatment method of waste activated sludge (WAS) in this study. First alkaline and MW pretreatment methods were examined separately, then their combination for different conditions was investigated in terms of their effect on COD solubilization, turbidity and capillary suction time (CST). For combined pretreatments, soluble COD to total COD ratio (SCOD/TCOD) of WAS increased from 0.005 (control) to 0.18, 0.27, 0.34 and 0.37 for combined methods of MW and pH-10, 11, 12 and 12.5, respectively. Deteriorated dewaterability due to alkaline pretreatment was also improved due to the incorporation of MW irradiation. Further, with small scale batch anaerobic reactors, pH-10, pH-12, MW (alone), MW+pH-10 and MW+pH-12 pretreated WAS samples were anaerobically digested. Highest total gas and methane productions were achieved with MW+pH-12 pretreatment with 16.3% and 18.9% improvements over control reactor, respectively. Finally the performance of MW+pH-12 pretreatment was examined with 2L anaerobic semi-continuous reactors for 92 days and compared to that of the control reactors. These reactors were operated at an SRT of 15 days. After steady state, 43.5% and 55% improvements were obtained in respective daily total gas and methane productions. TS, VS and TCOD reductions were improved by 24.9%, 35.4% and 30.3%, respectively based on a relative calculation with respect to control reactors. This way combined alkaline-microwave treatment proved to be an effective sludge minimization method. Pretreated digested sludge had 22% improved dewaterability than unpretreated digested sludge. Higher SCOD and NH3–N concentrations were measured in the pretreated digested sludge supernatant; however, PO4–P concentration did not increase much.The significant increase in the amount of sewage sludge production in treatment plants makes anaerobic digestion more important as a stabilization process. However, slow and incomplete hydrolysis of extracellular polymeric substances (EPS) and microbial biomass together limit the rate and extent of degradation in anaerobic digestion ( Alkaline pretreatment is a commonly examined pretreatment method which is very effective in terms of solubilizing extracellular polymers. Alkaline treatment becomes especially effective when combined with thermal hydrolysis ( Microwave (MW) irradiation has a wide range of application in environmental engineering such as contaminated soil remediation, waste processing, minerals processing and activated carbon regeneration ( Use of microwave irradiation as a pretreatment process before anaerobic digestion is a very new technology. During the past several years some researches have concentrated on microwave technique due to factors like microwave heating can reach the desired temperature quicker than conventional heating; and the process consumes less energy (  Even though thermochemical pretreatment techniques for sludge minimization and biogas production have been studied widely, no previous research has been conducted to test the effectiveness of MW irradiation combined with alkaline pretreatment. Since both of these techniques seem to be highly effective, their combination can act synergistically and even more efficient method can be obtained. Therefore the main objective of this study was to investigate the effect of combination of a chemical method, alkaline pretreatment and a physical method, microwave irradiation in improving anaerobic digestion of WAS. The study consisted of three parts: preliminary investigation of both techniques separately and combined, setting up and running anaerobic batch reactors and operation of anaerobic semi-continuous reactors. The aim of the preliminary studies was to investigate the disintegration effects of alkaline and MW pretreatment methods and their combination on WAS. In this part, MW application alone was applied, the effects of different alkaline doses were tested and the combination of the two methods was studied. Based on the results obtained in the first part, anaerobic batch reactors were set up for selected pretreatment techniques. Screening of the batch reactor results indicated the most effective pretreatment technique; so finally anaerobic semi-continuous reactors were set up accordingly in the last part of the study. Waste activated sludge (WAS) was taken from the secondary sedimentation tank return line of 4,000,000 PE Ankara Central Wastewater Treatment Plant (Ankara, Turkey). Treatment plant involves a conventional secondary treatment system which includes preliminary and primary treatments followed by activated sludge (SRT 7 days) system. MW irradiation was achieved with Berghof, Speedwave MWS-2 Microwave Pressure Digestion Unit (Berghof Products and Instruments, GmbH, Eningen, Germany) having a maximum temperature of 220 For alkaline pretreatment, pH values of 10, 11, 12, and 12.5 were examined with the addition of 2 For the combination of alkaline and microwave pretreatments, 200 After pretreatments, for both pretreated and control WAS, oxygen consumption, SCOD, turbidity and capillary suction time (CST) test were conducted. For the pretreatments of pH-10, pH-12, MW (alone), MW Anaerobic batch reactors were used to digest pretreated and non-pretreated WAS to observe biodegradability differences. Based on the outcomes of the preliminary investigations, the conditions of the batch anaerobic reactors were selected. In this part MW application alone, pH-10, pH-12 and MW Before setting up the batch reactors, WAS was pretreated by the use of single and combined pretreatment methods as explained in the preliminary studies. After pretreatment applications and before the reactor set up, pH of all pretreated sludge was neutralized to 7. WAS (at a VSS concentration of 4325 Control reactors were set up with the same methodology; the only difference being the WAS used in the control reactors had not gone through any pretreatment. Before the closure of the reactors, initial MLSS and MLVSS values of each pretreatment group and control group were determined. After that, all reactors were purged with N During batch digestion period, total gas production and gas composition were analyzed at predetermined time intervals. When gas production stopped, the reactors were opened and reactor contents were analyzed for pH, MLVSS, CST, SCOD and turbidity in order to examine the effect of pretreatment on final sludge characteristics. In this part combination of alkaline pretreatment (pH-12) with MW irradiation was studied with anaerobic semi-continuous reactors. Sampling and pretreatment of sludge were as explained before. MLSS, MLVSS values of raw WAS, pretreated WAS and ADS at the stage of reactor set up are summarized in Anaerobic semi-continuous system consists of four reactor sets; two identical control and two pretreatment reactors. Each set consists of a 3 For control and pretreatment groups, feed total solids (TS), feed volatile solids (VS) and feed total COD (TCOD) are given in the Anaerobic semi-continuous reactors were run for 92 days including the one-week acclimation period (no draining or feeding was done). For 3 months, gas production was analyzed daily from the graduated gas collector. Gas composition, TS, VS, TCOD, pH, SCOD and CST values were examined on samples taken from the reactors at predetermined times. After opening the reactors, NH In anaerobic batch reactors, total gas productions were analyzed by the use of an open-tube manometer. In anaerobic semi-continuous reactors total gas production was measured with the gas collector that was connected to the reactors. Gas composition analyses were done by gas chromatography (GC) with TCD detector (Agilent Technologies 6890 TS, VS, MLSS and MLVSS analyses were conducted according to Standard Methods 2540B-D-E ( After MW and alkaline pretreatments, oxygen uptakes of pretreated and control sludge were examined in order to develop an understanding of the effect of pretreatment method on microbial activity. Depending on the increased severity of the method, WAS microorganisms are expected to be disrupted more, become much less viable and release a higher quantity of soluble COD. The purpose of this test is to show a decline in the activity of microorganisms by their decreased oxygen use in support of increased soluble COD data. The absence of microbial activity does not necessarily indicate the cell rupture or hydrolysis of the macromolecules on the cell wall; but it is still considered a good indicator for the effectiveness of pretreatment method when used together with the soluble COD increase data. Oxygen consumption values with respect to time (slope correspond to oxygen uptake rate) are given in For alkaline pretreatment, it was observed that as the pH increased, oxygen consumption rate decreased indicating a reduction in microbial viability. pH-12 and 12.5 pretreatments had approximately the same significant decrease in oxygen utilization of WAS. However, after pH-10 and 11 treatments, there were still oxygen consumption with time, so these sludges were considered significantly active and possibly not greatly disintegrated under these conditions. With this analysis, pH-12 and 12.5 were chosen to be the most effective in terms of possible damage given to the cells. It was also concluded that for each combination of microwave with alkaline pretreatment, no viability would be observed similar to microwave application alone, and the oxygen consumption tests were not conducted for combined pretreatments.  For the microwave pretreatment alone, it was found that SCOD after pretreatment was approximately the same as in pH-11 pretreatment; where SCOD/TCOD ratio increased from 0.005 to 0.18. When the two pretreatment methods were combined, it was seen that with the increase in pH, SCOD values increased as well. For combined method, % soluble COD release values were well above the releases achieved by each individual method. Only when MW application was combined with pH-10 pretreatment, SCOD was at the level released by MW only. When the pH increased to 11 then to 12 and 12.5 together with MW application, the releases increased well above the release accomplished by each method. SCOD/TCOD ratio increased from 0.005 to 0.18, 0.27, 0.34 and 0.37 for the pretreatments of MW  Combined pretreatment methods, on the overall, caused an increase in CST compared to control. Contrary to single alkaline pretreatments, it was found that CST of pretreated WAS decreased as the pH increased for the combined pretreatments. Therefore the main disadvantage of alkaline pretreatment, which is to demonstrate poor dewaterability, was overcome by the combination with microwave pretreatment. This is possibly due to the well-known conditioning effect of thermal treatments, which is valid for microwave application as well. For each combined pretreatment, there was not a major difference between the turbidity values. As a result, with the combined pretreatment, SCOD/TCOD ratio increased more, and turbidity and CST improved to a certain degree compared to single alkaline pretreatment. Among the studied pretreatment methods, pH-10, pH-12, MW (only), MW For pretreatment methods of pH-10, pH-12, MW (alone), MW Methane production results for pretreatment and control bioreactors are presented in After 49 days of digestion period, gas productions ceased and anaerobic batch reactors were opened. MLVSS, CST, Turbidity and SCOD of digested sludge were analyzed. Apart from analyzing the sludge quality, a preliminary assessment of sludge reduction was also aimed to be made from the results of this part of study. After opening the reactors, pH of digested sludge for each reactor was observed to be 7.4 Maximum MLVSS reduction was achieved with the MW pretreatment alone which was 51.4%. For combined pretreatments the highest removal efficiency was achieved with MW Examining the CST results, MW (only) and MW The result of anaerobic batch reactors indicated that, the maximum biogas production was achieved with MW In anaerobic semi-continuous reactors, steady state was assessed by the stability of daily gas production and TS, VS and TCOD concentrations in digested sludge from each reactor. With this assessment after 53rd day, the fluctuations in these parameters were less than 10% and it was believed that steady state was achieved in all reactors. From the beginning of steady state till the end of the reactor take-down, the average daily gas productions were about 248.4 In As discussed above, the VS reductions can be regarded as the reductions that are expected to be achieved in total mass of sludge. Therefore, with the assumption of 70% organic matter present in sludge prior to pretreatment and digestion, and 58% of organics is destroyed in the pretreatment and 43% of organics is destroyed in control reactors, it is possible to reduce the total sludge mass by about 40% in pretreatment systems and 30% in control systems. This kind of reductions would reflect as savings in transportation and disposal costs of sludge in a full scale system. In According to average CST values obtained after steady state, dewaterability was improved by about 22% with MW Finally, turbidity, NH The study tested the effectiveness of microwave pretreatment methods in combination with alkaline pretreatment for the first time in the literature. The investigations were conducted in three stages: preliminary work, anaerobic batch reactor studies and anaerobic semi-continuous reactor studies. In the preliminary studies it was found that combination of alkaline and microwave pretreatments led to an improved COD solubilization. SCOD/TCOD increased from 0.005 (control) to 0.18, 0.27, 0.34 and 0.37 with MW In the second part of the study, pH-10, pH-12, MW (alone), MW Finally, MW The authors would like to thank TUBITAK (Turkish National Scientific and Technical Research Council) for financial support (Project # 105Y339).