Long-term stability of arthroplasty prosthesis depends on the integration between the bone tissue and the implanted biomaterials, which requires the contribution of osteoblastic precursors and their continuous differentiation into the osteoblastic phenotype. Classically, these interactions are tested in vitro using mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) isolated and ex vivo expanded from bone marrow aspirates. Human adipose tissue-derived stromal cells (AMSCs) may be a more convenient source of MSCs, according to their abundance and accessibility, but no data are available on their in vitro interactions with hard biomaterials. The aim of this work is to compare the osteogenic potential of human AMSCs and bone marrow-derived MSCs (BMMSCs) and to evaluate their response to Ti6Al4V alloy in terms of adhesion, proliferation and differentiation features, using the human osteosarcoma cell line SaOS-2 for comparison. The overall results showed that AMSCs have the same ability to produce bone matrix as BMMSCs and that Ti6Al4V surfaces exhibit an osteoinductive action on AMSCs, promoting their differentiation into functional osteoblasts and increasing bone formation. In conclusion, adipose tissue is a promising autologous source of osteoblastic cells with important clinical implications for bone tissue engineering.The titanium alloy Ti6Al4V has been widely applied to both dental implantology and orthopedic–prosthetic replacement. This is an inert biomaterial with an excellent biocompatibility, a great mechanical strength, an excellent bone-implant integration, and a unique resistance to corrosion Long-term stability of bone implants depends on the integration between bone tissue and the chosen biomaterial. This interaction requires the contribution of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and their continuous differentiation into osteoblasts. Adult MSCs are an unlimited source of multi-potent cells that can be used for More recently mesenchymal progenitor cells have been isolated from adipose tissue Immature adipogenic precursor cells (preadipocytes) have been widely employed in plastic or reconstructive surgery of soft-tissue defects resulting from trauma, tumor resection and congenital abnormalities The aim of the present investigation was to study the The materials used in this study were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise specified. Ti6Al4V alloy (Lima-Lto spa Medical Systems, San Daniele del Friuli, Udine, Italy) is medical grade 5 titanium following ISO 5832-3 international standard and with mechanical properties under ASTM F1472. Ti6Al4V alloy squared specimens (15×15 Femoral bone marrow and adipose tissue biopsies were obtained from 3 male patients (mean age: 63.7 years; range: 58–73 years) undergoing orthopedic surgery for osteoarthritis after obtainment of informed consent in accordance with the Institutional Review Board protocol. All biopsies were immediately placed in McCOY’S 5A medium supplemented with 22 Primary cultures of preadipocytic stem cells from 3 patients (PA1, PA2, and PA3 cell lines) were isolated as follows: each adipose tissue sample was minced into small pieces (0.2–0.5 Primary cultures of bone marrow stem cells from the three patients (BMC1, BMC2, and BMC3 cell lines) were isolated as follows: each bone marrow sample was dissociated with a scalpel blade, transferred to a plastic tube and mechanically dispersed. After natural sedimentation of the larger fragments, the supernatant was transferred to a new tube and centrifuged at 300 The human clonal SaOS-2 cell line was cultured in Ham's F12 Coon's modification medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS; Australian origin, BioWhittaker, Cambrex, Belgium), 2 BMC and PA cell lines were cultured in GM 72 SaOS-2, PA, and BMC cell lines were plated on polystyrene (PS) or Ti6Al4V at a cell density of 20 BMC and PA cell lines were cultured with a specific adipogenic medium (AM): Ham's F12 Coon's modification medium supplemented with 10% FBS (South America origin, BioWhittaker), 100 At 20 days from induction cells were detached and sedimented for RNA extraction. Total RNA was extracted using RNAwiz™ RNA Isolation Reagent (Ambion, Inc., Austin, TX, USA), according to the manufacturer's protocol. The RNA was treated with DNA-free™ Kit (Ambion). Complementary first strand DNA (cDNA) was synthesized from 1 Cells were plated on PS or on Ti6Al4V at a cell density of 1×10 The activity of ALP was determined in every cell line by cytochemical staining on PS and by fluorometric assay on both growth supports after 1, 10, 20, and 40 days from induction. For the cytochemical staining, the cells were washed with DPBS (2×), stained with a specific dye mixture (5 BMC and PA cell lines were grown in OM for 1, 20, and 40 days on Ti6Al4V or PS. Total RNA was isolated and reverse transcribed as illustrated above. Quantitative real-time PCR (QRT-PCR) for Mineralization of SaOS-2, PA, and BMC cell lines was evaluated after 1, 20, 40, and 60 days from differentiation. For the Alizarin Red S staining, cells grown on PS in OM or GM were washed with DPBS (2×), fixed in 4% PFA/DPBS for 15 SaOS-2, PA, and BMC cell lines were maintained for 1, 4, and 40 days on Ti6Al4V in OM, using PS as control. Four samples of each material (Ti6Al4V and PS) were inoculated with cells for each incubation period. Cells were fixed in 4% PFA/DPBS for 20 Samples cultured for 4 days in OM were stained for cytoskeletal actin together with vinculin or fibronectin using anti-vinculin (1:100, monoclonal anti-human raised in mouse, clone 7F9, Chemicon, Temecula, CA, USA) or anti-fibronectin (1:100, polyclonal anti-human raised in rabbit) primary antibodies in 2% BSA/DPBS for 40 Cells cultured for 1 and 40 days in OM, were stained for OCN together with actin or for OPN following a protocol similar to that described above. For OCN staining, however, before permeabilization, cells were decalcified with 9% EDTA in Tris–HCl 50 Cell nuclei were counterstained with TOTO-3 iodide (5 The ratio of focal contact area (FCA) to total cellular area (TCA) was calculated for every cell line grown on the two different substrates. FCA and TCA were evaluated by measuring the average area of focal contacts and the average spread area per cell, respectively. The image analysis to obtain FCA and TCA values was performed following the method described by Hunter et al. For fluorometric assay and Alizarin Red S assay the experiments were carried out in triplicate and data expressed as means±S.D. of quadruplicate experimental points. Statistical differences among mean values were analyzed using Scheffe's test (Statistica 5.1; Statsoft Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). The statistical significance of differences in the cell growth or adhesion between PS and Ti6Al4V was evaluated by one-tailed Student's The plastic-adherent cell populations obtained from bone marrow and adipose tissue did not express hematopoietic lineage markers CD34 and CD45, while all BMC and PA cell lines were positive for CD44 and CD71 markers ( The cytochemical staining showed that uninduced PA cell lines were less committed to the osteoblastic phenotype compared to uninduced BMC cell lines (6±2% vs. 24±5% at 1 day from induction) and that incubation with OM stimulates osteogenic differentiation in both BMC and PA cells (52±4% vs. 89±2% at 40 days from induction), with no significant differences among the three patients ( The expression of genes involved in osteoblast differentiation was analyzed in all BMC and PA cell lines, normalizing the data for Osteoblastic activity was confirmed by OPN and OCN immunostaining ( Osteoblastic activity of the cell lines was evidenced by the production of an osteoid matrix by every cell line cultured in OM with calcein, yielding an abundant deposition of a mineralized matrix after 20 and 40 days from induction on PS and Ti6Al4V substrates ( Not surprisingly, the calcium content increased in a time-dependent way in all cell lines, but with a different trend ( Results of the present study provided the evidence for a time-dependent growth of SaOS-2, BMC1, and PA1 cell lines on both PS and Ti6Al4V surfaces with no significant difference between the substrates ( Cell morphology and cytoskeletal organization analysis, determined by actin labeling with TRITC-phalloidin, demonstrated the presence of stress fibers in all cell lines grown for 4 days on PS and on Ti6Al4V ( The expression and localization of fibronectin observed at LSCM at 4 days from induction in SaOS-2 cells cultured on Ti6Al4V showed a preferential organization around the nuclei, while BMC and PA cells were characterized by a more intense staining with an intracellular localization of fibronectin, that also formed an extracellular well-defined and interconnected network ( Vinculin labeling was used in SaOS-2, BMC, and PA cells after 4 days from induction in order to assess the distribution and morphology of focal adhesions ( The degree of cell adhesion was quantified by measuring FCA and TCA and calculating FCA/TCA ratio. Data showed that FCA directly correlated with TCA ( Tissue-engineering approaches for promoting the repair of the skeletal tissue have been focused on cell-based therapies involving BMMSCs. In the search of new sources of osteoblastic progenitors, cells derived from adipose tissue are becoming interesting candidates Concerning these open questions, the objective of this Our preliminary studies have confirmed that PA and BMC cells satisfy several phenotypical criteria employed to define MSCs As previously observed A higher level of osteogenic commitment in BMC cells has been confirmed also by QRT-PCR analysis, with basal expression levels of The increase in the transcript levels of The cell–titanium alloy interactions showed a different osteogenic differentiation among the used cell lines. During induction PA cells, cultured on Ti6Al4V substrates, exhibited a higher ALP activity levels than on PS. Moreover, after 40 days of induction, PA cells produced a higher amount of HA crystals than BMC and SaOS-2 cells. Moreover, for times of induction longer than 40 days, the value of HA produced by PA cells on Ti6Al4V did not vary. Interestingly, the cytochemical analysis has revealed that cellular elements embedded in the central part and arranged at the periphery of heavily mineralized bone matrix showed necrotic features, as a possible consequence of the very high calcium concentrations around and within the cells. The interesting findings related to the The high level of adhesion of all PA and BMC cell lines to Ti6Al4V alloy could be ascribed to the chemical properties of this biomaterial, but also to its roughness, a factor that has been observed to influence considerably the cytoskeleton morphology, the proliferation rate, the synthesis of extracellular matrix proteins, and the mineralization process The present study showed that AMSCs and BMMSCs have similar ability to differentiate in mature osteoblasts, confirming that the adipose tissue represents an abundant reservoir of stromal cells for bone tissue engineering. Importantly, the novel description of an This work was supported by the MIUR FIRB 2001 projects “Technologies for nanometric scale manufacture of materials and their biomedical application”, and “In vitro development of scaffolds composite- and polyurethane-based to be seeded with osteoprogenitor cells from patients with osteo-articular disease” and by a grant from the Fondazione Ente Cassa di Risparmio di Firenze (to Maria Luisa Brandi). We also thank Dr. Maria Vittoria Barone (University of Naples) for the valuable assistance with LSCM and Dr. Valentina Martineti (University of Florence) for the critical reading of the manuscript.