An innovative technology named solid-state metalized reduction–magnetic separation (SSMRMS) was developed to produce ferronickel concentrates from magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores. A pilot-scale plant with a daily processing capacity of 500kg of dry ores was assembled and tested. SSMRMS involves four steps: feed preparation, solid-state metalized reduction, quenching and ball milling, and magnetic separation. After 40days of continuous tests, the operational stability of the proposed technology was good, and accretion did not form in a rotary kiln. Results revealed that (i) an appropriate positive pressure in the kiln terminal was beneficial to metallization; (ii) the overall recoveries of nickel and iron could reach 91.3% and 73.8%, respectively, whereas the nickel and iron grades of the produced ferronickel concentrate could be 7.4% and 69.6%, respectively; (iii) residual nickel to tailings was 0.16%; and (iv) the return ratio of dusts was approximately 8%. Notably, nickel could be released and sufficiently metalized at an appropriate temperature once the structures of the Ni-bearing silicates were destroyed in the presence of fluorite. The metalized nickel aggregated with the metalized iron surrounding the margins of the minerals. Therefore, fluorite could promote the generation and growth of ferronickel alloy particles, thereby increasing the recoveries of nickel and iron. Preliminary calculation showed that the electricity consumption of the solid-state metalized process was 52.5kWh/t-ore. Hence, SSMRMS is a competitive strategy for the processing of magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores.Nickel is an important commodity because of its unique physical and chemical properties. In the past 60 Nickel oxide ores are widely distributed in equatorial regions, such as New Caledonia, Australia, Cuba, Brazil, the Philippines, Papua New Guinea, and Indonesia ( Treatments for different layers of nickel oxide ores should be selected according to constituents. Current primary technologies for magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores include atmospheric pressure sulfuric acid leaching (AL) ( Given their acid consumption and economical throughput, magnesium-rich ores are suitable for the pyrometallurgical process to produce ferronickel or matte ( RKEF is an advanced technology to treat magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores, but its widespread application is hindered by several disadvantages. Some modifications have been conducted, and remarkable results have been achieved in laboratories ( An innovative technical route called solid-state metalized reduction–magnetic separation (SSMRMS) was developed to produce ferronickel concentrates from magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores ( The general process flow of SSMRMS ( Nickel oxide ores are complex minerals containing various metal oxide components, including iron and nickel existing in the form of Fe Thermodynamic analysis validated the feasibility of using coal as a reductant for the solid-state metalized reduction of nickel oxide ores. Nevertheless, our data revealed that the recoveries of nickel and iron through direct metalized reduction in a molten state were low (Ni In the pilot-scale test, a rotary kiln (inner diameter of 0.45 The original nickel oxide ore used for the pilot-scale test originated from Myanmar, and its chemical components were analyzed ( The original ore was ground for several minutes by using a cone ball mill to 80% passing 74 The operating conditions for each test were designed to evaluate the feasibility of the proposed technology for future commercial applications. The following parameters were evaluated: gas pressure in the kiln terminal; nickel losses to tailings (assuming that all dust losses would be returned to the feed preparation process); nickel and iron recoveries to ferronickel concentrates (assuming that all dust losses would be returned to the feed preparation process); and nickel and iron grades of ferronickel concentrates (average grades after normal running). This test aimed to investigate the effects of gas pressure in the rotary kiln during solid-state metalization. The test results and the basic parameters are listed in In Test II, the gas pressure in the kiln terminal was controlled in the range of 0.02–0.04 The results of Tests I and II were compared, and the results showed that an appropriate positive pressure in the kiln terminal is beneficial to nickel and iron metallization. This phenomenon can be attributed to the increased amount of reducing gases (main constituent, CO) that were drained from the kiln under a negative pressure. Nickel and iron oxides are also more easily reduced by CO than by fixed carbon ( On the basis of previous investigations, we treated 18.5 The test results were compared to analyze the promotion of fluorite addition in solid-state metalization ( The XRD patterns ( The microstructures of the original ore and the solid-state metalized product ( The balance of nickel distribution in Test III was calculated (calculating unit: 1 Preliminary calculation based on the tests showed that the electricity consumption of solid-state metalization in the rotary kiln was approximately 300 Consequently, the SSMRMS proposed in this study to produce ferronickel concentrates from nickel oxide ores is competitive, and it may provide an alternative process with considerable flexibility and advantages in the treatment of magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores. Further pilot-scale tests should be conducted, and engineering issues will be inevitably exposed. A detailed and accurate economic accounting based on future integrated test results will be included in a subsequent article. Nevertheless, our promising results contribute to the further development and commercial application of this innovative technology. SSMRMS was developed for the processing of magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores, and pilot-scale tests were conducted systematically. Based on the results of our analysis, the following conclusions are drawn: Nickel oxide ores can be metalized in a rotary kiln at a solid-state temperature. An appropriate positive pressure (0.02–0.04 In the presence of fluorite, nickel released from silicates could be sufficiently metalized at a solid-state temperature and further aggregate with the metalized iron. The generated ferronickel alloy particles grew and presented end-to-end bands, which surrounded the margins of the minerals. These bands led to the remarkably increased recoveries of nickel and iron. Accretion did not form in the rotary kiln within 40 SSMRMS may provide an alternative technology with considerable flexibility and advantages in the treatment of magnesium-rich nickel oxide ores. This work was financially supported by the