Background
                  Locking plate constructs for proximal humeral fractures can fail due to varus collapse, especially in osteoporotic bone with medial cortex comminution. Augmentation, using a fibular allograft as an intramedullary bone peg, may strengthen fixation preventing varus collapse. This study investigated the ability of the augmented locking plate construct to withstand repetitive varus stresses relative to the nonaugmented construct.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  Proximal humeral fractures with medial comminution were simulated by performing wedge-shaped osteotomies at the surgical neck in cadaveric specimens. For each cadaver (n = 8), 1 humeral fracture was fixated with the locking plate construct alone and the other with the locking plate construct plus ipsilateral fibular autograft augmentation. The humeral head was immobilized and a repetitive, medially directed load was applied to the humeral shaft until construct collapse or until 25000 cycles were completed.
               
                  Results
                  No augmented construct collapsed. In comparison, 6 of 8 nonaugmented constructs collapsed (P < .05). Collapse in the 6 nonaugmented constructs occurred after an average ±SD of 6604 ± 1984 cycles. Screw penetration of the articular surface was found in only 1 of the nonaugmented constructs.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Fibular allograft augmentation increased the ability of the locking plate to withstand repetitive varus loading. Clinically, this may assist proximal humeral fracture fixation in osteoporotic bone with medial cortex comminution.Proximal humeral fractures are the third most common type of fracture occurring in people over the age of 65 years. Locking plate technology has recently been applied to and popularized for the fixation of unstable proximal humeral fractures. The locking plate-screw construct acts as a fixed angle device to provide angular stability across the fracture, and the divergent configuration of the screws in the humeral head is theorized to improve pullout strength. Clinical and biomechanical studies, however, have shown variable results, with complication rates as high as 36% being reported. A novel technique has recently been reported that recreates the medial column in the fixation of proximal humeral fractures with a locking plate construct. Gardner et al The purpose of this study was to evaluate the biomechanical properties of a locking plate construct augmented with an intramedullary bone peg under conditions of clinically relevant cyclic loading. Our hypothesis was that augmentation would create a more durable construct that would withstand an increased number of cycles prior to collapse and demonstrate a decreased amount of construct deformation per cycle. Specimen preparation techniques were identical to those performed by Mathison et al. In both humeri, the fracture was reduced such that there was anatomic cortical contact laterally and then secured with a Synthes 3.5 mm LCP stainless steel proximal humerus plate with three shaft screw holes (West Chester, PA, USA). The plate was placed on the lateral aspect of the humerus, approximately 8 mm distal to the superior aspect of the greater tuberosity ( Cyclic loading testing was performed by immobilizing the humeral head and then applying a varus force to the humeral shaft, a method similar to that used by Siffri et al. Data collection was performed by Test Works 4 software that was provided with the Synergie machine. For each specimen, the initial position of the load point prior to any force application was recorded (X For each specimen pair, graphical representations of D Eight embalmed cadavers were used in this study. Two were male (specimens C and D) and 6 were female. The average age at the time of death was 88 years. The number of cycles to failure for each specimen is shown in In contrast, 6 of 8 nonaugmented constructs reached our definition of varus collapse. The number of specimens that collapsed in the augmented group compared to the nonaugmented group is statistically significant ( In the four specimens for which testing was continued beyond our definition of varus collapse, 1 specimen reached 25000 cycles without gross collapse and testing was stopped. In the other 3 specimens, gross collapse was reached prior to 25000 cycles when the screws loosened in the humeral head by cutting through the lateral cortex. This then allowed the lateral aspect of the humeral head to translate vertically against the plate with each applied load. Despite gross loosening and collapse of the construct, there was no screw penetration of the articular surface. The average amount of deformation per cycle was also calculated for each specimen. A typical graph of the D Fixation of proximal humeral fractures, particularly those occurring in osteoporotic bone and those with medial metaphyseal comminution, remains challenging. Gardner et al Our findings can be compared to those of Lill et al Our work can also be compared to that of Osterhoff et al, Lastly, our construct can be compared to a novel fixation technique for proximal humeral fractures that was recently tested by Brianza et al. In addition to simply providing the biomechanical properties of an intramedullary device and recreating the medial column, the fibular graft also increases the cumulative strength of the screw-bone interfaces. On average, 2 humeral head screws penetrated part of the fibular graft, providing at least 3 or 4 additional cortices of screw purchase. This not only secures the graft but also may help prevent screw loosening or screw pullout from the humeral head, and thus help prevent varus collapse. Indeed, in our study, screw loosening and articular penetration prior to 25000 cycles of testing occurred only in the nonaugmented constructs. Additionally, use of an intramedullary fibular allograft, in comparison to a metallic nail, provides the biologic advantage of eventual bony incorporation and improvement of bone stock. Allografts are commonly used in the fixation of periprosthetic fractures as “biologic bone plates” In our study, the nonaugmented specimens A and C both reached 25000 cycles without collapsing, and the nonaugmented specimen C construct actually demonstrated less deformation per cycle than the augmented construct. Specimen C was a male specimen of substantially greater size than all of the other specimens, and specimens A and C were both visually of slightly better bone quality than the remaining specimens, although still appearing osteoporotic, bilaterally. We do not have bone mineral density (BMD) data for these specimens to quantify these observations; however, potentially, these material factors allowed the nonaugmented locking plate to perform more effectively, to the extent that, in specimen C, augmentation with a fibular autograft did not further improve the mechanical properties of the construct. In our study, we stopped testing at 25000 cycles. This represents a rehabilitation program in which a patient performs 150 repetitions of exercises (scapulothoracic stabilization and pendulum) 3 times per day starting immediately postoperatively. This number additionally provides a buffer of another 6 cycles per hour for patients who continue to be dependent on their arm, even immobilized, for activities of daily living, and to account for passive and active position changes of the arm within the sling or the sling upon the body as the patient attempts to remain comfortable throughout the day. These activities submaximally activate the supraspinatus and provide stresses across the plate construct. It is hoped that by 6 weeks and 25000 cycles, the fracture will demonstrate biologic healing that will reduce the reliance on the plate construct and allow fracture solidification without risk of further deformity. Although an admittedly gross estimation of cycles until healing, we are unaware of any literature addressing this clinical issue. Twenty-five thousand cycles are well above the 1000 cycles used by Lill et al, Because of the small number of male specimens in our study, we are unable to make any inferences about the influence of gender on our chosen outcome measures. Similarly, we were unable to obtain data regarding hand dominance of the cadavers, and, as such, are unable to definitively rule out hand dominance as a confounding variable. The process of randomly assigning augmentation to either humerus of a cadaver, however, likely eliminates the influence of hand dominance on our results. There are obvious limitations to our study. We have chosen to test the humeri under the isolated condition of varus loading to simulate the pull of the supraspinatus. This is a gross simplification of the complex nature of the forces likely experienced by the fracture fragments and locking plate construct in vivo. Further testing using torsional forces and sagittal plane forces are necessary to more fully understand the mechanical behavior of this augmented construct. We have also chosen to model a relatively simple 2-part proximal humeral fracture with a wedge osteotomy to simulate medial metaphyseal comminution. Although this represents only a small percentage of proximal humeral fractures that require operative management, it is a reproducible fracture model that accentuates the factors most likely responsible for varus collapse. Lastly, as previously mentioned, we did not determine the BMD of the humeri used in this study. This data may have helped to explain observations among the nonaugmented specimens; however, we do not feel that lack of this data affects the validity of our results, as previous work by our group The locking plate construct augmented with a fibular autograft creates a more durable construct that can withstand an increased number of cycles prior to collapse, and demonstrates a decreased amount of construct deformation per cycle when tested under clinically relevant conditions of varus cyclic loading. We tested this construct using osteoporotic cadaveric bone with a fracture pattern simulating medial metaphyseal comminution. Thus, in the clinical situation of a proximal humeral fracture in osteoporotic bone and with medial metaphyseal comminution, augmentation of a locking plate construct with a fibular allograft may be a useful surgical technique. Implants for this study were donated by Synthes (West Chester, PA, USA). Synthes was not involved in data collection, data analysis, or the preparation or editing of the manuscript. The authors, their immediate family, and any research foundation with which they are affiliated did not receive any financial payments or other benefits from any commercial entity related to the subject of this article.