Financial data are typically not iid-normal. Yet standard tests of asset-pricing models are based on this assumption. We address the question of how sensitive the tests are to violations of iid-normality and use Australian data to compare the standard test results with those of the GMM-based J test and bootstrap-based tests. We find that, in contrast to US evidence, standard test results are robust to the iid-normality assumption. This is true for all tests and for all three asset-pricing models analysed.The mean-variance model is central to modern financial economics—it provides the foundation for the Capital Asset Pricing Model (CAPM) which continues to be the most widely used model of asset-pricing in practice. The mean-variance model and the CAPM are firmly based on the assumption that asset returns are identically, independently and normally distributed (iid-normal). The models are usually derived from these assumptions and by far the majority of tests of the models require the iid-normal assumption for their (asymptotic) validity. Yet it has become a stylised fact of empirical finance that the iid-normal assumption is systematically violated by asset returns in practice—returns typically exhibit skewness, excess kurtosis, (conditional) heteroskedasticity and temporal dependence. A pressing question in applied research in asset-pricing is, therefore, the sensitivity of the standard tests of asset-pricing models to the violation of the iid-normal assumption and, in particular, the extent to which the typically ambivalent test outcomes are the results of inappropriate tests. There is little evidence of whether the type of test used matters for the test outcomes although such evidence as there is suggests that the test results may not be robust to the iid-normal assumption. It is important to know whether test sensitivity is confined to isolated incidents or whether it is a general phenomenon applying to a range of countries, time periods and models. In this paper we contribute to the very limited literature on the subject and provide further evidence on this question by using Australian share-market data to compare the results obtained from standard tests to those obtained from tests which do not depend on the iid-normal assumption. The overall aim of the study is to contribute to the exploration of the question of when deviations from the iid-normal assumption matter and when they do not. To achieve our aim we begin by testing the CAPM (or the mean-variance efficiency of our chosen market portfolio) using standard Wald and Consistent with existing evidence, we find widespread departures from the iid-normal property in both returns and in market-model errors. However, in contrast to the US and Australian evidence cited above, we find no instance of sensitivity of the results to the test used. Thus for all the results—for all three models and for all three tests—we find consistent outcomes. In evaluating the results we first point out differences in the properties of our market portfolio compared with the US data used in earlier studies. We go on to argue that even, given this difference, the contrast between our results and those reported in the existing literature is more apparent than real since, on the whole, we find differences in prob values between standard and alternative tests similar in magnitude to those found previously. The different test outcomes are the result of the fact that in the US the CAPM restrictions are usually close to being rejected so that small changes in the prob values may change the outcome of the test. For our Australian data set, however, we find that the CAPM is very far from being rejected in almost all cases so that prob values can change very substantially as a result of using a different test without changing the outcome of the test at conventional significance levels. We arrive at the conclusion that the use of tests which take into account departures from the iid-normal assumption do indeed affect prob values. However, changes in prob values are likely to affect the test outcome only if the standard test produces a test statistic that is close to the critical value. The structure of the remainder of the paper is as follows. We set out the three asset-pricing models to be tested in the We begin with the standard (unconditional) CAPM. Assume that there exists a risk-free asset with return An alternative reaction to the unobservability of the return to the market portfolio is to treat this as a latent variable and, following  Consider the standard (unconditional) CAPM first. Written in terms of excess returns, Both the above tests rely on the iid assumption, and may therefore not be robust to heteroskedasticity, some evidence for which was found in our analysis of the data and the market-model residuals in the previous section. An increasingly popular alternative is to use If we denote by An alternative to the use of the GMM- There are several ways of proceeding to bootstrap tests of asset-pricing models. They differ both as to resampling scheme used and statistic to be sampled. Little is known about the theoretical properties of the various alternatives and Monte Carlo evidence is only beginning to emerge. Based on the discussion in Estimate the market model, Draw a sample with replacement from the residuals reserved in step (1) and generate a new set of return series under the null hypothesis (i.e. assuming that Estimate the market model based on the generated returns from step (2) and calculate the Wald and Repeat steps (2) and (3) 1000 times. Build up an empirical distribution of the Wald and The bootstrapping procedure just outlined is based on the implicit assumption that the model errors which are sampled are independent. If this is not the case, then the basic bootstrap method is inappropriate since it fails to preserve the interdependence present in the data. A common alternative is the block bootstrap in which the residuals in step 1 above are divided into So far we have dealt only with the unconditional CAPM but similar In the case of the macro-factor version of the APT, the unrestricted model is again given by Following recent work for the US and the UK (see for example The equity prices consist of value-weighted market and sector price indices taken from the Australian section of the Datastream Global Indices series. Using Financial Times Actuary classifications, the market is broken down into its constituent industrial sectors. The sectors and their components are Mineral Extraction (Gold Mining, Other Mining, Oil Integrated, Oil Exploration and Production) General Industries (Building and Construction, Building Materials and Merchandising, Chemicals, Diversified Industries, Electronic and Electrical, Engineering, Paper and Print) Consumer Goods (Brewers, Spirit, Wines, CID, Food Producers, Health Care, Pharmaceuticals, Tobacco) Services (Distributors, Leisure and Hotels, Media, Retailers, Food, Retail, General Support Services, Transport, Other Businesses) Financial (Banks, Retail, Insurance, Other Financial, Property) The aggregate macroeconomic variables experimented with following work on testing the macro-factor version of the APT reported in Summary statistics for the portfolios are reported in The results of the test for heteroskedasticity are mixed although the problem seems to be more severe in the residuals than in the excess returns themselves. Thus, while there is no evidence of intertemporal dependence of the AR type, there is evidence that in some sectors the errors are dependent in their second moments. We return to this matter later in the paper when considering the appropriate bootstrapping method. The remaining statistics are relevant to the normality of the variables. In the case of the excess returns, there is clear evidence of skewness and excess kurtosis for all sectors and, not surprisingly, the Jarque–Bera test for normality has very large values of the test statistic relative to the 5% critical values reported in the notes to the table. The alternative normality test, the goodness-of-fit test, has a significant test statistics for four of the six cases. There is thus strong evidence of non-normality in the excess returns. The same is true of the residuals from the market model although there is less evidence of skewness and the goodness-of-fit test provides little evidence of non-normality in contrast to the Jarque–Bera statistic which is again large, on the whole, compared to its 5% critical value. We may conclude, therefore, that neither the excess returns nor the residuals from the market model satisfy the iid-normal assumptions. In particular, there is strong evidence of non-normality across the board, and evidence for two sectors of temporal dependence in the second moments of the model errors, although there is no autocorrelation in the errors themselves. We begin by discussing tests of the traditional (unconditional) CAPM. The results are reported in The CAPM betas are clearly all precisely estimated and the model has considerable explanatory power as measured by the The more formal tests of the CAPM restrictions are reported in Panel B of the table. The first prob value for These results clearly support the CAPM restrictions. This finding is broadly consistent with those reported by The third row of panel B reports the value for the In the last line of panel B we report the value for the The second prob value for the It is common practice in tests of asset-pricing models to test the models over relatively short periods (often 5 years) in view of the evidence of parameter instability in the market model, which is consistent with our earlier finding of a lack of stability in the model. We proceed, therefore, to test the model over 5-year sub-periods. The results are reported in The results show the expected variation across periods. In only one period, however, are the CAPM restrictions rejected at the 5% level of significance, viz. the period 1983–1987, which includes the October 1987 Crash in addition to including a period of substantial de-regulation in the Australian financial system. In no period, however, does the use of bootstrapped critical values change the outcome of the test, irrespective of whether the We return now to the matter of the bootstrapping procedure. The bootstrapped results reported in We begin by considering block length. Since there is little guidance in the literature on the choice of block length, we experimented with blocks of 3, 6, 12 and 24 observations (adjusting the length of the sample to 276 for the first three and 264 for the last of these). For each block length we sampled blocks, created 1000 new time-series and examined the AR and ARCH characteristics of these artificial data by computing the means of the AR and ARCH statistics over the 1000 replications. The results are reported in In  If we turn to the sub-sample results which we discussed previously and reported in An alternative approach to the use of block-bootstrapping for taking account of temporal dependence in the residuals is to use a “post-blackening” procedure in which the temporal dependence is explicitly modelled and the sampling is done from the residuals after the dependence has been removed. In contrast to block-bootstrapping, this procedure requires one to identify the nature of the temporal dependence and to estimate a model to capture it. In addition, in the case of ARCH residuals, there are two practical problems. The first is that the model for the residuals generates only squared residuals (presuming that one captures the ARCH characteristics by regressing the squared residuals on their own lagged values) for the returns equation and it is quite possible that it will generate some negative values. The second problem is that even if one deals with the negative squared residuals, one must assign a sign to them after taking their square root and before using them in the returns equation to generate artificial returns data for the bootstrapping exercise. We found the problem of negative generated squared residuals to be a significant one for ARCH processes of a higher order than ARCH(1) and therefore restricted our experimentation to ARCH(1) models. In this case the relatively few negative numbers were set equal to zero. We overcame the second problem by sampling from both the ARCH residuals and the original residuals. A “runs test” indicated that the signs of the original residuals were consistent with independence so that we used signs of the sampled residuals to sign the square-roots of the generated squared residuals obtained from the estimated ARCH model of the residuals. The prob value for the Wald statistic obtained from this procedure was very close to both the theoretical prob and the prob obtained from a standard bootstrapping method. We conclude that the failure of the bootstrapping procedure to reverse the outcomes of any of the model tests was not because of ignored temporal dependence in the model residuals. On the basis of the tests of the CAPM (or mean-variance efficiency of the market portfolio) reported in this section, we may conclude that the outcome of the tests is not at all sensitive to whether the test is a small-sample one based on iid-normal errors (the This conclusion is very surprising in the light of the violations of the iid-normal assumption reported in However, the contrast between our evidence and existing results is not as strong as appears at first sight as will be clear from a more detailed comparison. Both A similar comparison can be made between our results and those reported by Hence, while our results are at variance with those reported for the US, on closer comparison the differences are not so marked. Nevertheless, differences between our results remain and there are various possible (not mutually exclusive) explanations. The first possibility we consider is the characteristics of the market portfolio for which we test the MVE property. A second possibility is that we have used different sample periods and sub-samples of different length. A third possibility lies in the number of portfolios used and the method of their construction. Both On the method of portfolio Before the conditional CAPM model can be implemented and tested, we need to specify the aggregate factors denoted by the The results of estimating and testing the model are reported in More formal evidence in favour of the null hypothesis is provided in Panel B of the table. Both the Wald and Finally, returning to panel A, we report the results of a further test for parameter stability due to We consider now the APT variant of the conditional model discussed in the previous section by interpreting the model as an APT model with macroeconomic factors along the lines first suggested by The results of estimating this model and testing the restrictions are reported in This paper set out to investigate the sensitivity of tests of asset-pricing models to the iid-normal assumption on which standard tests are based. We used two alternatives to these tests. The first was the Our conclusion can be very simply stated. We find differences between prob values based on the iid-normal assumption and those derived from the alternatives of a similar magnitude to those reported in the earlier literature and can conclude, therefore, that the iid-normal assumption does matter for tests of asset-pricing models. However, for the US the original prob values are generally close to conventional significance levels, so that small changes in prob values can easily reverse the test outcomes. In contrast, our original prob values are, almost without exception, large so that even substantial changes in prob values associated with different tests have no effects on test outcomes. Hence, for our data set, the test used makes no difference to the outcome of the test. This was true for all comparisons, for all three asset-pricing models and for all but one of the sub-samples considered. We explored several reasons for the differences in results and conclude, on the basis of earlier Australian work as well as UK evidence reported in