In a common medical procedure known as shock-wave lithotripsy hypersonic waves are generated and focused at the kidney stone. These shock waves are thought to fragment the stone but also lead to injuries of the kidney tissue. To predict and estimate this damage we develop here a mechanical model for the response of soft tissue to the exposure of shock waves.
                  The material model combines shear induced finite plasticity with irreversible volumetric expansion as induced, e.g., by cavitating bubbles. Dynamic effects like micro-inertia and rate sensitivity are included. The time-discretized porous-viscoplastic constitutive updates are described in a fully variational manner. A finite element analysis localizes the damage in the human kidney in good agreement to clinical and experimental studies.In extracorporeal shock-wave lithotripsy (SWL)—a non-invasive procedure to comminute kidney stones—a number of high intensity sound waves (shock waves) are generated outside the patient and focused on the stone within the kidney. A compressive wave with a typical peak pressure of 30–80 With a view to simulating the SWL-process by finite element analysis we provide in this paper a phenomenological material model for kidney tissue. This model accounts for irreversible damage due to shearing as well as for local damage caused by hydrostatic tension. Kidney tissue is not well investigated, therefore one goal of our modelling was to keep the set of necessary material data as small as possible. Moreover we do not analyze the micro-histological changes in detail, this would require an other scale of modelling. Instead we summarize the morphological lesions like hemorrhage, rupture of small arteries and tearing of peri-tubular capillaries, as damage in the sense of irreversible deformations to approach numerically the high-speed process of SWL. The equilibrium response of the solids considered in this work is characterized by a free-energy density per unit undeformed volume of the form The plastic deformation rate is assumed to obey the flow rule: The tensors It is useful to note that for purely volumetric deformations the flow rule From In order to formulate a complete set of constitutive relations, the free-energy density and appropriate rate equations for the internal variables It is worth to note that the volumetric plastic deformation depends on the “rigid-plastic” radius, The free-energy density Without loss of generality, the elastic strain-energy density may alternatively be expressed in terms of the logarithmic elastic strain The first Piola–Kirchhoff stress tensor We note that, whereas the dependence of In our calculations we specifically take A simple stored plastic energy function may be formulated by an additive decomposition into volumetric and deviatoric components. The latter, solely a function of the effective deviatoric plastic strain Aside of conventional Newtonian viscosity we consider two types of rate effects: rate sensitivity in the plastic deformations and micro-inertia due to rapidly expanding bubbles. To ensure a variational structure we postulate the existence of a dual kinetic potential For implementation we start by discretizing the flow rule in time using an exponential mapping technique with the result Clearly, the update We update the internal state variables, We emphasize that this function includes the free energy of the material, as well as the stored energy, the micro-kinetic energy and the dual kinetic potential. These contributions compete in energetic terms, and the optimal internal process is that one which minimizes the function  For finite element analysis we build an anatomical correct mesh of a human kidney using geometrical data from image processing ( The unsupported kidney was subjected to a 1 Common evidence of shock wave induced morphological lesions are kidney enlargement, bruising and hemorrhage in the pre-focal area, see the photograph of a SWL subjected pig kidney in We observe an encouraging agreement of localized damaged. Further research is ongoing to study the influence of the surrounding body tissue and the effect of varying material data.