Using the Hertzian indentation technique, the evolution of the WC–Co composite from plastic deformation to final fracture was studied. Loaded with a spherical indenter, the material underwent initial elastic, elastic–plastic, and fully plastic deformations, finally ended with macrocracks, namely cone cracks and radial cracks. The behaviors of both WC grains and cobalt binder phase during each step of the deformation process was studied including the slip of WC grains, the formation of microcracks, the apparent strain hardening of the WC–Co composite, and the evolution from quasi-plastic deformation to the formation of macro-rings cracks and radial cracks. The correlation between microcracks and the quasi-plastic deformation, apparent strain hardening, and macrocracks are examined.Cemented tungsten carbide is a composite with tungsten carbide (WC) embedded in a ductile metal matrix. Owing to the combination of the hard carbide phase and the tough, energy absorbing metal matrix, cemented tungsten carbide has a unique combination of high modulus, high strength, and moderate fracture toughness, rendering its usefulness in a wide range of demanding applications where neither metal alloys nor ceramic materials meet the requirements. On the one hand, cemented tungsten carbide is considered a class of brittle materials similar to ceramics because it tends to fail catastrophically in real life applications; On the other hand, cemented tungsten carbide has significantly higher fracture toughness than ceramic materials, and as widely recognized, WC–Co composites do have some degree of plasticity. Because tungsten carbide is a covalent compound and cobalt is the minor phase of the composite, the observed degree of plasticity is larger than one would expect based on conventional plastic deformation mechanism of metals. The fundamental understandings of the process and mechanisms of the plastic deformation of WC–Co is therefore a scientific as well technological issue that is worthy of in-depth research. Historically, there are two schools of thoughts on the plastic behavior of WC–Co materials. Early studies attributed the deformation of the WC–Co composite only to the plastic deformation of the ductile binder phase. This thought was emphasized in Doi’s The plastic deformation of WC–Co materials also affects the fracture processes of the material. Most reported studies of the fracture process emphasize only on the role of the plastic deformation of the binder phase because a large percentage of the crack path goes through the binder phase or along the carbide–binder interface The process from plastic deformation to fracture must involve a crack initiation process. For brittle materials including cemented tungsten carbide, the theory of fracture strength or toughness relies on defects that serve as preexisting cracks. In the past two decades, however, with the advances of manufacturing technologies in the carbide industry, the commercial WC–Co materials are essentially porosity free Recently the present authors studied the plastic deformation of WC–Co materials using a Hertzian indentation technique and showed that the “plasticity” of WC–Co was best characterized as quasi-plasticity because the mechanism was based on the formation of microcracks within the microstructure The Hertzian indentation technique refers to a method by which test specimen is loaded with a frictionless spherical indenter to deliver a normal load on a flat surface. Typically, two damage modes are generated: cone cracks (if the indented material responses “brittle”) and/or plastic deformation in a subsurface area beneath the contact circle (if the indented material responses “tough”). A principal advantage of the Hertzian indentation test is that by examining the responses of a specimen to variable loads one can study the fundamental deformation and fracture properties in a highly controlled manner In this paper, the evolution of the damage modes of WC–Co from initial plastic deformation to final fracture is characterized using a Hertzian indentation technique. The objective of this study is to understand the progressive process of the quasi-plastic deformation, crack initiation, and the eventual formation of macrocracks that leads to failure. The results of this study will shed light on the performance of WC–Co composites in real life applications. Specimens were fabricated using the conventional liquid-phase sintering process. Starting materials were a mixture of 3–5 Hertzian indentations were made on the polished surfaces using a polycrystalline diamond (PCD) sphere of Measurements of contact radius “ In order to study the nature of the quasi-plastic deformation from the subsurface sections, one particularly useful technique – split and bond specimen – was used Microcrack number density measurements were taken using quantitative microscopy technique. Hertzian elastic theory After each indentation test, surface damage in the form of indentation impressions was observed using an optical microscope. As shown in At the initial application of load, the response was elastic and can be predicted from Hertz relation by Eq.  As the indentation strain increases, the indentation stress–strain curve deviates from a linear relationship, indicating a “yielding” behavior. Above the yield point, the indentation stress continues to increase monotonically with indentation strain, exhibiting an “apparent strain hardening” behavior. At high strain values, the indentation stress levels off, even though the strain continues to increase. As mentioned earlier, the indentation plastic strain should be characterized as quasi-plasticity because the mechanisms of the plastic strain are partially due to the formation of microcracks  An enlarged view, shown in Although it is not visible in the micrographs, another contributing process to the overall deformation of WC–Co is the cobalt phase. In general, the plastic deformation of Co in the WC–Co composite can be accomplished by the slip of cobalt or the Martenstic transformation from FCC to HCP The most important phenomenon during elastic–plastic stage is that WC–10 During their studies of the quasi-plastic deformation of ceramic materials, Lawn and Marshall In short, macroscopically, during the second stage of the indentation stress–strain curve, indentation stress–strain curve deviates from the Hertzian elastic relation and the WC–10 The last stage of the indentation stress–strain curve is the fully plastic stage. The indentation strain continues to increase, but the indentation stress levels off. Microscopically, the skeleton of WC was broken up and substantial number of microcracks formed, also shown in The number of microcracks along the WC/Co interfaces also continued to increase as the indentation strain increased during fully plastic stage. The microcracks initiated when the local binder phase reached the limit of its accommodation of deformed WC phase. In order to further examine the relationship between the indentation strain and the microcracks, the number density of microcracks was plotted versus the indentation strain, as shown by The end of the plastic deformation and microcracking processes is the formation of macrocracks. This was demonstrated by the specimen that was subjected to large indentation load, under which ring cracks and radial cracks developed in the specimen. As shown in For the WC–10 When the indentation load was further increased, e.g. above 28.0 In order to investigate the starting point of the radial crack, the morphology of the crack was observed from three polished cross-sections as shown by  Although the radial crack behavior under Hertzian indentation load using a spherical indenter is similar to that of a Vickers indentation test using a sharp diamond indenter, the micromechanism may be different. In the case of using sharp indenter, the radial crack initiates at the corner of the diamond-shape indentation impression. In the case of using a spherical indenter, the area underneath the contact circle is a compressively stressed area, and the WC–Co plastically deforms by shear stress driven mechanisms during the loading cycle. At the interface between the plastic zone and elastic constrained area, there is a transition from compressive stress to tensile stress. Therefore, during the unloading cycle, the radial crack initiates around the edge of the plastic zone. After its initiation, the radial crack enters the tensile stress field (elastic constrained area) and propagates rapidly to the top surface until it approaches its final crack size. However, how the radial crack initiates and the relationship between the radial crack and the microcracks within the plastic zone are yet to be fully explored. The Hertzian indentation method was used to study the plastic deformation and fracture behavior of cemented tungsten carbide loaded with a spherical indenter. The quasi-plastic deformation was analyzed in three separate stages: initial elastic, elastic–plastic, and fully plastic deformations. The initial elastic deformation can be modeled by the Hertzian relation between the mean contact pressure and contact radius. The elastic deformation is pseudo-elastic because the contact damage does not recover upon unloading. During the quasi-plastic deformation process, WC–Co composite exhibits apparent strain-hardening behavior as demonstrated by the indentation stress–strain curve. The mechanism of the quasi-plastic deformation of WC–Co composites involves the deformation of the cobalt binder phase, the slip within the WC crystals, and the formation of microcracks. During the fully plastic stage of the deformation, the skeleton of WC grains is broken, and the indentation strain increases without further increase of the indentation stress. A ring crack forms when the indentation load exceeds a threshold value. As the load further increases, radial crack will form and propagate from underneath the indentation impression to the top of the surface and grow outwards radially from the edge of the indentation impression. The morphology and the direction of the radial crack are manifested by the transition from a compressive stress field within the plastic zone to a tensile stress zone during the unloading cycle.