The grain refining effect of four peritectic-forming solutes (Ti, V, Zr and Nb) as well as three eutectic-forming solutes (Cu, Mg and Si) on pure Al was investigated. Significant grain refinement is observed by the addition of peritectic-forming solutes, whereas the addition of eutectic-forming solutes only slightly decreases the grain size. The mechanisms underlying the grain refinement of these alloys were then studied by a new analytical methodology for assessing grain refinement that incorporates the effects of both alloy chemistry and nucleant potency. It is found that the low degree of grain refinement by the addition of eutectic-forming solutes is mainly attributed to the segregating power of solutes, i.e. the constitutional undercooling contribution. However, peritectic-forming solutes do not only cause grain refinement by their segregation power but, more importantly, they introduce copious potent nuclei into the melt and promote significant grain refinement via heterogeneous nucleation.Grain refinement of Al and its alloys has been an important process in commercial production for over half a century because fine grains not only deliver enhanced casting soundness and mechanical properties of cast metals, but also facilitate the subsequent mechanical working and forming processing Heterogeneous nucleation primarily focuses on the role of potent nucleant particles in promoting nucleation of grains. It suggests that an increase in either nucleant potency or number density of the nucleant particles considerably increases the nucleation rate, leading to effective grain refinement It has long been realized that peritectics often effectively refine the grains of a metal For convenience, the process of direct crystallization from a melt onto a properitectic phase is termed peritectic nucleation. In fact, how the peritectic phase forms, through peritectic nucleation or peritectic reaction, would not significantly affect the grain refining efficiency. The only difference between these two processes is that the peritectic reaction involves consumption of the properitectic phase at slow cooling rate close to equilibrium, and in the peritectic nucleation process, the growth of the peritectic phase only occurs in the melt once it nucleates on the properitectic phase under faster cooling conditions. Both are heterogeneous nucleation processes. However, the question still remaining is: which factor, the heterogeneous nucleation or solute segregation contribution, governs the grain refinement efficiency? Therefore, it is intriguing to reinvestigate the underlying grain refinement mechanisms operating in peritectic alloys, and the outcome may shed new light on the factors affecting grain refinement. One of the most important considerations is how to separate the effects of nucleant particles and solute. Most recently, a new analytical model of grain refinement (i.e. the As a result, this paper first focuses on studying the effect of a range of elements, including four peritectic-forming solutes (Ti, V, Zr, Nb) and three eutectic-forming solutes (Cu, Mg, Si), on the grain size of Al. Using the new grain refinement assessment approach (i.e. the High-purity commercial Al ingots (99.96% Al, 0.016% Si, 0.017% Fe, 0.0001% B and 0.0001% C; all the compositions hereinafter are in wt.% unless otherwise specified) were used as the base material in the present work. Commercial-purity Ti, V and Nb powders and Zr particles were selected as peritectic-forming alloying elements. To compare the effect of peritectic-forming elements on grain refinement with the eutectic-forming solutes in Al alloys, Cu, Si and Mg powders were also chosen as another test group of alloying elements. All the peritectic and eutectic solute additions were added in the form of compacted pellets, which were made by mixing the metal powders with freshly cut Al chips followed by compaction of the mixture in a die. Details of the solute addition levels and their corresponding growth restriction factors are listed in It should be noted that the All melts were prepared in clay-bonded graphite crucibles, which were coated with a wash of boron nitride. The crucibles with the weighed Al charges were placed in a resistance furnace and heated to 780 Metallographic samples were sectioned approximately 10 To ensure complete dissolution of the metal powders added into melts, appropriate holding times needed to be determined. Because of their high melting temperatures, the peritectic-forming solutes at the highest additions (0.05% Ti, 1.00% V, 0.50% Zr and 0.50% Nb) were used to select the experimental holding time. After adding the compacted pellets, the melts were held at 780 To determine the recovery efficiency of the alloying additions to the experimental melts, chemical analysis was done on selected samples using inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). The nominal chemical compositions and the measured values are listed in  The variations of grain size of cast Al alloys with the amount of alloying elements added are shown in   These results indicate that the addition of eutectic-forming solutes marginally reduces the grain size even at high To further elucidate the effect of Although trend-lines cannot be fitted through the grain size data for the alloys with additions of Zr and Nb, useful information on grain refinement can still be obtained from In order to identify the introduced nuclei that are responsible for the grain refinement, the Al–Zr and Al–V alloy samples displaying fine grains were selected and examined using SEM. To further confirm the presence of the properitectic particles prior to the formation of Al, thermal analysis was carried out during the solidification of the alloys with additions of peritectic-forming alloying elements. Three typical cooling curves and cooling rate curves of Al alloys with different V additions are shown in From Despite the correction, it is noted that the intercept of the corrected fitting line at high Ti additions is still smaller than that of the fitting line at lower Ti additions. This implies that the underlying reason for the dramatic grain refinement is likely to be due to the introduction of nuclei into the melt in conjunction with the solute. Some investigators As a result of the The grain refining effect of a range of peritectic-forming solutes (Ti, V, Zr and Nb) and eutectic-forming solutes (Cu, Mg and Si) on Al has been studied. It is shown that the addition of eutectic-forming solutes only slightly decreases the grain size of Al while remarkable grain refinement is observed by the addition of peritectic-forming solutes. Using a new analytical methodology for grain refinement assessment, i.e. the The small degree of grain refinement by additions of eutectic-forming elements is mainly attributed to their segregating power. To produce effective grain refinement, however, further addition of nucleant particles is required for these alloys. The significant grain refinement achieved by additions of Zr, Nb and V is not only due to their growth restriction effect but additionally is a result of the in situ formation of pro-peritectic particles at concentrations above their maximum solubilities. Extremely large reduction in grain size is observed in the alloys with additions of Ti at concentrations far below its maximum solubility. It is considered that Ti significantly refines the grain size not only through the contribution from its constitutional undercooling but also from the introduction of potent nuclei formed through the reaction of Ti with impurities. The experimental results in the present work indicate that the introduction of nucleants associated with the peritectic elements plays a key role in the grain refinement of Al alloys. The authors are very grateful to the Australian Research Council for funding support. F.W. would also like to acknowledge the support of the China Scholarship Council.