To extend the previous literature on industrial services, this study develops the concept of the life-cycle service offering by reviewing previous studies and collecting empirical data from seven cases. In particular, the present study develops a framework for life-cycle service offering by synthesizing 11 main categories of services based on an empirical categorization of 1638 services. These categories include administrative services, basic (installed base) services, consulting services, customer services, financial services, maintenance services, operational/outsourcing services, optimization services, research and development services, recycling services, and supply management and warehousing services. The concepts, dimensions and services developed in this study may enable managers of manufacturing firms to better analyze, benchmark, and develop their firms' life-cycle offerings to facilitate value creation and appropriation.Product life cycle: 1) engineering, 2) production, 3) usage, and 4) recycling/disposal. Manufacturer's view: Physical part: 1) product design, 2) product manufacturing, 3) spare-parts manufacturing, and 4) product remanufacturing. Non-physical part: 1) service design and 2) servicing (preparation, execution, and finalization). User's view: 1) product purchasing, 2) product usage, and 3) product disposal. In the search for new sources of profits, manufacturers have been shifting from stand-alone products to bundled solutions ( Servitization research has grown significantly in recent decades ( To advance our understanding, the present study aims to clarify the meaning and role of the life-cycle service offering by answering two complementary research questions. First, how does previous research conceptualize life-cycle service offerings and under what main definitional dimensions? In addition, from a practical standpoint, what types of services do life-cycle service offerings typically include in the context of industrial manufacturers? We address these questions by combining a systematic literature review that supports the abstraction of the concept with a multiple-case study that complements the conceptual discussion and identifies the main services that manufacturers include in their life-cycle offerings. Our research contributes to the industrial service literature ( Servitization can involve different strategies and business models for a variety of customer segments (and needs). In practice, a given service strategy commonly requires the development of a particular service offering, which consists of different types of services ( Using a variety of analytical dimensions, scholars originally focused on categorizing types of services ( To understand the meaning of a life-cycle service offering and evaluate how the previous research supports the abstraction of this concept, a sample of articles was identified by adapting the methodological approaches of other researchers ( The first round of searching returned more than 950 hits. After excluding duplicates and scanning the abstracts, we pre-selected 220 articles that highlighted the notion of life-cycle services. After downloading these articles, we scanned them for relevance while checking other papers recommended by the search engines as related items. We also carefully examined the lists of references in the selected articles to identify additional potential papers. To validate our search, we performed multiple searches by randomly including the keywords in searches using Google Scholar. We ended the search process when the additional retrieved articles consistently appeared to be irrelevant. After selecting a few more articles (primarily from relevant conference proceedings), the final pre-sample of references consisted of 237 articles from 72 academic journals. After reviewing the articles, we selected 46 articles that comprehensively address the concept of life-cycle services. “Durable manufactured products require added services as they advance through their life cycles” ( Although the representations are similar, some particularities exist, which depend on the research community to which each researcher belongs. Whereas the classifications typically adopted in industrial marketing are primarily based on simple depictions (e.g., Researchers have traditionally used the label “product life-cycle services” to refer to basic after-sale services that support the installed product base. For example, product life-cycle services is one category in the four-type taxonomy of the hybrid offering proposed by Solution business models are “natural extensions into life-cycle thinking” ( Creating value is a major concern for manufacturers when designing advanced service offerings ( Flexibly combining products and services to address heterogeneous customer needs is crucial when providing life-cycle solutions ( Creating appropriate offerings from a purchaser's perspective in collaboration with customers is a decisive factor for realizing the benefits of servitization ( Risk adoption is another major concern for manufacturers when selling advanced, long-term and relationship-based service offerings ( Pricing logic is an important complementary tool when examining profitability and when considering value appropriation in the context of life-cycle service offerings ( In addition, manufacturers seeking to offer performance-based contracts ( In summary, a life-cycle service offering is a broader concept than product life-cycle services. This study conceptualizes a life-cycle service offering as a manufacturer's emphasis on the sales and marketing of the life-cycle portfolio, which includes all types of services that might be needed by different customers at different stages, ranging from product purchase planning to product disposal. The concept draws on building life-cycle relationships and understanding how heterogeneous customers use and operate a product to deliver the most appropriate value proposition to different segments of customers. While offering diverse combinations of services at different stages of the life cycle, companies must flexibly combine products and services to exploit modularity and allow for alternative entry points. When taking the form of long-term agreements, additional dimensions must also be considered to explicate these offerings, such as co-development and mechanisms designed to align the incentives of suppliers and customers. Our research strategy combines a systematic literature review with a qualitative multiple-case study. Whereas the systematic literature review serves to clarify the meaning and dimensions of the concept of the life-cycle service offering, information from cases provides the basis to represent the life-cycle offerings in a common chart, classify the different types of services offered, and discuss the manner in which the definitional dimensions extracted from the literature review are manifested in the analyzed companies. As explained above in The empirical data for this study were collected from seven large global corporations in four industries (Andritz, Voith, Valmet, ABB, Wärtsilä, Outotec, and Neste Jacobs). Three of the case companies operate in the pulp and paper industry, two companies operate in the power industry, and a single company operates in the mining and chemical industries. We used a straightforward “purposeful” sampling selection method. As its main selection criteria, this study focuses on companies that 1) are some of the most influential actors in their representative markets, 2) have been actively executing different servitization strategies while constantly restructuring their service offerings, and 3) are defined as project-based companies that offer their customers comprehensive industrial solutions, project services, life-cycle services, and long-term service agreements. Accordingly, the selected companies are considered appropriate cases to analyze life-cycle service offerings because they provide uncommon research access ( This study draws on diverse data, including information from official websites, a workshop with the case companies, and face-to-face interviews with company representatives. When charting the generic life-cycle service offering, we employ data consisting of the total service offerings of the seven case companies. Data were obtained from the companies' websites and one workshop with the companies' representatives to validate the classification. Websites were selected as a data source because interview-based methodologies were thoroughly explored and provided a limited, example-based depiction of company offerings. The sample size of the offerings in the seven cases varied from 105 to 455 services per company. Although limited, the information obtained from websites offers a condensed picture of different types of services. According to the interviewees, although the website of each company may not offer a depiction of the total offering, it provides a large sample of services that indicates the reality of each company offering. The 1638 identified services were categorized using a framework based on the most common analytical dimensions taken from the previous literature. This exercise extended our understanding of the types of services included in life-cycle offerings in the context of industrial manufacturers. Following recent studies on industrial services ( When preparing the chart representing life-cycle service offerings, we followed two main steps. First, we classified each industrial service taken from the websites into sub-categories and, following that, into aggregated main categories. Whereas the subcategories derive from the data and insights obtained from the companies, the main categories represent those categories used in previous research. Second, we classified service categories into life-cycle stages. Company representatives in both the workshop and the interviews validated the classification. We also interviewed five specialized researchers to develop and readjust the framework for the life-cycle service offerings. Regarding the analysis of the interviews, we first listed the key themes related to life-cycle service offerings in each case company after coding the interviews consistently with the dimensions included in the theoretical model. Then, we conducted cross-case analyses to isolate patterns across the analyzed companies ( During the process, triangulation and different sources of active and passive data were applied to corroborate the accuracy of the data ( Valmet (formerly a division of Metso Corporation) is a large Finnish global technology and service supplier that serves customers in the pulp, paper, and power industries. In 2012, Valmet generated 2703 million Euros in net sales, 38% of which derived from the service business. Its operating profit was 189.2 million Euros. Valmet's offerings range from production lines, expert services, and maintenance services to spare and replacement parts. According to its website, Valmet offers 455 services. Voith is a large German global engineering company with a portfolio that includes plants, products, and industrial services. During fiscal year 2011–12, the Voith Group generated net sales of 5724 million Euros, operating income of 341 million Euros, and a net income of 114 million Euros. Of the company's net sales, 38% are derived from service sales. Voith Paper, which is the focus of this study, generated net sales of 1738 million Euros and a net income of 84 million Euros. Voith Paper provides both products and services to customers in the paper industry. Its products range from complete automation lines and solutions to individual spare parts and consumables, and it offers services that range from maintenance services to optimization services and technical support. According to its website, Voith offers 193 services. Andritz Group is a large Austrian global technology and service supplier that serves customers in process industries. During 2011, Andritz generated revenue of 4596 million Euros, and its operating income was 386 million Euros. This study focuses on the company's pulp and paper division, which generated 1856 million Euros in net sales. Service sales comprised 30% of the pulp and paper division's net sales, and operating income was 137 million Euros. Andritz Pulp and Paper offers products ranging from complete production lines to single components and solutions that support customer functions. Its services include maintenance contracts, equipment optimizations and upgrades, engineered-wear products, replacement parts, and technical support. According to its website, Andritz offers 105 services. A multinational company headquartered in Switzerland, the ABB Group generated revenue of 37,990 million Euros in 2011, which included operating income of 4667 million Euros and a net income of 3315 million Euros. This study focuses on two business divisions, discrete automation and motion and process automation. In 2011, the discrete automation and motion division generated revenue of 8806 million Euros and operating income of 1664 million Euros, whereas the process-automation division generated revenue of 8300 million Euros and operating income of 963 million Euros. The products offered by ABB range from single-wear products and spare parts to turnkey plants; services provided by the ABB Group include maintenance, repair, overhaul, installation, and technical support services, in addition to different types of optimization, upgrades, automation, and training. According to its website, the ABB Group offers 426 services. Wärtsilä is a large Finnish global company that delivers power solutions to marine and energy markets. In 2012, Wärtsilä generated net sales of 4725 million Euros, and its operating sales generated 515 million Euros. In 2012, Wärtsilä Services generated net sales of 1908 million Euros, which comprised 40% of the company's total net sales. This study focuses on services for power plants. Wärtsilä's products include complete plant deliveries and spare parts; the services that it offers include operations throughout the installation life cycle. Wärtsilä divides its service functions into four categories: life-cycle efficiency, services and support, spare parts, and field services. According to its website, Wärtsilä offers 218 services. Owned by the Finnish company Neste Oil (60%) and the American company Jacobs Engineering (40%), Neste Jacobs is not characterized by a strong manufacturing background. With net sales of 79 million Euros in 2011, the company is a global provider of technology, engineering, and project services for the oil and gas, bio refining, petrochemical, and chemical industries. In practice, the company offers few physical products; instead, it focuses on advanced industrial services and specializes in engineering, procurement, and construction management services in close co-operation with its clients. The company also offers services such as life cycle troubleshooting and commissioning. According to its website, Neste Jacobs offers 118 services. Outotec is a Finnish global company that delivers both technologies and services to the metal and mineral-processing industries. In 2012, Outotec generated net sales of 2087 million Euros, an operating profit of 184 million Euros, and a net profit of 128 million Euros. Sales in the services business area, which are the focus of this study, totaled 476 million Euros in 2012, comprising 23% of Outotec's sales. Outotec offers services and service solutions that include spare parts, maintenance and technical services, modernization, and operations. The company's investment decisions are increasingly driven by environmental and energy-efficiency factors. This strategy has increased the demand for advanced technologies and sustainable solutions for mineral and metal processing and for environmental solutions. According to its website, Outotec offers 123 services.   Although the case companies began their servitization several years ago, the services they offer remain primarily oriented toward product support. According to our data, transactional services account for the largest share of services. In particular, after-sales services such as optimization services (e.g., advanced control solutions and modernization services) and basic services for the installed base (e.g., repair services, inspection and diagnosis, and automation) remain the most important. Among the latter category, interviewees recognize that spare parts and consumables often comprise 50% of total service revenues. Although at different paces and success rates, the case companies have, for several years, been moving toward services that are more advanced. Indeed, five of the companies offer complex relational services, such as preventive and predictive maintenance, full maintenance, and full-service contracts. Project management and system integration are the most relevant outsourcing services provided by the case companies. Among supply management- and warehousing-related services, only delivery and spare-parts-management services play an important role. Because spare parts represent an enormous business, four out of the seven companies offer these related services to support customers' processes. One respondent clearly describes this transition: However, the case companies are not typically geared toward offering services for operating products sold to the customer and leasing products with operatives. The conclusion by Other categories of services are not extensive or relevant. All our cases offer many customer services during the sales phase (e.g., product demonstration, cost–benefit analyses, benefits visualization, and warranties and insurance). Many of them are also delivered in the after-sale phase (e.g., product documentation/information, customer information, help-desk support, expert sales, and ordering system services). However, as suggested by previous research ( The case companies attempt to apply a clear life-cycle perspective. However, the companies can only implement a total life-cycle approach for new projects, which requires the presence of the integrated solution supplier from the outset. Nevertheless, these cases are rare. Whereas companies focus on bundles and solutions instead of discrete services, these packages do not fully exhibit a long-term orientation. Although companies can adopt a life-cycle approach, customers are not always prepared to make long-term commitments and/or do not completely recognize the benefits related to a full life-cycle offering. Thus, aligned with the findings of Because the share of services dedicated to supporting R&D-related activities is significant in each case, this seems to demonstrate importance of participating in the design and early development of a product as a means of advancing the entry point into a customer's business ( Indeed, as companies use modular platforms, many services may be offered at different life-cycle stages. While interviewees confirm the application of different, frequently informal, processes and tools to co-develop products and services together with their customers, the design-for-service remains in an embryonic stage. The concept of a life-cycle offering has been evolving toward flexible, long-term multi-level service agreements. This new perspective has forced case companies to redesign the mechanisms for value appropriation, such as the pricing model and the main risk-sharing instruments. Whereas the analyzed cases have moved toward performance-based models, those customers who ultimately accept long-term agreements (customers are not always prepared to do so) seek to reduce costs and demand availability and reliability. Therefore, companies employ TCO-based arguments when selling and pricing. However, to provide services under the conditions specified in the agreements, providers must carefully assess risks to avoid losing money. While integrating theoretical insights from different streams of research and analyzing the services offered by leading corporations, this study extends the industrial service literature by developing the concept of the life-cycle service offering. Combined with a systematic literature review, the company cases enable us not only to understand the concept and its core dimensions while developing a generic framework for life-cycle service offerings but also to define the concept more accurately. Thus, the framework facilitates product–service bundling in manufacturing companies while extending existing theory, which cites this as an important objective of the industrial service literature ( This study conceptualizes a life-cycle service offering as a manufacturer's emphasis on the sales and marketing of the life-cycle portfolio, which consists of all types of services potentially needed by different customers from product purchase planning to product disposal. The application of this concept requires that manufacturers move beyond product life-cycle services toward a combination of basic and advanced services. Thus, the application of the life-cycle service offering concept involves adopting a customers' life-cycle perspective, which must be supported by modularity, flexible mass-customization and alternative entry points. Because manufacturers have been attempting to translate the concept into long-term agreements, co-development and the mechanisms for aligning incentives between suppliers and customers must be introduced as clarifying characteristics. The case companies provide a relatively extensive portfolio of services based on a variety of service strategies ( As a classification of services, the proposed scheme can be considered against the five criteria established by This study sought to develop the “life-cycle service offering” concept while arguing that a better understanding of this concept and its main dimensions can support the development of servitization strategies. As a practical tool, the classification presented in this study may help manufacturers in the initial phase of servitization to formulate early-stage servitization strategies to facilitate long-term value creation and appropriation. For manufacturers in more mature stages of servitization, this study may be helpful in re-designing servitization strategies. The concept of the life-cycle service offering and the resulting framework provide value for managers responsible for developing service offerings, as the framework shows how services can be integrated into a product life cycle and how this concept extends to include other services when adopting a customer perspective. Because services may be relatively easy to imitate, protective actions are recommended, and such an approach may provide a means to decrease the imitability of services to protect a manufacturer's competitive advantage. In particular, for product manufacturers moving toward more advanced integrated solutions, life-cycle service offerings provide means to differentiate vis-à-vis competitors by integrating services into the product life cycle. Offering an advanced service does not require that customers purchase those services in great volumes. Thus, an appropriate life-cycle concept, such as moving beyond the integration of services into a product's life cycle while concurrently adopting a customer perspective, may be a worthwhile strategic action that supports product sales and facilitates service sales. The developed framework enables managers of manufacturing firms to analyze, benchmark, and develop their firms' life-cycle offerings. As a benchmarking tool, the proposed classification may help companies improve their understanding of the requirements of value creation and appropriation while supporting the transition toward more advanced service offerings. Regarding value creation, our cases help managers understand what types of services companies can use to build attractive value propositions while constructing long-term, profitable relationships with customers. Thus, life-cycle service offerings may enable companies to achieve higher margins, increase existing customers' share of wallet, and extend the profitable solutions to new customers while increasing their market share and achieving greater economies of scale and scope. Practices for quantifying value such as TCO or productivity increases are also needed to identify profitable solutions and co-develop more valuable offerings in collaboration with customers. Our case companies also seek alternative entry points for conducting business with customers based on diverse combinations of services at different stages of the life cycle. Regarding value appropriation, customer closeness may also increase the complementarity between products and services while boosting sales and reducing costs via the achievement of greater economies of scale. Higher cost effectiveness also may lead to “demand-side economies of scope” ( Because providing life-cycle service offerings may not be feasible for every company and every customer, we suggest that companies should carefully consider those contingencies that determine the use-value of a life-cycle concept for the customer. To accommodate the service needs of multiple customer segments and a large customer base, we suggest the mass-customization of products and services; in addition, a configurator will enable companies to sell service packages separately to those customers that do not choose to purchase the life-cycle concept. Service co-production also provides an appropriate tool for advancing service-dominant logic within a technology organization. Moreover, selling more advanced services and solutions will require additional sales processes. To understand the challenges of life-cycle service delivery, a manufacturer that is developing an advanced service portfolio, such as a life-cycle service offering, should be aware of the resources and capabilities needed for timely service delivery. In addition, manufacturers should develop an appropriate capability base to support service delivery. Acknowledging how difficult the development of a service culture within a technology organization may be, we suggest the development of a life-cycle service offering to internally emphasize the concept and spread the idea throughout the organization. This study has some limitations. Concerning the systematic literature review, although our keywords cover an extensive conceptual range, we may have overlooked a few articles during the search process due to terminological differences. In addition, recent publications may have been overlooked because they are not cited in the literature or are not available in the databases that were searched. Nonetheless, after considering the journals and the authors included in our list of references, we are confident that the selected items accurately represent all research streams. In terms of the empirical study conducted, the sample must be appropriately extended to generalize the study's findings. Although our empirical evidence enables us to present a detailed illustration of a generic life-cycle service offering, the data are insufficient for investigating significant aspects that are highlighted in our literature review. The service categorization as a whole is intended to cover possible services in manufacturing industries, but it might also be applied (at least to an extent) to other types of industries. Although all the main categories (but not all the sub-categories) of services are present in the offerings of all companies, these types of services could be eventually included, and the categorization thus provides a framework for benchmarking, comparing and extending offerings across companies and industries. Although our case companies can be considered significantly servitized, they are not fully representative of the industry. Acknowledging that the results are not entirely generalizable, the studied companies (leading cases in each industry) are nonetheless indicative of the state of servitization among Finnish manufacturing companies. Overall, we are confident that the proposed framework enables analyses, establishes benchmarks, and develops life-cycle offerings to facilitate long-term value creation and appropriation. Although the framework may facilitate future conceptual discussions and developments, it also reveals the need for additional studies. Moreover, because our study is limited to life-cycle service offerings, future studies should individually consider the business models in which service offerings are embedded. Finally, the aim of this study is to develop the concept of the life-cycle service offering. Demonstrating how companies build life-cycle service offerings over the years is beyond the scope of this study. Examining the development of a life-cycle service offering would require further analysis. We see this subject as an interesting opportunity for future research. This paper is a product of the FUTIS (Future of Industrial Services) and FIMECC S4Fleet research projects. The financial support of the