Backfill is increasingly used in underground mines to reduce the surface impact from the wastes produced by the mining operations. But the main objectives of backfilling are to improve ground stability and reduce ore dilution. To this end, the backfill in a stope must possess a minimum strength to remain self-standing during mining of an adjacent stope. This required strength is often estimated using a solution proposed by Mitchell and co-workers, which was based on a limit equilibrium analysis of a wedge exposed by the open face. In this paper, three dimensional numerical simulations have been performed to assess the behavior of the wedge model. A new limit equilibrium solution is proposed, based on the backfill displacements obtained from the simulations. Comparisons are made between the proposed solution and experimental and numerical modeling results. Compared with the previous solution, a better agreement is obtained between the new solution and experimental results for the required cohesion and factor of safety. For large scale (field) conditions, the results also show that the required strength obtained from the proposed solution corresponds quite well to the simulated backfill response.Backfill is increasingly used in underground mines around the world. There are many environmental and economical benefits associated with underground backfilling for the mining industry Many mines operate with primary and secondary stopes. The primary stopes are mined and then backfilled with a cemented fill, which must possess certain characteristics so that it can stand on its own during the mining of adjacent secondary stopes. The solution proposed by Mitchell et al. is commonly used to calculate the required strength for the cemented backfill in stopes with an open face Mitchell et al. developed their original solution based on a limit equilibrium analysis In this paper, the solution proposed by Mitchell et al. is first recalled  Assuming For the specific case (considered by Mitchell et al. To validate this solution (Eq. The Mitchell et al. solution presented above was developed based on following hypotheses The potential sliding surface near the base of the stope makes an angle The friction angle of the backfill on the sliding plane can be neglected, i.e. The wedge block is submitted to shearing stresses along the interfaces between the backfill and the two lateral rock walls: These shear stresses are due to bond cohesion (adherence) only, with The shear stresses along the lateral walls were assumed to act along the vertical upward direction ( There is no shear and normal stresses between the sliding block and the back wall (opposite to the exposed face). The stope is narrow and high, with There is no surcharge applied on top of the backfill (n.a.: a surcharge was nonetheless applied in some of the experimental tests; see T6 and T12 in In the following, these hypotheses will be examined using numerical modeling results and laboratory testing data. In the solution proposed by Mitchell et al., the shear strength due to friction is neglected for the backfill and along the fill-rock interfaces Regarding the strength of fill-wall interface, it is a common practice in geotechnical engineering to assume Recently, Fall and Nasir conducted a series of laboratory tests to study the mechanical properties of interface between cemented paste backfill (CPB) and rough surfaces made from bricks, and concrete The solution of Mitchell et al. also neglects the shear resistance along the interface between the backfill and back wall, but this assumption can also be questioned Numerical simulations have been performed using the commercial software FLAC3D to investigate the response of backfill, based on an elasto-plastic approach  The rock mass is considered linear elastic, with the following properties:  The numerical modeling sequence involves the creation of the stope first. The fill is then placed in the stope in 8 layers, after the release of the elastic deformation in the rock. Once filling is complete (up to 40   Based on the numerical analyses presented above and on recent experimental observations, the following assumptions are adopted to develop a new formulation for the stress state in narrow backfilled stopes with an unsupported face ( The stope is high and narrow, i.e. The sliding surface makes an angle The moving block consists of two parts: the upper rectangular block and the lower triangular wedge. The shear resistance along the interface between the upper block and the back wall acts in the upward vertical direction. The shear resistance due to friction along this wall is neglected, as the normal stresses along the back wall are expected to be low once the front wall is removed. The interface cohesion (adherence),  Both cohesion (  A surcharge,  The weight of the upper block is obtained as follows: In the above equations, The two exponential terms on the right had side of Eq. The normal force Shear resistances The weight of the lower triangle wedge, The shear resistance Replacing the relevant terms by their corresponding expression, the following equation is obtained for the value of       As mentioned above, Mitchell et al. performed a series of experimental tests, using cemented tailings and sands, within a box of 2.0 The optimal solution for all the tests gives  It should be recalled here, however, that these physical model tests were conducted at a scale that is much smaller than the in situ conditions (leading to much smaller stresses), while some other characteristics were not representative of actual ground conditions in the field. Hence, these experimental results constitute only a partial indication of the validity of the proposed solution (or of any other solution). To help with the evaluation of the proposed solution with more representative conditions in terms of stope geometry, additional simulations have been conducted with FLAC3D to assess some of the characteristics of the backfilled stopes upon the front wall removal. The interaction between backfill and adjacent rock mass can be quite complex, especially when one of the supporting walls is removed. Simplifying assumptions have to be adopted to develop analytical solutions for this situation. As limited numerical modeling and experimental results are available, it is not straightforward to select the most appropriate hypotheses in terms of geometry and material properties. More elaborated testing programs are desirable in order to obtain additional results to validate such assumptions. A wedge model composed of an upper rectangular block and a lower triangular wedge was considered here. The former was assumed to move along the vertical direction while the latter moves in a direction parallel to the sliding plane; the internal shear stress that could be generated between these two blocks was neglected. This aspect needs to be further investigated to assess the validity of this assumption. Another limitation of the approach used here is related to the stress distribution in backfilled stopes, which has been based on the one proposed by the authors Other aspects that should be taken into account to further improve the solution include the effect of the backfill dilation angle, introduction of a more representative constitutive model, the potential impact of the fill desiccation near the surface, and the influence of wall inclination and stope size (which affect the magnitude and orientation of the stresses). These issues are part of the ongoing work performed by the authors and coworkers. In this paper, the commonly used solution proposed by Mitchell et al. for the design of backfilled stope with an open face is reviewed The authors acknowledge the financial support of the