The moisture content of a sulphide mineral concentrate was measured by the microwave cavity perturbation technique. Comparative experiments were performed using this technique and by oven drying. It was found that the deviation in the measurement of the moisture content of the concentrate was less than 0.5%, indicating that this would be a suitable technique for moisture content determination of sulphide mineral concentrates.Moisture determination has been a major problem in many branches of industry for many years. In the metallurgical industry, the exact moisture content of a specified material has to be determined in order to allow control of the water dosage, of the quality of the product, and of the reduction of applied energy. Moisture determination by microwaves is applied in many branches of industry ( The objective of this paper is to apply the microwave cavity perturbation technique ( Three different materials, sphalerite concentrate, chalcopyrite concentrate, and nickel sulphide concentrate were used in the microwave moisture determination experiments. These samples were obtained from a smelter in Yunnan (China). The composition of the sphalerite concentrate was: Fe 7.24%; SiO The mechanism for this technique is the measurement of resonant frequency and the output voltage of the resonant sensor ( The main parts of the equipment include resonant sensor ( To obtain the samples with different moisture content, each sulphide concentrate (typically 5 A series of 10 tests were carried out with sphalerite concentrates of different moisture content, the testing time per sample being about 5 Microwave cavity perturbation measurement is an indirect technique, which must be calibrated against a reference method (e.g. oven drying) for different materials. The initial temperature of the material influences the measured moisture content of the material, so the temperature at set-up and the material needs to be compensated for. Generally, the natural inhomogeneity of the samples used (particularly at large particle sizes) influences the moisture content measurement, and it is difficult to assess accurately the moisture content of the sample (  Using the microwave cavity perturbation technique, it is possible to determine the moisture content of sulphide mineral concentrates. The measurement deviation is less than 0.5% under laboratory conditions. The commercial prototype of the microwave cavity perturbation technique for measuring the moisture content of sulphide mineral concentrates is now under development ( The authors would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project 20463003) for financial support. Also the authors thank Kunming Jin-Hui-Tong Wireless and Microwave Sensor Institute for their cooperation.