This chapter introduces the regulatory scenario of complementary medicinal approaches all over the world, focusing upon the five main World Health Organisation (WHO) member states, including the United States of America, the Indian subcontinent, the European Union, the United Kingdom, and the People’s Republic of China. It includes the common WHO guidelines, along with the country-specific complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) provisions and practices followed in each of these areas. Within the chapter, the legislation associated with good agricultural practices, good manufacturing practices, quality control requirements, registration policies, and the pharmacovigilance systems adopted for the regulation of complementary medicines have been discussed. An attempt has been made to encapsulate not only the requirements, but also the current challenges and the loopholes that are remaining in this domain, overcoming which may further fortify the present health care systems.2.0 15 1.5 0.2 50,000 CFU g or CFU mL 500000 CFU g or CFU mL 10 500 CFU g or CFU mL 50 000 CFU g or CFU mL  Macroscopic examination: Biological name of the plant. Shape, size, color, surface characteristics, texture, fracture characteristics and appearance of the cut surface, other organoleptic characters, etc. QC of good agricultural and cultivation practices. Microscopic examination: Types of stomata, determination of stomatal index, palisade ratio, vein islet number, stomatal number, microsublimation study, etc. General tests for identity markers: (by HPLC, TLC, etc.). Physico-chemical examination: Determination of specific gravity, pH value, melting and boiling range, optical rotation. Determination of ash value: total ash value, water soluble ash, acid insoluble and sulfated ash). Determination of extractable matter: alcohol-soluble extract, water-soluble extract, ether-soluble extract. Determination of moisture content: azeotropic distillation, gravimetric determination (loss on drying). Determination of volatile oil content. Determination of bitterness value. Determination of haemolytic activity (saponins). Qualitative and quantitative determination of tannins. Determination of swelling and foaming index. Qualitative and quantitative determination of other constituents, like alkaloids, starch, carbohydrates, proteins etc. Tests for sterility (as required). Determination of contaminants: Heavy metals: mercury, arsenic, cadmium, lead, etc. Microbial contaminants: total viable aerobic count and specific microorganisms (ex: Mycotoxins : aflatoxins (B1, B2, G1 and G2), ochratoxin A. Endotoxins. Radioactive contamination. Determination of residues: Pesticidal residues: phosphates, chlorates, etc. Residual solvents. Determination of any unprofessed substance (if present). Justified use of appropriate substituent (if used). Additional specifications for finished herbal product: Chromatographic profile. Specific tests for various dosage forms. Safety and efficacy considerations. Stability of the preparation/product. Premises (adequate space, quality control sections, goods store, etc.). Personnel (qualification, training, number of employees, etc.). Qualification of the equipments used. Proper sanitation and hygiene. Water supply (specifications for the quality of water used for manufacturing, cleaning, etc.). Waste disposal. Cleaning of the containers and equipments. Good practices for the in-process and product quality control (sampling, testing methods, etc.) to be used for Part I. Adequate storage of raw material and finished goods. Validation. Batch manufacturing records. Distribution records. Complaints and product recall. Outsourced activities. Self-inspection. Documentation.  Many years ago, these medicines were only used in low-income countries, where costly allopathic treatment was unaffordable, though this trend has completely changed over the years. Now, these traditional medicines and healing practices have gained worldwide recognition, and are sometimes preferred over the allopathic drugs that produce different side effects. In contrast, these natural products and practices are usually believed to be free of adverse reactions and, therefore, are generally tagged “safe,” and this is responsible for their elevated use. However, these medicines are also liable to show certain side effects depending upon their individual compositions and qualities, which can be reported as adverse events. Besides, such traditional products can be inappropriately substituted or adulterated with substandard herbal drugs. They may also contain undeclared conventional drugs with a known history of adverse drug reactions based on their pharmacological properties. Other reasons may include the presence of contaminants, viz heavy metals, aflatoxins, microbial contaminants, or agricultural residues including pesticides. Moreover, the incorporation of these traditional medicines in conventional healthcare systems has elevated the risk of drug-herb interactions. These medicines, being the amalgamation of various chemical constituents influencing their therapeutic efficacy, may show the constitutive variability in their chemical composition and Pertaining to the reasons mentioned above, the stringent regulatory control, facilitating the safe and effective use of these medicines, is required to provide better healthcare to patients Furthermore, the “National policy on traditional medicine and regulation of herbal medicines: Report of a WHO global survey” came out, which summed all the CAM-related national policies and highlighted their regulatory statuses in all the responsive member states The National Health Interview Surveys (NHIS) conducted in 2002, 2007, and 2012 substantiated the increased use and popularity of traditional medicinal approaches in the United States. These reports provided a comparative sketch determining their utilization by the adult US-population, which were found to be 32.3% Principally, these traditional herbal medicines are regulated in the USA by the United States Food and Drug Administration (US-FDA) as the dietary supplements under the “Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 1994” (DHSEA of 1994) The National Centre for Complementary and Alternative Medicine (NCAAM) investigates the safety and efficacy of complementary and integrative medicines (including mind and body interventions, natural products, etc.) in USA. It conducts as well as sponsors advanced research in various scientific institutions and circulates the allied information to the public in order to upgrade the treatment standards. To date, it has released three strategic plans in the years 2000 Furthermore, the FDA’s perspective towards the complementary and alternative medicines became even clearer in 2006 with the publication of the most awaited draft guidance outlining the regulations on CAM products. These consolidated regulations, prepared by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, FDA, were released under the name of “Complementary and Alternative Medicine Products and their Regulation by the Food and Drug Administration” In contrast to conventional medicinal products, US-FDA is not legally involved in the premarketing of dietary supplements and it is the sole duty of the manufacturer to ensure their safety and efficacy prior to the sale of the product. Under the DHSEA of 1994, the legitimate role of FDA comes into picture only if any concern over the safety of these products is observed after the marketing In 2004, the “ephedra controversy” The FDA has also released a final rule in the federal register for the establishment of the 21 CFR part 111 regulations for the current good manufacturing practices (cGMP) of the dietary supplements (72 FR 34752) Subsequent to the release of cGMP guidelines, the USP Dietary Supplements Compendium (DSC) was also launched by the United States Pharmacopoeial Convention in the year 2009. It helps in ensuring the safety and efficacy of new dietary products by providing the quality standards for their development, manufacturing, quality control, packaging, labeling, and storing, etc. Traditional medicines are regulated in the European Union by the well-known European Medicines Agency (EMA) as per the general European legislations assembled in various volumes of “The rules governing medicinal products in the European Union” Considering the complicacy of this legal framework, EMA simplified these common EU legislations by launching a perspicuous procedure for the “traditional-use registration” and marketing authorization of Traditional Herbal Medicinal Products (THMP) Apart from this simplified and registration, herbal products can also be registered as products with “well-established use,” for which the applicant is required to submit additional bibliographic evidence substantiating the acceptable safety and efficacy of the “active ingredients” (Article 10a of directive 2001/83/EC). The applicant is also required to show that these active ingredients are in medicinal use for no less than ten years preceding the submission of application. Lastly, a “stand-alone” application accompanied by adequate clinical and/or clinical and safety studies and data by the manufacturing company can also be submitted to register the product (as per Article 8 The foundation of the good manufacturing practices for the products of medicinal human use in the European Union was decreed in the Commission Directive 91/356/EEC of 1991. However, the Directive 2003/94/EC came out as a benchmark, subsequent to which, the GMP guidelines were published in Volume 4 of the rules governing medicinal products in the European Union. According to the latter, “All medicinal products for human use manufactured or imported into the community, including medicinal products intended for export, are to be manufactured in accordance with the principles and guidelines of good manufacturing practice.” It particularly affected the manufacturers requiring marketing authorization for the medicinal and investigational products for human use under the directive 2001/83/EC Despite all this, there is still a need for better harmonization and recognition of CAM policies, practices, research, and patient care between the borders of all the EU member states, considering Furthermore, CAMbrella, a pan-European research network for complementary and alternative medicine (CAM), was also launched in 2010 under the Seventh Framework Programme (FP7). The main purpose of this project was reviewing various aspects (for example, the regulatory control, government supervision, reimbursement status, citizen’s attitude, patient’s perspective, etc.) of common CAM therapies in the 27 EU member and 12 associated states. The main objective of this project was to establish harmonized regulatory control in all the EU member states via development of a common EU network (linking various research centers) and terminologies describing CAM. It also aimed to scrutinize the patient’s perspective as well as the need for these therapies in the EU boosting present comprehension Furthermore, the provisions of Article 26 of the Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 In short, the European legislations allow the regulation of herbal medicines via three channels. As discussed in this section, these categories include the products for “traditional use,” “well-established use,” and “new products.” However, many of the EU member states have made their individual efforts in the promotion of the CAM practices by launching the related legislations and policies, a void indicating that the need for improved harmonization still exists. The traditional medicines in the United Kingdom are subjected to both the EU directives regulated by the EMA and the exclusive UK legislations regulated by the member state authority titled “Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency” (MHRA). Earlier, traditional medicines in the United Kingdom were regulated as per section 12 (S12(1) and S12(2) and section 56 of the “Medicines Act 1968,” in relation to which the herbal drugs were exempted from the general rules enforced for the issue of certificates and license for the sale, supply, or manufacture and dealing with medicinal products. Moreover, these exemptions were subjected to certain conditions specified within the same. As per section 12(1), the herbal products manufactured in the personal business area that are sold only upon personal request are excused from the general legislations Furthermore, the enforcement of the Directive 2004/24/EC led to the mandatory registration of such herbal products either by the product licensing via the stand alone/mixed application or by the simplified registration procedure for Traditional Herbal Registration (THR) In contrast to the common EU legislations where the translational period of seven years was allotted for “traditional-use” registration, the government of the United Kingdom decided to prolong the period up to April 30, 2014, allowing retailers to “sell-through” their stocks. Alongside, it was also suggested that the extension of this period would allow the firms to upgrade their quality standards to meet the obligations of the directive 2004/24/EC Alike HMAC, the “Advisory Board on the Registration of Homeopathic Products” (ABRHP), also referred as “the Board,” also gained the status of an expert committee under MHRA on Nov 1, 2012 Except for the common EU legislations To encapsulate, the regulatory scenario of traditional medicinal products in the United Kingdom is very similar to the European Union, however, MHRA is also working exclusively to implement new changes to improve the present picture. It has been estimated that around 70% of the total Indian population is dependent upon the traditional system of medicine for their basic healthcare needs The Indian Medicines Central Council Act of 1970 (IMCC Act, 1970) led to the establishment of the Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) to regulate the education and practice of the ASU system of medicine in India Later, the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine (PLIM) and the Homeopathic Pharmacopoeial Laboratory (HPL) were also established as central laboratories. They lay down the quality standards for the single ASU&H drugs as well as for their compound formulations and are involved in the drug testing routines of official samples provided by the drug control authorities The guidelines for Good Clinical Practices (GCP) for ASU drugs (GCP-ASU guidelines) have also been issued by the Department of AYUSH To work in this direction, the “Protocol for National Pharmacovigilance Programme for Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani (ASU) Drugs” was released by the Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India in association with the WHO Country Office for India, New Delhi in the year 2008, and the “Institute for P. G. Teaching & Research in Ayurveda” (Gujarat Ayurveda University, Jamnagar, Gujarat) was announced as the National Pharmacovigilance Resource Centre for the ASU Drugs (NPRC-ASU) There is no denying the fact that Chinese herbal medicines, also known as traditional Chinese medicines (TCM), have gained worldwide attention in past few years. Beyond China, these medicines have also been adopted by many other countries, which also led to improvement in their regulatory statuses and expansion of their market all over the world The requirements for the registration of these “drugs” (in accordance with the “Drug Administration Law”) have been specified in the “Provisions for Drug Registration” (order no 28) of the SFDA According to the Drug Administration Law, the use of any drug substance without the drug approval number or the pharmaceutical or import license is not permitted for the manufacture of drug products. However, no such approval number is granted for Chinese crude drugs and their prepared slices (Article 6), which are required to comply with the national drug standards. In the case that the respective crude drug or the slices are not covered by the latter, the manufacturer should essentially follow the processing procedures devised by the drug regulatory department of the province, autonomous regions, or municipality directly under the Central Government (Article 10). Notably, the People’s Republic of China has also adopted the “Regulations on Protection of Traditional Chinese Medicines” The proper control over the cultivation, processing, and packaging (indicating the contraindications, label warnings, etc.), by employing standardized procedures in compliance with the SFDA rules and regulations, may aid in reduction of associated adverse effects. All these guidelines may promote the safe use of the TCM ensuring the quality and efficacy of such medicines. Moreover, the state has also developed an ADR surveillance system with the aim of detecting the adverse events at early stages, thereby promoting the safe use of such medicines. Since 1989, the ADR monitoring centers are working in this direction, but the associated regulations came into existence in 1999, only after it joined the WHO International Drug Monitoring Programme. Furthermore, the online ADR surveillance information system was also organized, which allowed the easy and early reporting of ADRs To work in this direction, the nation also extends support to the international organizations for the promotion of the CAM services all over the world. In 2008, the WHO’s inaugural congress on traditional medicine was also held in the People’s Republic of China, where the “Beijing Declaration” was signed. The latter recommend the governments of all the member states to respect, preserve, promote, and exchange the knowledge of traditional medicines. Alongside, the creation of health policies, legislations, and standards, in addition to the integration of these medicines in the conventional systems, was suggested In the present era of drug discovery, when a number of synthetically-engineered drug molecules are incessantly flooding the market, the significance of ancient complementary medicinal approaches has not tapered. Conversely, these traditional approaches have become more popular and are used by a large number of people worldwide. For this reason, many countries have formulated their own legislations and regulatory guidelines for ensuring the safety and quality of these established medicines; however, many challenges are still hindering current progress, the overcoming of which may increase the statuses of these medicines in the future.