The thermal properties of various alkyl threo-9, 10-dihydroxystearates (DHSEs) prepared from non-edible fat were studied. Non-edible animal fat was hydrolyzed in a 93% yield with R. oryzae resting cells. Crude unsaturated fatty acids were recovered from the matter liquor resulting from a crystallization performed to achieve the saturated fatty acids. These unsaturated free fatty acids were epoxidized with 30% H2O2 using immobilized Candida antarctica Lipase-B (CAL-B) as biocatalyst. The epoxy ring was cleaved with hot water in the presence of tert-butanol (t-BuOH). Pure threo-9, 10-dihydroxystearic acid (DHSA) from animal fat was recovered by crystallization (51% yield). Subsequently, DHSA was esterified in α-limonene using biocatalysts yielding twelve DHSEs (58–90% yield). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) analysis of these esters revealed potential latent heats ranging from 136.83kJkg−1 to 234.22kJkg−1 and melting temperatures from 52.45°C to 76.88°C. Finally, the compounds with enthalpies above 200kJkg−1 were subjected to 100 and 1000 thermal cycles. These experiments showed that these products present good thermal reliability.It has been estimated that the world population will reach 9.2 billion by 2050 PCMs have the capacity to store heat energy during the phase-change that occurs during melting and solidification processes. In this regard, fatty acids present high thermal and chemical stability and high heat capacity The unsaturated moieties in fatty acids play an important role in the synthesis of monomers and polymers. The epoxy fatty acid derivatives produced from unsaturated oils allow the formation of pressure-sensitive adhesives (PSAs) Recently, we described a procedure using conventional chemistry to transform non-edible animal fat into palmitic-stearic acid eutectic mixtures and DHSA. These products were also analyzed by DSC analysis with distinct behavior, on the one hand, palmitic-stearic acid eutectic mixtures shown good thermal properties, whereas that DHSA presented low chemical stability, presumably caused by the formation of estolides between the diol and fatty acid moieties The aim of the present work was to combine biocatalytic reactions to prepare new PCMs ( Methanol (≥99.9%), 1-butanol (≥99.5%), 1-dodecanol (98%), 1-hexanol (98%), and oleic acid (90%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich Corp. (St. Louis, USA). Ethanol (≥99.9%) was purchased from Scharlau (Barcelona, Spain). 1-Propanol (≥99.8%), 1-pentanol (99%), 1-decanol (97%), 1-tetradecanol (97%), and 1-hexadecanol (99%) were supplied by Fluka (Buchs, Switzerland). 1-Octadecanol (97%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar (Karlsruhe, Germany). 1-Octanol (99%) was purchased from Acros (New Jersey, USA). Hydrogen peroxide (30%) (w/v) solution was provided by Fischer Scientific UK (Leicester, UK). CO  To study thermal cycling reliability, a Bioer Gene Q T-18 thermal cycler was used to analyze the changes of the phase-change temperature and latent heat of the esters after 100 and 1000 thermal cycles. A 0.5-mL vial was used for each compound. A dynamic method was established using a temperature range between 30 A volume of 5.42  A volume of 542 A volume of 5.42  The bio-catalytic hydrolysis of the fat and the separation of the resulting free fatty acids by crystallization was performed following the procedure already described A volume of 7  A volume of 1  A given amount of alcohol (  Enzymatic epoxidations were performed in Falcon To widen the scope of the enzymatic epoxidation study, the immobilized CAL-B was extracted with several organic solvents including α-limonene, instead of using supercritical CO Each solution resulting from the first epoxidation trial with the various solvents studied containing In order to achieve a straightforward process to produce DHSA, we expected an optimal amount of The highly unsaturated fatty acid mixture from hydrolyzed non-edible animal fat was epoxied, maintaining the double bonds: hydrogen peroxide (1:1.5) ratio used in the oleic acid epoxidation. The crude epoxide yielded crude DHSA using the hot water-  Finally, immobilized CAL-B was used as a biocatalyst to prepare various DHSEs. An alcohol excess ranging 5:1 to 1.1:1 was studied (results not shown).  On the other hand, some of the described commercial fatty acid bio-based PCMs The variation of solidification and melting enthalpies after 100 thermal cycles ranged from a gain of 0.99% to a loss of 2.94% (see The results from the 1000 thermal cycles ( From the phase-change temperature point of view, none of the materials tested experienced a temperature change of more than 16%. Nevertheless, the results suggest that thermal cycling increases the sub-cooling effect in several materials. For example, the solidification temperature of hexyl DHSE and octyl DHSE decreased from 48 On the basis of the thermal properties experimentally obtained and thermal cycling tests results, the preparation of DHSEs improved the thermal stability of DHSA and expanded the application scope. Besides, the diol moiety could easily be modified to groups such as ketals Non-edible animal fat was converted successfully into DHSEs that showed good thermal properties as PCMs. These DHSEs were synthesized using biocatalysts. Final products were purified by direct crystallization on the reaction solvent. Biocatalyst reusability in the epoxidation step was studied in terms of productivity using a model compound (commercial oleic acid). Besides, immobilized CAL-B successfully afforded the enzymatic final esterification during various cycles. In addition, GREA and DBA are certified agents TECNIO in the category of technology developers from the Government of Catalonia. We thanks to Subproductos Cárnicos Echevarria y Asociados S.L (Cervera, Spain) for supplying the non-edible fat. Moreover, the research leading to these results has received funding from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following is Supplementary data to this article: