This paper presents a system for measuring tunnel convergence called CANG (Convergence by means of ANGular Sensors) that enables monitoring of the positions of the points of a wire situated on the perimeter of the workings. This measuring system records the angles and lengths of each section of wire at all times, determining the shape of the wire and the convergence values.
                  There is no need to remove the CANG system to allow the movement of personnel or material, as the wire is always kept close to the perimeter of the tunnel, freeing up most of its useable cross-section. It may therefore be left installed over long periods of time, thereby providing a continuous record of convergence.
                  The mechanical and electronic components of this convergence system are reported, in addition to its pilot implementation in the Rellon road measurement tunnel located on the Autovía del Cantábrico dual carriageway in Asturias (northern Spain).The current requirements in tunnel construction call for the control and monitoring of settlement and convergence, as well as the development of techniques for processing recorded data. Monitoring plays an important role in every stage of tunnel construction: at the design stage involving an exploration tunnel for site evaluation; during construction, to accurately evaluate the impact of geological conditions, the effect of the tunnel on nearby structures and the construction methods to be used; once the tunnel is in service, to enable long-term monitoring, thus ensuring the safety of the tunnel over its life span ( Instrumentation is used to accurately quantify certain parameters of structural behaviour and to monitor their rate of change. It is thus possible to observe movement stabilization or to deduce the possibility of failure. The comparison of measured values with design values enables the monitoring of tunnel stability and the possibility of implementing corrective measures at the appropriate moment. The measurement of convergence is a direct and highly reliable system for controlling possible unexpected behaviour of the ground or the support system, providing the technician with a tool to prevent accidents ( Direct measurement of convergence is usually performed by distometers to control the variation in tunnel perimeter, or indirectly by other types of sensors such as strain gauges, slope gauges, subsidence recordings, load cells or inclinometer ( The convergence of the tunnel is determined by measuring the position of significant points, called control points, located on the tunnel perimeter. Optical or mechanical systems that record changes in diametrical or perimetric magnitudes in the tunnel can be used to perform these measurements. Optical systems include surveying equipment based on laser distometers, total stations, photometric reconstruction systems or, more recently, laser scan systems ( Among mechanical systems, the most widely used is the distometer ( Using distometers, the change in the relative lengths between one control point and the others are measured following different schemes, as shown in Tunnel deformation curves are obtained by plotting convergence against time. When correlated with the advance and support stages, these curves are important in the analysis of tunnel stability. These convergence graphs usually include an indication of when tunnel support begins to be installed and when the installation of this support system is completed. The monitoring of these convergence curves provides valuable information about the behaviour of the cavity, as well as indicating how the support system performs. In this respect, it is important to record how the advance of the heading or the removal of the core or of the side walls affects the different measurements. At the same time, the distances between diametrically separate points on the tunnel perimeter can be determined (convergence measurements), or just the settlement of specific points on the perimeter can be measured with respect to a reference point that remains fixed (levelling measurement). In many cases, these measurements refer to the distance between the cross-section measured and the excavation face. While these curves provide valuable information, they are expensive to obtain due to the inconveniences involved in their continuous recording. The use of tape distometers presents a number of drawbacks: the tapes hamper the movement of material and workers in the tunnel being excavated, the accuracy of the data is reduced, and it is difficult to automate the continuous recording of displacements. In recent years, new strain gauge sensors have been developed to overcome these serious limitations ( When excavation is not carried out using arches as support, convergence recording techniques focus on topographic surveys employing laser scan systems or photometric devices ( The CANG system is based on the measurement of an open polygon This polygon may be measured using surveying techniques such as a theodolite and a distometer to determine the distances and angles of the polygon. In the case in hand, several rotation sensors were positioned on the pulleys which the wire rests on inside each module. These sensors allow to determine the angle through which each pulley rotates and the angle formed by each section of wire with respect to the vertical. All the distances and all the angles of the polygon may be determined using these angular data. As can be seen in The CANG system allows to determine these angles incrementally and to use these measurements to calculate the shape of the polygon, determining at each instant the position of all the points and hence the relative displacements and convergence. The Two POSIROT-PMIS4 (ELAP) sensors for measuring the rotation of the wire (Encoders A and Encoder B). An ELAP-E30 (ASM) sensor for measuring the displacement of the wire (Encoder C). An electronic circuit for monitoring the signal including a PIC microcontroller (Microchip Technology Inc.) that will store the rotation of each of the encoders internally. The mechanical elements that guide the wire and transmit the rotations and displacements of the wire to the encoders. The CANG system develops a procedure to determine the position of all the points of the wire at each instant. Once the sensors have been installed, a preliminary survey is carried out to determine the initial position of all the points To generalize this process, it is necessary to relate each data capture module with the following one, as can be seen in As the system records incremental values between the initial calibration The values of angular increments The counts The shape factor The tangent line to both circles of radii Considering the angles of Applying the geometric relations and the law of sines: From these equations we have the implicit function The derivate of this implicit function give the shape factor Eq. The length of each section of wire will be given by the expression: The increase in angle in encoder C is proportional to the value on its counter: The value of The Cartesian coordinates of each point These coordinates refer to point If the topographical monitoring is carried out by geo-referencing another point, for instance, point As stated previously, the designed measurement system consists of a wire fixed at one end which passes through each measurement point and has a weight hanging from its other end to keep it tense. A The components of the data capture module are enclosed in a 200 The features of the angular sensors used will be now analysed and later the electronic components of the CANG system. The CANG system is designed to allow easy deployment in mining works, ensuring its reliability by reducing electromagnetic noise and vibration while at all times aiming at a design that minimizes the size and cost of the mechanical and electronic components used. A preliminary study of the sensors best suited to the measurement of angles was carried out. Absolute positioning encoders and/or relative positioning (incremental) encoders may be used. Absolute encoders provide the rotational position with respect to a known fixed reference position. Incremental encoders do not record the absolute position, only the rotation that has occurred between two consecutive stops of the axis of the sensor. Absolute encoders directly determine the angular position at any instant in time without the need to store intermediate measurements. However, they are much more expensive and their angular resolution is significantly lower than that of incremental encoders. The decision was therefore taken to use incremental encoders in this project. It is accordingly essential for the measurement system to operate continuously from the outset, since any intermediate rotations that occur will be lost in the case of interruption. These values must be stored in an orderly manner to determine the total rotation angle. In order to provide information regarding such malfunctions, each station internally stores the last position read in non-volatile memory and restores it during reset, so that the loss in data is minimal in the case of power failure over short periods of time. Among the angular sensors, the possibility of using solid shaft digital sensors or hollow shaft magnetic sensors was considered. Solid shaft encoders are very robust sensors, but have two important limitations: their accuracy decreases significantly with size, and it is difficult to mount two sensors on one single shaft. In hollow shaft encoders, the shaft is replaced by a ring-shaped disk that performs the angular measurement by means of a non-contact magnetic mechanism as it rotates. These sensors are more precise and have the advantage that several ring-shaped disks may be installed on a single shaft. This allows a reduction in the size of the boxes and the simplification of the mechanical design of the measuring equipment. The CANG system employs encoders of both types, the most appropriate being used in each case (see More accurate POSIROT-PMIS4 (ASM) hollow shaft sensors were chosen for the entry and exit rotations of the wire (Encoder A and B), each of which provides 131,072 pulses per revolution (524,288 counts per revolution) and an accuracy of 1.4 thousandths of a degree (see ELAP-E30 (ELAP) solid shaft encoders were chosen to record the rotation of the wire support pulley (Encoder C), which allows to estimate the displacement of the wire. These 5V push–pull signal encoders provide 10,000 pulses per revolution (40,000 counts per revolution). For a pulley radius of 4 Having justified the use of the angular sensors employed, the electronic components of the CANG system will be described in detail. Basically, the CANG system has a board to monitor the signals measured at the sensors and a board that manages the communication and storage of these values. Each The chosen microprocessor is a PIC16F886 (Microchip Technology Inc.) which has digital inputs and analogue-to-digital converters as well as program and processing memory and non-volatile memory to store the position of each of the encoders internally. This microchip has 256 The variables that are initially stored in the EEPROM of the PIC are:      The readings which at any given time will be stored in RAM are:       The status lines of encoders A, B and C which are stored at the end of the memory are needed to restore the measured value in the case of power failure or during a system reset, as incremental encoders do not provide information on their absolute position. Each station is supplied with a voltage of between 8 This stabilization circuit likewise comprises a LED that will be lit while the module is powered. It has a reset circuit with a button to reset the microprocessor if necessary and an ICSP circuit that enables the microprocessor pre-mounted on the board to be programmed, which is more convenient both for manufacturing the circuits and for possible future updates of the microprocessor’s firmware. The circuit includes jumper-type connectors for connecting encoders A, B and C and a series of LED indicators for fault conditions and activity in the encoders, in addition to a flashing LED indicating that the processor is carrying out the change in status at regular intervals. Should the LED stop flashing, this means that the processor has entered into an infinite loop or has crashed. Finally, there is also an adapter circuit of the TTL communication signals generated by the processor to signals that are compatible with the RS485 protocol used to communicate with the storage station using a MAX662 (MAXIM) integrated circuit. This protocol allows the interconnection of more than one data capture module to the storage module via a single wire. This circuit has two LEDs that indicate activity on the RS485 network. The The storage station is idle until one of the following two events occurs: first the activity in the computer communication port due to a prompt for data, second the elapsing of the scheduled time since the last reading, in which case the unit will come on line, consult the current values of the data capture units and store these in an additional memory, subsequently returning to stand-by status. On the prompt of the computer connected to it, the storage unit transmits the data to the computer. Data are deleted when prompted by the computer after checking they have been correctly transmitted, thereby freeing up space for new data. The storage unit queries the data capture stations and stores the readings provided by these on an SD card controlled by a Microingenia uALFAT module (GHI Electronics), which it communicates with via the TTL-level serial protocol. For each reading, 5 The CANG measurement system has passed various laboratory tests to fine-tune its operation, but it has also been used to monitor convergence in the construction of the Rellon tunnel. This road tunnel is located near the coastal town of Luarca in north-western Spain. It corresponds to the Otur-Villaverde section of the A-8 “ Section A corresponds to the cut that provides access to the western mouth of the tunnel, while Section B corresponds to the tunnel formed by two pipe-shaped corridors measuring 280 The tunnel was excavated from west to east, dividing the face into a higher level of advance heading and a lower level of bench excavation. The bench excavation was divided in turn into two trenches, I and II (see The excavation process was conducted in six phases. In Phase 1, the excavation heading was mined to the full extent of the tunnel, given the characteristics of the rock and the fact that it does not exceed 300 During Phases 3 and 4, bench excavation was performed by means of alternating trenches, installing the support for the bench excavation in Phase 5. The CANG sensors were removed at the end of this phase. In Phase 6, the tunnel was given its final coating and the concreting of the footings and of the guide walls was carried out. The CANG system continuously recorded values of convergence for advances of the heading from 40 to 280 Finally, to ascertain the validity of these results, traditional measurement of the convergence curves was carried out in the parallel tunnel using distometers, obtaining the results shown in blue in As can be seen, the measured values are of the same order of magnitude as those obtained with the CANG system, although the measurements were not carried out continuously in the distometers. The time in which the convergence stabilizes with the traditional distometers is slightly lower than with CANG system, at least for the tunnel under study. The traditional ones consider only two point, and the CANG system consider the effects of all the points. Moreover, the differences between both systems can be mainly attributed to the fact that the CANG system has to be set up in a section located two meters from that where the distometer was installed. This was due to security reasons given that the tunnel was in operation when the CANG was installed. Other factors such as the initial topographic survey required to start measuring, the anchorage conditions, vibrations, etc., have influence in the accuracy of the CANG system. To study the precision of the CANG system at full scale, the possibility of making a detailed record using a Laser Scan system would be studied, which would allow to monitor the shape of the tunnel as a function of time and thus obtain the convergence curves, while at the same time recording the displacements at the same points using the CANG system. This type of testing requires a pilot tunnel for experimentation, since the cost of its implementation in a real tunnel under construction is high. A comparison between three different convergence measurement systems is provided in By way of conclusion, the advantages of using the CANG system for measuring convergence will be now outlined. Its installation allows continuous monitoring of the tunnel without hindering the movement of vehicles or materials as it is fixed to perimeter of the tunnel and does not affects its effective cross-section. Each data capture module is autonomous and allows automation of continuous data recording and may be used in both the tunnel construction and in-service phases. More accurate measurements are obtained, allowing the reconstruction of the shape of the tunnel perimeter with a greater number of points and the obtaining of all the different convergences. It allows for the introduction of alarm signals when abnormally high displacements are detected. It is easy to increase the number of monitoring points on the perimeter for large tunnel cross-sections, as these do not pose any operational changes. It is only necessary to increase the length of the perimeter wire and install more data capture modules, and installation is quick and easy. The CANG system is an experimental development that has already been used in real cases. However, the following circumstances, which are currently in the process of being resolved and which suppose a limitation to its use at the present time, should be noted: The system is sensitive to power or communication failures, so it has to have a stable fail-safe power supply system and a communication protocol that allows the detection of transmission failures. As it only measures changes in the position of the encoders and not in their absolute position, a preliminary calibration is needed by means of surveying techniques. If a measurement error is produced at one of the stations in a section, the rest of the measurement stations of that section will no longer be able to continue operating. The recorded measurements shall be valid until that time, but a new topographical survey will have to be performed to restart the measurement process. The accuracy of the CANG system obtained in laboratory tests is about ±0.5 Considering the test performed in the laboratory, while the pulley system maintains its configuration, it would be possible to estimate maximum displacements of 20 This paper has been funded by