Chalcopyrite, CuFeS2 is the most important mineral of copper, but it is a refractory mineral and does not easily dissolve in various leaching solutions. In the present work, sulfuric acid solution containing hydrogen peroxide as the oxidant was used for leaching of chalcopyrite at ambient pressure and temperatures up to 65 °C. Recent investigations have shown that the presence of some polar organic solvents in the leach liquor increases the efficiency of copper leaching from chalcopyrite, probably due to stabilization of hydrogen peroxide. A comparative study on the effect of five polar organic reagents: acetone, ethanol, ethylene glycol, isopropanol and methanol at exactly the same conditions was done for the first time. It was found that the isopropanol is significantly more effective than others and ethanol was found to be the weakest. The leaching efficiency surprisingly increased from below 50% to over 80% by adding 1 mol/L isopropanol into the leaching solution. The optimized condition for leaching was found to be as: 1.5 mol/L H2SO4, 2 mol/L H2O2, 2 mol/L isopropanol and temperature of 65 °C with dissolved copper of 85% after 120 min. X-ray diffraction and scanning electron microscopy proved the formation of elemental sulfur while no evidence of surface passivation of chalcopyrite was found.The mineral Chalcopyrite, CuFeS Chalcopyrite is a refractory mineral and its dissolution is very difficult. Remarkable lattice energy of chalcopyrite ( Ambient pressure leaching of chalcopyrite with sulfuric acid, needs strong oxidative conditions to extract Cu(I) from CuFeS The use of organic solvents in extractive metallurgy is expanding, and a new branch of solvometallurgy is in progress( In order to find a reason for beneficial effect of organic reagents, the subject was deeply explored. Finally, we find a paper by ( Results of ( They also find that Cu Although valuable works have been published in the field of effect of polar organic reagents on the oxidative leaching of chalcopyrite, but they suffer from lack of comparability even within an individual work. This is mainly because of non-uniformity in reporting the concentration of polar organic reagents and inability to fix the concentrations of other reagents. In the present work, a comprehensive and comparative investigation has been done on the comparison of the effectiveness of five polar organics. After the selection of isopropanol as the most effective reagent, the leaching conditions including the temperature and concentration of sulfuric acid, hydrogen peroxide and isopropanol, have been optimized. A chalcopyrite concentrate was obtained from Songun copper mine located in Varzeghan, East Azarbayjan, Iran. The dry concentrate with the particle size of approximately 80% passing through 400 mesh (−37 μm) with 23.0 wt% copper and 26.5 wt% iron was used in all experiments without any pretreatment. Leaching solutions were prepared by adding predetermined amounts of analytical grade reagents into distilled water. Used chemical reagents including sulfuric acid (98%), hydrogen peroxide (H Measurement of copper concentration in the filtrate of leaching process was done by atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS, Analytik Jena AG-novAA® 300, Germany). To determine the present minerals in the concentrate and leach residue, X-ray diffraction using X'Pert Pro diffractometer (XRD- D8 ADVANCED-BRUKERS AXS model, Germany), with a copper anode Kα radiation in a wavelength equal to λ = 1.546 Å was utilized. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analyses (SEM, Philips XL 30, Czeck) were conducted on the solid residue of leaching at the optimized conditions. In all tests, 250 mL of freshly prepared leach solution was poured into a 3-necked Pyrex flask then placed within a thermostatically controlled water bath. A condenser was utilized to avoid solution loss as vapor. When the solution temperature reached the desired value and was stabilized, 5.00 g of concentrate charged in the flask and allowed to agitate using a magnetic stirrer. In the first series of tests 20 mL samples of slurry were withdrawn after 30, 60, 120 and 240 min and subjected to copper analysis after filtration. Two series of leaching tests were done; first in order to determine the most effective polar organic reagent and the second for the optimization of leaching conditions. The leaching tests for the comparison of polar organic reagents (acetone, ethanol, ethylene glycol, isopropanol and methanol), were conducted at 35 °C and initial composition of leach liquor: 0.5 mol/L H After comparison of the effect of the polar organic reagents, and selection of the best one, the optimization tests were conducted. The The benefits of the presence of some polar organic reagents in the solution have already been proven. However, there was no clear ranking between them. Leaching tests with equimolar concentrations (4 mol/L) of five different polar organic reagents in the exactly the same conditions (35 °C, 0.5 mol/L H In order to find a reason for the superiority of isopropanol on other solvents, several physical and chemical properties namely, the number of hydrogen bonds, dipole moment of molecules, boiling point and molecular weight of each polar organic solvents were scrutinized. However, there was not a significant correlation between their effectiveness and aforementioned properties. It seems that the key factor is the reactivity of organic reagents with hydroxyl radicals. Higher reactivity with hydroxyl radical can result in slower decomposition of hydrogen peroxide as mentioned in introduction. Data about the reactivity of various organic compounds with hydroxyl radical in aqueous and gas phase is available ( The later experimental effort focused on the investigation of leaching of the chalcopyrite concentrate in the H In order to study the effect of H The initial concentration of H The influence of leaching temperature on the amount of dissolved copper from chalcopyrite concentrate is given in The influence of the concentration of the polar organic reagent in the leach liquor is given in ( The leach residue obtained after 120 min leaching in the 1.5 mol/L H Copper-rich sulfides, polysulfides, iron oxides, iron hydroxides and jarosite are some solid reaction products other than elemental sulfur that may be produced during chalcopyrite leaching processes( SEM micrograph of the leaching product at the optimized conditions is given in Major portion of particles are those which are apparently intact and clean with sharp edges (area 3, Leaching of chalcopyrite concentrate was performed in the sulfuric acid, hydrogen peroxide, and a polar organic reagent solution. After the comparison of five different organics, isopropanol was chosen as the best one. More than 85% copper dissolution was obtained using isopropanol after 120 min. This is a considerable achievement for the chalcopyrite leaching at non-pressurized conditions. Investigations on the effect of various factors showed that the concentration of sulfuric acid and temperature within the studied range have a little positive effect. Whereas, in the presence of isopropanol, increasing the concentration of hydrogen peroxide as the oxidant from 0.5 to 2 mol/L, caused dissolution rate to increase considerably (from 47.8% to 76.1%). Copper dissolution does not exceed 50% by using the isopropanol free solution, while increased surprisingly to more than 85% after addition of 2 mol/L of isopropanol. Elemental sulfur, pyrite, undissolved chalcopyrite and an aluminosilicate gangue were recognized with XRD and SEM studies of solid residue of leaching. However, no evidence of chalcopyrite surface passivation by leaching products was found.