One of the more challenging issues in upper extremity surgery is the four-part proximal humeral fracture. Humeral fractures of this variety carry a higher risk of avascular necrosis and associated worse prognosis than many others. Despite this risk, this fracture in younger patients is best treated with internal fixation and restoration of anatomic alignment. The valgus impacted fracture often lends itself toward better outcomes with open reduction and internal fixation. In contrast, the displaced four-part proximal humeral fracture and/or dislocation, more frequently seen in the elderly, is best treated with humeral head replacement, which more predictably results in a pain-free shoulder and acceptable range of motion.The incidence of fractures of the proximal humerus has continued to increase as our population ages. This aging population is also staying much more active into their later days, requiring us to no longer accept the results of older treatment methods that result in lower functional outcomes. In addition, new types of fixation and repair (ie, reverse total shoulder, proximal humerus locking plates, etc) have also presented us with more options for treatment and subsequently more outcomes. Presented here is a systematic approach to management of the complex four-part proximal humerus fracture. The Neer classification of proximal humerus fractures has become the favored system over the years based on its simplicity of description of a fracture by parts. When evaluating a proximal humerus fracture a standard shoulder trauma series should be obtained. The trauma series consists of three views: true anteroposterior (AP), lateral scapular, and axillary. In those rare instances in which pain precludes obtaining an axillary view, a Velpeau axillary may be obtained more readily. When examining these specific views, the AP view gives a good appreciation of varus or valgus inclination of the head fragment relative to the glenoid and the status of the greater tuberosity in terms of superior displacement and compromise of the subacromial space. It does not, however, give good understanding for posterior displacement. The lateral scapular view better defines the posterior displacement of the greater and lesser tuberosities and also the position of the head relative to the glenoid fossa. The axillary view is optimal for determining displacement of the head relative to the glenoid and associated subluxation or dislocation and provides the surgeon with an idea of comminution and involvement of the articular surface. Computed tomography scans, with the use of standard axial cuts or three-dimensional reconstructions, can be very helpful to define overall comminution, joint surface involvement, and tuberosity displacement. All of the earlier mentioned criteria are critical in deciding on hemiarthroplasty versus open reduction internal fixation (ORIF). As is the case with all musculoskeletal injuries, there is a role for nonoperative management. Individuals who do not do well with postoperative restrictions include those who have compromised mental status resulting in an inability to cooperate with postoperative rehabilitation or those who have compromised functional status requiring the use of wheelchair with preinjury difficulty with transfers. We must also consider nonoperative management in those with significant medical comorbidities. There are several situations in which ORIF should be first line of treatment for four-part proximal humerus fractures. First and foremost is when the head fragment is likely to remain vascular, such as in a young patient with a four-part fracture or the valgus impacted four-part fracture. In both instances vascularity is likely to be preserved and the risk of avascular necrosis diminished. The literature has shown mixed results throughout the years regarding the surgical treatment of proximal humerus fractures. In 1995, Norris and coworkers The valgus impacted four-part fracture was first described by Jakob and coworkers Those individuals who are best suited for hemiarthroplasty in four-part proximal humeral fractures are older patients in excess of 65 years of age, those individuals with significantly compromised bone quality in which fixation will be an issue, patients with marked head displacement and/or dislocation, fractures in which there is comminution of the articular surface, and patients in whom an anatomic reconstruction is attempted but fails and at the same setting a hemiarthroplasty may be performed. Two keys to the performance of a hemiarthroplasty for four-part proximal humeral fractures are tuberosity repair and component positioning. Numerous authors have addressed the issues of tuberosity nonunion and malunion, noting a high correlation between failure in hemiarthroplasties for four-part fractures and tuberosity problems. Humeral component positioning in four-part fractures has always been a challenging task. Numerous devices have been created to facilitate this, including external and internal jigs, all of which are somewhat cumbersome. The system employed by the senior author uses a jigless device that allows insertion of the trial humeral component, expansion of the tip of the prosthesis, and, once appropriate version and head height are determined, locking it in place. The modular head trial is then placed on the humeral stem, the shoulder is reduced, and the tuberosities are reduced beneath the head to assess rotator cuff tension and position of the head relative to the glenoid. Having assured correct trial position, the height and version of the trial are recorded and those measurements are transposed to the true, final humeral stem before cementation. The loss of metaphyseal bone in this fracture necessitates placing the humeral component in a somewhat “proud” position, recreating the normal anatomic neck height. Version is determined by reference to the bicipital groove. While not an absolute measure of version, placing the lateral fin of the trial humeral stem 7 to 10 mm posterior to the bicipital groove at the time of trial reduction will provide a reasonable amount of retroversion. After reduction, with tuberosities reduced, the optimal version can then be better determined and changes made ( The treatment of four-part fractures of the proximal humerus is never simple and often the surgeon is faced with a number of treatment options, including ORIF and hemiarthroplasty. In most cases the following rules will be helpful: Four-part fracture–dislocations in the elderly over the age of 60 years do best with primary humeral head replacement. In patients under 50 years primary ORIF should be attempted; however, if anatomic reduction of the joint surface is unattainable, primary humeral head replacement should be undertaken. Valgus impacted fractures are best treated with ORIF and bone grafting. Avascular necrosis does not always result in a poor outcome and often mirrors the outcome of primary arthroplasty if anatomic reduction is obtained.