Investigations of Cu–Co–Fe alloys dissolution in sulphuric acid solution were conducted. The phase compositions were identified before electrochemical experiments. Anodic dissolution was found to give about 100% current efficiency and was independent of anode composition. Passivation of anodes was not observed. Dissolution was selective; iron and cobalt were transferred into the electrolyte, while copper was left in anodic slimes and/or deposited on the cathode.It is well known that cobalt is hydrometallurgically produced mainly from either oxide or sulphide ores of copper and nickel In this paper, results of anodic dissolution of Cu–Co–Fe alloys in H Following the equilibrium phase diagrams of Cu–Co, Co–Fe and Fe–Cu alloys The alloys were leached with H The anode potential was measured with respect to the saturated calomel electrode. A peristaltic pump assured continuous flow of the electrolyte with circulation rate of 5 L/h. In order to determine precisely the electric charge flowing through the circuit, independent copper coulometers were used, which were connected in series with the electrodes. In the course of the electrolysis, samples of the solution at hourly intervals were taken. After electrolysis, anode slime was removed mechanically from the electrode surface, washed with distilled water and dissolved in hot 2 M H  The application of the scanning microscope with EDS analyzer enabled qualitative as well as quantitative studies of alloys (mapping, local analysis, line analysis across one precipitate at least). “Maps” are unpublished in this paper, but the conclusions confirm the results of line analysis. The quantitative analysis was conducted following K lines of Cu, Co and Fe (L lines interfere). The results showed that the chemical composition of precipitates and matrices are different and depend on the alloy composition  In  Distributions of the metals across Cu5Co70Fe25 alloy We started the electrochemical studies from the determination of the anodic polarization curves The low content copper alloys dissolved with relatively low overvoltage. It suggests weak inhibition of the anode process and easy dissolution of these alloys in the sulphuric acid solution. Only for Cu90Co5Fe5 alloy anodic dissolution was very high overvoltage observed (about 300 mV for very low current densities). The polarization curves for Cu5Co47Fe48 and Cu5Co70Fe25 overlap in the current density range of 40–300 A/m The anode potential was recorded continuously during electrolysis. At first, the dissolution runs at constant potential values, but for the Cu-depleted alloys the potential was increasing gradually  The linear plots enabled the calculation of the Cu, Co and Fe dissolution rates. For Cu90Co5Fe5, copper dissolution rate was calculated according to the linear dependence observed in the initial stages of the process (the broken line in The comparison of the specimens' chemical composition (in mol%) with the metals dissolution rates (in mol%/min) showed that the alloys dissolution does not proceed simultaneously (during simultaneous dissolution of the alloy, each metal is transferred to the electrolyte with rates proportional to mole fraction of the component in the alloy). Preferential Co and Fe dissolution from the Cu-rich alloy was observed. The anodic dissolution of copper was inhibited for all alloys. It appears very strange that cobalt dissolves in a more preferential way than iron. The explanation of this is based on the comparison of the metal dissolution rates In the low content copper alloys, the matrix is richer in cobalt than the precipitates. The main component of these precipitates is iron. Iron as the metal with the lowest electrochemical potential should be dissolved preferentially. Low volume fraction of precipitates The precipitates in the high content copper alloy are enriched in iron and their volume fraction is considerable. It appears that the precipitates dissolve easier than the matrix. Instead of the anodic electrode reactions secondary reactions can occur, e.g. copper cementation—Cu Some amounts of the slime were produced on the anodes' surface. Only in the case of Cu90Co5Fe5 was a very thin slime layer created and it was insufficient for quantitative analysis. The average chemical compositions of the anodic slimes are given in The results showed that the slimes include copper mainly, though traces of other metals are present. It confirms earlier observations of the inhibition of the copper dissolution process. The composition of the anode surface changes during electrolysis. Under the slime layer on the electrode surface a metallic layer enriched in copper was visible after the process. The chemical composition and the mass decrement of alloys made possible the calculations of the anodic current efficiency. In the calculations it was assumed that all alloy components dissolve simultaneously and none of them is preferred. The theoretical electrode mass decrement The results of calculations are summarized in Initially the cathode reaction was the hydrogen evolution. The concentrations of metals ions in the bath were increasing with time and secondary reaction of the copper deposition took place. The reduction reactions of cobalt and iron ions did not proceed. For the low content copper alloys, the cathodic deposits were obtained after 10 h of electrolysis only. The cathodic current efficiencies were very low, but increased gradually with time. It is visible especially for Cu90Co5Fe5 alloy (three 2-h stages in the same electrolyte: I—25.6%; II—48.1%; III—55.4%). For other alloys the cathodic current efficiencies are less than 0.5% (10 h electrolysis). During the electrolysis the metals divided among the bath, the cathodic deposit and the anodic slime. The participations of the individual elements in these three phases at the end of the process are given in The results of our investigations indicate that the Cu–Co–Fe alloy electrochemical dissolution in H the anodic current efficiency is about 100%; anode passivation does not occur and the anode slime layer does not inhibit the dissolution process; considerable anode mass decrement is observed in a short time (0.5 g/h); the anodic dissolution is selective. It is necessary to separate copper, cobalt and iron. The electrochemical method has to ensure selectivity of the alloy dissolution. In that case one of these metals accumulates in high concentration in the anodic slime, the cathodic deposit or the bath. Instead of simultaneous dissolution of Cu, Co, and Fe from Cu90Co5Fe5 alloy, only copper (99.9%) deposits on the cathode. Cobalt and iron are transferred into the electrolyte. For the low content copper alloys all copper remains in the anodic slime, however, Co and Fe accumulate in the solution. Further recovery of metals is going to focus on the separation of cobalt from iron in acidic sulphuric solutions. This research work has been supported by the Polish Committee for Scientific Research under Grant No. 7 T08B 019 19.