On the basis of the continuous operating vane pump-grinder technology, a novel high-shear homogenizer consisting of a saw-tooth rotor-stator system was combined with a vane pump to produce meat batters. The rotational rotor speed varied between 1000 and 3000 rpm and the volume flow rate varied between 10 and 60 L/min at either constant volume flow rate or constant rotational rotor speed. The meat batters were filled into casings and heated up to a core temperature of 72 °C in order to induce gelation. Characteristics of samples were assessed by structure, L*a*b* color values, texture, and water-binding analysis. The rotational rotor speed and the volume flow rate define the volumetric energy input that induces the degree of dispersion. Thus, the mean diameter of visible lean meat particles was between 0.361 ± 0.011 mm and 0.468 ± 0.017 mm, whereas the volume-surface diameter attained sizes between 0.626 ± 0.018 mm and 0.929 ± 0.066 mm.The concept of the vane pump-grinder technology is the combination of a positive displacement pump with a grinder system. Thus, the vane pump works as a feed pump ensuring a constant volume flow rate, whereas the grinder system facilitates the size reduction zone ( In addition to bowl choppers, continuously operating fine meat homogenizers also ensure the production of stable finely emulsified meat batters ( In general, the production of meat batters for emulsion-type sausages, such as Frankfurters, using the vane pump-grinder technology is feasible. In doing so, the degree of dispersion can be modified freely by the variation of the knife rotational speed of the grinder In our study, we attached a newly developed high-shear homogenizer directly to a vane pump. The homogenization zone of the homogenizer consisted of a two-stage tooth-saw rotor-stator system ( Lean pork meat and pork fat from shoulder and ham were obtained from Mega eG (Stuttgart, Germany) and standardized to SIII and SIX, according to the GEHA – meat classification system ( Lean pork meat SIII and pork fat SIX were ground to 5 mm in a grinder (Type W 114 T82 487-1, Seydelmann, Aalen, Germany). A combination of 50 wt% lean meat, 27 wt% fat, and 23 wt% crushed ice were mixed with 18.0 g/kg curing salt, 5.0 g/kg spice mixture, 1.5 g/kg tetrasodium pyrophosphate, and 0.5 g/kg ascorbic acid for 10 min at 30 rpm in a MVZ 150 T-paddle mixer (Asgo, Ermesinde, Portugal). This raw material mixture was then fed into the funnel of a vane pump VF 616 equipped with a novel high-shear homogenizer (Handtmann, Biberach, Germany), shown in The raw material mixture was processed to a meat batter at (i) varying rotational rotor speed of the homogenizer Machine parameters of the vane pump equipped with a high-shear homogenizer were captured by internal sensors and recorded by the operating software of the vane pump. Thus, the normalized torque of the motors of vane pump and homogenizer, Photographic images of the sausage cross-sections were taken with a digital camera (K-5, Pentax, Tokyo, Japan). All images were taken under standardized illumination, camera distance to the sample, and magnification. The contrast of the photographic images, which are shown henceforth, was modified with the digital image processing and analysis software (ImageJ 1.49a, Wayne Rasband, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA). The structure of the emulsion-type sausages was evaluated from the photographic images of the cross-sections. The images were converted to grey scale images using ImageJ. From the grey scale images, binary black and white images were generated by applying a grey scale threshold on the visible lean meat particles. Binary black and white images were subjected to particle size analysis yielding the mean particle diameter Mean diameter Product color was determined at the cross section of the emulsion-type sausages with a colorimeter CR200 from Minolta (Ahrensburg, Germany). The colorimeter was calibrated against a white ceramic tile (tristimulus values: The water-binding capacity of the meat batter was determined gravimetrically as released serum after a heat treatment using a modified method by The amount of solubilized protein in the meat batter was measured after extraction with an isoionic sodium chloride solution. To this purpose, 30 g unheated meat batter was suspended in 80 mL sodium chloride solution, and agitated with a stomacher (Circulator 400, Seward, West Sussex, UK) for 30 s at 300 rpm. The resulting suspension was transferred to a 200 mL volumetric flask and allowed to stand for 1 h at 4 °C. The solution was then centrifuged at 23,000 g and 4 °C for 1 h. The supernatant was filtered and the solubilized protein content of the filtrate determined with the Kjeldahl method, according to The texture was determined as firmness using an Instron texture analyzer (Model 1011, Instron Corporation Ltd., Canton, MA, USA) equipped with a Kramer shear cell (10 blades; each 7.0 × 0.3 cm). The emulsion-type sausage was sliced into cylinders 0.3 cm high and 4.5 cm diameter. Samples were packed into plastic film (PVC, 7.5 μm thick) to prevent drying. The temperature of all samples was adjusted to 1 °C before analysis. Sausage cylinders were then placed in the Kramer shear cell, compressed, penetrated, and sheared by the blades at a speed of 1.7 mm/s. The force was recorded as a function of deformation to obtain a yield force Means and standard deviations were calculated from these measurements using Excel (Microsoft, Redmond, WA, USA). Regression analyses were conducted using SigmaPlot (Version 12.3, Systat Software Inc., San Jose, CA, USA). Further statistical analysis was conducted with the statistical software SAS (Version 9.3, SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC, USA). A one-way variance analysis, the Tukey–Kramer test (α = 0.01), was carried out for the determination of the product properties if the data fulfilled the criterion of normal distribution tested with the Shapiro–Wilk method (α = 0.1). If the data did not fulfill this criterion, a nonparametric test, the Kruskal–Wallis test (α = 0.01), was used. There, the Monte-Carlo simulations were employed.  At a constant rotational rotor speed The volumetric energy input The volumetric energy input  This relation is only valid for a rotational rotor speed of 2000 rpm. There, Although the rotor-stator system is in contrast to the cutting tool in a grinder system, is a non-intrusive cutting device, friction with the raw material mixture emerges during the homogenization process. Hence, the energy input was partially transformed into heat. Therefore, the temperature of the raw material mixture increased during processing.  In order to quantify the homogenization efficacy of the rotor-stator system, we determined the particle sizes of the visible lean meat particles using an image analysis of the photographic images of the sausage cross-sections. The lean meat particle mean diameter The combination of these two relationships using the energy input applied yielded a graph with the visible lean meat particle mean diameter The regression was significant ( The The lightness None of the emulsion-type sausages produced showed visible fat or water separation. When the meat batter was heated under stricter conditions, the released serum According to the literature, a critical temperature of more than 16–18 °C after preparation of the meat batter may increase fat and water separation after heating ( The texture of the sausage slices was measured as firmness expressed as yield force Compared to vane pump-grinder systems, volumetric energy inputs during the production of meat batters could be increased greatly using the newly developed homogenizer. Thus, the homogenization of meat and fat was enhanced. A considerable range of structures could already be generated and modified freely by varying the volume flow rate However, very finely emulsified structures, typically for e.g. Frankfurter type sausages could be produced only at the highest rotational rotor speed or minimum volume flow. Further studies will focus on the implementation of the downstream homogenizer to vane pump-grinder systems. This may permit increased volume flow rates during the production of finely emulsified meat batters. The grinder thereby may ensure already a coarse dispersion whereas the homogenizer facilitates the homogenization at lower torques. Therefore, this enhancement may even broaden the range of structures that can be prepared with the system on the basis of the vane pump-grinder technology. With such innovations for the production of meat batters for emulsion-type sausages of any structure, the application of these continuous working systems for industrial manufacture may be realized. This research project was supported by the