Carbon microsphere was synthesized from glucose via hydrothermal method, and then alumina hollow microsphere was prepared using carbon template. At reaction time of 6 h, the carbon sphere displayed uniform diameter of 800 nm. After removal of carbon core during calcination, it obtained 600 nm of γ-Al2O3 hollow sphere with shell thickness of 80 nm and surface area of 186 m2/g. For adsorption of methylene blue, material exhibited adsorption capacity of 26.5 ± 1.2 mg/g, fitting well with Langmuir isotherm. It is demonstrated that calcining carbon template was an effective and facile approach to obtain hollow sphere material.Hollow micro/nanomaterial exhibits huge inside space and nanoscale shell, such as hollow sphere, hollow tube and hollow polyhedron Generally, carbon was selected as the core with coating of metal ions on its surface, and the hollow shell would be obtained after remove the carbon template In present work, hydrothermal method was used for preparation carbon microsphere from green and low cost precursor of glucose. The core-shell structure was formed with carbon core and Al Typically, 8.1 g of anhydrous glucose (98%) was dissolved in 75 mL of deionized water to form 0.6 M glucose solution. Subsequently, solution was transferred to Teflon autoclave and heated at 180 °C for 3, 6 or 9 h. After washing and drying, carbon microsphere (CM) was synthesized. Then, 2.4 g of CM was immersed into 100 mL of 0.5 M Al(NO Particle size distributions were investigated using laser particle size analyzer (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern). X-ray diffraction (XRD) was measured by a Bruker diffractometer (D8 Advance) using Cu Kα radiation ( As a typical dye, methylene blue (MB) was usually used as adsorbate in liquid adsorption to investigate mesopores and micropores. During continuous stirring adsorption at 25 ± 1 °C, 0.1 g of AlHM powder were added into 100 mL of MB (97%) solution, with MB concentrations of 5, 10, 20, 50, 100 and 200 mg/L, respectively. After 8 h for adsorption equilibrium, the MB concentration was determined using an UV1800 ultraviolet spectrophotometer (Shanghai AUCY) at 660 nm. Adsorption capacity For kinetic studies, the linear pseudo first-order model Eq. For classic Langmuir (homogenous monolayer adsorption, Eq. Microstructures of samples are shown in Particle size distributions of CM 3–9h and AlHM are shown in  The FTIR spectra of materials are presented in  The formation process of AlHM is explained in  Kinetic and isotherm were used to investigate the MB adsorption onto AlHM. The parameters of kinetic equations are listed in Plots of two isotherms for MB adsorption onto AlHM 6h are expresses in At MB concentration of 200 mg/L, the The CM was synthesized by hydrothermal method under time of 3–9 h using glucose, and then it was selected as template to form core–shell structure of Al@CM. At hydrothermal time of 6 h, the CM displayed relatively uniform particle size distribution with diameter of ~800 nm. After calcination in N This work was supported by Fundamental Research Funds for None.