Introduction
                  The necessity for reduction and fixation of posterior malleolus fractures remains under debate. Therefore, we assessed the functional outcome and quality after plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus, identified the main drivers of outcome and aimed to determine which patient and fracture type are eligible for plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus.
               
                  Materials and methods
                  A prospective patient cohort of 50 patients with an ankle fracture including the posterior malleolus underwent plate osteosynthesis via a posterior approach, and was compared to a retrospective patient cohort of 85 consecutive patients who did not. Twenty-five demographic, operative and postoperative characteristics were assessed. Outcome was recorded using questionnaires: AOFAS, EQ-5D, EQ-5D-VAS, EQ-5D-TTO, sensory nerve‐associated complications, and flexion deficit of the hallux.
               
                  Results
                  Direct reduction and plate osteosynthesis of posterior malleolus fractures was inferior to non-operative treatment. Subanalysis of trimalleolar fractures revealed that the outcome of plate osteosynthesis was equal. Both fracture type and plate osteosynthesis were independent drivers of the outcome; Haraguchi type 3 posterior malleolus fractures were associated with the best functional outcome and quality of life scores. Comorbidity, age, postoperative complications and reintervention largely determined the outcome. Up to 30% of the patients reported (temporarily) flexion deficit of the hallux and 38% numbness at the lateral side of the foot.
               
                  Conclusions
                  There is no indication for routine plate osteosynthesis of all posterior malleolus fractures. Careful patient selection, less invasive surgery and modified postoperative rehabilitation seem mandatory to improve the outcome and prevent adverse effects.Posterior malleolus fractures occur in about 46% of all Weber type B or C ankle fracture-dislocations Previously posterior malleolus fractures were often ignored or reduced by ligamentotaxis and percutaneously fixated using an anterior-to-posterior lag screw. As a consequence, dislocated posterior malleolus fracture were usually not adequately reduced. In contrast, open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) through either a posterolateral or posteromedial approach allows for direct reduction of the posterior malleolus. The choice between a posterolateral or posteromedial mainly depends on the fracture morphology, with extended medial fractures preferably being treated via posteromedial approach The big advantage of a posterolateral approach lies in the fact that both the fibular and posterior malleolus can be treated via a single approach, preferably through the same interval between the flexor halluces longus and peroneal muscles. The overlying muscles warrant sufficient soft-tissue coverage and are likely to prevent wound problems. However, with the posterolateral approach the sural nerve crosses distally and is prone to damage. Furthermore, extensive soft-tissue dissection and plate osteosynthesis potentially leads to more fibro-adhesions (i.e. flexor halluces longus and peroneal muscle) and joint restriction, subsequently. Therefore, we prospectively assessed the functional outcome and quality of life after plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus and compared these with a retrospective patient cohort wherein the posterior malleolus was not directly reduced and fixated through a posterior approach. We identified the patient and operative characteristics that affect the outcome most and subsequently provide insight into which patient and fracture type are most eligible for plate osteosynthesis via an posterior approach. A prospective series of 60 patients who sustained an ankle fracture and underwent ORIF using plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus between March 2015 and January 2018 at the Department of Trauma Surgery of the University Hospitals Leuven were included in this study. The latest follow-up was in March 2019, which allowed for a minimal follow-up time of 12 months. 10 (16.7%) patients were lost in the follow-up, 1 of whom had died (malignancy) 15 months postoperatively. The patients that were lost in the follow-up differed from those who were not, in reintervention (respectively 0 This study was conducted in compliance with national legislation and the guidelines of the ethics committee of University Hospitals Leuven. All information was retrieved from the University Hospitals Leuven electronic medical file database. All authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study. There was no funding for this research. A total of 15 variables were grouped as demographic characteristics (age, gender, ASA-score, BMI, cardiovascular risk factors [CVRF]) and operative characteristics (fracture side, open fracture, fracture type, preoperative posterior step-off >1 mm, medial clear space [MCS] widening >4 mm, syndesmotic injury, surgery staging, time to definitive surgery, malleolus fixation, and the use of a syndesmotic screw). CVRF included: diabetes mellitus, age, hypercholesterolemia, dyslipidemia, hypertension, smoking, alcohol abuse, overweight, current cardiovascular diseases, use of blood vessel narrowing drugs, e.g. beta blockers and ergotamine, and rheumatoid arthritis. Fracture type was categorized based on the malleolus involved; in addition, based on CT posterior malleolus fractures were classified according to the Haraguchi and Bartonicek classification Ten postoperative characteristics were measured: fracture related infection (FRI), other complications, step-off of the posterior and medial malleolus, syndesmotic screw removal, time to syndesmotic screw removal, radiologic failure, nonunion, reintervention and radiologic follow-up time. FRI was defined according to the recent consensus definition Seven patient reported outcome measures were recorded: Orthopaedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS), European Quality of Life Questionnaire in 5 Domains (EQ-5D), EQ-5D-VAS (visual analogue scale), EQ-5D TTO (time trade-off-score), numbness on the lateral side of the foot, flexion deficit of the hallux, and follow-up time. The functional outcome was assessed using the AOFAS. The AOFAS questionnaire results in a score from 1 to 100 in which a high score indicates a good functionality. The general health status was recorded using the EQ-5D questionnaire, which is composed of five parts: mobility, self-care, usual activities, pain/discomfort and anxiety/depression, wherein each dimension represent three levels of severity. Based on the EQ-5D, the TTO-score was calculated for each patient. The TTO-score represents the number of years living in their current health state patients would give up to live in perfect health. For example, if a patient prefers living 8 years in perfect health instead of 10 years in the current health status, the TTO-score is 0.8. According to the EQ-5D-VAS, the patient selects a score between 0 (worst health status) and 100 (best health status). All questionnaires are standardized and tested for reproducibility and validated for the Dutch language For statistical evaluation of all data, IBM SPSS 25.0 (SPSS Inc. Chicago, IL) was used. The Mann-Whitney U test was used for comparing nonparametric variables. Correlation was tested using the Pearson correlation test for continuous and Spearman correlation test for nominal variables. Nominal variables were compared using Chi-Square statistics. To test for factors that independently influence outcome, a multiple logistic regression analysis was conducted.  Nine posterior malleolus fractures of the retrospective cohort were percutaneously fixated using an anterior-to posterior screw, with a postoperative step-off in 6 patients. The patient reported AOFAS, EQ-5D, EQ-5D-VAS, EQ-5D-TTO-scores, and follow-up time of the prospective and retrospective patient cohort are displayed in AOFAS, EQ-5D on 5 domains, VAS and TTO did neither differed between patients with anterior-to-posterior fixation and nonoperative treatment of the posterior malleolus fracture, nor between anterior-to-posterior fixation and plate osteosynthesis of a posterior malleolus fracture. However, plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus fractures showed significantly lower AOFAS and TTO-scores compared to non-operatively treated posterior malleolus fractures (respectively, 73.40 [12–100] vs. 81,81 [20–100] A bivariate analysis of all patients identifying those factors that affect the outcome measures most, was performed (supplement To be able to make a statement about who potentially would be eligible for plate osteosynthesis, we determined which characteristics affected the outcome after plate osteosynthesis most. Overall, the multiple logistic regression for plate osteosynthesis indicated the same determinants as shown for all patients with a posterior malleolus fracture: reduced functional outcome scores (AOFAS) were associated with reintervention (implant removal) ( The primary aim of this study was to assess the functional outcome and quality of life after plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus, identify its drivers, and determine which patient and fracture type are most eligible for plate osteosynthesis. Surprisingly, the AOFAS, EQ-5D on mobility and anxiety/depression and TTO were significantly worse after plate osteosynthesis compared to non-operative treatment of the posterior malleolus. Since both groups are rather heterogeneous (all fracture types were included), we performed a subanalysis for trimalleolar fractures, revealing no significant difference in any outcome measure between plate osteosynthesis of posterior malleolus fractures and those patients that did not underwent plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus. In turn patient reported outcome was equal between non-operatively and percutaneously treated patients as well percutaneous treatment and plate osteosynthesis. With regard to all patients, reintervention (i.e. implant removal) was significantly associated with impaired functional outcome and quality of life. Moreover, quality of life was determined on the one hand by comorbidity and age and on the other hand by fracture type (i.e. trimalleolar ankle fractures), plate osteosynthesis, postoperative complications (FRI and numbness of the lateral foot) and follow-up time. Despite a significantly higher quality of reduction, a postoperative step-off of the posterior malleolus was not found to play a significant role in the functional outcome. This is not in line to what we and others observed previously, wherein a posterior step-off of the posterior malleolus was identified as an important predictor of poor functional outcome [ Xu et al. reported in 2012 a similar AOFAS score as Verhage et al. did, and interestingly no difference in outcome between the fixated and non-fixated posterior malleolus fractures independent of both the size, fixation type (front-to-back and back-to-front not otherwise specified) and age Our study differs from other studies in that we report on a relatively large consecutive patient cohort with plate osteosynthesis solely, while other studies compared functional outcome between indirect reduction and percutaneous fixation using an anterior-to-posterior screw, and ORIF using either plate or screw osteosynthesis via a posterolateral approach to fixate the posterior malleolus [ Beside significantly lower functional outcome and quality of life scores, patients that underwent plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus reported a (temporarily) flexion deficit of the hallux to some extent in up to 30%, and in 38% numbness at the lateral side of the foot, which indicates that plate osteosynthesis via a posterolateral approach leads to more fibro-adhesions (i.e. flexor halluces longus and peroneal muscle) and sural and peroneal nerve injury. Unfortunately, the retrospective patient cohort was not questioned on this. However, these patients neither underwent a posterolateral nor a posteromedial approach and therefore it can be assumed that this was less or not the case at all. Logistic regression analysis of prospective patient cohort alone showed that a higher of ASA-score was the main driver of the EQ-5D on 3 of the 5 domains, as well as the EQ-5D VAS and TTO. This indicates that plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus is of limited value in patients with severe comorbidity. Complications (FRI) can be prevented and the need for implant removal be avoided. Furthermore, the Haraguchi classification of posterior malleolus fractures was found to be an independent driver EQ-5D VAS as well, in which patients with a Haraguchi type 3 fracture (i.e. posterior shell) reported by far the best outcome scores. This means that the outcome was determined by both implant and fracture morphology. Although we did not observe an association between postoperative step-off of the posterior malleolus and impaired functional outcome, the literature seems quite clear about this, a posterior step-off leads to osteoarthritis in the long term and should therefore preferably be reduced and fixated. Haraguchi type 3 and Bartonicek type 1 posterior malleolus fractures are not considered as a posterior step-off and except for fixation of the posterior tibiofibular ligament there seems no need to address these shell fractures. Although indirect reduction (ligamentotaxis) often gives insufficient reduction, an anterior-to-posterior screw is less invasive, while a posterolateral or posteromedial approach that allows the surgeon to directly reduce the fracture, seems to lead to increased fibro-adhesions, joint restriction and nerve injury, and subsequently adverse outcome scores. Provided that the fracture comminution allows this, posterior screw osteosynthesis may ultimately lead to better results. Nonetheless, Erdem et al. reported a small prospective cohort study with no significant difference in AOFAS scores and range of motion between patients treated with screw and plate osteosynthesis both via a posterolateral approach This study has some limitations. No routine postoperative CT scans were performed, which prevented us to make an accurate statement about the quality of reduction other than whether or not a step-off is present on the post-operative X-ray. Despite an equal radiological follow-up time of approximately 10 months, the follow-up of the prospective cohort was half of the retrospective patient cohort, which could have influenced our results; it does not allow us to make statements about osteoarthritis in relation to a posterior step-off. Furthermore, the heterogeneity of the study groups makes it difficult to define unambiguous guidelines for the treatment of these fractures. In conclusion, there is no indication for routine plate osteosynthesis of all posterior malleolus fractures, since plate osteosynthesis of the posterior malleolus was found to be associated with adverse effects. Careful patient selection and surgery by a skilled surgeon should improve the outcome. Moreover, a modified rehabilitation program could prevent unnecessary fibro-adhesions and joint restriction. Nevertheless, a randomized clinical trial should determine whom and how to fixate the posterior malleolus. None. Supplementary material associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 