Anecic earthworms (those that build semipermanent vertical burrows) are known to alter the biological activity and physical structure of soils through their burrowing and casting. Information on how earthworms change the physical structure of soil may provide clues about the mechanisms by which earthworms affect microbial processes such as nutrient mineralization. We evaluated the pore structure of bulk soil and of the soil in burrows and casts formed by an anecic species of earthworm (Lumbricus terrestris) in a fallow field. Differences in pore structure (specific pore volume, V
                     sp, and median pore neck dia., D) were assessed using mercury intrusion porosimetry. We also examined the relationship of these physical properties with mass water content at field capacity (θ
                     m), rate of C mineralization (C
                     min) and specific C mineralization rate (C
                     sp=C
                     min/C content of soil). Mean values of V
                     sp (±SD) for bulk, cast and burrows were 242±35, 213±13, and 197±4μl g−1, respectively. Values for D were (±SD) 10.8±2.5, 7.9±3.3, and 5.5±2.9μm for bulk, burrow, and cast soil, respectively. A smaller proportion of the pore volume in cast and burrow soil was associated with pore diameters in the 3–30 and 30–100μm range than in bulk soil. θ
                     m was higher in burrow and cast soil than in bulk soil and was inversely proportional to V
                     sp and D. C
                     min and C
                     sp followed the order: burrow >cast>bulk soil. Both C
                     min and C
                     sp decreased inversely with V
                     sp. By contrast, no consistent relationship was observed between either measure of C mineralization and D. Our results suggest that the changes in soil pore structure produced by anecic earthworms cause a shift towards smaller pore volume and smaller pore neck diameters. These changes in turn affect physical (e.g. water retention) and microbial (e.g. C mineralization) processes in soil.The pore structure of soil is a basic constraint on soil ecosystems because it controls nutrient and water fluxes, water availability, gas diffusion, and habitat for soil organisms. Pore structure is a dynamic soil property that can be altered by tillage and traffic, root growth, and burrowing of soil animals. The resulting alterations in habitable pore space affect the soil ecosystem because habitable pore space controls the structure, function, and interaction of microbial and microfaunal communities in soil ( Earthworms affect the pore structure of soil through burrowing and casting ( Our aim was to quantify changes in the distribution of pore sizes and pore volume caused by anecic earthworms under field conditions. This would complement previous, qualitative data on soil pore structure (e.g. Soil samples were collected in May 1998 from a fallow corn field at the Peckham Farm Research Area of the University of Rhode Island in Kingston, RI, USA. The field was last planted to corn in 1995 and not cultivated since then. The soil is an Enfield silt loam (coarse-silty over sandy or sandy-skeletal mesic Typic Dystrudept) ( Mercury intrusion porosimetry measures pore size distribution in porous solids. It has been applied successfully to soils ( Intrusion occurs through constrictions of hydraulic diameter, The pore neck diameter is given by Pore size distribution with mercury porosimetry gives pore volume accessible through constrictions of diameter The model yields two types of information from the pore size distribution obtained with mercury porosimetry: (1) the diameter ( Soil samples were prepared for porosimetry by drying in an evacuated desiccator overnight at room temperature. A known mass (about 0.8 To analyze which pore size intervals contributed to the differences between bulk, burrow and cast porosities, we compared the intrusion volumes for pore neck diameters in the intervals from <0.3, 0.3–3, 3–30, and 30–100 For one replicate set of soil samples we measured bulk density using mercury pycnometry. The volume of the penetrometer was derived from the weight of mercury that filled the penetrometer at 3 Soil water content ( Carbon mineralization rates were determined by gas chromatographic analysis following static incubation of samples. Immediately after collection a sample of soil (2 Total C and N content of soil was determined using an automated nitrogen/carbon analyzer (model NA 1500/Series 2, Carlo Erba). Statistical comparisons of the properties of burrow and cast soil with bulk soil were made using Student's two-tailed test. Differences in intrusion volume for different pore size ranges among burrow, cast and bulk soil were assessed using a one-way analysis of variance. Multiple comparisons were made using the Student–Newmann–Keuls method. Bulk soil was the most porous and burrow soil the least porous, as indicated by mean values of specific pore volume, The reduction in Intrusion pore volume was greater for the bulk than for the cast and burrow soil in the 3–30 and 30–100 Carbon mineralization was evaluated in two ways: (1) as the amount of CO Soil pore structure is thought to be an important control on the activities and interactions of the microflora and microfauna (e.g. Our results show that burrow soil and casts generated by anecic earthworms are markedly different from bulk soil in terms of C mineralization, water content, and pore size distribution. Others (e.g. Values for The partitioning of pore volume towards smaller pore necks resulting from earthworm activities is a factor in the greater moisture values we observed for burrow soil. When burrow and bulk soil are at a similar water content, the burrow soil has a lower matric potential than the bulk soil. Under these conditions water moves from the bulk soil into the drilosphere. When the matric potentials are the same (hydrologically equilibrated condition), more water is held in the drilosphere because a greater portion of pore space is associated with smaller pore necks in the drilosphere. A directional bias of unsaturated water flow from bulk to burrow soil has been observed by others. For example, The linear relationship between measures of carbon mineralization ( Our results are consistent with the enclosure hypothesis proposed by The high degree of statistical significance observed for differences in variables among bulk, burrow, and cast soil—as well as for relationships among physical and biological properties—underscores the strength of the effects that anecic earthworms have on soil micropore structure and C mineralization. The mechanisms involved in exerting these effects may include greater numbers of bacteria in water-filled pores, higher concentrations of C and energy sources and nutrients, or stimulation of bacterial activity through grazing by microbivorous soil fauna, all of which could be enhanced by water retention in pores with smaller necks. Our results indicate that anecic earthworms cause measurable, statistically significant changes in the pore structure of soil through burrowing and casting. Under field conditions these changes occur at a scale (100 Support for this study was provided by the U.S. Department of Agriculture National Research Initiative Competitive Grants Program, by the Rhode Island Agricultural Experiment Station, and by the author's personal funds. We thank an anonymous reviewer for helpful suggestions to improve the manuscript.