Utilizing the sol–gel method, Al-Ti codoped ZnO (ATZO) thin films were deposited on glass substrates. The effects of annealing at different temperatures (500, 550 and 600°C) and post annealing in reducing atmosphere on the structure, optical and electrical properties of the ATZO thin film were studied. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM) methods were used to investigate the structure, morphology and surface roughness of the thin films. The optical properties were investigated by UV–vis spectrophotometer. The XRD results show that increase in annealing temperature from 500 to 600°C lead to increase in grain size from 19 to 31nm. The obtained results of the XRD analysis were confirmed by the FE-SEM morphological characterization. The AFM measurements exhibit that the RMS roughness varies between 6.9–10.3nm. It was concluded that the increase in the annealing temperature of the thin films up to 550°C lead to improvement in the transparency and reduction of the resistivity. It was revealed that post annealing in a reducing atmosphere of 95% N2–5% H2 caused a significant reduction of the resistivity along with an increase in transmittance.Due to their tunable optical and electrical properties, ZnO-based compounds have been extensively studied. As an attractive category of transparent conductor or semiconductor materials, they have been used in many applications, such as thin film transistors (TFT), solar cells, light emitting diodes (LED) and flat panel displays Utilizing the sol–gel method, ATZO thin films were deposited on the glass substrates via dip-coating technique. Before the deposition, the substrates were carefully pre-cleaned by detergent solution, then were successively cleaned with acetone, ethanol and de-ionized water. High purity materials all from Merck company, including zinc acetate dehydrate (Zn (CH In order to investigate the crystal structure of the thin films, X-ray diffraction analysis was performed using a PHILIPS PW3040 diffractometer with Cu Kα radiation (λ  Using the Scherrer formula, it is possible to estimate the grain size of the thin films: The well-known Bragg’s law can be used to calculate the lattice parameters of the wurtzite crystal structure: The surface morphology of the samples was characterized utilizing the FE-SEM.  The elemental examination of the ATZO thin film was carried out using the quantitative analysis of energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX).  The room temperature transmittance spectra, as a function of wavelength for the A500, A550, A600 and A550-H thin films is presented in The results of the resistivity measurement for the A500, A550, A600 and A550-H thin films are presented in The Al-Ti codoped ZnO thin films were deposited on the glass substrates, utilizing the sol–gel method. The effects of the annealing at different temperatures (500, 550 and 600