The elbow is a complex hinge joint relying on bony and soft tissue restraints for stability. The primary soft tissue stabilizers are the medial and lateral collateral ligament complexes. Injury to these structures may occur because of an elbow dislocation or due to a severe varus or valgus force. Most injuries are treated conservatively, but when associated with more severe soft tissue and bony injuries around the elbow, surgical repair or reconstruction may be required. Repair should be anatomical and should restore stability to the elbow so that early active range of motion can be initiated. Reconstruction may be required in severe cases and where primary repair is not possible. Knowledge of the normal anatomy and understanding the pathoanatomy is crucial to achieving a good result. Depending on the degree of instability, either one or both of the collateral ligament complexes may need to be repaired or reconstructed. When reconstruction is required, usually only the lateral ulnar collateral and the anterior band of the medial collateral ligament need to be reconstructed, but when severely unstable, the posterolateral capsule and the posterior band of the medial collateral ligament may also require reconstruction. This may be accomplished by 2 separate grafts or as a single circumferential graft. Arthroscopy is a valuable tool to assess the stability as well as to identify and treat associated injuries. This article describes the normal and pathoanatomy of the unstable elbow and outlines the surgical techniques for repair and reconstruction of the collateral ligaments.The elbow joint is a complex synovial hinge joint consisting of 3 articulations: the ulnotrochlear (hinge joint), radiocapitellar, and proximal radioulnar joints (gliding joints). The structures that provide stability to the elbow joint may be classified as primary, secondary, and dynamic stabilizers. The primary stabilizers include the ulnotrochlear articulation, medial collateral ligament (MCL) complex, and the lateral collateral ligament (LCL) complex. The anconeus and deep head of the brachialis form a dynamic lateral stabilizing ring that maintains dynamic stability between the lateral humerus and the proximal ulna, thereby also stabilizing the radial head. The brachialis muscle has 2 heads, a superficial head from the shaft and a deep head from the distal lateral humerus. The LCL complex originates from the lateral epicondyle at the isometric point of the elbow and consists of 4 components: the LUCL, the lateral radial collateral ligament, the accessory LCL, and the annular ligament. The LUCL is a thickening of the capsule and is the primary restraint against ulna supination and inserts on the tubercle of the supinator crest of the ulna. The lateral radial collateral ligament blends with the annular ligament, which encircles the neck of the radius. It functions as a varus restraint and stabilizes the annular ligament. The MCL complex consists of 3 bands: the anterior band, the posterior band, and the transverse band. The anterior and posterior bands originate from the anteroinferior aspect of the medial epicondyle. The anterior band is the most important valgus restraint and inserts on the sublime tubercle on the medial side of the coronoid process. The posterior band of the MCL is the primary restraint against pronation of the ulna on the humerus. The coronoid process is the single most important stabilizer of the elbow as it provides an anterior buttress to resist posterior dislocation. It is the insertion point of the middle third of the anterior capsule, the anterior band of the MCL (sublime tubercle), and the deep head of the brachialis muscle.       This is rare and is typically seen in association with olecranon fractures. In this condition, there is severe multidirectional instability of the elbow. It usually follows severe trauma and is associated with rupture of both collateral ligament complexes, fractures, and circumferential capsular stripping of the elbow. Assessment includes history, examination, radiography, fluoroscopy, and arthroscopy. The first step in assessment is acquiring a good history and examination. The examination should start with inspection. Bruising and swelling on the medial or lateral side of the elbow suggest injury to the underlying soft tissue and bony structures. Tenderness on palpation further suggests injury. A neurovascular examination should be performed. Simple elbow dislocations without associated fractures are managed with closed reduction. After reduction, the elbow is taken through a range of motion to assess stability. If the elbow is unstable, the point of instability should be assessed by noting the degree of flexion when the elbow redislocates. Crepitus during joint motion suggests a fracture or an osteochondral fragment trapped in the joint. Radiographs should be obtained to assess the congruency of the joint and to identify any associated fractures. On a true lateral radiograph, lateral ligament instability may be identified by subtle opening of the trochlea-trochlea notch interval, which is referred to as the “tilt sign.” Fluoroscopy is a valuable tool to assess instability. It provides real-time imaging and allows the surgeon to observe medial or lateral joint space widening while a varus or valgus force is applied to the elbow. Arthroscopic evaluation can be used to evaluate joint space opening of the ulnohumeral joint during rotational, varus, and valgus stresses to the elbow. The coronoid-trochlea articulation is viewed from the proximal anterolateral portal. Widening of the joint by more than 1 Rotatory instability is best assessed from the posterior compartment. In the normal elbow, the olecranon-trochlea articulation would open and admit the probe medially and laterally. With PLRI, the arthroscope can be introduced between the trochlea and trochlea notch. The bare area of the olecranon can often be seen, as can the radial head and a rent in the lateral capsule. We use arthroscopy to classify patients with PLRI into 3 groups. Those with isolated PLRI are managed with a lateral reconstruction. Those with associated medial joint space opening are managed with a circumferential graft to reconstruct the MCL and LCL complexes. If the elbow is stable through the full range of motion, a broad arm sling is provided for comfort and the patient is encouraged to mobilize the elbow. If the elbow subluxes or dislocates in extension, the stability should be assessed with the forearm in pronation. If this restores stability, a hinged brace is applied with an extension block and the forearm being maintained in full pronation. The indications for surgery include failure to obtain and maintain a congruent reduction, persistent instability of the elbow joint requiring immobilization beyond 30°-45° of flexion, and suspected entrapment of intra-articular fragments or the median nerve in the joint. The primary goal of surgical treatment is to achieve stability to allow early range of motion. Overall, surgery is seldom necessary in the management of a simple posterior dislocation. Osborne and Cotterill The Mayo Clinic has proposed that in an elbow dislocation, the sequence of soft tissue disruption occurs in 3 stages. The LCL complex most commonly fails by avulsing as a sheet along with the capsule and common extensor origin from the lateral epicondyle. These patients may present with recurrent elbow dislocations with each subsequent dislocation requiring less force; however, recurrent painful clicking, snapping, clunking, or locking of the elbow are the most common symptoms, and these usually occur in the extension half of the arc of motion with the forearm in supination. The patient is placed in the lateral decubitus position with the arm over a bolster. A global approach with a midline posterior skin incision is preferred because it allows access to medial and lateral structures. In the acute setting, a repair is performed. Our preferred technique is an anatomical repair using grasping sutures and tensionable suture anchors. Tensioning of the ligaments can be performed in a controlled manner. Sequential tensioning of the MCL and LCL may be performed. They allow cycling of the elbow and on-table clinical assessment of stability and balance before final tensioning. They allow locking of the repair at the desired tension. First, grasping sutures (eg, Bunnell or Krackow) are placed in the avulsed LCL complex. The suture ends are then loaded into the eyelet of the tensionable anchor. The anchor is then placed into the lateral epicondyle at the site of repair. At this point, the sutures remain unlocked and untensioned in the anchor. If the MCL is to be repaired as well, then grasping sutures are placed in the MCL, loaded into the anchor, and the anchor is deployed into the medial epicondyle before any tensioning is performed. We term this “prefabrication”, where all anchors and sutures are initially placed, before final tensioning. The anchors should not be inserted until all other work is done. If both the MCL and LCL are being repaired, the authors recommend tensioning each side alternatively. The MCL is tensioned first with the elbow in flexion and the forearm in supination. The LCL is then tensioned with the forearm in pronation. The surgeon should perform repeated reassessments of elbow stability and range during tensioning. It is important not to overtension 1 side as this may lead to an inability to reduce the opposite side. Ligament reconstruction is indicated for the patient who does not have adequate ligamentous tissue for a repair. This is usually a patient with chronic recurrent instability. The reconstruction should be isometric, extracapsular, and anatomical, using an autogenous graft. The authors prefer to use a hamstring graft, which gives the required length (15-20 Two 4.5-mm drill holes are made from the insertion point of the LUCL on the supinator crest through the ulna to exit on the medial side. We place them just proximal and just distal to the ulnar insertion of the LUCL. The drill holes are extra-articular, just distal to the capsular attachment. The exit sites of the drill holes are identified on the medial side of the ulna. Two 4.5-mm drill holes are then made in the humerus. The starting point is the isometric point of the elbow at the lateral epicondyle, which is the origin of the LCL complex. The drill holes are directed from anterior to posterior, with the first drill hole exiting posterosuperiorly and the second exiting posteroinferiorly. There are thus 3 drill holes in the humerus, 1 anteriorly and 2 posteriorly. The anterior drill hole should be enlarged, as it would have to accommodate the passage of the tendon graft twice. One should ensure that there is an adequate bone bridge between the 2 exiting drill holes. Grasping sutures are then placed in both ends of the tendon graft. The graft is passed through the drill holes in the lateral epicondyle so that the ends of the graft enter and exit through the same hole forming a loop around the posterior aspect of the humerus. A loop of wire is then passed through each of the drill holes in the ulna from medial to lateral to retrieve the suture ends of the graft. The wire loop is more robust than a suture loop and makes the task of retrieving the sutures easier. The suture ends are then retrieved, and the 2 ends of the graft pulled through the drill holes in the ulna from lateral to medial ( The graft is tensioned while the elbow is cycled through a range of motion and the stability is assessed. The tension in the graft should be uniform throughout the range of motion if it is isometric. The graft is secured into the drill holes with interference fit screws. Screws are inserted into the proximal drill holes first, and final tensioning of the reconstruction is performed before the screws are inserted into the ulna drill holes. Any remnants of the original ligament should also be repaired. Patients are placed in a sling for 2 weeks and gentle active mobilization is performed under the guidance of a physiotherapist. No sport is allowed for 4 months. With a significant acute valgus force applied to the elbow, the MCL complex may be injured. Like the LCL, the MCL most commonly avulses from the humeral origin. Acute traumatic ruptures may occur following a severe valgus stress. The MCL complex avulses from the medial epicondyle with or without rupture of the flexor-pronator muscle mass. Management depends on the level of instability. If the flexor-pronator muscles are ruptured, there is usually gross instability with a palpable defect. In this situation, with no muscle support for the torn ligament, operative management is indicated. Acute ruptures may also occur in throwing athletes such as originally described in javelin throwers. There is often an associated pop, pain, and swelling over the medial aspect of the elbow. There are 2 types of chronic MCL injuries: Persistent MCL instability following an injury. Repetitive strain injury such as occurs in a throwing athlete. This primarily involves the anterior bundle of the MCL. Valgus stress testing and MRI usually confirms the injury. In the throwing athlete, initial conservative management with anti-inflammatories, corticosteroid injections, modification of throwing action, and rehabilitation exercises can be effective. Valgus stress testing should be performed with the elbow in supination and in 25° of flexion to unlock the olecranon from the olecranon fossa. The “Moving valgus stress test” is the most sensitive and specific test. In the management of acute elbow injuries, repair of the MCL is a controversial area. In principle, repair of the unstable MCL restores stability and allows early rehabilitation. Patients are placed in a lateral decubitus position with the arm over a bolster and a tourniquet applied to the upper arm. The posterior global approach is used. Reconstruction is indicated for severe cases that fail to respond to conservative treatment, and may also be required for delayed presentation of acute traumatic ruptures, or in chronic dislocations where it is not possible to perform a primary repair. It has been shown that in severe cases and in high-level athletes, MCL reconstruction using a free tendon graft yields better results over direct repair of the tendon. The authors use a hamstring tendon autograft for the reconstruction. Two 3.5-mm drill holes are created in the ulna, which would reconstruct the anterior and posterior bundles of the MCL. One drill hole is made adjacent to the sublime tubercle and another at the medial margin of the greater sigmoid notch. The medial epicondyle is drilled in a ‘‘V’’ fashion. The base of the ‘‘V’’ is at the origin of the MCL on the anteroinferior aspect of the medial epicondyle and the limbs diverge proximally in a posterior and posterosuperior direction. The hamstring graft is then passed through the drill holes in the medial epicondyle and the 2 limbs of the graft are then passed through the drill holes in the ulna ( Any part of the native MCL remaining is sutured and incorporated into the bone tunnel to reinforce stability. The graft is tensioned with the elbow in varus and supination. Interference fit screws are used to secure the graft in the ulna and the medial epicondyle. The ulnar nerve should be identified and protected throughout the entire procedure. If it is unstable it is transposed. Global instability is when there is both medial and lateral instability. For these patients, the authors have developed a circumferential graft technique that addresses both the medial and lateral instability with a single tendon graft. The circumferential graft may be performed as a single-loop technique to provide a reconstruction of the anterior band of the MCL and the LUCL, or in more severe instability cases, it may be performed as a double-loop technique, which reconstructs all 4 ligamentous units (LUCL, posterolateral capsule, and anterior and posterior bands of the MCL). A humeral 4.5-mm drill is passed through the isometric points that make up the axis of rotation (ie, between the lateral epicondyle and the anteroinferior aspect of the medial epicondyle). An ulna 4.5-mm drill is passed from the sublime tubercle on the medial side to the supinator crest on the lateral side. A hamstring tendon graft is passed through the humeral drill hole and secured with an interference fit screw at each end. Both ends of the tendon are passed through the ulna hole and secured with inference fit screws. The flexor-pronator mass is repaired back to the medial epicondyle, and the Kocher interval is closed ( This is similar to the single-loop technique but also reconstructs the posterior band of the MCL and the posterolateral capsule. This is accomplished by placing a second ulna drill hole from the supinator crest laterally to the posteromedial olecranon facet at the attachment of the posterior band of the MCL. A hamstring graft is passed through the humeral drill hole. The free ends of the graft exiting the humerus are then split longitudinally to create 2 free tails of equal size. One tail from each side is passed through each of the 2 drill holes in the ulna. The graft is tensioned and secured with interference fit screws in the humerus and then the ulna. It is important to make sure that the elbow is fully reduced throughout this procedure and, especially, before the graft is secured ( The coronoid process is the most important anterior stabilizer of the elbow. It acts as a buttress against anterior translation and resists rotatory translation of the trochlea during range of motion of the elbow. The indications for fixation of coronoid process fractures are an acute dislocation with a type II (up to 50%) or type III (>50%) fracture, The authors position the patient supine with the arm across the chest and over a bolster. This allows access to the posterior aspect of the elbow, and when access to the anterior elbow is required, the arm is taken off the bolster and placed onto an arm table ( Many techniques for fixation of coronoid process fractures have been described. However, we believe that the anterior buttress plate is the best option. We perform an anterior approach just medial to the biceps tendon and splitting the brachialis muscle to expose the coronoid process. A K-wire is used to provisionally fix the fragment and then a 2.0-mm variable angle locking T-plate is slid over the wire. The variable angled screws can be angled away from the articular surface ( In the setting of chronic dislocations and secondary surgery, the coronoid fracture may not be repairable owing to comminution, malunion, and bone loss. The authors have described a technique using an osteochondral rib graft Other authors have reported the use of external fixation for elbow instability. We now only have 3 indications for this: Acute injuries with bone or soft tissue loss, for example, open dislocation with loss of lateral condyle. Complex osseo-ligamentous reconstructions where a neutralization device is required until osseous and soft tissue healing has occurred. Interposition arthroplasty when we use the anterior capsule as an interposition graft that is sutured to the distal humerus. A reconstruction using a circumferential hamstring tendon graft is performed, and then a dynamic external fixator is applied as a neutralization device. Elbow stability is maintained by a complex arrangement of bony and soft tissue restraints, and because the surgeon may be faced with numerous complex instability patterns. The key to a good result is knowledge of the normal anatomy and recognizing the pathoanatomy of the injury. The principles of surgery are to restore the normal bony anatomy and to repair or reconstruct the collateral ligament complexes to provide adequate stability to begin early active range of motion.