The polymer-bridging flocculation processes that take place in hydrometallurgical thickening are very much affected by the solid concentration at the point of flocculant dosing, with the optimum concentrations maximising settling flux often well below that of the thickener feed. This is a consequence of the open, low density aggregate structures formed by flocculation. Achieving adequate solids dilution in full-scale applications can be problematic, and a flocculant that can produce a denser aggregate and thereby reduce the extent of solids dilution required may offer practical advantages. There is evidence that Rheomax® DR 1050 (BASF) has such potential, although detailed quantification of this has not been previously published.
                  The kinetics of flocculation of fine calcite slurries in turbulent pipe flow by Rheomax DR 1050 was contrasted against a conventional acrylamide/acrylate copolymer over a range of solid concentrations and dosages. Focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) was used to provide in-line monitoring of aggregate size as a function of reaction time, with batch sampling also producing corresponding settling rates. These reaction profiles confirmed distinct responses to solid concentration for the two flocculants; the conventional flocculant was superior in the range 20–40kgm−3, while the optimum for Rheomax DR 1050 was near 60kgm−3. Fitting of a population balance model to this kinetic data indicated that this behaviour primarily reflected a higher fractal dimension from flocculation with Rheomax DR 1050. The experimental results and model predictions are used to explore the practical scenarios under which Rheomax DR 1050 would be expected to perform best, showing that even at high solids, the benefit may only be realised in applications requiring higher dosages and mass throughputs. The practical limitations of the experimental approach used here to measure flocculation kinetics are also discussed.Hydrometallurgical processing of minerals invariably involves at least one stage of solid–liquid separation, with gravity thickeners typically employed to treat high volumetric throughputs of dilute suspensions. When particle sizes are small (e.g. < While surface charge alteration by polyelectrolyte adsorption (coagulation) is used to give aggregation of sub-micron solids in many water treatment applications, in hydrometallurgy the dominant flocculation mechanism is polymer bridging between particles by long chain synthetic polymers. Polymer bridging should lead to stronger aggregates than those formed by coagulation, but any breakage of the former is irreversible in the absence of fresh flocculant. As a consequence, flocculation performance is highly sensitive to the applied mixing conditions; mixing is required to disperse the often viscous flocculant solution through the slurry and to promote aggregate-forming collisions, but prolonged or intense mixing will result in aggregate breakage and lower settling fluxes. Published studies of the flocculation process range from comparisons of flocculant selection effects on settling rates to detailed modelling of aggregate growth and breakage kinetics. Almost all flocculated system properties are affected by the open, low density (porous) aggregate structures formed. Initial mudline settling rates are well known to be determined by both aggregate size and density. Critically, such aggregate structures influence the effective solid volume fraction ( This can dramatically affect hindered settling rates and thereby the flocculation response to changes in solid concentration. The fractal dimension is used here as a single measure of aggregate structure, and whether this is strictly valid for real systems with broad particle or aggregate size distributions is questionable. However, it remains a convenient tool for characterising a flocculated suspension under clearly defined conditions, and can then be used with some confidence to compare different conditions or flocculant products. Given the range of commercially available products and the importance of the flocculation response to solid concentration in mineral systems, there are surprisingly few published studies that provide convincing evidence that a different response is achieved on the basis of flocculant selection. A number of factors may be at play: The control over flocculation conditions in the majority of published studies is poor, mostly in terms of the applied mixing, which is the single most important factor ( The majority of commercial products used in hydrometallurgical processing are copolymers of acrylamide and sodium acrylate of varying compositions or molecular weights, and any subtle variations in the structures produced with these products may not be seen when flocculation conditions are not well controlled, as discussed above. Direct characterization of fragile, time-dependent aggregate structures is difficult, and often fractal properties need to be inferred indirectly from other properties. Plant trials are complicated by feed variability, which can manifest in terms of particle size, mineralogy, solid concentration, flow rate and any combination of these factors. Alternative products often come at a higher cost, and their use can often only be justified when there is a clear performance driver to achieve higher densities. Polyethylene oxide (PEO) has been proposed as a flocculant for minerals, although reasons behind its success or failure were often not understood. Cationic products have been extensively studied in clay flocculation, although this is mainly for low solid clarification, with the main mineral process application being in coal tailings thickening ( The use of two flocculants in sequence (anionic and cationic) has been proposed in laboratory studies of alumina flocculation (  Laboratory and plant trials of BASF's Rheomax® DR series of flocculants ( As part of broader studies into the design and optimisation of thickener feedwells within mineral processing, work within these laboratories has established procedures to characterise flocculation performance. Central to this has been the development of a pipe reactor system for determining aggregate growth and breakage kinetics, with flocculation state monitored on-line as a function of reaction time by a focused beam reflectance measurement (FBRM) probe and initial mudline settling rates then obtained from cylinders of the flocculated products ( This PB has now been applied to the flocculation of industrial thickener feeds to generate their kinetic parameter sets. Incorporation of the PB into computational fluid dynamics (CFD) modelling of thickener feedwells provides the ability to then use the parameter sets to predict aggregate sizes, solid concentrations and flow patterns. This study represents the first attempt to characterise a feed's flocculation kinetics for two flocculants with the potential for distinctly different responses to solid concentration. The results are then interpreted in terms of their practical implications for flocculation performance. The pipe reactor consists of a series of stainless steel pipes (internal diameters up to 30 Slurry is pumped through the pipe at known flow rates (and therefore at known mean shear rates), with flocculation achieved by adding flocculant solutions at well-defined distances prior to the FBRM probe, thereby giving a reaction time that is known to a fraction of a second, as represented in Previously published results for this approach have focused on 22 Secondary flow effects developed within helical coils are well known (  Aggregate size for each reaction time is recorded instantaneously using the FBRM probe. Full chord length distributions from 1 to 1000 There is a fixed length of flexible tubing after the FBRM probe leading to waste or settling rate measurements. For the latter, slurry is collected in a 100 In a typical experiment, the required length for the small-scale pipe reactor was fixed between the feed Y-piece and the FBRM flowcell. Water was first pumped through the system to check for leaks. Slurry flow was manually measured exiting the system upon start-up, and continuously monitored throughout operation with an electronic flow meter. Once the correct slurry flow was obtained, flocculant was added at varying flow rates (i.e. dosages) and the aggregate size monitored by FBRM. When the FBRM distribution and main statistics (total counts, mean chord length and mean square-weighted chord length) indicated that a stable flocculation state had been achieved, samples would be collected for settling rate determination. Once measurements at all required flocculant dosages (and for all flocculants) were completed at one pipe length, the system was flushed with water and drained before adjustment to the next pipe length (reaction time). After measurements at eight pipe lengths, a series of runs would then be completed varying the feed solid concentration and slurry flow rates. Two substrates were used for this study: a standard calcite (calcium carbonate) product and an industrial tailings thickener feed. The calcite is commercially known as Omyacarb 2 (Omya Australia Pty Ltd.), manufactured from high purity natural limestone, with a compositional purity > The names and general descriptions of the flocculants used in this study can be seen in The flocculants Magnafloc 336 and 1011 are both based on a conventional polyacrylamide/polyacrylate backbone. Magnafloc 5250 also has a similar backbone but is a highly branched UMA product. While still having a polyacrylamide backbone, Rheomax DR 1050 contains a different functional chemistry to conventional anionic flocculants. Stock flocculant solutions (0.5% w/w, ~ Dilute (working) flocculant solutions were prepared daily from the stock, with the required mass of the stock diluted by weight with water to give the final desired concentration. This solution was mixed with an overhead stirrer for 10 The derivation of the PB model for polymer-bridging flocculation and the full parameter estimation process were described in detail by The aggregation kernel ( For polymer-bridging flocculation, With these equations, combined with knowledge of the readily measureable physical properties of slurry, the flocculation behaviour of the system can be modelled if the fitted parameters     The first step towards parameter estimation is to extract an estimate of The fitted parameters In anything other than the most academic of flocculation studies, it is generally desirable to examine a “real” substrate, i.e. when examining flocculation in a mineral processing context, the slurry would ideally be a thickener feed from an operating plant, and is essential if seeking plant-specific insights. However, this can be complicated by the variability of the feed in terms of mineralogy and particle size, as well as the potential for slurry ageing that may be reflected in flocculation performance. A complication more specific to the quantification of flocculation kinetics in turbulent pipe flow as discussed here is the breadth of the feed particle size distribution, given the reliance upon FBRM for a real-time indication of aggregate dimensions. The tailings slurry as provided had a very broad size distribution, with a significant fraction of the solids in the range from 100 to 1000 It was therefore necessary to remove the majority of the coarse fraction from the tailings through cyclone treatment, although even then, the resultant distribution for the overflow remained quite broad ( Chord length distributions measured on-line during pipe flocculation of the tailings overflow at a fixed reaction time of 4.7 Comparisons with the corresponding distributions for flocculation of the standard calcite slurry provide useful insights on a number of practical issues. It is this last point that is the key towards successful quantification of flocculation kinetics and the application of PB parameter estimation. The PB is based on the premise that increases in dosage will in most circumstances lead to an increase in aggregate size, although that will become limited as the increased effective volume fraction of the aggregates formed begins to influence the slurry viscosity; such limitations are captured within the PB. However, in the case of the tailings overflow, any increase in flocculation is still partially masked by the coarser solids within the slurry, and therefore a reliable indication of the flocculation response is not being obtained. This issue is more clearly seen in  While useful kinetic information can still be obtained for the flocculation of the tailings overflow slurry, the complications outlined above make the application of the PB problematic, and it is likely that more advanced customisation of the model may be required to make this practical. It was therefore decided to focus on the standard calcite slurry for the more detailed comparison of different flocculant products. The key aspect of quantifying flocculation kinetics as a precursor to PB parameter estimation is to examine a wide range of solid concentrations. Each substrate–flocculant system will have optimal solid concentrations based on  Increasing the solid concentration to 60   The advantage of using Rheomax DR 1050 is evident at the higher solid concentrations. While the performance of Magnafloc 336 clearly deteriorated on moving from 40 to 60 Examination of the effect of mean shear rate at 60 The parameter estimation process was applied to the data shown above for flocculation with Magnafloc 336 ( The parameters shown here for the conventional flocculant, Magnafloc 336, are slightly different from those quoted in The most significant difference observed between the parameter sets for the two flocculants was a higher  While a difference in The above discussion focuses very much on a direct comparison of flocculant performance in regard to their response to different conditions, but actual flocculant selection needs to be put into a proper practical context. That Rheomax DR 1050 This is illustrated in  The impact of solid concentration and the need to achieve solids dilution prior to flocculation are most apparent at higher dosages and when significant settling rates are sought. In applications where applied dosages are low and aggregate sizes may not be large, the effective volume of flocculated solids may not be sufficient to have a major negative impact on flocculation. It would be anticipated that this could be the case for some older thickeners, where large tank diameters (and hence low rise velocities) create less demand on settling flux. Solids dilution would be a much greater priority in most modern applications, for which it is hard to imagine low settling flux conditions being applicable. CFD modelling that includes flocculation performance predictions through the incorporation of the PB model developed by The impact of using Rheomax DR 1050 is also believed to extend beyond the feedwell to settled bed properties, with the potential for higher underflow densities and/or lower compressive and shear yield stresses. This was outside the scope of this study and will be published separately. Turbulent pipe flow with FBRM monitoring of aggregate size allows the kinetics of aggregate growth and breakage to be quantified for polymer bridging flocculation processes as they take place in hydrometallurgical processing. A scaled down version of this system has been described that greatly reduces the slurry volumes required. The ability of FBRM to provide real-time indications of the aggregation state without the need for sampling or solids dilution is critical to this approach. However, the inability of FBRM to adequately differentiate between aggregates and large particles prevents direct measurement of kinetics for industrial slurries with broad particle size distributions. Given that aggregate structures and flocculation performance are predominantly determined by the fine fraction, the removal of coarse particles (e.g. > Flocculation kinetics measurements performed on slurries of a fine calcite with Rheomax DR 1050 and Magnafloc 336 confirmed that the two products gave distinct responses to variations in solid concentration. The conventional acrylamide/acrylate copolymer flocculant Magnafloc 336 was superior at lower solid concentrations, and both products gave comparable performance for low dosages at higher solid concentrations, conditions under which the effective aggregate volume fraction does not greatly impact upon the aggregate sizes attained. However, Rheomax DR 1050 consistently produced larger aggregate sizes and settling rates for higher dosages at solid concentrations ≥ This work was conducted as part of AMIRA P266F ‘Improving Thickener Technology’ project, supported by the following companies: The authors are indebted to Jean Swift and Andrew Owen, who had key roles in establishing the initial procedures for flocculation kinetics in turbulent pipe flow, and to Alex Heath, who was responsible for developing the population balance model for polymer bridging flocculation and the procedures for parameter estimation. BASF is thanked for provision of the flocculants studied and permission to publish. BHP Billiton — Cannington Mine is thanked for the provision of the tailings slurry.