The discharge end design of a ball mill plays an important role in discharging the desired particle sizes (−150 + 10 µm) and the percentage of recirculating load from the discharge end of the ball mill. In continuous wet ball mills, the composition of feed (hard ore or soft ore) to the mill varies continuously, leading to uncontrolled grinding in the mill. In view of this, a new design of the discharge mechanism has been implemented to remove the ground particles of desired particle size fraction with minimum recirculating load (+150 µm).
                  The results from the discharge end with lifters (closed and open) show that the particle size fraction obtained from the discharge end has a maximum percentage of desired particle size fraction when the mill is operating at 60% critical speed. Discharge end without lifters has an uncontrolled particle size distribution in the discharge and the percentage of desired-size particles discharged was found to be very less. Also, the percentage of the recirculating load is minimum in the case of discharge end with lifter design compared with discharge end without a lifter. Hence, a new design of lifters in the discharge end leads to the discharge of the desired particle size fraction with minimum recirculating load.In wet grinding mills, the flow of the material inside the mill is due to the existence of a gradient between the feed position and the discharge trunnion. In overflow mills, at the discharge end of the mill, the ground product is removed by overflowing in the discharge trunnion and the size of particles discharged from the mill depends on the design of the discharge trunnion. However, the discharge of desired-size particles from the mill depends on the operating parameters of the mill. Pulp lifters are used to transport slurry from the feed to the discharge end through grate holes in the mill. At the discharge end of the mill, based on the requirement, different types of lifter designs are used. Earlier, to lift the pulp, “pan pulp lifters” were used ( The main drawback of lifters is that the slurry held up inside the mill is high as lifters are always in contact with the slurry; thus, the complete flowback of slurry to the mill cannot be avoided. This increasing backflow and formation of a pool of slurry ultimately affect the grinding efficiency of the mill (    Mill speed significantly affects the behavior of a particle inside the mill when it rotates at different operating speeds. At a rotating rate of 75–80% critical speed of the mill, particle behavior is highly consistent due to particle trajectory (  In summary, different types of lifters were used to analyse the power draw, the forces acting on the lifter bar, the wear rate affecting the service life of lifters, the overall charge motion and the velocity of a single ball inside the mill ( The new laboratory ball mill with classifier set-up, shown in In the present work, in order to improve the grinding equipment’s performance, a special type of discharge end overflow trunnion was designed for fitting or removing lifters, as shown in In this system, the slurry flows through the inlet feed trunnion due to the gradient between the inlet and outlet openings of the rotating drum. The inlet feed trunnion section is steeped with a higher angular position of 15–20° to the horizontal compared to discharge end overflow trunnion. The steeped angle at the inlet restricts backward flow and maintains better settling and enhanced initial acceleration to the material flow in the pulp. As shown in  Before starting the experiment, the chemical and physical composition of the selected iron ore sample was determined, as shown in Initially, the mill discharge end is kept open by using an open-and-close mechanism at the discharge end. The mill is started by switching on the power button. The mill volume was maintained with 40% of charge throughout the experiment ( V D = the inner diameter of the mill (in meters); and d = the size of the grinding balls (in meters). The particle size measurement for the feed sample was conducted using a mechanical vibratory sieve shaker and the resultant PSD is presented in The discharge product from the mill was dried in the oven. After drying, the samples were subjected to the parallel beam laser-diffraction set-up for particle size measurement. The particle size analysis obtained from the parallel beam laser-diffraction set-up is in terms of the cumulative passing particle size fraction. Based on the particle size analysis data, the size above +150 µm was considered as a recirculating load to the mill, the particle size range in −150 µm/+10 µm was considered as desired the size particles and particle size below −10 µm was considered as fine particles. This classification was done based on the different particle size range requirement for pellet feed. Pellet making requires feed particles to contain about 60–70% of 150–10 µm, less than 30% for particles smaller than 10 µm and no particles above 150 µm ( The particle size distribution and percentage of the recirculating load obtained at the discharge were studied for different mill operating speeds, lifters and outlet-discharge mechanisms, as shown in Particle size analysis was carried out by plotting the mesh size/screen size along the x-axis and the cumulative percentage passing along the y-axis. The results of particle size analysis are shown in   Lifter design and mill speed play a very important role in the flow and discharge of particles from the mill. Lifters are mainly used to lift particles from the toe end to the shoulder position of the shell. The falling trajectory of the particles from the shoulder position to the grinding section depends on the design of the lifters and the speed of the mill ( In this case, a special type of lifters was used in the discharge section of the mill. Each lifter consists of primary, secondary and tertiary plates. The primary plate was fixed at a corner portion of the diaphragm. The profile of the primary plate is concave, which acts as a bucket when the lifter reaches the bottom portion of the mill. This kind of profile helps lift the desired particles from the bottom portion of the mill to the discharge end of the mill. Having lifters at the discharge end avoids coarse particles and balls to exit from the discharge end. The lifter blades are arranged in such a way that whenever a stream of cataracting balls and coarse particles come in contact with the lifter blades, the blades direct the balls and coarse particles back to the grinding section instead of allowing them to enter the discharge trunnion. The lifter blades are designed in such a way that the outer radius of the blade is not extended but terminated inside ( For all the experiments, the discharge end was kept open for varying speeds of the mill. The variation of the particle size distribution at the discharge for the mill operating at different speeds, with the discharge end fitted with lifters, is shown in  From  The opening and closing of the discharge end mechanism with lifters arrangement are shown in  From The particle size distribution in Case 1 has more coarse particles in the range of 90–840 µm compared to Case 2 and Case 3, wherein the particle size ranges from 75 to 290 µm when the mill operates at 50–70% critical speed ( It can be observed from A study of the laboratory ball mill performance for different mill speeds operating with and without lifters (cap open and cap close) at the discharge end has been presented in this paper. The behaviour of the ball mill with respect to the size of particles discharged and the percentage of the recirculating load to the mill was studied using this modified system. It was observed that a mill without a lifter arrangement in the diaphragm segment cannot provide a separation zone in the discharge end of the mill, which leads to uncontrolled particle size discharge from the mill; furthermore, the percentage of the desired particle sizes discharged was found to be very small. The mill with lifter arrangement in the diaphragm segment provided a separation zone in the discharge end of the mill that helped lift the desired particle sizes from the mill; however, balls and coarse size particles cannot be picked to the separation zone, leading to a relatively a higher percentage of the desired particle size distribution discharge from the mill. The following observations were made: The particle size distribution for Case 1, Case 2 and Case 3 was almost the same when the mill was operated at lower speeds (20–30% critical speed); 80% passing sizes of particles obtained at the discharge was composed of very fine particles of the range 44 to 50 µm. The discharge end without lifter arrangement led to a higher recirculating load of 34% when the mill was operated at 70% critical speed. At the same operating speed, the discharge end with lifter arrangements (Case 2 and Case 3) led to 22–25% recirculation, which is lesser compared with discharge end without a lifter. The discharge end with lifter arrangement discharged maximum percentage of the desired particle size with minimum percentage of recirculating load to the mill when the mill was operated at 60% critical speed. The experimental results suggest that with appropriate design and placement of lifter in the discharge end, the output can attain the desired particle size distribution with the minimum recirculating load to the mill, ultimately decreasing the regrinding of ore in the mill. The authors declared that there is no conflict of interest. The authors sincerely thank the reviews who went paper in depth and provided valuable comments. The present research study was carried out in collaboration between