Elastic wave velocity is a critical parameter in evaluating rock stability and integrity. Temporal changes in wave velocity during mine dynamic hazards including rockburst and gas outburst might potentially illuminate physical processes associated with stress concentration, crack propagation and fault slip behaviors. Laboratory and theoretical studies predict changes in wave velocity before rock failure; however, these dynamic hazards occur in a range of modes and little is known about precursors for those modes. Here, we show that precursory changes of wave velocity occur in laboratory tests for coal and sandstone samples under cyclic loading. We survey the ultrasonic wave velocity variation using the method of coda wave interferometry and find fluctuations of wave velocity during the cyclic loading corresponding with the stress-strain change, which may be explained by crack nucleation and propagation processes. Our data show that accumulated micro-cracks cause significant reduction of ultrasonic wave velocity and elastic moduli during the transitional phase preceding failure, which suggests that continuous wave speed monitoring might be a means to detect mine dynamic hazards precursors.Reliable estimates of strength and integrity of rock masses are crucial for underground rock excavation, especially for underground coal mining operation Here, we measure P-wave velocity together with mechanical data to illuminate the physical processes that cause rock failure. We evaluate changes in wave velocity accurately using code-wave interferometry method and observe procuracy velocity changes prior to peak stress. Our data show that velocity change is a potential method for continuous rock state monitoring and detecting mine dynamic hazards precursors. All loading experiments are performed on a servo-hydraulic press (YAW4306 from SANS). The axial pressure is measured by a load cell inside the load frame with an accuracy of The P-wave velocity measurement system contains two sub-systems, one is a PCI based arbitrary waveform generation hub (ARB-1410 card from PAC), which can generate 150 kHz ultrasonic P-wave with a high voltage of 150 V, and the other part is the receiving system. We use a four-channel acoustic emission testing unit (PCI-2 from PAC) and record the output wave with a 14-bit PCI-2 card at the sampling rate of 2 MHz and the capture time is 1500 µs (3072 points per signal). Additionally, we use two, 18-mm-diameter, P-type piezoelectric transducers (α-15 from PAC), with a central frequency of 140 kHz. Each waveform is synchronized with the mechanical data in real time. As shown in Here, we use the stretching technique developed by Snieder To shed light on the damage evolution processes during cyclic loading, we record transmitted P-wave signals throughout the test. Combining the mechanical properties and acoustic data, we get a comprehensive view of the damage evolution process for the cyclic loading processes. We find that for both coal and sandstone samples, the failure events can be divided into three unique phases ( In the compaction phase (I), the deformation is mostly elastic with few new crack formations, the stress enables the pre-existing cracks to close, which causes the sample volume to shrink, and thus, causes the P-wave velocity to increase, about 9% for coal and 6% for sandstone samples compared with the initial value (before compression). In the crack initiation phase (II), fractures begin to generate, and the deformation is almost plastic. At around 30% of peak stress, the wave velocity reaches its maximum value Our data demonstrate that the state of damage and stress can be monitored using P-wave velocity changes during the whole loading cycle. Notably, we find wave velocity fluctuation and slow reduction during the crack initiation phase (II) and abrupt drop of wave velocity prior to the peak stress (phase III). Our work shows that underground rock dynamic hazards are often preceded by plastic deformation and fracture interaction, which induces wave velocity change and can be accurately monitored using our methods. This study was supported by the