To increase the volume of energy wood and pulpwood harvested from early thinnings, their procurement costs will have to be significantly reduced. This can be done through the integration of pulpwood and energy wood procurement applying a newly-developed supply chain based on whole-tree bundling. In 2007, the first prototype of the bundle harvester capable of incorporating compaction into the cutting phase was launched. Cost savings, especially in primary and secondary transportation, can be achieved by increasing the load sizes by replacing undelimbed whole trees with bundles. The bundles can be hauled by a standard forwarder to the roadside storage area, from where they are transported by a standard timber truck to the pulp mill. Batches of bundles are then fed into a wood flow consisting of conventional delimbed pulpwood. Separation of the bundles into pulpwood and energy wood fractions does not take place until the wood reaches the debarking drum.
                  In this feasibility study, the required productivity level of bundle harvesting (i.e., cutting and bundling) in Scots pine-dominated stands was assessed by comparing the total supply chain costs based on whole-tree bundling with those of the other pulpwood and energy wood supply chains by means of system analysis. The cost calculations indicated that whole-tree bundling enables the procurement costs to be reduced to below the current cost level of separate pulpwood and energy wood procurement in early thinnings. The greatest cost-saving potential lies in small-diameter (d
                     1.3
                     =7–10cm) first-thinning stands, which are currently unprofitable for conventional pulpwood procurement.According to the National Forest Programme, the annual need for first thinnings in Finland is 250,000 hectares In 2007, 6.1 High harvesting costs, particularly cutting costs, is the main problem when harvesting both energy wood and pulpwood from early thinnings. Small stem size, low removal per hectare, a high number of remaining trees, and dense undergrowth result in low productivity and high cutting costs (e.g., The goal of the integration of industrial roundwood and energy wood procurement is to achieve total supply chain costs that are lower than in the case of separate procurement chains. There are several options to combine their procurement. In Finland, the procurement of logging residue chips in final fellings is nowadays strongly integrated with that of roundwood. With regard to first thinnings, integrating the procurement of energy wood with pulpwood has been attempted on several occasions during the past decades. For example, in 1990s, separating whole-tree chips into pulpwood and energy wood fractions was tested with the Massahake method, and the flail delimbing method for debarking and chipping of whole trees (e.g., In the procurement of logging residue chips, bundling has proved to be competitive when operating with long forwarding and road transportation distances (e.g., In bundle harvesting, trees are felled with an accumulating harvester head. After felling, a bunch of whole trees is lifted onto the feeding table of the bundling unit ( The bundles are hauled by a standard forwarder to the roadside storage area, from where they are transported to the pulp mill by a standard timber truck ( The results of bundle harvesting experiments indicate that the machine concept is viable in terms of its basic technical constructions This study was aimed at determining the productivity level required for cost-efficient operation by means of system analysis, in which the total costs of the procurement chains based on whole-tree bundling were compared with those of the other pulpwood and energy wood supply chains. The five supply chains included in the system analysis were as follows: Separate procurement of pulpwood using the shortwood system with single-tree handling ( Separate procurement of energy wood using the whole-tree system ( Roadside chipping (chipping at roadside landing) Comminution at the plant (chipping at power plant). Integrated procurement of pulpwood and energy wood using two variations of the whole-tree system ( Whole-tree bundling Harvesting of loose whole trees (traditional whole-tree system, in which loose whole trees are separated into pulpwood and energy wood fractions in the debarking drum). The cost comparisons between the supply chains were based on spreadsheet calculations. The cutting and forwarding costs per solid cubic meter of wood were obtained by dividing the hourly machine costs per operating hour ( In the case of Separate Pulpwood procurement, the time consumption models of a single-grip harvester for thinnings (weight 14–16 tonnes) For bundle harvesting, i.e. cutting and bundling of whole trees, there were no time consumption models available (cf. For forwarding delimbed pulpwood (Separate Pulpwood), the time consumption models of a medium-sized forwarder (carrying capacity 10–12 In the case of forwarding undelimbed loose assortments (Separate Energy Wood and Integrated/Loose whole trees), the time consumption models designed for whole-tree forwarding in early thinnings were applied There were no time consumption models available for forwarding bundles in young stands either (Integrated/Whole-tree bundling). Therefore, the models designed for the forwarding of industrial roundwood in first thinnings The costs of road transportation were determined by the Truck Transportation Model of Metsäteho using the following load volumes: Separate Pulpwood: 47.0 Separate Energy Wood/Roadside chipping: 42.5 Separate Energy Wood/Comminution at plant, Integrated/Loose whole trees: 25.0 Integrated/Whole-tree bundling: 40.0 The road transportation costs used in the system analysis are presented in Eqs. The supply chain costs independent of stand characteristics are summarized in The cost calculations indicated that, with whole-tree bundling, it is possible to undercut the current costs of the Separate procurement of Pulpwood and Energy Wood in first-thinning stands ( When compared to the conventional whole-tree supply chains (Separate Energy Wood and Loose whole trees), cost savings with bundling can be achieved especially in the case of relatively long forwarding and road transportation distances ( The Integrated procurement system based on bundle harvesting was considered competitive when its total supply chain costs were lower than those of the Loose whole-tree supply chain. Based on the system analysis, the productivity in bundle harvesting must exceed 4.6 Bundle harvesting offers several advantages when compared with the other harvesting systems applied in the Nordic countries. Eliminating delimbing and excessive bucking, and applying multi-tree handling increase the productivity of cutting compared with the conventional shortwood method The whole-tree bundling concept is competitive with the standard whole-tree system only if its total supply chain costs are lower. The main weaknesses of the bundling system are the high hourly operating cost of bundle harvesting, caused by the high purchase price of the bundle harvester, as well as the increased time consumption due to the feeding phase. In cost-efficient wood procurement, the savings in the other operational costs must off-set the additional costs caused by compaction. The procurement chain based on whole-tree bundling was competitive in first-thinning stands with a breast-height diameter of the harvested trees ranging between 7 In the absence of time-study models of bundle harvesting, forwarding and truck transportation, the models designed for conventional whole-tree chain had to be modified for the bundling system. In these calculations, it was assumed that the productivity of the bundle harvester is dependent on the size of the trees to be removed. This is in accordance with the time study of Jylhä and Laitila Producing separate energy wood bundles from small-diameter trees seems to be cost-efficient only in the case of very long transportation distances. Piling energy wood bunches on the ground instead of bundling might often be a more cost-efficient option. The final allocation of the raw material into pulpwood and energy wood fractions, as well as the value relationships between the end products and raw material costs, affect the choice of supply chain (cf. In the integrated supply chains, the harvested volume was divided into pulpwood and energy wood fractions on a fifty-fifty basis. In the study of Jylhä and Laitila By increasing bundle harvesting productivity through improvements in machine design and working techniques (see Using the whole-tree bundling system it might be possible to increase large-scale energy wood procurement cost-efficiently, without placing the raw-wood supply of the forest industries at risk. The bundling system seems appropriate especially when harvesting pulpwood and energy wood from remote sites with Scots pine as the dominant species. In the present study, above-stump recovery of biomass was assumed to be complete in the whole-tree options. In practice, however, a part of crown mass and foliage shed on the ground, and in whole-tree bundling, also some top sections of the trees are lost. Recovery of biomass affects both competitiveness of the supply systems and ecological consequences