Wear test using pin-on-disc machine was used to investigate the role of multiple tempering after cryogenic treatment of D-3 tool steel. Conventional quenching (950°C) and tempering (150°C) treatments were given along with intermediate cryogenic treatment (−185°C). Specimens were subjected to wear tests on pin-on-disc machine in dry sliding condition for sliding distance of 6000m at 5.5kg load and for sliding speed of 3.0m/s. Hardness data, microstructures, wear loss and SEM analysis of worn surface throw light on the underlying metallurgical mechanism responsible in improving wear resistance property of the D-3 tool steel.Cryogenically treated materials find a lot of applications in engineering and allied industries. Cryogenic treatment may not always improve the performance of materials and its workability needs to be checked after some trials in designing the treatment cycle. Cryogenic treatment in tool steels causes the precipitation of finely dispersed carbides in martensite and also converts soft unstable austenite to martensite. Literature of past work does not adequately clarify the selection of tempering, cryogenic temperature and soaking time. There is a need to standardize the process for cryogenic treatment in particular tool steels and understand the underlying metallurgical mechanism responsible for improvement of wear. In general cryogenic treatment is still in the dormant level as far as metallurgical mechanisms are concerned.      There is an inadequate understanding about the wear resistance and metallurgical mechanism with respect to the multiple tempering. This is the main focus of the present work on D-3 tool steel. D-3 tool steel was chosen for studying the effect of multiple tempering. The chemical composition of specimen (diameter 8 The material chosen in this work was given various treatments and treatment cycles indicated in Hardening of D-3 steel was done in the muffle furnace [3 Tempering of D-3 steel was done in the muffle furnace [3 Cryogenic treatment was carried out in a cryobath (−185 Block diagram of cryogenic equipment is given in Microstructure analysis was carried by an image analyzer with inverted microscope [Make: Carl Zeiss, Germany, Model Axiovert 40Mat] at a magnification 500×. Carefully prepared samples were first surface leveled on endless emery belt (80/0) paper. The samples were subjected to polishing on emery paper (1/0, 2/0, 3/0 and 4/0) so as to make surface free from scratches. Final polishing was done on velvet cloth polishing machine with intermittent application of fine suspensions of alumina for D-3. Nital with composition of concentrated nitric acid (specific gravity 1.42) 2–5 For all hardness measurement, Rockwell hardness tester was used. The flat surface was prepared by polishing paper on 1/0. For D-3 steel material HRC scale was used. A minor load of 10 Pin-on-disc method was used for testing the mass loss of D-3 material in wear test. During testing, pin of D-3 steel specimen was kept stationary while the circular disc was rotated. The apparatus consisted of a SAE 52100 steel (RC 55) disc (0.98% C and 1.40% Cr by wt.) of diameter 215 The surface roughness of the counter face was maintained uniformly by polishing with 400-grit paper. The disc was polished for constant time (about 5 After wear test, the worn-out surfaces were cleaned in the ultrasonic cleaner. Ultrasonic cleaning was carried out in acetone. Due to ultrasonic cleaning, wear debris to the surface could be washed away. The samples were cleaned for 10 There is no hardness difference noticed in HT (B-I) and HCT (B-III), but there is a gradual decrease in hardness observed from single-tempered to triple-tempered samples as depicted in  It is seen that multiple tempering has deteriorated the performance as evident from hardness data of HCTT and HCTTT indicated in Wear test study conducted on D-3 steel shows a remarkable drop in the wear rates as evident from It is revealed from The wear rate indicated in HT is highest in which wear mechanism is dominated by dislodgement of delaminated sheets which results in a rough surface as is evident from In the present work based on the characterization of cryotreated materials viz. D-3 steel, the following conclusions are drawn: Cryogenically treated D-3 steel shows decreasing hardness from single stage to triple stage tempering whereas hardness of HT and HCT remains same. It was seen that wear rate was lowest in single tempered D-3 steel, that is 93% reduction in wear rate than that of HT. Subsequent tempering, i.e. double and triple tempering deteriorates wear resistance of D-3 steel. For the same hardness of HT and HCT, the wear rate is a strong function of carbide size and its distribution. Coarsening of carbides lowers wear resistance as seen in double- and triple-tempered condition. Worn surface analysis provides useful correlation in understanding wear mechanism. There is a shift in wear mechanism from delamination wear mode as seen in HT to abrasive wear mode as seen in HCTTT.