Gas permeation of polymers is one of the important factors to be considered in the selection of materials for many packaging applications, such as modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) for foods. Poly (ethylene therephthalate) (PET) is known to exhibit very low gas permeation compared with most polymers such as polystyrene, polyethylene and polypropylene. However, MAP applications require better barrier performance than that of PET. In the present work PET trays reinforced with organically modified sepiolite, fibrillar nanoclay, have been produced at industrial processes. Permeability to water vapour, oxygen and carbon dioxide has been studied in PET nanocomposites as well as their microstructure through transmission electron and scanning electronic microscopy (TEM and SEM), and their mechanical properties. Results show a better performance in barrier properties as well as an increase in tensile strength, and impact resistance when the sepiolite content is lower than 2.5%.Modified Atmosphere Packaging Poly(ethylene terephthalate) Scanning Electron Microscopy Transmission Electron Microscopy Montmorillonite Ethylene Vinyl Alcohol Copolymer γ-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxy Thermogravimetric Analysis Relative Humidity Nano-Sepiolite Permeability Coefficient European Food Safety Approval Nanotechnology has brought the opportunity of improving polymer properties for basically all technical disciplines; such as polymeric nanobiomaterials [ And this study will review the use of nanosepiolite clay as a reinforcement in PET matrix nanocomposites for their use in industrial food packaging applications. Poly (ethylene therephthalate), PET, has some characteristics that make it very useful for food packaging, such as transparency, chemical resistance, medium barrier to gases, good recyclability and mechanical properties. Therefore, it is one of the most widely used polymers for food packaging. However, packaging must be under continue development due to consumer demand in achieving higher durability while keeping product freshness characteristics. As a response to these requirements modified atmosphere packaging (MAP) has developed [ PET pellets are form Novapet S.A., and were kindly supplied by LINPAC Packaging Pravia S.A.U. (Asturias, Spain) as well as PET-EVOH-PE laminated sheet. These PET pellets are specially conceived for film packaging and sheeting applications via extrusion, being its viscosity of 0.79 dL/g. The sepiolite (Pangel S9), modified with γ-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxy (MEMO) silane (approved, by Regulation CE 975/2009, for food contact applications), was kindly supplied by TOLSA S.A. (Madrid, Spain) in the form of fine powder, and Repol S.A. (Castellón, Spain) produced the PET/nanosepiolite master by melt-blending in an extrusion pelletizing machine. Processing conditions, such as type of extrusion (mono screw or twin screw), extrusion speed (rpm and discharge pressure controlled) and melt temperature, have a huge influence in nanocomposites morphology and viscosity, and thus in nanocomposites properties. Two masters with different nanosepiolite concentrations (8.77% and 16.3%) were prepared by melt blending at Repol in an industrial polyamide low shear extruder. These masters were used to produce nanocomposite sheets in an industrial co-rotating twin screw extruder (LINPAC Packaging Pravia) at 736–1246 kg/h and 270 °C, with final nanosepiolite concentrations ranging from 1 to 3%. The extrusion speed was kept high, at 1246 kg/h, since at low values the discharge pressure highly decreases, which indicates a lower residence time is best for the nanocomposites viscosity and hence, their mechanical properties. The trays were produced in a Kiefel thermoformer. Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) was used to determine nanosepiolite percentage within the nanocomposite sheets. The analyses were performed in a Mettler Toledo 851e equipment, using a procedure in two steps: 1st step: from 50 °C to 600 °C at 20 °C/min under nitrogen atmosphere. 2nd step: from 600 °C to 900 °C at 20 °C/min under air atmosphere. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) was performed on a fractured surface after a treatment in liquid nitrogen using a Hitachi 3400 N microscope. Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) was used to analyse the nanosepiolite nanometric dispersion/defibrillation in the nanocomposite's sheets. Sample preparation was made with an ultramicrotome in liquid nitrogen. The TEM microscope used was a JEOL 200FX at 200 kV. The permeability analyses were done on sheet samples; specimens taken from the extruded sheets before going to thermoforming into trays. Water vapour transmission rate was measured with a Permatran W398, from “Modern Control, Inc” (MOCON). The tests were carried out according to the Standard ASTM Oxygen transmission rate was measured in an OXTRAN with a volumetric sensor (MOCON, Oxtran SS 2/20). Previously to the analysis the samples were upgraded, 48 h under an atmosphere with 0% RH. Oxygen transmission rate was measured at 23 °C and 0% RH following Standard ASTM Carbon dioxide transmission rate was measured in a Permatran C-200 (MOCON), with an infrared sensor. Specimens were previously upgraded under at atmosphere with 0% RH for 48 h. The transmission rate determination was done at 23 °C and 0% RH following the Standard ASTM The mechanical properties were evaluated both in the extruded sheet and on the final thermoformed tray. Tensile testing on sheet was carried out on an Instron Model 5582 (100 kN) equipped with a load cell of 5 kN according to Standard ISO 527-3 on type 5 specimens and a crosshead speed of 100 mm/min. The samples were cut in longitudinal direction from the extruded sheet. The tray chosen has been a MAP tray with the following measures: 18 cm length, 25 cm width and 25 cm depth (see Lateral compression test and stiffness were tested on a Hounsfield H1KS Benchtop equipment (  Samples from M0 to M5 were obtained from master 1, while M6 and M7 come from master 2. This was due to a limitation in the extruder dosing system for additives. The morphology of the fracture surface of PET/nanosepiolite composite is shown in The SEM examination shows differences regarding morphology and dispersion depending on the nanosepiolite master and the final concentration of the clay within the matrix. In The sample M7, with 3.02% of sepiolite, shows a higher number of micrometric aggregates, with sizes between 0.5 and 1 μm. With the aim of verifying the nanometric dispersion of the nanosepiolite within the nanocomposite TEM analysis of the samples was done. On the other hand, analyzing the same sample but after a transversal cut, it can be seen a good dispersion of nanosepiolite within the matrix, and that both nanofibers and clusters appear broken do to sample cut orientation ( Looking at The SEM and TEM results indicate that the sepiolite fibres are completely disordered and dispersed relatively homogeneous into the PET matrix. This could mean that the big silane molecules (MEMO) are doing their job, interacting between the sepiolite and the polar groups in the PET matrix. The permeability properties have been analysed for oxygen, water vapour and carbon dioxide as diffusing gases which influence food degradation, such as oxidation or microbial growth. In order to compare the permeability properties of the different sheet samples, it has been calculated the permeability coefficient (PC). PET-EVOH-PE sheet values are also shown because it is one of the most used polymers for food packaging under MAP conditions, requiring long shelf life. From the results shown in Tensile strength and elongation at break tests, carried out according to ISO 527-3, with Type 5 specimens. Tensile strength of nanocomposite sheets increases up until 28% over that of pure PET for the sample with the highest content of sepiolite. This could be attributed to high stiffness of the clay, together with a good affinity between PET and the organosepiolite [ Although elongation at break tests results showed a high degree of dispersion, it can be observed a decrease in the results when increasing the amount of sepiolite ( Tensile strength and elongation at break results suggest a good interfacial adhesion between organo- modified sepiolite and the PET matrix. When a good interface exists between the nanoparticle and its matrix it is necessary to apply a higher tensile stress to break the material; at the same time elongation at break should decrease when increasing the interfacial adhesion but it also depends on the dispersion of the nanoparticles [ Once the sheets of nanocomposite have been tested, the next step is to scale up the production to industrial machines, since the objective is to produce trays with better performance for food freshness and shelf life. These tests were done on equipment that has been specifically prepared for trays. Photos of the equipment are in Results for impact strength (illustrated in Compression tests results are done with the tray in vertical position since is, generally, the most critical force a MAP trays are going to be submitted to. Results indicate that the nanocomposite trays have more resistance to compression forces compared to the pure PET trays. Results of these tests show higher compression strength on those nanocomposites produced with lower concentration of sepiolite ( From the results, it is clear that it is possible to obtain PET nanocomposite trays with improved barrier properties in an industrial process. To obtain a PET-Nanocomposite material with the best balance in properties it is necessary to control the final percentage of sepiolite. Depending on the desired properties, a percentage between 1 and 2.5% is recommended. The permeability decreased when increasing the amount of nanosepiolite from 1% up until a point where the concentration of the nanoclay starts being too high (at 3% nanosepiolite) for a good nanocomposite processability and clay dispersion. The improvement in the permeability of PET is related to the dispersion of the nanosepiolite particles in the PET matrix, since the better the dispersion the more obstacle the gas will have to penetrate through the nanocomposite (tortuous path [ Tensile and impact properties were measured since food packaging must resist transport, manipulation at supermarkets and it needs to arrive in perfect conditions to customers, while maintaining the product freshness and shelf life. Tensile strength is 28% higher that than or neat PET for the sample with 3% of nanosepiolite, while that value is 24% for sepiolite content of 0.9%. This means that, although there is an increase with clay content, the difference is quite small (4%). The reason for not achieving a higher tensile strength with 3% of nanosepiolite could be the poor dispersion and matrix degradation observed. These same reasons would apply to the smaller elongation at break with the maximum nanoclay loading (3%). The tests done on thermoformed trays show an impact strength 9–21% higher for those containing approximately between 1 and 2% of nanosepiolite. Also, the best results for compression forces are found in those samples with 1.2% of nanosepiolite, being up until 6 times higher than that of pure PET. Besides, all nanocomposite samples are stiffer than that of pure PET, being the stiffest ones those with sepiolite content ranging between 1 and 2%.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Authors of this paper would like to thank Klöckner Pentaplast in Pravia (former LINPAC Packaging S.A.U.), Cidaut, Ainia, Grupo Repol S.A. and Tolsa S.A. for their different collaborations in this project.