Halloysite nanotubes (HNTs) showed natural nanotubular structures with similar chemical composition to kaolin. This paper reviewed the exciting applications of HNTs due to their abundantly deposit, nanoscale lumens, high length-to-diameter ratios, and relatively low surface hydroxyl group density. HNTs have been used as ideal templates for conveniently immobilizing nanoparticles, which could enable the construction of designed nano-architectures that are extremely attractive as supports for heterogeneous catalysts and for use in the fuel cells and related technologies that exploited the inherent ‘smallness’ and hollow characteristics of the nanoparticles. The recent developments in this area by exploring the various techniques with which HNTs could be functionalized with metal nanoparticles, and the diverse applications of the resulting materials overviewed in detail. The corresponding interfacial characteristics of the nanocomposites were emphasized.Halloysite (Al Studies on halloysite act as containers for drug delivery have been performed by several researchers ( After a brief introduction to the application of HNTs in medication, modeling, the interfacial relationships between halloysite and organics, and the fabrication of polymer nanocomposites, this review emphasizes the interfacial characteristics between metal nanoparticles and halloysite in addition to the application of halloysite–metal nanocomposites. Multiple nanocomposites provide an excellent platform for the integration of different functional nanocomponents into a single entity to exhibit multifunctional properties. Most studies on metal nanoparticle deposition on HNTs are predominantly focused on transition metals, such as Pt, Pd, Ru, Ag, and Au. The catalytic, magnetic, antibacterial and other applications of HNT-supported metal nanoparticles are described in the following sections. Halloysite has mostly been investigated for use in new advanced materials because of its availability, ease of functionalization, and well-defined structures. Its structures have been modified to yield specific chemical and physical properties, particularly for their use as adsorbents, photocatalysts or photocatalyst supports. In the field of environmental catalysis, HNTs-based nanocomposites offer various advantages, such as the use of catalytic amounts, simple recovery and high turnover rates, ease of set-up and work-up, mild experimental conditions, and high yields and selectivities, making them useful foundations in the establishment of environmentally friendly technologies ( Using clays with tube morphology was beneficial to the improvement of the dispersibility and photocatalytic activity of TiO The light could not penetrate the wall of the tube, and photocatalytic activity did not occur when nanoparticles were dispersed on the inner surface ( Another interesting function of the halloysite based photocatalytic materials was produced by using Fe Halloysite, which consists of SiO Adsorption technology is generally considered an effective method for reducing the concentration of dissolved dyes in a short period. Dyes can be effectively removed by an adsorption process. The pore structure of adsorbents is known to have an important effect on their adsorption capacity of reactive dyes, which is limited by the narrower pores. Thus, a higher surface area and wider pores would mean a higher adsorption capacity of the dye molecules. Compared with other minerals of the kaolinite group, HNTs exhibit the highest adsorption capacity. ZnS nanoparticles could be assembled on the surface of HNTs to produce HNTs–ZnS nanocomposites ( In addition, ZnS ( Toxic waste gas has attracted much attention in the past decades because of its high toxicity and potential adverse effects on human health ( The catalysis of hydrocarbons into value-added derivatives remains a challenge for modern chemistry and industry. Recently, an increasing interest has been directed to the catalytic potential of precious metal catalysts. Particularly on the use of carbon and CNTs as supports to make precious metal even more attractive for the catalysis of liquid-phase aromatic hydrocarbons. Unfortunately, a carbon-based catalyst only exhibits good catalytic performance with the addition of a specific organic solvent. The performance of a CNT-based catalyst is affected by the amount of tertiary butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP). The selection of carbon or CNTs is important because the structure of the carrier has a great effect on the catalytic performance of the supported precious metal. Silica and Al In addition to their low toxicity and biocompatibility, magnetic nanoparticles with properties of super paramagnetics have been intensively studied because of their potential technological applications, including for microwave absorption, bio-separation, in-vivo drug delivery, and hyperthermic treatment of cancer. Because of the potential for enhanced ability in water purification, microwave absorption and magnetic applications, many studies have been reported on the synthesis of various halloysite-based magnetic nanocomposites. MnFe Halloysite is a nontoxic and biocompatible material, which makes it a prospective candidate for medical applications and household products. The development of new anti-microbial nanocomposites based on the immobilization of nanoparticles on the surface of halloysite has received growing interest from industry and academia. Halloysite was used as a support for loading antibacterial agents (Silver, Ag) ( Metal nanoparticles have been considered promising active material candidates because of their unique and irreplaceable properties in optics and hydrogen storage. The combination of active materials and ancillary materials to form functional systems had been highly expected to promote their functionalities and applications in many fields. Since HNTs possess some excellent characteristics, such as nanotubular structures, rich mesopores and nanopores. The outer surfaces of HNTs are composed of tetrahedral SiO There are many ingenious methods described in the literature concerning depositing metal nanoparticles onto HNT substrates, each expected to achieve significant improvements in performance of new halloysite-based functional nanocomposites. The production of functional halloysite could make it rather appealing for excellent applications. In addition, some modified methods may directly lead to unique properties of the HNT substrate. Therefore, there is considerable interest in systematic studies on the interfacial relationship between HNTs and nanoparticles. Such studies play an important role in guiding research in materials synthesis, the combined interface, synergy, as well as the relationship between the formed structures and properties of halloysite-based functional nanocomposites. Various approaches are used for metal nanoparticles dispersed on the surface of halloysite. A novel HNTs–CdS nanocatalyst was synthesized using a hydrothermal method with the direct growth of CdS nanoparticles on the surface of the HNTs ( The impregnation method is used for metal colloidal solutions or precursor solutions ( HNTs have been mostly investigated for use with new advanced materials because of their availability, ease of functionalization, and well-defined structures. Their structures have been modified to result in specific chemical and physical properties. Some studies have been performed on the interfacial characteristics of halloysite and nanoparticles ( Some functionalizations benefit the HNT substrate directly. In particular, halloysite nanotubes are modified for use as adsorbents, photocatalysts or photocatalyst supports. In environmental catalysis, modified halloysite nanotubes have various advantages such as the use of catalytic amounts, simple recovery and high turnover rates, ease of set-up and work-up, mild experimental conditions, and high yields and selectivities, making them useful tools in establishing environmentally friendly technologies. However, natural HNTs exhibit a low ability to catalyze chemical reactions. In addition, they are insulators and rigid, similar to other inorganic nanotubes, without enhancing electron transfer ability. However, the structure and properties of HNTs can be modified using various activation methods to produce catalysts with high sorption abilities, electronic conductivities, and thermal stabilities ( Halloysite nanotubes serve as excellent supports for nanoparticles due to their unique geometry and properties, while the low electron transfer ability, multiple impurities, irregular morphology have long limited their applications. Herein the recent development in functionalizing HNTs with metal nanoparticles and the diverse applications of the resulting materials were overviewed. The interfacial characteristics between HNTs and nanoparticles were emphasized by combining halloysite's advantage like nature, biocompatibility, nontoxicity, which allows us to expend the application such as drug delivery system, multi-phase nanocomposite material in the near future. This work was supported by the