Bioinert ceramic, such as zirconia, provides the mechanical strength required in implants, but its limited bioactivity renders it incapable of osseointegration. Thus, its biomedical application is limited. Graphene and its derivatives possess excellent bioactivity and can enhance osseointegration, hemocompatibility and antibacterial properties. Here, we introduce an innovative technique for functionalizing bioinert ceramic by immobilizing reduced graphene oxide (rGO) onto the surface by tailored self-assembled monolayer (SAM). Three routes have been applied for immobilization: i) spontaneous reaction between OH groups of zirconia and organic functional groups of rGO, ii) spontaneous reaction between NH2 functionalized ZrO2 attained by silanization and COOH groups of rGO and iii) reaction between NH2 functionalized zirconia and activated COOH groups of rGO attained by using the catalysts EDC and NHS. The most efficient immobilization was obtained between activated COOH groups of rGO and NH2 functionalized zirconia. Thereby, for the first time rGO was successfully coupled to ZrO2 using SAM technique. Through this technique, the properties of rGO and zirconia could be merged to create a versatile biomaterial.The development of new biomaterials to fulfill ever-challenging clinical demands as well as patients’ growing needs has continued to be a prime area of research for the past few decades. Bioinert ceramic such as zirconia has been witnessed as an apt choice in these regards due to its excellent chemical, thermal and mechanical stability To improve the bioactivity, various coating strategies were applied Since its discovery, graphene has been an important research topic due to its exceptional electronic, optical and mechanical properties The SAM technique has been found to be a viable technique to functionalize bioinert ceramics Zirconia (TZ-3YS-E, Tosoh, Japan) substrates were manufactured by uniaxial pressing (p = 100 MPa) and subsequent sintering at 1450 °C. The sintered specimens were further polished with1 μm diamond paste. rGO paste was purchased from the Institute of Electronic Materials Technology (ITME) in Warsaw. At first, GO was prepared using modified hummer’s method SAM of the rGO was immobilized on non-silanized substrates by placing them in a solution containing rGO paste and deionized water (ratio 1:5) respectively ( The successful immobilization of APDS on the substrate surfaces was proven by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study (results not shown). rGO was immobilized on all substrates, proven by the SEM ( Graphene-based materials exhibit multifunctional properties, such as hemocompatibility, osseointegration and antibacterial character, which are crucial for implant characteristics We applied a specific innovative silane, APDS, to immobilize covalently rGO to the zirconia surface. The advantage of this silane in opposite to other commonly used silanes is its greater hydrolysis-stability, which is essential for The most efficient immobilization of rGO was obtained by using a cross-linking EDC/NHS reaction ( This study shows for the first time a successful immobilization of multifunctional rGO to the inert ceramic surface that could improve its biological properties. In a next step, biological agents could also be immobilized on the rGO-modified substrates via processes such as hydrophobic interaction to reinforce its biological activity. The immobilization by activation of