The leaching rate of chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) by Fe3+ in H2SO4 solutions depends on the redox potential determined by the Fe3+/Fe2+ concentration ratio, and there is a maximum leaching rate at an optimum redox potential. The present study investigated the effects of solution composition on the optimum redox potential by electrochemical measurements using a CuFeS2 electrode and electrolyte solutions containing 0.01–1 kmol m−3 of H2SO4, Fe2+, and Cu2+ at 298 K in nitrogen.
                  Anodic-polarization curves of the CuFeS2 electrode showed that there was a current peak on the curves in the presence of Cu2+ and Fe2+, corresponding to the maximum leaching rate. The redox potential of the peak increased markedly with increasing Cu2+ concentration, while it was little affected by the H2SO4 and Fe2+ concentrations. These results agree with the results of leaching experiments reported previously, and indicate that the optimum redox potential for chalcopyrite leaching is a function of the Cu2+ concentration. An empirical equation for the optimum redox potential for CuFeS2 leaching is proposed.In recent decades, heap leaching, combined with solvent-extraction/electro-winning (SX/EW) methods, has become important in copper production ( The deepest part of a typical porphyry copper deposit is a primary copper sulfide zone, where chalcopyrite (CuFeS The redox potential determined by the concentration ratio of Fe To optimize CuFeS A CuFeS Solutions containing known concentrations of H Anodic-polarization curves for the CuFeS After immersing electrodes into the electrolyte, the rest potential of the chalcopyrite electrode was measured as a function of time. When the rate of the rest potential change became less than 5 mV min Anodic-polarization curves were obtained by plotting the final current density measured in each anodic current measurement against the applied potential. For the comparison of the experimental data with theoretical calculations and the previous studies, the redox potential is shown in values against a standard hydrogen electrode (S.H.E.) in this study. Assuming the redox potential of the reference Ag/AgCl electrode is 0.199 V at 298 K, the values of redox potential against S.H.E were calculated by summing up 0.199 V to the redox potential measured against the Ag/AgCl reference electrode. The rest potential of the CuFeS As reported in a previous study ( The polarization curve in the presence of 0.1 kmol m When 0.1 kmol m To interpret the active–passive polarization curve, the authors have proposed a reaction model assuming the formation of an intermediate Cu The results shown in  As mentioned above, the H   The current at peak B with 1 kmol m As discussed in the previous sections, the redox potential of peak A,  It should be noted that the values calculated by Eq. ( On the surface of CuFeS As shown in     From both Eq. The values of the coefficients, As discussed above, there is a disagreement between Eq. Both Eq. Because the redox potential is an important factor affecting CuFeS In most of the above processes, the redox potential is proposed to be controlled at a constant value or in a set range by regulating the concentration ratio of Fe In the present study, the effect of chemical composition of solution on the optimum redox potential was investigated, and it was found that the Cu The effects of H The authors express their appreciation for support of this research by a grant from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology.