Broom (Cytisus scoparius) is considered an invasive species in countries outside its native range and a significant colonizing species in Europe. In particular this shrub rapidly invades pastures after grazing cessation in central France mid-elevation mountains. In order to better understand the effects of broom plants on vegetation composition and species richness after grazing abandonment, a study was conducted including stand descriptions and impact on light availability and soil properties. A total of 50 plots were sampled from the following categories: grazed pasture free of broom colonization, abandoned pasture in the process of being colonized by broom plants (1–3 years old), intermediate broom stand (2–4 years old), mature broom stand (4–5 years old) and dead broom stand (8–10 years old). In each plot the vegetation composition was measured; additionally, broom size and density were recorded. Light transmittance was measured beneath the broom canopy. Soil moisture, soil carbon (C), soil nitrogen (N), and nitrate production were measured in a subset of plots. Results showed that broom colonization is associated with a decline in species richness and cover, with a shift toward fast-growing species in the understory compared to uninvaded abandoned pasture. After broom decay stands were dominated by Rubus sp. plants. Concomitant to broom colonization and vegetation changes, light was severely reduced as only 11% of the incident light reached the floor in mature broom stands. In contrast soil moisture, N and C contents increased, respectively, of 37%, 52% and 61% in the upper soil layer from uncolonized pasture to mature broom stands and nitrate production was multiplied by 6.5. However changes in δ15N values were not significant. Dead broom stands were characterized by lower values of N, C, and N mineralization as compared with the other types of broom stand. Our data suggest that land abandonment and broom colonization is associated with altered vegetation composition and resource availability and that this shrub tends to occupy a mid-successional position between early successional communities such as heathlands and grasslands and late-successional woodlands.Broom ( Within its native range and especially in central France broom was considered as a minor weed and this plant has been for centuries associated with agricultural practices and used to restore soil fertility after cultivation and also as fuel wood ( It is noticeable that, unlike the dynamics of the shrub outside its native area, broom does not exhibit the same capacity to colonize very different habitats (from open grasslands to forests) and to form stable stands in Europe. Moreover broom colonization within its native range is associated with disturbances of grazing regimes, frequently occurring in moderately-grazed pastures and fallow lands (Rousseau and Loiseau, 1987). Several factors have been proposed to explain invasion and persistence of broom outside its native range: a lower abundance of specialist phytophages in exotic compared to native habitats ( greater longevity in introduced range (but see increased capacity to regenerate in introduced range ( The aim of our study was to document the effects of broom colonization after grazing abandonment in central France on vegetation composition and species richness at different stages of the process: from the grazed pasture to the different stages of the colonization by broom plants. Soil properties and light availability were quantified for these different stages as it appeared important to us to understand how above and below ground resources were modified by this invading shrub, and how those changes could affect the community that followed broom stands after decay. Previous studies have shown that colonization by shrubs or trees often led to a drastic reduction of light availability and also altered C and N pools and dynamics ( The study area is located in the Chaîne des Puys (45°38′–45°55′N and 2°47′–3°4′E), a volcanic mountain range of the French Massif Central, at a mean altitude of 1000 m. The climate in this area is mountainous with oceanic influences, mean rainfall is 1070 mm well spread thorough the year, and mean annual temperature is about 8 °C. The substratum of the studied site is composed of a granitic saprolite mixed with a small content (< The area (total 62 ha) is composed of grasslands grazed by domestic animals and mainly dominated by species of the We selected six broom patches in this area in similar site conditions and free of grazing. Each patch is composed of mature broom plants at its center (4–5 years) and of younger plants at its edge (from 1 to 4 years). We ran six transects of about 36 m long from the uncolonized grasslands to the center of the patches. For each transect, we established a 4 m On each plot all living broom plants regardless of size were counted and their diameter at stem base recorded with an electronic caliper (± All vascular species and terricolous mosses were recorded on each plot and each species was given a value of abundance-dominance according to the procedure of In broom colonized plots, photosynthetically active radiation (PAR, 400–700 nm) was measured at four locations using a linear ceptometer (Decagon Devices, Pullman, USA). Measurements were done simultaneously above and below the living broom canopy using an external sensor three times in the summer of 2003 at the same time and with a blue sky. Light transmittance for each stand was then computed from the ratio between the mean PAR values measured above and below broom cover. Volumetric soil water content of the upper layer (0–15 cm) was measured using a TDR probe (TRIME device, IMKO) in 20 plots evenly distributed in the following categories: abandoned pasture, intermediate, mature and dead broom stands at four locations per plot. Measurements were taken during 6 consecutive weeks over a dry period of May and June 2003. On a subset of the plots ( In order to assess the impact of broom cover on nitrate and ammonium production and N mineralization, soils, sieved through a 4 mm sieve, were incubated aerobically immediately after sampling in the field. For each sampled plot, two subsamples of 400 g of soil (0–15 and 15–30 cm) were placed in hermetic plastic boxes to avoid evaporation and kept at a constant temperature ( From the vegetation data, a floristic array was established after eliminating species represented by There was a large variation of vegetation composition as shown in the factorial correspondence analysis ( The second axis of the factorial correspondence analysis depicts vegetation changes due to broom colonization. It distinguishes plots of the abandoned pasture (above the horizontal) from plots located in the mature and dead broom stands (below the horizontal) while plots of other younger broom stands occupy an intermediate position. The greatest differences in the composition of the vegetation as depicted by this axis were found in the increase of ligneous species and of species with nitrophilous tendency: The change in vegetation composition is also depicted in Plant diversity indices all indicated that plant diversity was maximal in the grazed pasture due to the presence of light-demanding species tolerant to grazing. On the other hand diversity indices dramatically decreased after abandonment followed by broom colonization reaching a minimum in dead broom stands dominated by Radiation transmittance was strongly and negatively correlated with basal area ( Soil water content was significantly higher under the complete cover of mature broom stands than under the partial cover of intermediate broom stands or in the absence of broom colonization ( Bulk density of the upper layer was significantly higher for the grazed pasture than the other colonization stages ( The δ There were no significant differences in N-NH Vegetation changes recorded in this study were explained by two major disturbances: grazing abandonment and broom canopy closure. There was a first significant shift in vegetation composition due to grazing abandonment: a decrease in species diversity and an increase in nitrophilous tall herbs and grasses such as Then there was a second marked alteration in composition and abundance of the ground vegetation due to broom canopy closure concomitant with soil enrichment. Due to shrub development, most of the light-demanding species disappeared. As a consequence, species number and species cover were particularly low under mature broom stands. Only a few herbaceous species (e.g. Reduced light in the broom understory had two major effects. First, it prevented broom seedlings from successfully establishing because no seedlings were recorded beneath closed canopy. Concomitant to light reduction, soil moisture was also modified by broom colonization as it was higher beneath the broom canopy than in the grasslands. The beneficial impact of woody shelter on the soil moisture regime can be explained by the reduced evapotranspiration of the soil surface due to shade not balanced by the transpiration of broom plants. Stem flow may also concentrate water underneath shrubs or hydraulic lift may move water from deep in the soil profile to upper soil layers ( Soil properties were significantly modified by grazing abandonment before broom colonization occurred. Grazing is known to influence N mineralization and alter soil compaction by trampling ( Broom thicket-formation was associated with increased N content and increased nitrification, a common feature recorded in the case of invasion by N-fixing species ( Broom colonization also increased the C pool. The mechanisms accounting for this process can be identified in litter accumulation followed by fast decomposition in tissue chemistry and root distribution and in changes in the mass and species composition of the soil biota ( It is noteworthy that dead broom stands were characterized by lower N and C contents and stocks ( The δ Within our study area, broom stands established on abandoned pastures tend to be fairly uniform in age ( Our results along with those found by Authors are especially grateful to F. Landré, A. Marquier, B. Pollier for field measurements and soils preparation. We thank B. Zeller and S. Bienaimé for lab analysis and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.