Aluminum-silicates such as pyrophyllite, illite, kaolinite and chlorite are impurity minerals in diasporic-bauxite, it being necessary to remove these silicate minerals to improve the mass ratio of Al2O3/SiO2 of diasporic-bauxite for the Bayer process. A new quaternary ammonium salt (DTAL) has been shown to be efficient in the flotation of these silicates. Selective de-sliming was accomplished by using Na2CO3 as pH regulator and dispersant, and the slime of particle size below 0.010 mm was removed with the mass ratio of Al2O3/SiO2=1.60. X-ray diffraction analysis on the feed and the flotation products has shown that the illite is more difficult to remove from diasporic-bauxite than pyrophyllite, kaolinite and chlorite due to its inferior floatability. Closed-circuit flotation tests showed that reverse flotation de-silicating can be achieved by a new reagent scheme (DTAL, SFL and MIBC) to obtain a bauxite concentrate (A/S>10, Al2O3 recovery>86%), which can be economically processed by the Bayer technology.A commercial mono ether amine and a corn starch have been used in the reverse flotation of magnesite, to produce a magnesite concentrate with SiO Bench-scale experiments for the flotation of quartz from gibbsite/kaolinite using alkyl sulfates as collectors have been successful at pH 2. A concentrate containing 93.0% Al The diasporic-bauxite in China is characterized by a high content of Al Direct flotation has been shown to be an efficient method for the de-silicating of diasporic-bauxite ( The diasporic-bauxite ores used in the flotation tests were supplied from Zhengzhou Henan China, and crushed to 0–3 mm by a jaw crusher and double-roller. In the X-ray powder diffraction analysis, it was found that the composition of minerals in sample I were diaspore (53.4–53.8%), pyrophyllite (14.7–17.4%), illite (16.5–15.8%), chlorite (9.3–12.6%) and kaolinite (3–3.5%). The illite, kaolinite and chlorite are the main aluminum-silicate gangues in sample II, but pyrophyllite was not found in sample II by X-ray powder diffraction analysis. The mass ratio of Al Dodecylamine (DDA), cetyl trimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and a special quaternary ammonium salts (DTAL) were used as collectors for aluminum-silicate minerals. DDA and CTAB were analytical grade, and the DTAL is an industrial product. Sodium carbonate and sulfuric acid were used as pH modifiers. A new inorganic reagent (SFL) was used as depressant and dispersant. DTAL and SFL were prepared in the laboratory. The ores flotation tests were carried out in an XFD-type laboratory flotation machine (1.5 l) according to the flowsheet shown in According to the zeta potential measurement of diaspore, kaolinite, illite and pyrophyllite, the PZC of diaspore, kaolinite, illite and pyrophyllite are about 6.68, 3.65, 2.88 and 2.51 respectively ( As seen from  Using DTAL as the collector, and SFL as depressant and dispersant, reverse flotation tests on sample I have also been carried out both with non de-slime and de-slime. The closed-circuit flotation tests results are shown in From Kaolinite, pyrophyllite, illite and chlorite are the main gangue minerals in the diasporic-bauxite ores, these aluminum-silicate minerals affecting reverse flotation de-silicating, as the floatabilities of the three aluminum-silicates are different (pyrophyllite As shown in The reverse flotation products of samples I and II were subjected to analysis by X-ray powder diffraction to find the distribution of the aluminum-silicates, especially the pyrophyllite, kaolinite, illite and chlorite in the flotation products. The results from samples I and II are given in From (1) A new quaternary ammonium salt (DTAL) has higher selectivity than dodecylamine and cetyl trimethylammonium bromide in the reverse flotation de-silicating of diasporic-bauxite ores in the range of pH 6–7. (2) Slime with particle size below 0.010 mm affects the reverse flotation with cationic collector, so it is necessary to remove the slime with −0.010 mm size using Na (3) The new reagent scheme has shown better flexibility for reverse flotation de-silicating, and a bauxite concentrate (A/S (4) X-ray powder diffraction analysis has also proved that illite makes reverse flotation de-silicating from diasporic-bauxite difficult due to the poor floatability of illite, this being detrimental to improvement of the A/S for the diasporic-bauxite. The authors are grateful for the financial support provided by the “Key Basic Research Program (973) G199064901” of China.