Based on the particle simulation method, a thermo-mechanical coupling particle model is proposed for simulating thermally-induced rock damage. In this model, rock material is simulated as an assembly of particles, which are connected to each other through their bonds, in the case of simulating mechanical deformation, but connected to each other through thermal pipes in the case of simulating heat conduction. The main advantages of using this model are that: (1) microscopic parameters of this model can be directly determined from the related macroscopic ones; (2) the temperature-dependent elastic modulus and strength are considered in an explicit manner, so that thermally-induced rock damage can be realistically simulated in a thermo-mechanical coupling problem. The related simulation results from an application example have demonstrated that: (1) the proposed model can produce similar behaviors to those observed in experiments; (2) the final failure is initiated from the outer surface of the testing sample and propagates toward the borehole; (3) microscopic crack initiation and propagation processes can be reasonably simulated at the cooling stage.Understanding thermally-induced rock damage is of great importance and significance for both scientific research and engineering application. For example, in underground mining engineering, because most of the near-surface mineral deposits (<1000 A large amount of research, theoretical, experimental and numerical, has been carried out in an attempt to understand thermally-induced rock damage over the past decades Keeping the aforementioned considerations in mind, this paper is arranged as follows. In Section The particle simulation method In the thermo-mechanical coupling particle model, the normal and tangential contact forces are calculated using Eqs. In a purely mechanical system, if two circular particles in contact have the same normal and shear stiffnesses, then the values of these stiffnesses are equal to twice the macroscopic elastic modulus of the material On the other hand, the contact bond strength of a circular particle is directly proportional to both the tensile/shear strength of the particle material and the diameter of the circular particle Eqs. Stress is a continuum quantity and therefore does not exist at each point in a particle simulation model, because the medium simulated by particles is treated as a discrete one. For this reason, a measure circle of unit thickness is used to evaluate the stresses of an equivalent “point” As shown in By assuming that strain changes play a negligible role in influencing the temperature, the heat conduction equation for a continuum can be expressed as follows: Fourier’s law for a continuum defines the relationship between the heat-flux vector and the temperature gradient as follows: Note that the parameters involved in Eqs. By using the thermal-pipe and heat-reservoir assumption, a theoretical relationship between the thermal conductivity (which is a macroscopic parameter) of a measurement circle and the thermal resistance (which is a microscopic parameter) of a thermal pipe can be established as follows  In the present model, a thermal pipe is associated with a specific contact. Once the thermal microscopic properties are assigned, subsequent loading or damage (in the form of bond breakages) will modify the number of active pipes, and thereby change the ability of the material to conduct heat. For example, as a bonded material is compressed and new pipes form, the macroscopic thermal conductivity will be increased, but as bonds break and associated pipes become inactive, the macroscopic thermal conductivity will be reduced. On the other hand, the thermally-induced force will affect total force. The detailed formulations are given below. When a contact bond is present at the contact associated with a pipe, it is assumed that only the normal component of the force carried by the contact bond, Note that in the thermo-mechanical coupling system, the contact force exerted on a particle contains two parts (i.e. the mechanically-induced force and the thermally-induced force increment), which can be evaluated as follows: It needs to be pointed out that only the normal component of the force is affected by the temperature difference at two ends of the pipe associated with the contact bond. Unlike the calculation of the normal component of the temperature-dependent contact force, the tangential component of the temperature-dependent contact force is computed in an incremental fashion. For any given time instant, It is noted that two different time scales are associated with the thermal and mechanical processes For the thermo-mechanical coupling model, crack initiation and generation are determined using the following crack criteria: Obviously, Eq. Having proposed a thermo-mechanical coupling particle model for simulating thermal and mechanical coupling processes, it is applied below to the simulation of thermally-induced rock damage problems. As an application example, rock damage processes in the Lac du Bonnet granite specimen with a heater placed in the center of a borehole, which was investigated through a laboratory experiment  The generation of a particle simulation model involves the following five steps: particle generation, particle packing, isotropic stress installation, floating particle elimination and bond installation After the particle simulation model reaches a static equilibrium state, a set of particles which lie around the central borehole was identified as the heater particles (see For the Lac du Bonnet granite used in the laboratory experiment It should be noted that thermally-induced rock damage is an irreversible process. For this reason, the values of both elastic modulus and strength in the cooling state should be treated as constants, which are the same as those at the end of the steady stage. During the particle simulation, changes in both temperature and thermally-induced stress are monitored using the monitoring particles and monitoring circles (see As shown in  The particle simulation method is capable of tracking the initiation and propagation of thermally-induced microscopic cracks automatically without re-meshing or using any constitutive laws  In the particle simulation method, the contact bond is weaker in the normal direction than in the tangential direction, because the tensile strength of the particle material is greatly smaller than its corresponding shear strength. For this reason, crack initiation and generation in the normal direction is considered to explain why the cracking is observed at the cooling stage, rather than at the heating stage. As mentioned above, crack initiation and generation in the normal direction are determined using the related expression in Eq. Let us take the contact bond between particle A and its neighboring particle (i.e. particle E) as an example. If we assume that the temperature of particle E decreases also from 191.57 to 108.93 Based on the above parameters, the temperature-dependent force ( At the second step, the temperature-dependent normal strength of the contact bond between particles A and E (i.e. Eq. During the early period of the heating stage before a macroscopic fracture is formed, the maximum displacement of the particles increases with the increase of temperature, while the displacement distribution is uniform, symmetrical and oriented from the borehole to the outer boundary of the particle simulation model. Generally, the larger the distance of the particle to the heater, the greater the displacement of the particles is. During the early period of the heating stage, the maximum displacement of the particles can reach 0.015 First, we compare the current particle simulation method with the previous PFC method Next, we compare the current numerical results with the previous ones In the particle simulation method, the particles size is an external parameter. It is necessary to carry out a particle-size sensitivity analysis using at least three different models, which have the same initial geometry but different total numbers of particles, to confirm the particle simulation results of a thermo-mechanical coupling system. For this purpose, the same problem as considered above is simulated using 6424 and 9521 particles, so that the total number of particles used herein is nearly twice and three times that used in the previous simulation. It should be noted that in the particle-size sensitivity analysis, although the particle sizes are different in these three models, other mechanical and thermal parameters are exactly the same as those used in the previous particle simulation model.   To simulate thermally-induced rock damage problems, a thermal–mechanical coupled particle model based on the particle simulation method is proposed in this paper. In this model, rock material is simulated as an assembly of particles, which are connected to each other through their bonds in the case of simulating mechanical deformation, but connected to each other through thermal pipes in the case of simulating heat conduction. The main advantage of this model is that: (1) microscopic parameters of this model can be directly determined from the related macroscopic ones; (2) the temperature-dependent elastic modulus and strength are considered in an explicit manner, so that thermally-induced rock damage can be realistically simulated in the thermo-mechanical coupling problem. Through applying the proposed thermal–mechanical coupled particle model to a thermally-induced rock damage problem, the related simulation results have demonstrated that: (1) at the heating stage, both the number of microscopic cracks and the maximum displacement of the particles in the particle simulation model increase slowly until the temperature of the heater reaches a critical value, above which both of them show a remarkable increase, leading to the failure of the particle simulated specimen. Although microscopic cracks are initially distributed around the outer surface of the particle simulated specimen, they tend to propagate along the radial direction to form a star-like pattern. Consequently, the macroscopic radial-fractures are generated from the progressive failure of tension-induced microscopic cracks. (2) At the steady stage, the number of microscopic cracks is almost constant, while the distribution pattern of particle displacements is nearly unchanged in the particle simulation model. The maximum displacement of the particles increases gradually in the model. (3) At the cooling stage, most of secondary thermally-induced microscopic cracks are generated and they grow in three planes along the radial direction to form a star-like pattern in the particle simulation model, while the maximum displacement of the particles decreases gradually in the model. This work is financially supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11272359). The authors express their thanks to the anonymous referees for their valuable comments, which led to a significant improvement over an early version of the paper.