The role of pH in the green synthesis of silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) is investigated. For the reduction synthesis of AgNPs we use silver nitrate, glucose, sodium hydroxide and starch respectively to serve as precursor, reducing agent, accelerator and stabilizer. The effect of NaOH addition on the nature of AgNPs is systematically studied. Two reaction pathways are proposed to explain the formation of AgNPs, keeping in view the pH changes that occur on addition of different amounts of NaOH. The aqueous sol of AgNPs prepared at different pH values display different surface plasmon resonance (SPR) behavior. This is explained in terms of size and size distribution of AgNPs.During past few years AgNPs have attracted extensive attention due to their SPR and large effective scattering cross section. Biological applications of these materials such as in biosensors Recent work in the area of green synthesis of silver nanoparticles has demonstrated their stabilization by natural polymers like starch In this paper we synthesize AgNPs using glucose as reducing agent and starch as stabilizer. We investigate the interplay of the reducing action of glucose and the stabilization behavior of starch with respect to the pH of the reaction medium. Here amount of NaOH as accelerator will be varied systematically to understand the role of pH on the nature of AgNPs. Materials used to synthesize silver nanoparticles were AgNO The characterization of samples was done by UV–visible spectrometer (Cary Bio1000-UV–Vis Spectrophotometer), X-ray diffraction (Rigaku-DMAX-III with Cu-Kα radiation), and AFM (Multimode SPM of Vecco). We now present the results of our study. In the following we discuss the results presented above. To explain the change in pH with addition of NaOH we propose the following reaction sequence. Reactions (1) and (2) constitute one pathway while Reactions (3) and (4) are the second mechanism As is well known, the optical absorption spectra of metal nanoparticles, owing to their surface plasmon resonance, shift to longer wavelengths with increasing particle size AgNPs have been prepared by chemical reduction green route with glucose as the reducing agent and starch as the stabilizer. The synthesis of such nanoparticles has been carried at different pH conditions brought about by addition of NaOH. The pH of the resulting suspension has been found to decrease to a minimum value and then increase with subsequent addition of NaOH. Under mildly acidic conditions, occurrence of starch hydrolysis affects the size of particle and thereby UV–visible absorption spectra of AgNPs. Insufficient protection of the particle surface leads to formation of larger particles but with finer crystallite sizes. When the magnitude of starch hydrolysis is less, coalescence of nanoparticles occurs leading to a blue shift and splitting of the absorption spectra. Manjeet Singh acknowledges the financial support received as JRF from UGC. The authors thank Professors A. S. K. Sinha (Department of Chemical Engineering) and R. M. Banik (School of Biochemical Engineering) for the use of experimental facilities. The AFM image was recorded at unit of Nanoscience and Technology on BHU campus for which authors thank DST, Government of India, New Delhi.