Bone defects or bone deficits in the field of Oral and Cranio-Maxillofacial Surgery are quite common. They occur in posttraumatic situations, infectious disorders like osteomyelitis, periodontal disease, cysts, tumours, following oncological procedures, but also because of developmental disturbances, dento-alveolar, orthognathic and neurosurgical interventions, and last but not least by the aging process—osteoporosis, especially in atrophic edentulous situations. Various inventive techniques have been developed in order to repair these shortcomings of bone, to reconstruct and rehabilitate. After the first surgical book publication in Egypt around 1600 Naturally or artificially derived, biological versus chemical, every slogan has been used in the commercial advertising campaigns of biomaterials. There have been experimental in vitro and in vivo studies in all kinds of animals, and clinical studies in series and individual cases on various body-locations/sites (mainly calvaria). In biomaterials, the composition of the material, the form, surface, the macro- and the microarchitecture are important. A differentiation of materials or substances, techniques and definitions will be outlined and further developed in this commentary. Mesenchymal stemcells are pluri-potent cells that can be derived from the bone marrow stroma, or from adipocytes.   It is known that bone marrow- and periosteum-derived cells have intrinsically different responses to osteo-inductive agents.   Growth factors are proteins. Two groups can be differentiated. Group 1—examples used in cranio-maxillofacial research—are the so-called tyrosine-kinases: a platelet derived growth factor (PDGF), and the fibroblast growth factors (FGFs), subdivided into acidic (FGF   Metalloproteinases are proteases capable of biodegrading matrices and hydrogels. Three groups of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) have been identified: (1) collagenases MMPs 1, 8, 13, degrading interstitial collagens type I–III. (2) gelatinases MMPs 2, 9, degrading collagen type IV and gelatin. (3) stromelysins MMPs 3, 7, 10, degrading proteoglycan, fibronectin, laminin, gelatin, casein and some collagens. MMP 3 is a potent activator of the other MMPs. Bone grafts can be cancellous, cortical or cortico-cancellous, and can be used as blocks, bars, strips, chips, as onlays or inlays and have been milled, or particulated and compressed. Scaffolds serve as a supporting or carrier material, and can be rigid, solid, gel-, paste- or injectable fluid-like. They are characterized as being absorbable, resorbable, biodegradable, osteoconductive, osteoinductive, etc. Hydrogels seem to be popular and promising, however, decalcified bone or demineralized bone matrix is still used (      Allografts—allogenic and alloplastic—are materials which are not replaced or transformed. They can be individually (pre)fabricated and are tolerated as chemically inert biocompatible structures. The most common examples are polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) and titanium. In the past, silver, gold, tantalum and stainless steel have been used. When dealing with bony reconstruction, guided bone regeneration techniques are based on osteoconduction, osteoinduction, and osteoneogenesis. Different sites for the investigation of osteoconduction, osteoinduction, osteoneogenesis have been chosen and are discussed: subcutaneous, intramuscular (osteoneogenesis), intrabony (critical sized defect), endosseous, endosteal, endochondral, intramembranous, periosteal, epidural/supradural. There are different animal models: mice, rats, rabbits, Goettingen minipigs, sheep, and goats with different characteristics, which cannot be directly transposed to human use. Different time scales for evaluation after implantation or injection of the test material—varying from 1 day to 5 years—make objective comparison difficult. Complex combinations of test materials with different confounding variables were introduced in the different studies. Also, there are different techniques for evaluation of the results: conventional radiography, soft X-rays, CT-scanning, MRI, conventional histological analysis, histomorphometry, and immunohistochemical techniques. Vascularity of the bony reconstructions is of utmost importance—Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor (VEGF)—an angiogenic cytokine—needs to be studied in future research. Written are the comments and future perspectives of three-dimensional (3-D)-bony-reconstructions off the shelf with their own—inherent—vascularity. A human spare-part department store and barcodes for genetic typing are even dreamed of.