Proximal Humerus Fractures (PHF) is a source of a dilemma to most of us. While literature supports conservative treatment, The intrigue of these fractures can partially be cleared if we understand their bimodal age group presentation. The majority (>80%) of these are fragility fractures, occurring in low demand (often elderly) patients. Weak osteoporotic bones not only break easily but are also difficult to stabilize and are often associated with high failure rates, after the surgery. Younger individuals, however, have stronger bones & fixation provides a stable construct during fracture healing. They have significantly more demands from their shoulder function too. Hence, an accurate reduction is required to achieve efficient biomechanics of the shoulder joint. These patients thus show maximum improvement in post-surgical shoulder function.   A surgeon must have clear answers to the following questions before making any decision in PHF: Is the humeral head in the glenoid socket? (A posteriorly dislocated head can look deceptively normal even on a good AP view). Is there a posterior tilt? (It can only be seen in a good lateral view). Has the greater tuberosity (GT) moved upwards? Has the greater tuberosity (or a part of it) moved posteriorly? (Only lateral view can show this) Are there signs of medial pillar instability? Medial cortical comminution or marked varus? The PHF can be managed by both nonoperative means and with surgery. The absolute indications for Dislocated head. Head facing superiorly/posteriorly (though in the socket, but not facing the glenoid). Splitting of head GT is lying above the humeral head or displaced posteriorly. Significant varus angulation of the head (usually indicates severe medial pillar instability & progressive malposition). A significant change of fragments position with conservative treatment, on serial radiographs. Minor displacement of GT, minimal head shaft angulation only in young and high demand individuals. (These include overhead workers like plumbers, electricians, etc) The management of all the other fracture patterns, except for the indications mentioned above is debatable. These can be treated by either non-operative or operative means, especially in low demand older patients. Cochrane reviews The best indications for An undisplaced 2 or 3 fragment fracture, in any age group. An undisplaced 2, 3 or 4 fragment fracture, in the older age group. A mild to moderately displaced fracture, where the anesthesia risks are high. The conservative treatment involves rest to the arm and shoulder in a pouch or a sling for three to four weeks. Passive mobilization can be started as early as the second week. However, weekly serial radiographs must be done in the first three weeks to check for any displacement of the fracture. There are several ways by which the PHF could be fixed surgically. These include the following:     Supporting the weak medial pillar: A weakness in medial pillar below the humeral head could be due to medial comminution, thin cortices, and severe varus deformity. If not supported adequately, it invariably leads to varus collapse of the fracture or screw penetration through the humeral head. A well-positioned calcar screw, fibular strut graft or a small medial plate can prevent this complication. Repairing the ‘bony’ rotator cuff: The crux of PHF surgery is to bring back the fractured GT in its anatomical position, to achieve satisfactory rotator cuff function. Nonunion of GT is the most frequent cause of inability to lift arm. Sufficient time must be spent to identify, tag and repair the GT. A posteriorly displaced GT is often missed from the anterior deltopectoral approach. Suture bites must be taken from the bone-tendon junction (not thru the bone). Insufficient sutures & rough handling of GT are often responsible for “high flying” GT on post-op Xrays.  Older generation nails scarred the rotator cuff and thus went out of favor. The 3rd generation nails have been recently introduced which are inserted through the supraspinatus belly and articular part of the head. These are difficult to insert and useful only to stabilize largely undisplaced fractures.  Hemi-arthroplasty (HA) - Every attempt must be made to reconstruct proximal humerus (even in split or dislocated head), particularly in younger patients. Reverse Shoulder Arthroplasty (RSA) – Non-union of tuberosities and varus collapse leading to screw cut-outs are common in fragile bones. RSA offers an attractive alternative approach. We propose an algorithm (