Objective
                  To evaluate and present our current clinical experience in the treatment of closed and open tibial shaft fractures using the expandable intramedullary nailing system.
               
                  Design
                  Prospective study.
               
                  Setting
                  One level-1 trauma centre.
               
                  Participants
                  Twenty-six patients with acute tibial shaft fractures with at least 10cm of intact cortex on both sides of the fracture.
               
                  Intervention
                  Internal fixation using the Fixion expandable intramedullary nail (Disc-O-Tech Medical Technologies Ltd., Herzliya, Israel).
               
                  Main outcome measurements
                  Operative and fluoroscopy time, healing time and perioperative complications were recorded.
               
                  Results
                  Twenty-six tibial fractures were treated (OTA classification: 3 type A1, 8 A2, 8 A3, 3 B1, 3 B2, and 1 B3), six of which were open. All fractures healed by week 18.5 with an mean of 12.8±3.8 weeks. The operating time ranged from 20 to 50min with an mean of 40±12.17min. The fluoroscopy time ranged from 6 to 22s with a mean of 10±5s. In one case the nail failed to expand, as detected by X-ray control, and had to be exchanged intraoperatively. Two patients reported anterior knee pain during the follow up, but did not wish any further treatment. In a low demanding patient rotational malalignment was noted and no further action needed.
               
                  Conclusion
                  According to the results of this study, the use of the Fixion nailing system, where indicated, is associated with minimal complications and very good functional outcomes in fractures OTA types A and B. The advantages of the expandable nail include the decrease in the operating and fluoroscopy time and the simplicity of its application.The treatment goal for tibial shaft fractures is to achieve rapid union with correct axial and rotational alignment, while maintaining initial fracture length. Early mobilisation of the patient along with pain free weight bearing and functional range of movement of the knee and ankle joints are also advocated. Non opervative treatment is generally reserved for closed, stable, isolated, minimally displaced fractures, caused by low energy trauma. It requires a great deal of patience and time from the physician, and a cooperative patient The Fixion expandable nail is a stainless steel sealed tube consisting of four external longitudinal bars and can be easily introduced in a similar way to an unreamed nail. Having a reduced initial diameter, allowing an easier insertion, it is expanded with saline solution using a dedicated hydraulic pump. The four longitudinal bars are forced against the cancellous and cortical bone and the nail adapts itself to the contours of the medullary canal. The aim of this study is to evaluate the clinical outcome of the Fixion expandable intramedullary nail in the treatment of tibial shaft fractures, types A1 to A3 and B1 to B3. This prospective study was conducted at a level-1 trauma centre. From October 2001 to August 2004, 26 patients were treated for tibial shaft fractures using the expandable nail. Evaluation and operation was performed by two senior surgeons, having previous experience in intramedullary nailing and study device. All patients were informed of the new procedure and filled in the appropriate consent form. Local Ethics Committee approval for the study was obtained. Patients were included in this study only if they had acute tibial shaft fractures with at least 10 All patients had low molecular weight heparin and three doses of antibiotic prophylaxis, while open fractures had additional antibiotics (gentamycin The knee was placed flexed under skin traction and no tourniquet was used. A skin incision was made along the medial edge of the patellar tendon which was then retracted laterally. The entry point at the junction of the anterior and superior aspects of the very proximal end of tibia was opened using an awl. A dedicated single use manually operated hydraulic pump was filled with sterile saline solution, and the pump was connected to a specially designed insertion handle, using a quick release connector. After air bubbles were removed from the system, the handle was connected to the nail's proximal end. The nail was inserted into the medullary canal in its narrow configuration and was expanded gradually under fluoroscopy using pressurised saline to a maximum pressure of 70 Postoperatively, all patients were allowed immediate partial to full weight bearing, except those with multiple injuries and type B fractures who were allowed touch to partial weight bearing during the first 4–6 weeks. In open fractures, the wound was re-examined 48–72 Follow up appointment was arranged at 2, 6 and 12 weeks time and every 6 months till two years post-op. Each appointment included clinical examination and radiographic control, in order to assess possible complications and healing time. Deep infection, hardware failure, fracture propagation, nail protrusion to the knee, delayed or non union, malunion (>5° angulation in any plane on the final follow-up radiographs), malrotation (>10° in comparison to the normal leg) and shortening (>1 Clinical union was regarded as absence of tenderness in the fracture site and painless weight bearing. Radiological union was regarded as complete bridging of at least three cortices in anteroposterior and lateral views. The combination of clinical and radiological union was considered to be healing time. The Iowa Knee and Ankle evaluation scores were used to evaluate the joints above and below the tibia. Twenty-six patients (21 male and 5 female) with a mean age of 38 (17–78 years) were treated for closed or open fractures of the tibial shaft. Six fractures were open (two Gustilo type I, three type II and one type IIIB) and two were in multiply-injured patients: one with a contra-lateral femoral fracture and one with a bimaleolar fracture. Fractures were classified according to AO system: 3 type A1, 8 A2, 8 A3, 3 B1, 3 B2 and 1 B3 ( The mean time between admission and operation was 5 days (0–15 days). The operating time ranged from 20 to 50 There were no axial but one rotational malalignment (15°). This case was in a low demand psychiatric patient and no further action was needed. Two patients reported anterior knee pain during the follow up, but did not wish further treatment. Till now, hardware has been removed in five patients, after complete union of the fracture, without any difficulty. The reason for removal in all cases was patients’ request. No clinical perioperative deep vein thrombosis, pulmonary embolism, infection or compartment syndrome was recorded. Shortening more than 1 Operative treatment of tibial shaft fractures is widely accepted, Locked intramedullary nailing is considered as the treatment of choice for most types I, II, IIIA open and closed tibial shaft fractures. Although these risks were thought to be reduced with unreamed nails, Despite the fact that proximal interlocking screws are quite easy to apply using dedicated instrumentation, the distal ones might be demanding, time consuming and increase the amount of radiation used. Since no interlocking screw fixation is required with the Fixion nail, there is a significant decrease in fluoroscopy and operative time. It is simple to apply and can be easily removed by deflation. Only one entry point is needed, blind power tools are not used and the possibility of nerve damage, reported in interlocking nails, is reduced. As the Fixion nail does not require reaming, which increases intramedullary pressure and may lead to pulmonary and cardiac phenomena, The expandable nail can also save valuable time and cost from reoperations required in interlocking nails, such as dynamisation of a statically locked nail and removal of broken distal locking screws. Our results have shown an overall healing rate of 100% which is similar to other published reports. In a rather interesting study on Smith et al., The relation between time to union and the mode of locking has been presented in several studies, The main limitation of our study is the low sample size of patients. Further limitations of this technique, compared to conventional IM nailing, include comminuted fractures AO type C, proximal and distal metaphyseal tibial fractures and the implant's increased cost. The results of this study show that the use of the Fixion nailing system is associated with minimal complications and very good functional outcomes in fractures AO type A and B. The nail self-expands, improving load sharing and rotational control without needing interlocking screw fixation. The advantages of the Fixion nail include mainly the reduction in the operating and fluoroscopy time, at the expense of its increased cost. The authors did not receive grants or outside funding in support of their research or preparation of this manuscript. The devices that are the subject of this manuscript are FDA approved.