Pilgered Zircaloy-4 was subjected to recrystallization annealing at 650°C: temperature sufficient for primary recrystallization but inadequate for noticeable competitive grain coarsening. Associated microstructural developments were monitored through bulk and microtexture measurements. The deformed microstructure had two, generalized, types of grains: fragmenting/deforming and non-fragmenting/non-deforming. The former had higher stored energy of cold work and defined the early recrystallization stages through preferred nucleation. Non-fragmenting grains, on the other hand, did not contribute directly to recrystallization; but provided significant growth inhibition or pinning to the recrystallized grains. A combination of these two mechanisms defined the recrystallization behavior of pilgered Zircaloy-4.Zirconium alloys are widely used for structural applications in thermal nuclear reactors Studies on recrystallization texture/microstructure in predominantly single phase Zr are relatively less frequent Pilgered Zircaloy-4, whose chemical composition is listed in Cast and forged Zircaloy-4 (for chemical composition see Mid-thickness section of the pilgered samples (containing rolling and transverse directions) was used for X-ray diffraction (XRD) in a Panalytical MRD (materials research diffractometer) system. Measurements were made for crystallographic texture and also for X-ray line profiles. The latter was used to estimate dislocation densities. For texture measurements, (0 Dislocation density estimations from X-ray line profile analysis is an involved, albeit evolving, subject  Diffraction profiles of (0 A Fei Quanta-3d field emission gun (FEG) microscope and TSL-OIM electron backscattered diffraction (EBSD) package was used for microtexture measurements/analysis. Four scans, and at least a total area of 1 The combined criterion of grain size and in-grain misorientation  Textural developments during primary recrystallization can be caused by preferred nucleation/growth of recrystallized grains and/or preferred annihilation of deformed orientations To explain the apparent preference/selection during early recrystallization stages (i.e. till 9% recrystallization), it was considered necessary to explore possible stored energy differences. As in To comprehend the recrystallization micro-mechanisms, it is important to visualize the deformed microstructure. Our understanding of recrystallization behavior in metallic materials has evolved substantially over the past decades The nucleation of recrystallization has an important distinction from that of classical phase transformation. In the former, the nuclei are a part of the deformed matrix The recrystallization behavior, more specifically recrystallization texture developments, is often viewed in terms of nucleation and growth advantage and disadvantage This simple picture of preferred nucleation due to stored energy, however, gets complicated through the possibilities of selective or local growth. Nucleation of cube in fcc and γ-fiber in bcc are expected to be aided by the presence of growth favorable 40°〈1 In cubic materials, growth inhibition has also been considered important  As pilgered Zircaloy-4 was distinguished in terms of two clear microstructural features: fragmenting and non-fragmenting grains. The former could easily be distinguished from the grain size refinement and higher stored energy of cold work. Recrystallization was restricted to the fragmenting grains. Early recrystallization stages (approximately 10% recrystallized) clearly showed preferred nucleation, linked to higher stored energies of cold work. At the latter stages of recrystallization, however, the growth of the recrystallized grains were inhibited. The non-fragmenting grains, which were otherwise unaffected by the recrystallization, pinned the recrystallized grains. The pinning effectively erased the consequences, in terms of the textural developments, of the earlier preferred nucleation and also created a typical banded microstructure. Support from Board of Research on Nuclear Science (BRNS) and from Department of Science and Technology (DST) are acknowledged. The authors also acknowledge support from the National Facility of Texture and OIM – a DST-IRPHA facility at IIT Bombay. VDH, SKS and IS are grateful to Indo-French organization (IFCPAR) for additional financial support. Technical discussion with Prof. Roger Doherty is also appreciated.