Solution salinity is critical for the inhibition effect of sodium hexametaphosphate on different mineral surfaces, further affecting the separation of minerals in aqueous solution. In this work, the effect of K+ and Ca2+ on adsorption of sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP) and hydrophobically modified polyacrylamide, poly(AM-NaAA-C16DMAAC) (HMPAM), on alumina surface (i.e., kaolinite Al-OH surface) were investigated using quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM-D). The deposition layer on alumina surface with the effect of adding 1 mM SHMP in 10 mM of CaCl2 solution were examined by glancing angle X-ray diffraction (GAXRD), scanning electron microscope (SEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The 100 mM KCl solution promoted the adsorption of both HMPAM and SHMP on alumina surface, which would be mainly caused by the molecular configuration change. The more flexible and coiled configuration of HMPAM and SHMP in 100 mM KCl solution could be helpful for increasing the adsorption sites on alumina surface. Moreover, the intermolecular hydrophobic interaction between the alkane chains of HMPAM would lead to the multilayer adsorption of HMPAM instead of adsorbing directly onto alumina surface. Alternatively, 1 mM and 10 mM CaCl2 solutions lead to a lower adsorption amount of HMPAM on alumina surface, which is most likely caused by the suppressed electrostatic attraction and condensed conformation of HMPAM. The adsorption layer of SHMP formed on alumina surface could prevent the adsorption of HMPAM through different mechanisms in KCl and CaCl2 solutions at different concentrations. Interestingly, scattered micro-spheres were found to adsorb on alumina surface with 1 mM SHMP in 10 mM CaCl2 solution, mainly in forms of calcium hydrogen phosphate hydrate. Our work provides fundamental insights into the effect of adding dispersant (e.g., SHMP) and polymer flocculant (e.g., HMPAM) during selective flocculation of kaolinite, with helpful guidance for clay-involved mineral processing.The presence of clay minerals leads to problems such as increased pulp viscosity, overconsumption of reagents, slime coating, coating of air bubbles and mechanical entrainment in flotation [ Sodium hexametaphosphate (SHMP, (NaPO In this work, the unavoidable ions K SHMP of AR grade was purchased from Dingshengxin Chemical Co., Ltd., China. HMPAM (average molecular weight of 2.46 × 10 A Q-sense E1 system (Biolin Scientific, Gothenburg, Sweden) was used to conduct the adsorption measurements. As shown in Glancing angle X-ray diffraction (GAXRD), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning electron microscope (SEM) were utilized to characterize the inorganic deposition on alumina surface with the effect of adding 1 mM SHMP in 10 mM CaCl XPS measurement was carried out on an ESCALAB 250 Xi photoelectron spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific, USA) equipped with a monochromatic Al Kα source (hv = 1486.6 eV) under ultra-high vacuum (1.0 × 10 QCM-D technique was used to determine the adsorption of SHMP and HMPAM with different salinity (i.e., 10 mM KCl, 100 mM KCl, 1 mM CaCl The effect of KCl concentration on adsorption of HMPAM on alumina surfaces was shown in When 1 mM SHMP in 10 mM KCl solution was pumped into the QCM-D chamber, Δ Divalent cations are cycled and accumulated in water system of mineral processing plant. The influence of the most common divalent cations, i.e., calcium ion on the adsorption behavior of SHMP and HMPAM was studied using QCM-D. The adsorption of HMPAM on alumina surfaces in 1 mM and 10 mM CaCl  The possible dissolvable complexes and precipitation reactions of SHMP with Ca ions were summarized and shown in Eqs.  The GAXRD patterns of the adsorption layer on alumina surface with the effect of 1 mM SHMP in 10 mM CaCl Alumina surface with the effect of adding 1 mM SHMP in 10 mM CaCl In this work, the effect of K The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank the