In this study, the floatability of Yozgat Ayrıdam lignite using kerosene, kerosene+emulsifier and kerosene+emulsifier+surfactant has been investigated. It was determined that the combination of both kerosene+emulsifier and kerosene+emulsifier+surfactant were stable (except anionic), easily dispersible in water and formed very small oil droplets compared to the kerosene. It was concluded that all of the collectors except kerosene investigated in this study increased the floatability of Yozgat Ayrıdam lignite. However when the combustible recovery and flotation efficiency index were considered, the best results were obtained from the combination of both keresone+Acorga M5640 and keresone+Acorga M5640+Flotigol CS (non-ionic). It was based on the high binding and spreading tendency of both collectors over the coal surface.
                  The concentrates having a relatively low ash content were obtained with the kerosene+Acorga M5640+Flotigol CS. Consequently, the floatability improvement of Yozgat Ayrıdam lignite was achieved by using the combination of both kerosene+emulsifier and kerosene+emulsifier+surfactant.Coal is often described, along with talc and sulphur, as a naturally floatable mineral. However, since coal is not a chemically unique substance, its natural hydrophobicity varies with its rank, petrographic composition and degree of oxidation Generally, froth flotation is the technique used for beneficiation of coal particles below 0.5 In the coal flotation, non-polar oils such as kerosene, fuel oil, creosote have been used as collectors. These collectors are used to promote the rigid adhesion of air bubbles to the coal surface. It is very difficult to float lignite using non-polar oils in the concentration range used for strongly hydrophobic coals due to their hydrophilic nature. Therefore, the excessive amount of oil are required (for example; 5–50 In recent years, the interest has focused on the use of various collector combinations or mixture for enhancing the recovery and selectivity of flotation process It has been indicated that the orientation of reagent on the coal surfaces occurs in two ways, the reagent either adsorbs on the non-polar surface of coal with the polar groups outward, or with positively charged group of the reagent oriented towards the negatively charged sites on the coal Since the surfactants stabilise the emulsions, the accumulation of oil droplets are prevented by collision and the wetting ability of oil on the coal surface are improved. Because the increase in collector dispersion (the increased number of oil droplets) causes a decrease in the oil/water interfacial tension, the energy needed for spreading of the oil over the coal surface is lowered and hydrophobicity of coal increases It was reported that one reagent was not found to be the best for all ranks of coal, some were best for one range of ranks, and some were best for another In the studies on the electro kinetic potential of low rank coals, it was shown that the point of zero charge (PZC) varied in the acidic range (pH∼2–4) and values of zeta potential at pH 7.5 at which flotation experiments were performed, were between −30 and 40 In this study, the improvement of the flotability of Yozgat Ayrıdam lignite was investigated by using kerosene, the combination of kerosene+emulsifier and kerosene+emulsifier+surfactants (anionic, cationic and non-ionic). The coal sample was obtained from Yozgat Ayrıdam coal mine, Turkey. This coal was of low rank type. XRD analyses proved that kaolinite, pyrite, calcite and quartz were the main mineral matters. The total sulfur content was 1.58%. Some characteristics of this coal sample are given in The coal sample was ground to a nominal top size of −355 In the experiments, Acorga M5640 (an oil soluble emulsifier) and wetting surfactants Hostaflot LIP (anionic), Flotigam ENA (cationic) and Flotigol CS (non-ionic) were used. The chemical compositions and some other properties of these surfactants are given in Kerosene: K, Acorga M5640: AC, Flotigam ENA: E, Flotigol CS: CS, Hostaflot LIP: L As it is known, hydrophile–lipophile balance (HLB) number is a measure of hydrophilic to hydrophobic ratio of a given surfactant frequently used to determine the emulsification power of surfactants In the experiments, kerosene was used as oil. It was characterised by 0.78 Flotol B: Flotol B is a high-grade natural pine oil obtained by the chemical purification of oils derived from the distillation of pine wood. It has an approximate density and viscosity of 0.93 Batch flotation tests were performed in a cell of 1.5 The experimental results were evaluated in two stages. In the first stage, preparation of the collectors and dispersion properties, in the second one the results of flotation experiments were investigated. Emulsions were used as collectors in the flotation experiments. There were two criteria for the applications of emulsions, their stabilities and dispersion properties. At different weight ratios of K+AC and K+AC+surfactants were mixed to obtain stable emulsions. After mixing, the emulsions were placed into glass test tubes to investigate stabilities of emulsions. A visual examination was carried out to check the prepared emulsions for the signs of separation after seven days. The weight percentages of the reagents forming the emulsions are given in The photographs of kerosene+Acorga M5640+surfactant showing their colours are given in The followings are the results obtained from the observation of the mixtures. There was not a significant change in the colour of the K+AC mixture until it reached the weight ratio of 50% K+50% AC. It was observed that the mixture began to take the colour of AC when its concentration increased. The emulsions were stable in the mixtures of K/AC with 9/1, 3/1 and 1/1 weight ratios. These findings showed that a stable emulsion could be obtained by using emulsifier without any surfactant. In the experiments carried out by using the mixtures of K+AC+CS, the colour homogeneity was obtained with CS/AC mixtures at the weight ratios of 5/1, 2/1 and 1/1. In CS/AC mixtures at these ratios, the emulsions were also stable. In the experiments with K+AC+E, the homogenous emulsions were obtained by the mixtures of E/AC at 1/5, 1/2 and 1/1 weight ratios. This implied that stable emulsions could also be obtained by E/AC mixtures at these ratios. On the other hand, it was also determined that L was not dissolved in K+AC mixture. Two phases were observed at the weight ratios studied. No stable emulsions were obtained at any weight ratio of AC/L. These results clearly indicated that both the emulsifier and the non-ionic and cationic surfactants provided a great flexibility for oil emulsification. Dispersion properties of kerosene and surfactant/kerosene emulsions in water are other important parameters aside from creating a stable emulsion. If the emulsified oil can be easily dispersed in water, a better wetting of the oil collector at the coal surface can be achieved to improve the flotation properties of coal. In the dispersion tests, the dispersion properties of K, K+AC and K+AC+surfactant were investigated. In these tests, 1 The results of dispersion tests are as follows: It was found that kerosene could not be easily dispersed in water. It possessed the poorest dispersion characteristic in all collectors. The dispersion properties of K+AC were investigated by the use of K/AC mixture at the ratios of 3/1, 1/1 and 1/3. It was observed that the mixtures of K+AC had the best dispersion characteristics with immediate and uniform dispersion upon injection for the weight ratios above. In the emulsions having CS (non-ionic surfactant), the dispersion properties of the emulsions were investigated by the use of CS/AC mixture at the ratios of 5/1, 2/1 and 1/1. There was no significant difference in both dispersion speed and droplet size at these weight ratios. This proved that the best dispersion characteristics were obtained by the weight ratios above. In the emulsions having E (cationic surfactant), the dispersion properties of emulsions of E/AC mixtures were investigated for 1/5, 2/1 and 1/1 weight ratios. The best characteristics were obtained by the ratio of 1/1 with respect to the dispersion speed and droplet size. Since L (anionic surfactant) was not dissolved in the mixtures of K+AC, the combination containing two phases were vigorously shaken and injected into the beaker. For this reason, K+AC+L were tested for the weight ratios studied. The best dispersion properties with respect to the dispersion speed and droplet size were observed for all of them. The best dispersion properties of the combination of the K+AC+L were attributed to the association of the non-polar groups of reagents with hydrophobic interaction, while the polar groups oriented toward water during stirring. The interaction of mixed collector was investigated in detail by several authors In the studies related to dispersion, the best results were obtained by the use of E/AC at the ratio of 1/1. On the other hand, other reagents (non-ionic and anionic) gave similar dispersion properties for the weight ratios used in the stability studies. For this reason, flotation experiments were performed on the weight ratios of 70% K+15% AC+15% surfactant. Besides, in the flotation experiments, the emulsion of K/AC at the weight ratio of 1/1 was used. The combustible recovery was calculated from the equation below The effect of collector concentration on combustible recovery and ash content for the collectors considered are shown in The relation between flotation efficiency index and collector concentration is shown in Experimental findings were interpreted as follows: The low combustible recoveries with the kerosene were attributed to both to a large extent, the limited spreading of K and to a lesser extent, pore penetration tendency of K over the coal surface. These findings verified with those in the literature High combustible recoveries in the decreased concentrations of all collectors except K were based on; the formation of stable emulsions except L, easy dispersion of collectors containing surfactants in water (easy dispersion of collector containing the L was due to the association of the non-polar groups of reagents with hydrophobic interaction, while polar groups oriented toward water), the formation of small oil droplets using surfactants according to K (in visual examination results, no droplet size was measured in this study), the interaction of surfactants with both at the coal/water and air/water interface. The high surface area of small oil droplets and the existence of surface active materials, which were mostly adsorbed at the oil/water interface and to a lesser extent, adsorbed coal/water and air/water interface, improved the spreading of oil droplets over the coal surface. With all surfactants, the pore penetration tendency of K was reduced as a result of the increase in viscosity. Both the AC and the other surfactants except L had higher viscosity than that of K. Depending on the previous studies in the literature The low recoveries were obtained by using K+AC+E (cationic) over the K+AC and K+AC+CS. The interaction of this collector containing E that had polar nature with the coal surface may be due to both hydrogen bonding and electrostatic attraction with negatively charged coal surface. This type of adhesion would result in a tendency for a residual water film to be retained between the coal surface and oil. As a result, the surface of coal would be, to a lesser extent, covered with the oil according to collectors containing non-ionic surfactants. Therefore, the improvement in flotation performance was less than those of non-ionic collectors. On the other hand, the partial decrease in ash contents of concentrates could be attributed to both the decreasing of AC amount in the mixtures and electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged CH Relatively low recoveries were also obtained by using the combination of K+AC+L. The bonding of this collector to the coal surface was due to the hydrogen bonding as a result of polar nature. However, electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged oil droplets and coal surface was also present. Therefore, the surface of coal would be, to a lesser extent, covered with K. It was also possible that the residual water film remained between the coal surface and K droplets. As a result of the combining effects above, the combustible recoveries were lower than those of other collectors. The ash contents of concentrates had a tendency towards the decrease as a result of electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged K and the ash forming mineral matters. At the collector concentration of 250 Consequently, improvement in the flotation performance with K+AC and K+AC+CS (non-ionic surfactant) were better than that with K+AC+cationic or anionic surfactant, as observed in flotation experiments. It was shown that using reagents improved the flotation performance. Compared to K, clear advantages from both the higher collecting power and lower consumption could be achieved by using other collectors. Further improvement could be achieved with a rational and well founded choice of the kind and concentration of auxiliary chemicals (frother, modifier reagents) and the determination of optimum conditions of the operating parameters. As stated previously, flotation efficiency index, nearly showed the same trend observed in the combustible recovery. Although some concentrates contained higher ash, flotation efficiency index values were high. This situation was due to the high amount of concentrates (froth products). In the concentration range studied, the best results were obtained at 1250 The results of this study are as follows: The stable emulsions were produced by the addition of the emulsifier and emulsifier+surfactant (except anionic) to the kerosene. It was found that all collectors used in the experiments had better dispersion characteristics than that of K. Without using other surfactants, as only oil soluble emulsifier such as AC was used, the flotation performance of lignite was improved. The combustible recovery and flotation efficiency index were improved by all of collectors except K. As the combustible recovery, ash content and flotation efficiency index were considered, the best results were obtained with the K+AC+CS (non-ionic surfactant). Although it was possible to produce concentrates having high combustible recovery with the K+AC (emulsifier), the ash contents of concentrates were relatively high. The pore penetration tendency of K was reduced by using surfactants as a result of increase in viscosity. Reaching the high combustible recoveries with combinations of both K+emulsifier and K+emulsifier+CS were based on the higher ability of binding and spreading of these collectors over the coal surface. This phenomenon was due to the hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction between the coal surface and reagents. For the determination of performance of different collectors, the ash content and combustible recovery of products must be considered rather than efficiency index.