Process models in mineral processing can be classified based on the level of information required from the ore, i.e. the feed stream to the processing plant. Mineral processing models usually require information on total solid flow rate, mineralogical composition and particle size information. The most comprehensive level of mineral processing models is the particle-based one (liberation level), which gives particle-by-particle information on their mineralogical composition, size, density, shape i.e. all necessary information on the processed material for simulating unit operations. In flowsheet simulation, the major benefit of a particle-based model over other models is that it can be directly linked to any other particle-based unit models in the process simulation. This study aims to develop a unit operation model for a wet low intensity magnetic separator on particle property level. The experimental data was gathered in a plant survey of the KA3 iron ore concentrator of Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara AB in Kiruna. Corresponding feed, concentrate and tailings streams of the primary magnetic separator were sampled, assayed and mass balanced on mineral liberation level. The mass-balanced data showed that the behavior of individual particles in the magnetic separation is depending on their size and composition. The developed model involves a size and composition dependent entrapment parameter and a separation function that depends on the magnetic volume of the particle and the nature of gangue mineral. The model is capable of forecasting the behavior of particles in magnetic separation with the necessary accuracy. This study highlights the benefits that particle-based models in simulation offer whereas lower level process models fail to provide.Minerals and particles are the key elements in mineral processing operations and simulation. Both mineral properties and particle size define the selection of a process and particles govern the process performance. However, the full potential of using particles in mineral processing simulation has not been accomplished yet. This is partly due to lack of analyzing instruments to collect information on particle level as well as lack of mass balancing techniques and data reconciliation methods capable to work with the mineral liberation level. The development of automated mineralogy methods ( Taking a step back and looking at the bigger picture, where the feed has not reached the mineral processing plant yet, a holistic view of geology, mining and mineral processing exists. This approach is known as geometallurgy, a rapidly expanding area of geology and mineral processing to create spatially based models for production management ( As to the level of details, geometallurgical predictive models can be divided into three categories whether the smallest block in the simulation is an entire processing circuit (black box model), a section (e.g. comminution circuit) or a single unit operation (e.g. individual flotation cells). Another way of classifying geometallurgical models is based on the level to that the feed stream properties are described. A stream can have several attributes including flow rates and particle size classes. A bulk stream can be considered as a set of sub-streams each representing a particle size class. If there are no size classes available, then unsized or bulk information is used. The flow rates in a stream, from lowest to highest level of detailedness, are solids, elements, minerals and particles. Obviously, the study goal defines the selection of the level and size information. For instance, sized solids are often used to model and simulate comminution circuits whereas bulk-mineral information is common in flotation. The selection of a modeling level comes with certain restrictions ( The purpose of this paper is to develop a particle-based unit operation model for geometallurgical purposes by using wet low intensity magnetic separation (WLIMS) as a case study. The aim is that a particle-based model can forecast composition and flow rates (i.e. recovery) of the magnetic concentrate and tailings for any new feed stream if the particle level information is available. This type of models can be coupled with any other particle-based unit models in mineral processing and recycling ( Literature on magnetic separators focuses on design and operation of the unit with recommendations for improving their performance ( In magnetite ore processing, the Davis Tube test is traditionally used to develop recovery and grade models. Its development goes back to 1921 when a test previously performed manually mechanized ( The empirical model of wet high intensity magnetic separator (WHIMS) by   The magnetic separator model in the USIM PAC simulator is defined based on the recovery of minerals in size fractions. The user defines recoveries to the magnetic concentrate for each mineral by particle size fractions based on experimental results. An application example was given in the context of designing an iron ore beneficiation plant in Kiruna where a statistical model for a wet low intensity magnetic separator (WLIMS) was developed (  A simplified approach called pseudo-liberation approach for simulating the effect of liberation in WLIMS was proposed by Metso has developed a model for the LIMS that couples discrete element method (DEM), computational fluid dynamics (CFD) and finite element method (FEM) ( The models, as summarized in Before starting to develop a process model, one needs to identify and decide on the level of detailedness needed for the purpose. A model can be established for the whole circuit, part of the circuit or a process unit. Once the smallest process entity is defined, model level based on achievable detail of feed stream ( In mineral processing, developing and calibrating process models requires experimental work. The tests and corresponding analyses must be designed to meet the criteria of selected level; process/section/unit, element/mineral/particle, and bulk/sized. As the purpose of this study is to develop particle-based unit models for several mineral processing units in iron ore processing, the experimental work was based on a plant survey for an entire concentrator plant. However, at this stage only data around the primary magnetic separator was used here as the case study for developing particle-based unit models. Before experimental data can be used in model development, the data must be mass-balanced. The mass balancing must be done on the same level the model is aiming to operate. For example, to address the liberation issues in the performance of a plant, the level of data collection and mass balancing needs to be on the particle composition level. Once data reconciliation is done, the input and output of the unit is provided for model development. Principally, a mineral processing unit model is a set of mathematical functions representing the unit that uses the relevant input data such as feed properties and operating conditions for forecasting the performance of the unit. The modeling level and the model's purpose usually specify the input and output parameters. The output of the model can be qualitative or a quantitative value. The unit models based on qualitative output are usually developed by unit manufacturers to reflect the effects of changes in the unit. On the other hand, a particle-based unit model is built to take particle properties as the input and provide the same level of output information. This ensures that the unit models can be coupled together and be used in flowsheet simulation. The model should be developed in such way that unimportant details are neglected. The model can be developed based on empirical observations, or first principles behind the process, or by a combination of both. If the model uses a transfer function as the mathematical representation fitted to describe input and outputs, then a black box model is in use. After development, the model needs to be compared against observations; this is called verification. The next step, the validation, is when the model is used to forecast the performance of the process based on observations not used in the modeling stage. Once a unit model has been verified and validated, it is ready to be used in simulation ( The plant survey was done at one of the Luossavaara-Kiirunavaara AB (LKAB) iron ore processing plants in Kiruna, Northern Sweden. While the plant was operating at steady state, selected streams in the plant were sampled during a two hours period. The sampling protocol at LKAB was followed. Incremental sampling was performed around the circuit during the sampling period. Samples were taken at 10 Additionally, all the information available from the control room was collected during the sampling campaign. For two of the streams, sampling was repeated three times in order to measure the experimental error and to control the quality of the sampling. In this paper, samples around the primary WLIMS (feed, concentrate and tailings) are used to develop a particle-based model for the magnetic separator. The WLIMS feed comes from the overflow of a screw classifier and the concentrate is sent to a pebble mill for further grinding. The survey samples were prepared according to the procedure shown in X-ray fluorescence analyses of the samples were done at the chemical laboratory of LKAB using the company's standardized methods (MagiX FAST, PANalytical). Chemical analysis of the samples was used as a quick sanity check to evaluate the quality of modal mineralogy by automated mineralogy. Epoxy samples on size fractions were prepared at Kemi University of Applied Science. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and automated mineralogy analysis on epoxy samples were done by using a Merlin SEM (Zeiss Gemini - FESEM) with Oxford Instrument EDS detector at Luleå University of Technology, Sweden. The SEM system was coupled with the IncaMineral data acquisition system by Oxford Instruments in order to combine and store backscattered detector images with EDS information during automated mineralogy into a joint database ( In average, > Mass balancing, data reconciliation, particle tracking, and LIMS modeling were done using the modeling and simulation software HSC Chemistry 8 by Outotec and MATLAB by Mathworks. Standard deviation for XRF and automated mineralogy measurements in repeated samples were calculated according to To evaluate the quality of automated mineralogy, back calculated chemical compositions were compared against chemical assays ( Mass balancing and data reconciliation improve the reliability of measurements and can under certain circumstances even enable the estimation of unmeasured streams and variables. It is a requirement for estimating the metallurgical performance of the circuit, for diagnosis of process bottlenecks, and for modeling the process. Well established methods exist for mass balancing and data reconciliation of mineral processing data and several software packages have been developed for performing these tasks ( Particle mass balancing is the state-of-the-art technique as developed by Bulk mass balance by minerals Sized mass balance by minerals Particle mass balance (by so-called particle tracking) As a first step, unsized data was used for mass balancing total solid and mineral flowrates in bulk. The result from the bulk mass balancing was then used as a constraint when mass balancing the minerals in size fractions. This stepwise procedure minimizes the error propagation and ensures that bulk and sized mass balances are consistent. The adjustment of mineral grades in mass balancing for most minerals was minor as shown in The particle tracking technique ( In some streams, some bins may have no or very few particles making the mass balancing result unreliable. In the following stage, the advanced binning, the bins with low numbers of particles are globally combined (i.e. in all the streams in a similar way) in order to reach a sound number of particles in each bin. In this work, the advanced binning was first done for the feed stream and the minimum number of particles in each bin was set to 25. This equals to a maximum of 20% relative standard deviation for the mass proportion of the particle type (bin) in question. The other streams were binned in the same way by using the feed stream as a reference. In the final stage, the mass proportion of each bin (particle type) was adjusted to reach the mass balance in the whole circuit by keeping the total solids flow rates as constraints. Additionally, the particle flow rate of each bin was balanced among feed, concentrate and tailing by considering a weighting factor calculated from the number of particles observed in each bin. In this study, the particle tracking resulted in the mass balancing of 702 different kinds of particles around the WLIMS ( In the WLIMS, the rotating drum with the magnet is partially submerged into a slurry tank where it lifts out the magnetic particles. Based on the tank design and the feed slurry flow three types of setups can be distinguished: concurrent, counter-current and counter-rotation. Selection of the type of magnetic separator for treating an ore is governed by feed particle size, throughput, and concentrate grade and recovery ( Based on the type of the magnetic separator, slurry tank and magnetic arc, several different zones can be defined. For example, the counter-current magnetic separator can be divided into three zones. The pick-up zone is where the fresh slurry feed encounters the drum. The scavenger zone is a shallow zone close to the tailings outlet where the drum's rotation is opposite to the slurry flow. The dewatering zone or cleaning zone is where the drum pushes the concentrate up to the discharge and the concentrate water flows back to the tank ( When ferromagnetic material is exposed to the magnetic field, magnetic ordering occurs based on intrinsic property of the material which defines spontaneous magnetization ( Magnetized particles in the slurry tend to gradually gather into groups and form flocs or aggregates. This is called magnetic flocculation. Before magnetic saturation is reached, the strength of the flocs increases with the growth in field strength and effective permeability. The magnetic content of the particles, the fineness and as well as the nature of the non-magnetic material affect the effective permeability ( The major mass population of particles in the concentrate is formed by liberated and magnetite rich binary particles, as expected. For modeling purposes, the aim is to find an equation for the recovery of particles into the magnetic concentrate when its composition and size is known. Therefore, in Liberation measurements revealed that there are liberated non-magnetic particles in the concentrate and the mass balancing confirms that there is a positive relation between the liberated gangue particle size and the recovery into the concentrate ( Stereological bias A stereological bias in 2-dimensional particle image analysis means that particles that are regarded as liberated in sections, can actually be composite particles in three dimensions. If this is the case then the recovery should show a decrease by increasing particle size. Relatively speaking in a similar texture a fine-grained particle in coarse size fraction changes to coarse-grained particle in fine size fraction, as depicted in Entrainment phenomena Entrainment means that particles are dragged into the concentrate with water. This effect is stronger for fine particles than for coarse ones ( Entrapment As discussed earlier, in a flocculation process magnetite particles attach to each other. During this process, liberated gangue minerals can be trapped between magnetic particles. The entrapment of non-magnetic particles has been previously reported as enclosures in the flocs ( Even though observations show a clear correlation between the recovery of particles and the physical processes, it is not possible to develop a pure physical model. This is mainly due to numerous and complex sub-processes involved in the separation. Further, the data available from the plant survey describes only one operational point. Therefore, the model developed here is semi-empirical in nature and tries to reproduce recovery curves at mineral liberation level. Requirements to be formulated for such a model are that (i) it should be flexible to adapt to linear or curve shaped recoveries, (ii) should have reasonably low number of parameters, and (iii) should reflect physical sub-processes in the system. At a later stage, the model can be further developed to consider operational variables. A flexible and relatively simple way to model the recovery patterns of binary particles is to use the incomplete beta function If for the sake of simplicity, the For the entrapment, the observation shown in To model the recovery of various magnetite binary particles in the WLIMS concentrate, the following function is used: Fitting the Eq. The results indicate that binary pairs of magnetite with gangue can be divided into two groups. The first group is magnetite binary particles with apatite, biotite, and actinolite and the second group is magnetite binaries with quartz, albite, calcite and titanite. For each group an average regression model for To verify the developed model, the model was compared against observations in two levels. In the first level the comparison was made against the bulk and sized mineral flow rates. In the second level the comparison was made on liberation distribution in the concentrate. Comparison of solid flow rates and mineral grades from observations and model indicates that the model forecasts well the solid and mineral flowrates ( Evaluation of the model at particle level was started by comparing the liberation curves for magnetite particles. As shown in Missing mineral liberation information and a lack of mass balancing techniques for multiphase particles has hindered the development of unit operation process models to be based on particle properties ( The developed particle-based WLIMS model can forecast recovery and product quality of any new feed stream if the particle level information is available. Process simulators and unit operation models that operate at particle level exist and are becoming more common. In addition, simulation of a process where the model level is at particle level stays straightforward, i.e. input and output stream of the model can be directly used by any other unit models. For example, the hydrocyclone model by Notably for the purpose of geometallurgy, the liberation level model is suitable only if the geological model provides information on ore textures level and if there is a mechanism to transfer this information to generate multiphase particles with compositional information in the comminution stage. The example of such a characterization was given by The developed model can be used in optimization for example by testing the effect of grinding fineness and detaching of flocs before sending the concentrate to the cleaning stage. From the curve shapes coarser grinding gives higher recovery but lower grade compared to fine grinding. Detachment of the flocs could potentially decrease the entrapment. Further development is needed to relate the model parameters to the operational parameters or include certain sub-processes of magnetic separation if the model is intended to be used for process control or to investigate the effects of operational conditions. Observations at particle level as well as physical theory imply that magnetic separation is a complex process that is controlled by both operational conditions and the feed stream properties. Studying and characterizing the feed stream at particle level provides insight about the performance of a magnetic separator that previously was not possible to reach accurately. The developed semi-empirical model of WLIMS describes the recovery of particles based on two mechanisms; recovery of particles due to magnetic volume and entrapment. This was achieved through applying the particle tracking technique. However, there are several other factors that need to be addressed. The relationship between particle size and recovery of fully liberated gangue particles can be explained by the entrapment phenomenon. As seen in The spread factor As seen in observations, the entrapped liberated gangue particles in the concentrate are one of the sources of impurities in the products. While formation of the flocs is stronger in high grade magnetite ore and is crucial for the recovery of fine particles, releasing gangue particles from these flocs is highly unlikely. Unless the flocs become demagnetized or detached, entrapped gangue particles inside the flocs find their way to the concentrate. Mechanical detachment of the flocs can be momentarily but may be enough to let gangue particles escape from the flocs. The studied ore is such a high grade and shows high recovery not only in the first magnetic separation but also in the whole process. This raises the question whether liberation information is really needed for the process simulation. However, in producing high quality products the recovery is not the main concern but the impurities are, thus the grade of gangue minerals in the concentrate. For a high quality iron product, the requirements for certain impurities are tight and must be met ( Conversely, in processing of low grade ore, the mineral liberation can cause a recovery issue as well. It is expected that the strength of formed flocs in low grade feed will be weaker and the loss of binary particles with magnetite and fine magnetite particles accordingly be higher. As it is known, 2-dimensional measurement of liberation which inherently is defined in 3-dimension is biased estimate of the liberation. The liberation is always overestimated and the magnitude of the overestimation depends on ore texture. The bias exist for liberation estimation, however the bias affects the model parameters in less degree. In calculation of modal parameters, instead of using absolute value of liberation, the term liberation recovery was used. This means the overestimation of liberation presents itself in feed and concentrate which to some extend cancel each other. In this way, the model can take the uncorrected liberation data as well as corrected liberation data as an input and gives the same quality of the liberation. Using particle tracking technique for the first time demonstrated that the behavior of magnetite-gangue particles in magnetic separation is not only dependent on the particle size but also on nature of the gangue mineral. Particles containing gangue minerals such as biotite, actinolite, and apatite are showing similar behavior in WLIMS where others such as albite, quartz, and calcite are having different behavior respect to the first group. The origin of differences in behavior seems to be tiny magnetite inclusions in the first group. Also the entrapment phenomenon is greater in the first group than in the second group. The developed model requires that the feed stream is described at particle level and each particle must have information on its size and mineral composition. Even though the model lacks operating parameters it can be used for any WLIMS. Entrapment parameters and spread values for each mineral by size must be calibrated. When calibrated for certain operational conditions the parameter value should not change as the feed composition change. Benefits of the developed model are that it is portable and does not need continuous calibration according to fluctuation in feed mineralogy, particle size distribution and liberation characteristics. The developed model requires that the feed is characterized on mineral liberation level. In geometallurgy, validated methods to provide such information through the whole ore body don't exist and therefore fully utilization of the model requires that such a concept and model is developed. The authors acknowledge the financial support from the