In the present work, the bake hardening of ultra-fine grained low carbon steel was compared with that of its coarse-grain counterpart. The ultra-fine grained sheets were produced by applying three passes of constrained groove pressing resulting the grains of 260–270nm. The microstructure of ultra-fine grain specimens were characterized using electron back-scatter diffraction technique. Then, the bake hardenability of ultra-fine grain and coarse-grain samples were compared by pre-straining to 4, 6 and 8% followed by baking at 150°C and 250°C for 20min. The results show that in case of baking at 250°C, there was an increase about 108%, 93%, and 72% in the bake hardening for 4%, 6% and 8% pre-strain, respectively. As for baking at 150°C, these values were 170%, 168%, and 100%, respectively for 4%, 6% and 8% pre-strain. The maximum in bake hardenability (103MPa) and final yield stress (563MPa) were pertaining to the ultra-fine grain specimen pre-strained 8% followed by baking at 250°C.Bake hardenable steels are widely used in transportation industry as their usage lead to a reduction in vehicles weight and an improvement in safety In terms of using severe plastic deformation to produce nanostructure sheets Recently, many works are carried out to study the mechanical properties and microstructural evolutions of different materials such as low carbon steel, aluminum and copper subjected to constrained groove pressing. According to these studies Two main objectives of transportation industry are the reduction in vehicles weight and improvement in safety. It is well known that bake hardenable steels are excellent solution to meet the aforementioned requirements In the manufacturing process of the car panels, the cold rolled steel sheets are given a pre-strain of 2–10%, so-called press forming. This is followed by painting and baking the paint at 170–180 Extensive efforts have been made by Dehghani et al. The aim of present work was first to produce ultra-fine grain low carbon steel by constrained groove pressing and then comparing its bake hardening behavior with that of coarse grain structure. To the best of our knowledge this is the first report on the bake hardening of ultra-fine grain low carbon sheets. The as-received low carbon steel sheet, with the composition summarized in In order to produce the ultra-fine grain samples, the constrained groove pressing was used. The workpiece was subjected to severe plastic deformation by applying three passes of constrained groove pressing which resulted in the total strain of 3.48. This led to ultra-fine grain low carbon steel having the grains of 260–270 According to the past works Tensile samples were cut from the deformed sheets according to ASTM E8, To study the effect of ultra-fine grain on the bake hardenability of low carbon steel, both the ultra-fine grain and coarse-grain samples were pre-strained to 4, 6 and 8% followed by baking at 150 The microstructural evolutions and hardness measurements of steel sheets subjected to three passes of constrained groove pressing were investigated to ensure the formation of ultra-fined grains. The initial microstructure of the as-received steel is shown in  Considering Thus, the total increase in the final yield strength is the sum of bake hardening and work hardening increments, i.e. WH As for the contribution of bake hardening itself, Kozeschnik et al. As discussed in more details in the recent work of Dehghani According to Hall–Petch equation, there is a pronounced strengthening because of both the grain refinement to ultra-fine grain/nanograin and the increase in the volume fraction of grain boundaries. In present work, this resulted in 85% increase in the initial yield stress (205 In case of ultra-fine grain and/or nanograin structure, the higher dislocation density and work hardening results in enhanced strengthening as well. Comparing to its coarse-grain counterpart, the increase in work hardening of ultra-fine grain specimen is obvious from the pre-strained parts of the stress-strain curves presented in Higher density of finer precipitates in case of ultra-fine grain leads to significant strength during baking. That is because the applied severe deformation provides a large number of defects acting as heterogeneous and/or preferential nucleation sites for precipitates during age/bake hardening. In case of baking at 250 The results showed that the maximum bake hardenability (103 The most interesting strengthening mechanism is the increase in the solid solubility of elements due to severe plastic deformation. All of these four mechanisms are well discussed in Ref. According to While, the work hardening depends on the dislocations density and their interactions, the bake hardenability relies on the available solute C and N as well. That is because the solute interstitials are required so as to form the Cottrell atmosphere around dislocations. When the solute saturation is reached, the precipitates are formed. In such a case, there is another strengthening effect due to a strong strain field generated around dislocations, which refers to precipitation hardening. Consequently, a high density of fine precipitates can form in case of ultra-fine grain structure. In addition, the second-phase particles can then pin the grain boundaries and hereby not only increase the strength via grain refining but also enhance the thermal stability of produced ultra-fine grained structure through Zener pinning effect. Thus, the one important parameter responsible for the increase in the bake hardenability can be the precipitation of second-phase particles on both the high density of dislocations as well as on the high volume fraction of grain boundaries in case of ultra-fine grain structure The bake hardening of low carbon steels is also controlled by the diffusion of solute carbon and nitrogen to the dislocations generated during prestraining. In other words, bake hardening is kind of artificial aging process controlled by the diffusion of interstitial atoms toward the dislocations distributed by plastic deformation. Cottrell assumed that the stress concentration generated because of dislocation pile-up in one-grain results in the activation of dislocation source in the adjacent grain. It is well known that grain boundaries act as the major source of dislocations. Thus, the smaller the grains, the greater the sources of dislocation will be This is what happening during the industrial application of bake hardening, when after the press forming or deep-drawing of car bodies, they are subjected to painting followed by baking the paint. Obviously, a decrease in the grain size from 30 According to the present results, the bake hardening of steels can be affected by their grain size. One reason is that the smaller the grain size, the higher the volume fraction of grain boundaries will be. As high angle grain boundaries are of higher energy, this can provide preferential deposition sites for interstitial solutes such as C and N, and hereby cause an increase in the solid solubility of interstitials. Dehghani Another point is that with decreasing the grain size, the solutes can reach faster the grain boundaries, i.e. after a shorter diffusion path, where they are finally segregated. This results in a higher concentration of solute C at the grain boundaries of ultra-fine grain steel comparing to coarse-grain one. This is in agreement with the past works Generally speaking, the concentration of solute carbon and nitrogen can be distributed in both the grains and their boundaries, the contribution of each depends on the grain size and in turn the volume fraction of grain boundaries. In other words, in case of ultra-fine grain structure, the decrease in grain size leads to higher volume fraction of grain boundaries where act as a drift for interstitial solutes. Consequently, higher solute content is available comparing to coarse-grain case. Therefore, it is obvious that the grain size affects the maximum amount of bake hardenability that can be achieved. Thus, the dependence of bake hardenability on the grain size is related not only to the solute content but also to the location of solute atoms. In this regard, different effects of solute carbon were reported on the bake hardenability depending on its location, i.e. existed either at the grain boundary or inside the grains. For a given carbon content, the bake hardenability was increased with a decrease in grain size Therefore, the grain size affects the bake hardenability by influencing the diffusion path between the solute carbons drifted at grain boundaries and the mobile dislocations introduced in the matrix In brief, it seems that two important aspects should be considered here: (i) the amount of hidden solute C accommodated at the grain boundaries, and (ii) the diffusion path between the segregated solutes at grain boundaries (known as “hidden solute”) and the introduced dislocations. It is worth mentioning that grain boundaries have two important contributions to age/bake hardening. The first is that the grain boundaries are the major source to generate the mobile dislocations; thus with a smaller grain size, more dislocations are generated. The second, as already discussed, the higher the volume fraction of grain boundaries, the more solute carbons can be accommodated at grain boundaries. Both of these are pronounced with decreasing the grain size to ultra-fine grain, resulting in greater bake hardenability and strength in case of ultra-fine grain structures. There are also other aspects regarding the effect of grain size. The foremost of these is the pronounced strengthening according to Hall–Petch equation. This accounts for both the grain refinement to ultra-fine grain/nanograin and the increase in the volume fraction of grain boundaries. Also, in case of ultra-fine grain and/or nanograin structure, the higher dislocation density and work hardening results in enhanced bake hardenability as well. Another important parameter responsible for the increase in the bake hardenability in case of ultra-fine grained case can be the precipitation of second-phase particles on both the high density of dislocations as well as on the high volume fraction of grain boundaries in a ultra-fine grain structure. Besides, it is well known that grain boundaries act as the major source for dislocation emission. Consequently, the smaller the grains, the greater the dislocation generation and the bake hardenability will be. The formation of ultra-fine grain by constrained groove pressing led to considerable increase in the bake hardenability of low carbon steels. The greater bake hardenability of ultra-fine grain structure can be attributed to: (i) strengthening due to Hall–Petch equation, because of both the grain refinement to ultra-fine grain and the increase in the volume fraction of grain boundaries, (ii) the higher work hardening comparing to coarse-grain structure, and (iii) the enhanced heterogeneous nucleation sites for precipitates during bake hardening, this is because the applied severe plastic deformation provides higher density of dislocations/defects acting as preferential nucleation sites for precipitation. In case of ultra-fine grain structure, both the diffusion path for segregation of “hidden carbon” segregated at grain boundaries during/after quenching and diffusion path of hidden solutes from grain boundaries to dislocations during baking are much shorter. As a result, higher bake hardenability is reached in case of ultra-fine grain specimen. In conclusion, the smaller grain size exhibit a significant effect in terms of solutes required for baking, i.e. accommodating a high content of hidden solute carbon during solution treatment because of enhanced volume fraction of grain boundaries. In ultra-fine grain structure, the increase in bake hardenability and final strength can be of significant importance in terms of industrial applications of low carbon steels used as car bodies. This can result in saving in energy and higher safety as well as in greater dent resistance of car panels.