A fundamental study is provided in this work to understand the effect of Fenton-like reagent made by the addition of FeSO4 in H2O2 aqueous solution on surface hydrophobicity and floatability of chalcopyrite (CuFeS2) and molybdenite (MoS2). Contact angle measurements were performed to assess the surface hydrophobicity. The contact angle results showed that Fenton-like reagent could alter the surface hydrophobicity of chalcopyrite at lower concentration of H2O2 aqueous solution compared to that of using H2O2 aqueous solution. On the other hand, molybdenite surface remained hydrophobic after the oxidation treatments using Fenton-like reagent and H2O2 aqueous solution. Surface characterizations using atomic force microscopy (AFM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) shows that the chalcopyrite surface covered with a thicker layer of oxidation products after the oxidation treatment using Fenton-like reagent, indicating a stronger surface oxidation. Flotation results were in agreement with contact angle results, showing that Fenton-like reagent could depress the floatability of chalcopyrite at lower concentration of H2O2 aqueous solution. On the other hand, molybdenite recovery remained high under various oxidation treatments owing to low surface oxidation.Separation of copper (Cu) and molybdenum (Mo) sulfide mineral is an important issue in flotation of sulfide minerals. Molybdenum minerals are often associated with copper sulfide minerals [ Conventionally, copper and molybdenum ores are separated in selective flotation circuits by using copper depressants (i.e., sodium hydrosulfide (NaHS), sodium sulfide (Na It is well known that the oxidizing performance of H Recently, many researchers utilized the heterogeneous catalyst to overcome the problems generated from the Fenton reaction, i.e., the generation of secondary pollutants, the ferric ions, the low pH conditions, and the difficulties to recover and recycle the dissolved iron catalyst, without losing its oxidation performance [ In this study, ferrous sulfate (FeSO As mentioned previously, molybdenite can be recovered from Cu-Mo ores as a by-product in a flotation process. This is because of large differences between surface properties, typically surface hydrophobicity, of molybdenite and other sulfides minerals. However, flotation is a dynamic process and in this process hydrophobicity is a necessary, but not sufficient condition for floatability [ Chalcopyrite and molybdenite from Miyatamata Mine, Akita Prefecture, Japan, and Wolfram Camp, Queensland, Australia, respectively, were used for contact angle measurements and surface characterizations by atomic force microscopy (AFM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis. Mineral powders were used for flotation tests. Molybdenite powder (<30 μm) was supplied by Sumitomo Metal Mining Co., Ltd., and cleaned using a 1 M HNO XRF analysis showed that the purity of chalcopyrite powder was 99.96% with a small amount of Si (0.03%) as contaminant. Meanwhile, the purity of molybdenite was 99.42% with small amounts of Al (0.09%), Si (0.18%), P (0.19%), and Fe (0.11%) as contaminants. For surface characterization using AFM and contact angle measurements, the mineral samples were cut as a flat surface and were casted in an epoxy resin (SpeciFix-20 Kit, Struers, Germany). The surface of chalcopyrite was polished consecutively using 2000 and 4000 grit emery papers, followed by 3 μm and 1 μm diamond sprays on a DP-Mol cloth (Struers, Germany) mounted on a polishing machine plate (Doctor Lap ML 182, Maruto, Japan) [ The mineral samples (powders or polished flat surfaces) were immersed in an aqueous solution at pH 9. Various concentrations (0–0.1 mM) of FeSO The polished minerals were then treated with H Freshly ground chalcopyrite and freshly cleaved molybdenite surface with size of ca. 1 mm were used for XPS samples. XPS analysis was conducted by following the procedure applied in the previous works [ AFM was used to characterize the surface topography of chalcopyrite and molybdenite before and after the oxidation treatments. The polished mineral samples were treated by following the procedure described in Section The floatability tests of chalcopyrite and molybdenite were carried out using a glass column flotation ( Flotation test of mixed mineral was carried out using a copper-molybdenum (Cu-Mo) bulk concentrate produced from a Chilean copper mining operation. The Cu-Mo concentrate was final products of the bulk flotation process with copper and molybdenum grades of 19.0% and 3.1%, respectively. The main copper and molybdenum minerals in this concentrate are chalcopyrite (46.6%) and molybdenite (5.2%), respectively. Prior to flotation test, the concentrate was strongly agitated without air in a flotation machine (D12 Laboratory Flotation Machine, Metso Minerals, Inc.) by following the procedure reported by Hirajima et al. [ NaHS treatment was also conducted in this work to provide a comparison with the conventional Cu-Mo flotation process. The NaHS treatment was conducted by following the procedure reported in the previous work [ The recovery for single mineral flotation test was calculated based on the mass percentage of the float fraction (m Surface hydrophobicity of the mineral can be estimated from contact angle value of the surface. Therefore, contact angle measurements were performed and the results are presented in  Unlike chalcopyrite surface, molybdenite surface remained hydrophobic as indicated by relatively high contact angle values of molybdenite after treated with various concentrations of H The effect of Fenton-like reagent can be observed from the addition of various concentrations of FeSO Concentration of dissolved oxygen presented in The increasing concentration of dissolved oxygen after the addition of FeSO AFM and XPS analysis were carried out to understand the effect of oxidation treatment using Fenton-like reagent on the surface topography and its chemical compositions. Contact angle results presented in Effect of treatment time on surface topography of chalcopyrite and molybdenite is presented in On the other hand, a small area of the chalcopyrite surface was covered by mountainous features after treated with 10 mM H  XPS results presented in The Cu 2p spectra could be best fitted with three peaks located at ca. 932.0, ca. 932.7 and ca. 934.2 eV. The lowest binding energy is attributed to chalcopyrite [ The similar oxidation products were observed on the chalcopyrite surface after the oxidation treatment using Fenton-like reagent (a mixture of 0.1 mM FeSO Oxidation on the chalcopyrite surface was further confirmed from the shifting of the Fe 2p of chalcopyrite species located at ca. 708.1 eV [ The O 1s spectra in XPS results of molybdenite presented in The effect of various oxidation treatments could be seen from the Mo 3d spectra (  Effect of various concentrations of H XPS analysis results of chalcopyrite and molybdenite are presented in Interestingly, CuSO The effect of increasing concentration of H Based on contact angle and surface characterization results, the flotation tests of single mineral of chalcopyrite and molybdenite were carried out using a shorter treatment time (i.e., 5 min) both with H It can be seen that the recovery of chalcopyrite gradually decreased with increasing concentration of H The flotation results presented in The effect of H A fundamental study of the effect of oxidation treatment using Fenton-like reagent on hydrophobicity and floatability of chalcopyrite and molybdenite is presented in this work. The Fenton-like reagent was generated by the addition of FeSO Furthermore, flotation test results of single mineral of chalcopyrite and molybdenite were in agreement with contact angle and surface characterization results. The addition of FeSO This work was supported by a