Polyphosphates are commonly used industrially to provide electrostatic stabilisation to mineral and material suspensions. Polyphosphate solutions however have shown instability under processing conditions such as high temperature and acidic pH which may lead to a reduction in dispersion properties when added to mineral or material suspensions.
                  In this study the influence of pH, temperature and divalent cation concentration pre-treatment on polyphosphate dispersion properties is reported. Dispersion properties are determined using rheological suspension analysis. The suspensions investigated are material-based model systems of titania pigment and high purity boehmite. Infrared spectroscopy studies of polyphosphate solutions were undertaken to directly investigate the polyphosphate structure after pre-treatment. The rheological measurements show reduced polyphosphate dispersion properties with reduced pH, increased temperature and at high calcium concentrations which correlate with directly measured and reported changes in the polyphosphate structure. When pH, temperature and high divalent cation concentrations are combined, the synergistic effect on reduced polyphosphate dispersion performance is particularly prominent.Dispersion is a key component in a wide range of mineral and material processing applications. In mineral processing, dispersants are commonly used to reduce or even eliminate aggregation, by control of slurry viscosity, during pumping to enable efficient transportation of high pulp solid loadings ( Polyphosphate reagents are widely used in mineral and material processing industries as dispersants and rheological modifiers ( Polyphosphates have the ability to adsorb onto metal oxides and clay particle surfaces via electrostatic and/or chemisorption mechanisms. Specific adsorption of polyphosphate reagents is known to occur to metal oxides such as titania with the apparent viscosity of metal oxide systems decreasing upon adsorption of polyphosphates ( It has however been shown that aqueous polyphosphate solutions are not stable under certain conditions. Polyphosphates have been observed to hydrolyse at high temperature, acidic or basic pH, or in the presence of specific metal ions resulting in the formation of smaller phosphate molecules ( As discussed above, amorphous polyphosphates in solution can be converted into phosphate of shorter chain length, by hydrolysis. The rate of conversion will vary according to the temperature and pH of the solution. While the lower polyphosphates retain, to a large extent, the properties of the original amorphous polyphosphate, further ionisable groups are introduced at the points where the chains break. A recent study of the effect of pH, temperature and time on the stability of ammonium polyphosphate fertiliser solutions has shown that polyphosphate solutions are stable at neutral pH and room temperature (25 Smaller phosphate units such as orthophosphates which are formed during the hydrolysis process may be detrimental as they are likely to have reduced dispersion capacity. While many investigations of polyphosphate degradation are based on measuring the rate of orthophosphate formation and extrapolating that to a corresponding rate for the degradation of the polyphosphate species ( This paper examines the influence of physical and chemical parameters, such as temperature, time, pH and cation concentration, upon polyphosphate dispersion efficiency. Boehmite and titania pigment suspension were used as model systems in this study. Boehmite was used as model of the titania pigment surface as spectroscopic surface analysis has shown that the titania pigment surface coating is in the form of boehmite ( High-purity water was produced by the following sequential treatment: reverse osmosis followed by two stages of mixed bed ion exchange, two stages of activated carbon treatment and a final filtering step through a 0.22 Calgon T used was sodium polyphosphate granular obtained from Albright & Wilson (Australia) Limited. The structure of the Calgon T is presented in The titania pigment sample used was an aluminate- and zirconia-coated, aluminium-doped rutile with a density of 4.1 High purity boehmite, Apyral AOH 60, used throughout this study was obtained courtesy of Nabaltec, Germany with a density of 3.0 All other reagents used were analytical grade (unless otherwise stated). Shear stress of the titania pigment or boehmite suspensions was determined at 25 A single-beam Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer Nicolet Magna-IR System 750 fitted with a liquid nitrogen cooled mercury–cadmium–telluride (MCT) detector was used at a resolution of 4 In order to investigate the impact of chemical and physical parameters on polyphosphate stability, freshly prepared stock solutions were conditioned at a range of pH values, temperatures, divalent metal ion concentrations and time, typically termed ‘pre-treated’ solutions. Subsequently, polyphosphate solutions were added to suspensions and rheologically analysed. Rheological characterisations of mineral slurries are important factors in determining the mineral suspension behaviour (  The minimum yield stress for freshly prepared polyphosphate solution at neutral pH occurs at polyphosphate concentrations of ∼1.5 The yield stress values of the suspension as a function of polyphosphate solution pre-treatment time, temperature and pH is presented in The yield stress of the suspension at pH 9.0 as a function of pre-treatment pH and temperature (re-plotted from data extracted from Interestingly, the polyphosphate solution pre-treated under acidic pH conditions synergistically causes a relative suspension yield stress increase when pre-treatment occurs at 90  The band at 1000 Suspension yield stress as a function of pre-treated polyphosphate solution concentration and calcium ion concentration is presented in To investigate further the influence of calcium ions on the dispersion properties of polyphosphate solution, the suspension yield stress in the presence of pre-treated polyphosphate as a function of calcium ion concentration is presented in The suspension yield stress as a function of pre-treated polyphosphate concentration, temperature and pre-treatment time in 0.025 At 90 Interestingly, the effect of polyphosphate solution pre-treatment on the suspension yield stress in 0.025 From the rheological investigations conducted, the relationship between polyphosphate structure and suspension stability is proposed to involve polyphosphate when in original form and therefore with a ‘long’, extended structure providing steric and electrostatic stability to the suspension. When the polyphosphate length is reduced and is therefore ‘short’ in length, the suspension is stabilised by the electrostatic properties of the polyphosphate. Alternatively when polyphosphate has a coiled or aggregated structure due to cationic complexation, the suspension is stabilised by steric and electrostatic properties of the polyphosphate however these are reduced. The behaviour of the universally used polyphosphate dispersant was investigated in this study using titania and boehmite suspensions as model systems. It was found that polyphosphate solution pre-treatment including pH, temperature, or the presence of divalent calcium ions, influences the polyphosphate dispersion efficiency. Polyphosphate dispersion properties were measured directly by analysing particulate suspension rheological properties in the presence of polyphosphate. The results can be applied to different material and mineral systems. Acidic pH conditions, high calcium ion concentrations and/or high temperatures all reduce the polyphosphate dispersion performance. The reduced dispersant performance at acidic pH conditions and elevated temperature is proposed to be due to hydrolysis of the polyphosphate chain as observed with polyphosphate solution infra-red analysis. Polyphosphate hydrolysis which causes scission and thereby reduction of the polyphosphate chain length, consequently reduces the steric stabilisation component of the electro-stabilisation mechanism. However, electrostatic stabilisation is still provided by the adsorbed short chain polyphosphate molecules. The reduced dispersant performance in the presence of calcium ions is proposed to be largely due to divalent ion-phosphate complexation and polyphosphate chain bridging, reducing both electrostatic and steric stabilisation provided by the polyphosphate chains. The physical and chemical parameters investigated in this study have a synergistic and detrimental effect on the polyphosphate dispersion properties, as the ability of the polyphosphates to act as dispersing agent decreases with decreasing chain length. Control of pH, temperature and cation concentrations is therefore critical for efficient and effective dispersion properties of polyphosphate solutions. Financial support from the Australian Research Council through a Linkage Project is gratefully acknowledged.