Two principal existing analytical methods, which are presented in this paper, can be used to estimate the vertical stress acting on pillars in room-and-pillar mines, based on the concept of extraction ratio. These two methods can adequately predict the pillar load in specific geometrical and mechanical conditions. However, they are not always suitable in the case of irregular geometries with important local variations of the extraction ratio. In fact, one of these methods tends to underestimate the average vertical stresses while the other significantly overestimates the highest values. Therefore, the work undertaken here is focused on the development of a more accurate analytical method for calculating the vertical stress on pillars of irregular size. By using a finite difference code, several hundreds of room-and-pillar mines with random geometries have been simulated in order to obtain numerical estimations of the average vertical stress on pillars under different configurations. A quadratic function of the relative extraction ratio is shown to provide a good fit to the numerical results. It is proposed as a new method for calculating the vertical load on elastic pillars, which offers a better approximation than the existing methods. This is verified for typical ranges of depths and extraction ratios observed in room-and-pillar mines.The room-and-pillar mining method is one of the oldest underground extraction techniques. Instabilities of pillars represent a serious hazard in operated mines and in regions of abandoned exploitations. The induced displacements of the rock can cause severe problems for mining operations and sometimes for surface installations. Even when mines are designed in such a way that short-term stability is ensured, the damaging effect of time on the bearing capacity of pillars is always present and may lead to pillar deterioration. The classical method for assessing the stability of pillars in horizontal tabular mines is based on the calculation of their factor of safety, which is defined as the ratio of their compressive strength to the average vertical stress (load) they are bearing. The prediction of a potential failure then partly relies on the determination of the average vertical stress applied on each pillar, which may vary during the evolution of the mine. In practice, the estimation of a potentially achievable vertical stress is performed for intact pillars and field measurements are rarely available to compare the results. Despite its limitations, numerical modeling is often the only tool to assess the reliability of the stresses predicted by the analytical methods. Estimation of the vertical stress on pillars is commonly achieved by using the Tributary Area Theory (TAT; firstly used in Ref. Poulsen The tendency of the TAT to overestimate stresses is well known. The recent PAT method has, in turn, not been validated for various geometrical and mechanical configurations. On the basis of analytical considerations and numerical modeling, the present study focuses on the development of a new analytical solution to estimate the vertical stress on irregular pillars as a function of both the local extraction ratio and the average (global) extraction ratio of the panel, under an assumption of linearly elastic rock behavior. After a brief review of the two principal existing methods to estimate the average vertical pillar stress, the numerical models used for carrying out the study are presented. On the basis of the obtained numerical results, a simple linear model for the vertical stress is first proposed. Then, an improvement of the linear function is developed by addition of a quadratic term of the same variables. The final quadratic function is then numerically compared with the TAT and PAT models for various mining geometries, first under the 2D plane-strain hypothesis and then for a more realistic 3D model. A discussion is finally conducted concerning the physical meaning and the applicability of the proposed model as well as concerning the new prospects it opens regarding the design of pillars. The state of stress within a mine pillar can typically be expressed as the superposition of two components: the Under gravitational loading, the The mining induced term is mainly related to the mechanical properties of the rock mass and to the geometry of underground excavations. Mine pillars may be rectangular or of irregular shape. There is no general analytical expression giving the stress state of such elements. Even so, Obert and Duvall In more realistic 3D conditions, the stress distribution is more complex and cannot be easily experimented, but Hoek and Brown In reference to classical laboratory tests, pillar loading might be considered as triaxial because of the non-negligible internal confining stress, especially for pillars with a high width-to-height ratio. But it is generally considered as uniaxial vertical whereas this assumption does not affect significantly the predicted response of the pillars. For the purpose of engineering, estimation of the average vertical pillar stress is an important issue and simple and generalizable methods are needed. Two important existing analytical models are presented in this section. The TAT is the most frequently used model to estimate the average vertical stress on mine pillars In the frame of the TAT, the vertical stress is more generally calculated as a function of the initial (virgin) The tributary area model can easily be used. However, it relies on some strong simplifying assumptions related to the purely static nature of the method, which does not take the deformability of the rock mass into account: (1) Each pillar supports the weight of the complete overhanging column, regardless of the relative stiffness of the adjacent pillars (the contribution of the pillars in bearing the weight of the roof is supposed to increase with their relative stiffness For these reasons, it is known that the TAT overestimates the vertical stress on pillars in most of the cases. It follows from the work by Robert et al. To account for the interaction between pillars of different dimensions inside an exploited panel and for the interaction between the mine and the lateral unmined host rock, Poulsen On the basis of fifty-five According to the and to apply the following equation in order to calculate their average vertical stress, where It is worth noting that Eqs. The Poulsen’s method accounts for the presence of irregular pillars and unmined areas within the zone of influence of each single pillar. For one given zone of influence centered on one given pillar, an increase of the surrounding pillars section or the presence of unmined rock induces a decrease of the ratio The PAT model turns out to be more realistic than the TAT, by comparison with some specific 3D elastic numerical cases The next section presents, on the basis of analytical considerations and 2D numerical results, a new method for determining the average vertical stress on irregular vertical pillars by using the basic tributary area concept and accounting at a time for the local extraction ratio of each single pillar and for the average (global) extraction ratios of the entire mine panels. We propose to introduce a new parameter of each individual pillar that is a normalization of their local extraction ratio. It will be called the relative extraction ratio, Hereafter, the relative extraction ratio Numerous mines were simulated with Itasca's FLAC software (version 6.0). This code exploits the Finite Difference Method and is well suited to study the stress distribution around underground excavations in continuous media. Because of the large number of required simulations, part of the study was first reduced to 2D plane strain models, the results of which were later confirmed by 3D calculations performed with the FLAC3D software. A simple linear elastic constitutive model was used in this study. Since rock masses around tunnels and underground mines are typically observed to behave in a linear elastic manner at large scale and in the long term The simulated mines are comprised within a large rectangular model whose lateral and bottom boundaries are located at approximately 400 To determine the effect of the relative extraction ratio of each individual pillar while investigating their average vertical stress, numerous models of mines with nineteen pillars and twenty rooms were built with randomly chosen widths following a uniform distribution. Each width is successively chosen in a range of variation (±50% of an average value for the rooms) fixed so that the average extraction ratio nearly corresponds to a predefined value. Ten models of random dispositions are realized for several depths and for several values of predefined average extraction ratios chosen among common values observed in room-and-pillar exploitations (summarized in The pre-mining stress state is considered as geostatic. A uniform gravitational acceleration field is thus applied to initialize the stresses within the model. The corresponding vertical component is equal to the overburden weight per unit area. Natural horizontal stresses in the earth crust are conditioned by many factors, a part of which has been presented and theoretically investigated by Sheorey. A preliminary study also showed that the height of the pillars has only very little effect on the calculated average vertical stresses when compared with the effect of the extraction ratio. The height of rooms and pillars is then fixed at 5 After the numerical calculations are ran, the average vertical stress of all the pillars of the model is recorded along their central sections in order to overcome the mesh-dependent effects at the corners of the pillars (stress concentration). From now on, the average vertical stress will be expressed as the sum of the From the TAT (Eq. The coefficient The previously defined relative extraction ratio The portion When the local extraction ratio of a pillar is equal to the average extraction ratio of the panel ( Averaging Eq. The terms It has to be noticed that the effect of Vertical stresses on pillars are obtained with numerical modeling after averaging the vertical stresses of all the mesh composing the horizontal cross sections at mid-height of the pillars. The results are displayed in The proposed linear function (Eq. Regarding the points clouds formed by the numerical results ( Concerning the value of Overall, we can see that the estimation of the average vertical stress by the linear function is better when the extraction ratio is close to 1 and thus when the pillar stress is close to the average vertical stress of the panel. The function tends to overestimate the vertical stress on the less-loaded pillars ( To improve the quality of the fit, and in view of the shape of the points cloud presented in The derivation of the quadratic function is done while preserving the properties of the TAT mentioned in the last section. If with: In a way similar to the fit of the linear function, the quadratic function is fitted to the numerical results with a polynomial regression by adjusting For the modeled geometries, the values of The condition of Eq. Vertical stresses obtained with the TAT, the PAT and the proposed quadratic function are compared to those calculated numerically for ten models, each containing nineteen pillars, at a depth of 300 The results obtained with the TAT model are in good agreement with the numerical results for low stress values. From approximately 13 It appears that the proposed quadratic function of the relative extraction ratio offers the best prediction of vertical stress when compared with the elastic numerical results after a correct adjustment of the polynomial coefficients On average over the whole tested models the accuracy of the quadratic function seems to be influenced by the proximity to the abutments. The quadratic function slightly overestimates the vertical stress of pillars close to the lateral limits of the mines, what is shown by the black curve in When looking more in detail the results, in the case of two panels ( The shape of the curves representing the quadratic function and TAT results are similar in A Flac3D model of 20 irregular pillars ( The results obtained with the quadratic function, the TAT and the PAT were compared with the numerical results for a 100 Once again, it may be noticed the TAT model overestimates high vertical stresses while the PAT often underestimates the vertical stress and produces results concentrated around an average value. The quadratic function offers the best approximation for the whole range of vertical stresses. The obtained average relative error is about 4.6% against 9.6% for the TAT and −11% for the PAT while their respective standard deviations are 4.9%, 7.6% and 13%. The maximum relative errors compared to the numerical results are +15% for the quadratic function against +21% and −34% for the TAT and the PAT respectively. The range of relative errors is quite similar to that observed for the 2D models. This confirms that the proposed quadratic function may be used for irregular long rib pillars (2D plane strain model) as well as in the case of 3D irregular pillars with the same polynomial coefficients determined in function of only the average extraction ratio of the mine ( The proposed equation (Eq. Different panels, located at 100 Simulations that cannot be presented here have shown that the results of the quadratic function are the most accurate for a The physical meaning of the quadratic model may be interpreted as follows: on average, a portion When Young's modulus of the overburden is more than 2 times higher than that of the pillars, it has been shown that a linear function of the relative extraction ratio, using the portion The geometry, in turn, determines the proneness of the overburden to deflect under the effect of mining. For given stiffness of the pillars, the vertical load applied on them increases when the deflection of the overburden increases, that is, when its flexural stiffness decreases. The average relative stiffness of the overburden compared to that of the pillars seems to be mainly due to the average extraction ratio of the panel The numerical results show that the flexural stiffness of the overburden logically decreases close to the boundaries of the mines because of the proximity to the stiff unmined seam, what results in a reduction of the load on the external pillars. The linear and the quadratic functions of the relative extraction ratio, as they have been developed, do not account for that phenomenon. A better estimation of the pillar stress close to the boundaries of the mine can be expected if considering that the portion of the weight of the overburden transferred to the pillars ( As they do not properly consider the local variations of the relative flexural stiffness of the overburden, the TAT and PAT produce results significantly less accurate than the proposed quadratic function when compared with the elastic numerical modeling results where pillars are very irregular. In fact, the TAT only accounts for the local extraction ratio of each pillar and ignores the average extraction ratio of the panel whose effect is to limit the deviation of the vertical stress of the most loaded pillars compared to the average vertical stress of the panel. This results in an important overestimation of the highest values of vertical stress. In addition, this overestimation is accentuated due to the fact that the complete weight of the overhanging ground is assumed to be transferred to the pillars, whereas it has been observed in the numerical models that only 93–99% of that weight really is. The TAT turns out to be, however, a good approximation for low values of stresses, that is, for stresses lower than the average vertical stress of the panel. Indeed, it is shown in In turn, the PAT accounts for an average extraction ratio calculated within a zone of influence centered on the pillars to estimate their average vertical stress, but the local extraction ratio of the considered pillar is not directly taken into account. The obtained vertical stresses are thus smoothed around an average value what often results in a significant underestimation. This smoothing effect is accentuated due to the fact that the physical phenomenon of distance-dependence interaction is not considered in the PAT. Indeed, it is known that the effect of an excavation is even softer than the distance to the excavation increases. Consequently, a pillar should interact with another one (as stated in the Poulsen's method) in bearing the weight of the roof in function of their spacing, while in the PAT, all the pillars within a zone of influence interact regardless of their distance to the pillar under consideration. Otherwise, the PAT turns out to be more appropriate when Young's modulus of the overburden is higher than that of the pillars because, under those conditions, the local variation of the flexural stiffness of the overburden and thus the local deviation of the pillar stress compared to the average stress of the panel are less marked (higher ability of the overburden to laterally transfer the load). Such contrasts of Young's modulus may be encountered in the case of coal seams, for which the PAT method has been specially developed, since coal rock is often considered as softer than other sedimentary rocks. The quadratic function depends on 6 variables (Eq. The proposed function to calculate pillar stress can be used for assessing stability of existing mines through the classical factor of safety calculation when the classical TAT method does not apply, like for example in presence of a very irregular pillars. This may help to overcome the use of numerical modeling when the model creation and running are respectively complex and time consuming (in particular for 3D simulations). Although the quadratic function has been developed for horizontal mines with horizontal topographic surfaces, more various geometrical configurations can be analyzed after slight modifications of the proposed equation. The depth The method can be used for various type of exploited seam since it has been shown to be relatively accurate for large contrasts of Young's modulus between the mined rock and the overburden. However, as suggested by the results exposed in The quadratic function opens up new prospects concerning the design of future mines as irregular panel layouts may now be considered. The method has the potential of optimizing the safety and the profitability of future mining operations as outlined by the following two points: it is possible, with an irregular geometry, to increase the pillars factors of safety while keeping an extraction ratio similar to that obtained with a regular geometry; it is also possible to increase the extraction ratio while keeping factors of safety identical to those obtained with a regular geometry. The development of these aspects requires further attention and will be the object of future works. Some limitations are inherent to the proposed method owing to the way it has been developed. The quadratic function may only be used for single exploited seams or at least for the top layer of a multiple-levels exploitation. Indeed, the effect of eventual underlying exploited layers has not been considered in this study. It can be expected that the influence of eventual lower exploited seams on the pillar stresses will be even greater than the pillars of successive horizons are not vertically aligned. The simulated panels have limited lateral extensions of about 500 Owing to the elastic nature of the carried out modeling, the obtained quadratic function is not suitable for considering the effect of an eventual damaged non-elastic zone around the panel’s area. As it is specified in Ref. As suggested by Heasley, Numerical modeling shows that, even under idealized continuous and elastic conditions, the exact stress distribution inside systems of irregular geometry is complex and often elusive. Nonetheless, it is possible to obtain a close approximation of that repartition, acceptable for the needs of engineering, based on simplified analytical considerations and taking into account relevant factors. On the basis of numerical results, a simple linear analytical model has been proposed in this paper to estimate the distribution of the average vertical stress between interacting irregular mine pillars at shallow depth and in linear elastic conditions. This function of the After a numerical comparison with two existing methods in numerous 2D models and in a more representative 3D model, the proposed quadratic function has been shown to be the most accurate with an average error of 1.5% and a standard deviation of 3.5%. This function allows taking into account the role of the local flexural stiffness of the overburden in the vertical stress distribution by introducing an accessible geometrical factor: the relative extraction ratio of the pillars. A discussion concerning the advantages, the disadvantages and the applicability of the proposed method has been conducted. It appears that, in spite of the limitations inherent to the method, the quadratic function of the relative extraction ratio is a relatively simple method, which is generalizable to various mining geometries and that can be useful both for estimating the load and then the safety factors of irregular pillars of existing mines and for optimizing the design of future mines.