The isotherm phase diagram of the ternary system (Cu(SO4)–Zn(SO4)–H2O) was firstly established at 25°C using a synthetic method of conductivity measurement. Then, we made use of volumetric dosing, in order to identify solid phases. The obtained isotherm has revealed the presence of two solid phases that having a stable equilibrium with the liquid phase, which are Cu(SO4)·5H2O, and the Zn(SO4)·7H2O. This study was confirmed numerically while going through the calculation of the binary and ternary Pitzer parameters for the studied salts through a Nelder Mead simplex algorithm. Indeed, the comparison of these with the bibliographic data has confirmed the accuracy of our experimental results.The need for the optoelectronic device with a low cost and high performance had driven by, to the development of thin films of transparent conductive oxides with improved optical and electrical properties. Therefore, electrical materials are currently at the heart of scientific and technological development and their uses are expanded across the most innovative fields of innovation. Such as electrical energy, computing, renewable energy, hydrometallurgy, geochemistry and oceanography. Undoubtedly, photovoltaic cells based on metal oxides are the object of several studies The first factor involved in the development of thin films of conductive oxide is the temperature. Absolutely, matter changes its physical state, according to this one, which makes diagrams development very useful in this domain because it promotes the explanation of mechanical and thermodynamic properties changes, of metals depending on temperature. In this context comes the present work, where the main objective is to establish the isothermal phase diagram of a ternary system based on metal salts. Furthermore, a theoretical study was approached based on the Pitzer model. The Cu(SO As we know, models have been developed allowing an adequate description of the behavior of concentrated aqueous solutions Hence, comes the second part of our paper in which we have treated the numerical aspect of the established isotherm using the algorithm previously elaborated. We could be able to determine Pitzer parameters for the studied system. The method is based on the comparison between the experimental phase diagram and the one obtained using Pitzer parameters, this comparison has allowed us to confirm that the experimentally developed isotherm is effective. On the other hand, several methods have been used for the Pitzer parameters determination, except that some are considered expensive in terms of time and money, because of the enormous need for materials, energy, and equipment Clearly, the most known and used way is the iterative calculation based on the determination of the osmotic coefficient experimentally through the isopiestic method. This is an effective method if we could manage to undertake the experimental protocol correctly with low uncertainty. However, it is considered expensive since the process must be repeated for a large number of modalities’ values. The analysis of the solution in equilibrium with the different solid phases has been performed with a synthetic method based on conductivity measurements The experiment was carried out using a thermostated cell, We followed for several poly-phases (liquid The salts used in this work are the Cu(SO The solid phase compositions were determined by a dosage of the Cu and Zn ions in the several sulfates. It is a chemical analysis method whose objective is to confirm the solid phases identified from the conductivity curve. The Cu ions were measured by iodometry, it is an indirect dosage using potassium iodide (KI) and sodium thiosulfate (Na The other object of the present work is the Pitzer parameters determination of the ternary system (Cu(SO The Pitzer model is one of the most known models that has known a remarkable success. It is particularly popular with geochemists, waste chemists and engineers, for the prediction of mineral solubilities and phase equilibrium. Pitzer and his colleagues have developed the ionic interaction approach to predict the mean activity coefficients of salts in aqueous solutions of electrolytes as a function of molality as well as the theoretical solubilities of isotherms This ion-interaction model gives an equation for the activity and osmotic coefficient of electrolyte solution depending on four binary parameters, The method is based on several steps whose most of them move the point of the simplex where the function is maximum to the point where it is minimal. First, we initialize the programs by a set of vectors chosen such that they are not collinear. Then, vectors are ordered while respecting the ascending order of the objective function values. We compute the centroid, these steps are repeated for each iteration. Thereafter, comes the fourth iterative operations that aim to find the minima of the objective function, Reflect, Expand, Contract and shrink; the method is wide explicit in previous work.  Initialization: we initialize the programs by a vectors set, chosen such that they are not collinear. With Centroid: Reflect: Expand: Contract: Shrink: The objective function The calculated ( The weight composition coordinates of considered mixture points were calculated using the following expressions: The solids phases encountered in this work are: Cu(SO Zn(SO The experimental results of the solubility isotherm obtained at 25 The conversion of the orthogonal reference to a triangular one on a 45° angle is as follows:  (I): the liquidfield. (II): the saturated solution is in equilibrium with a stable Zn(SO (III): the solid phases in equilibrium with the saturated solution is Cu(SO (IV): the solid phases in equilibrium with their saturated solution are Zn(SO Otherwise, only one invariant isotherm and isobar is found at 25 In this part, our approach is to determine the Pitzer parameters for the studied solid phases using the algorithm previously confirmed while exploiting the isothermal curve of the stake ternary system, a comparison was made between the results of our program and existing data in literature as will be shown in tables. The ternary Pitzer parameters of the studied system are not available in literature. Therefore, we have been able to find their values thanks to our used approach. The main object of this part is to confirm our experimental work. As we have previously seen in this paper, the algorithm is based essentially on the isothermal curve, especially the experimental points of solubility limits. We made use of these points to find the Pitzer parameters numerically. Then, the comparison was made to discover how much we are near to the literature data.  As it will be shown in The most interesting issue about this method is that it can also be used inversely. Thus, this work has been dedicated to determine the binary and ternary Pitzer parameters of the metallic salt system, while basing it on experimental results that has been established before. In a reversible way, the experimental points that define the isotherm can be elaborated from known Pitzer parameters while making these last the fixed starting values of the simplex method, that has been used in a previous work With this investment, we have proved that the used algorithm is efficient for the studied system. In our case, we have opted for two different aspects: In the first place the isotherm of the ternary system (Cu(SO In fact, this identification allowed us to conclude that the obtained isotherm is 100 percent correct. Furthermore, we have justified that the algorithm previously established can be useful, to elaborate a phase diagram from Pitzer parameters, which means less investment in terms of time, money and energy. The authors declare no conflicts of interest. The authors would like to thank all people that have contributed to achieving this work.