Characteristic phenylpropenoids are a quality marker to distinguish rhizome and root of authentic Rhodiola rosea L. from other Rhodiola species. A consistent content in line with pharmacopoeial requirements is one objective of increasing cultivation to satisfy the worldwide demand. We set out to compare the influence of harvest season and age on total rosavins (ROStot) and their aglycon cinnamyl alcohol (CA) determined by HPLC/DAD. Plants from 9 different European origins were grown homogenously in South England and harvested in March, August and November of cultivation years 3–5. For experiment optimisation and validation we initially studied other factors that influence the chemical profile: sample origin (plants, herbal drugs and final products of different origin), plant part (rhizome, root, herb), drying (temperature and duration), extraction (solvent strength). We also investigated differences between plant individuals of the same provenance such as male and female plants.
                  Pre-tests showed the importance of confirmed plant identity as non-authentic samples are indicated by total and relative amounts of phenylpropenoids vis-a-vis phenylethanoids. Rhizomes contained 2–3 times higher ROStot values than roots. There was no substantial influence of drying temperature (45°C versus 65°C), but drying at room temperature longer than 10 days influenced negatively phenylpropenoid values. ROStot are best extracted with 70–90% ethanol; CA with 50–70% ethanol. No significant influence of plant sex on the phenylpropenoid content was detected.
                  Extracts (70% ethanol) from R. rosea rhizomes contained 0.5–4.1mg/mL total rosavins corresponding to 0.31–2.6% in the dry drug. Across all provenances the ROStot and to less extent the CA content in rhizomes was significantly higher when harvested in March than in August or November alongside a decrease from year 3 to year 5 under our cultivation conditions. The CA content was 5–30% of ROStot with some influence of the plant origin and may be considered for drug identification and standardisation. The objective of this study was to investigate the influence of harvest season (3 times a year) and age (3–5 year old plants) across different provenances with the focus on total rosavins (ROS Collected seeds from 9 wild provenances originate from Northwestern European costal areas: Iceland (R2, 50 For validation and comparison commercial reference material of different sources were used: 4 herbal drugs (I ‘Rhizomata et radices Rhodiolae rosea’ 50 As reference standards salidroside (CAS 10338-51-9), tyrosol (CAS 501-94-0), rosavin (CAS 84954-92-7), and cinnamyl alcohol (CAS 104-54-1, all SIGMA, HU) were diluted in methanol. Stock and derived solutions for HPLC linearity tests were stored at −18 After seeding in early spring 2006, seedlings, re-potted twice, were kept under greenhouse conditions until October. All propagation conditions including peat containing substrate, pot size, water supply on demand, moderate fertilisation in the second half of the first year (Osmocoteplus The cut dried drug consisting of 0.5–6 The direct analysis of tinctures without pre-treatment previously described ( Salidroside ( Additional calculation of the two rosavin-accompanying subordinated phenylpropenoid glycosides rosarin (t The precision was checked by repeating measurements of standards at a medium (100 or 500 From 3 authentic provenances (R2, R3, R5) and a previously identified non-authentic provenance (R6) 3-5-year old plants (3 individual plants each), harvested in July, were split into herb, rhizome and root, dried at 45 Age Cultivation conditions Harvest time Drying Extraction Provenance (3) Plant part (3) R2, R3, R5 Root, rhizome, herb For comparison, four marketed herbal drug samples (Drugs I–IV) were treated in a similar way as well as two products (Prod I, II, see Section Extraction Sample origin (6) Drugs I–IV Prod I, II Two 5-year old plants from 3 randomly chosen provenances outside the main screening (R-I, R-II, R-III) were harvested in July and split in rhizome and root. Each of the cut samples (2–6 Age Cultivation conditions Harvest time Drying duration Extraction Drying temperature (2) (Provenance 3) (Plant part 2) 45 R-I, R-II, R-III Root, rhizome Two 4-year old plants from 2 randomly chosen provenances outside the main screening (R-IV, R-V) were harvested in October and split into rhizome and root. Each of the samples was divided into two whereof one half was cut into smaller pieces (1–4 Age Cultivation conditions Harvest time Drying temperature (20 Extraction Comminution (size) with subsequent drying duration (2) (Provenance 2) (Plant part 2) Fine cut 10 days vs. coarse cut 30 days R-IV, R-V Root, rhizome  Provenance Cultivation conditions Harvest time Drying Extraction solvent (4) (Samples 3) EtOH 30%, 50%, 70%, 90% Age 4 rhizome, age 6 rhizome, age 6 root   Provenance Cultivation conditions Drying Extraction repetition (4) Extraction solvent (4) Samples (3) Macerations M1-4 EtOH 30%, 50%, 70%, 90% Age 4 rhizome, age 6 rhizome, age 6 root Variation of single plants per provenance (seed propagation from one original plant) were tested with 3 year old plants (harvest August) both for composition and yield data.  Provenance Age Cultivation conditions Harvest time Drying Plant part (rhizome) Extraction Individual plants (10)  Age Cultivation conditions Harvest time Drying Plant part (rhizome) Extraction Individual plants (5) (Provenance 3)  Age Cultivation conditions Harvest time Drying Extraction Plant sex (2) (Provenance 2) Female, male D, E  Cultivation conditions Drying Extraction Plant sex (2) (Harvest time 4) (Provenance 9) Female, male Year 3 Aug, year 3 Nov, year 4 Nov, year 5 Mar Provenance not considered Four plants per provenance from 9 provenances (R1–R5, R7–R10) were harvested mid March (start vegetative season before sprouting), mid August (during fructification and start withering of the first generation stems) and beginning November (end of vegetative season) in cultivation year 3, 4, and 5. The herb had to be removed in August (partially in November the wilted herb and occasional 2nd/3rd generation stems) before splitting in rhizome and root, cutting (2–6 For the influence of harvest season and age we compared: harvest date means (±s.e.m) and range (minimum, maximum) across all provenances ( annual means (±s.e.m) and range (minimum, maximum) across all provenances ( In addition we looked at provenance differences as regards composition (ROS Cultivation conditions Drying Plant part (rhizome) Extraction Age (3) Harvest time (3) (Provenance 9) Year 3–5 Mar, Aug, Nov R1–R5, R7–R10 For factor evaluation pre-tests 2.6.1–2.6.3 ROS For the cultivation experiment (2.7) and the linked sampling pre-tests (2.6.4 and 2.6.5), ROS We compared profiles of rhizome, root and herb of three previously authenticated Rosavin was always the predominant phenylpropenoid across all samples, yet the rosarin:rosavin:rosin ratio also shows some differences between authentic (rhizome 1:2.8–3.2:0.3–0.4, root 1:1.7–3.5:0.3–0.5) and non-authentic samples (rhizome 1:6.8:0.4, root 1:6.8:0.5). Three marketed drug samples originating from Russia, one traded in Germany and 2 products sold in Austria and Hungary were tested for comparison. They revealed similar features for 3 drugs and 1 product (PP We found no significant ROS Rosavins are best extracted with 70–90% ethanol, while CA was found highest in 50–70% ethanolic extracts ( While for quality control a triple maceration would be advisable to determine the absolute total amount of phenylpropenoids contained in the drug, for screening purposes the single maceration, yielding consistently about 75% both for ROS When sampling simultaneously 10 single plants from one provenance (August 2009) the ‘intra-genetic’ (seed propagation) variation for ROS No significant differences were detected between samples from male ( We recorded, however, plant sex at four different harvest dates and retroactively compared across all provenances male and female plants (Suppl. data Table 2). Again, no significant differences were detected with usually more male than female samples. A trend that male plants develop more biomass and have also slightly higher ROS Across all samples and provenances the ROS CA appears equally determined by the harvest season and plant age but to less extent. The March harvest produced always significantly higher CA values compared to August or November; while the latter differed not significantly in cultivation year 4 and 5 ( The derived ROS All 9 provenances followed a similar ROS The CA content per provenance followed largely the overall pattern (higher in spring and year 3) (Suppl. data Fig. 1). However, in contrast to the ROS The yield development over 3 years without fertilisation is shown in Differences between provenances were less pronounced in year 3 but diversified substantially in year 4 and 5. Three genotypes (R1, R5, R8) seemed to cope best with growing conditions not found in natural habitats of the species. Due to the sub-optimum conditions (climate, nutrition) but mainly the transfer and subsequent growth depression, the yield was not considered representative for statistical analysis or provenance comparison. Nonetheless we checked to which extent the phenylpropenoid content relates to the biomass. We found no correlation between the ROS Different provenance may be suitable for short term cultivation (high ROS We showed for the first time systematically that the harvest season has a major influence on the rosavins content when cultivated in a temperate climate. Few previous reports mention seasonal influences. The usual harvest of root drugs or foods at the end of the vegetative season is followed by most producers and investigations but may not be the optimum for The substantial decrease year 3–5 was unexpected but cannot be generalised due to cultivation probably on the edge of what is possible in terms of temperature and humidity. Some genotypes were better able to adapt to warmer conditions than found in their natural habitats. Annual ROS For the CA content, no systematic investigation of season influence is published so far. We found values at about 5–30% of the ROS In conclusion, a drug highest in ROS From 10 genotypes originally included in this study one (R6) had to be excluded as a possible hybrid of The same applied to one of four traded drugs and one of two randomly chosen products. The examples show that wrongly labelled seeds, herbal drugs and finished products can currently reach the European market, if no HPLC profiles, identity tests and key marker determination are applied. It confirms previous reports by From the 9 tested authentic provenances a genetic determination of the phenylpropenoid content can be stated and significant differences can be found, however, we did not find a consistently superior clone or provenance group. It can be assumed that all tested genotypes are location-and climate-dependent suitable for cultivation considering content, growth and robustness. The influence of harvest season, ages and plant part was more relevant than provenance although plants originate from very different locations in Europe. Conclusions on superior types from specific regions cannot be made on the basis of this limited sample range. Our previous report that rhizomes contain significantly more rosavins than roots (about 1.5–3 times more) has been confirmed also for CA (about half the content in roots). We additionally analysed also the herb in its freshest most abundant status (July, ‘first stem generation during fructification), and found minor amounts of SAL As A 20 We found optimum extraction of rosavins with 70–90% ethanol with a 75–85% yield with the first maceration, while 30–50% ethanolic extracts contain significantly less rosavins. It can be assumed that traditional ethanolic tinctures have been prepared with a range of alcohol strengths, yet the resulting ‘dosage’ in phenylpropenoids – absolute and in relation to other compounds- is substantially influenced by the choice of solvent. Therefore specification and standardisation is required as otherwise use and effects of one We did not find consistent significant phenylpropenoid differences according to plant sex. In view of heterogeneous findings in this respect ( The ROS CA is so far not considered for Given that several of these studies were not performed with the solvent or plant part optimum it is not surprising that our results (rhizome, EtOH 70%) of 25–602 The possible genetic determination of the ROS We gratefully acknowledge the support of Elisabeth Williamson (The School of Pharmacy University Reading, UK), Wolfgang Kainz (AGES, Dept. Pflanzengenetische Ressourcen, Linz, Austria), Martin Pfosser (Botanische Arbeitsgemeinschaft am Oberosterreichischen Landesmuseum, Biocenter, Linz, Austria), Anne Starker (Berlin, Germany) and Aidan Slingsby (London, UK) without whom collection, cultivation, sampling and processing would not have been possible. Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: