Sequestration of carbon dioxide in unmineable coal seams is an option to combat climate change and an opportunity to enhance coalbed methane production. Prediction of sequestration potential in coal requires characterization of porosity, permeability, sorption capacity and the magnitude of swelling due to carbon dioxide uptake or shrinkage due to methane and water loss. Unfortunately, the majority of data characterizing coal–gas systems have been obtained from powdered, unconfined coal samples. Little is known about confined coal behavior during carbon dioxide uptake and methane desorption. The present work focuses on the characterization of lithotype specific deformation, and strain behavior during CO2 uptake at simulated in-situ stress conditions. It includes the evaluation of three-dimensional strain induced by the confining stress, the sorption, and the desorption of carbon dioxide. X-ray computed tomography allowed three-dimensional characterization of the bituminous coal deformation samples under hydrostatic stress. The application of 6.9MPa of confining stress contributes an average of −0.34% volumetric strain. Normal strains due to confining stress were −0.08%, −0.15% and −0.11% along the x, y and z axes respectively. Gas injection pressure was 3.1MPa and the excess sorption was 0.85mmol/g. Confined coal exposed to CO2 for 26days displays an average volumetric expansion of 0.4%. Normal strains due to CO2 sorption were 0.11%, 0.22% and 0.11% along x, y and z axes. Drainage of the CO2 induced an average of −0.33% volumetric shrinkage. Normal strains due to CO2 desorption were −0.23%, −0.08% and −0.02% along x, y and z axes. Alternating positive and negative strain values observed along the sample length during compression, sorption and desorption respectively emphasized that both localized compression/compaction and expansion of coal will occur during CO2 sequestration.For a successful sequestration of carbon dioxide in coal seams and subsequent enhanced coalbed methane recovery (ECBM), knowledge of coal structural properties and their variation under replicated in-situ stress conditions is required ( The analysis of rock behavior in 3D has advanced with X-ray Computed Tomography (CT) 3D data sets at micrometer scale ( In contrast to conventional radiography projection, in which a two-dimensional projection of a three-dimensional object is made, computed tomography reconstructs a volume rendering from which volumetric reconstruction can be generated and cross-sectional views of selected transverse planes obtained. The CT imaging allows a quantitative map of the X-ray attenuation throughout the sample. The distribution of the X-ray attenuation coefficients allows the localization of specific features in the material. Following the displacement of these features throughout the volume permits strain evaluations. This technique quantifies the microstructure deformation and any heterogeneous behavior. In-situ strain calculation was initially based upon reconstructions of two-dimensional photo-elasticity images ( This paper applies a three-dimensional full-field measurement technique, based on high-resolution X-ray computed tomography, to quantify strains and visualize deformation in a bituminous coal core ( A coal core was prepared from a coal block collected from the Hazard No. 9 coal seam, Perry County, Western Kentucky. The highwall overburden, mostly sandstone was estimated to be 50 The unconfined and confined core was analyzed using X-ray CT technology. Four sets of scans of the sample were taken: (1) evacuated sample at unconfined state, (2) subjected to confining pressure for 48 The CT scans were viewed and analyzed using commercial software. After volume rendering, multiple mineral grains (fiducials) were located to generate regional tetrahedron element in each volume. Some 43 tetrahedrons were constructed. The strain obtained from the deformation of the tetrahedron was represented at its centroid. The coordinates of these fiducials in successive scans were located ( The state of the displacement of a point is defined by three directional displacement components u, v and w in directions The procedure was repeated for the entire strain elements (tetrahedrons) in the volume, yielding local strain values characterizing the coal core in three dimensions. Tetrahedron boundaries were shared as recommended by Swelling induced by CO     Lithotypes constituting the coal display different chemical and physical characteristics ( The results from the uniaxial testing undertaken by The feature tracking method for three-dimensional strain calculations has been successfully used to quantify the deformation of coal during confining stress application, CO We appreciate the constructive comments and suggestions from the reviewers. We thank Drs Glenn Stracher and James Hower for coal collection.