Sustainability of product quality is important for the consistency of commercial bentonites. Nowadays, this issue is receiving more attention, especially for treated products such as activated bentonites. Even minor changes of process conditions might result in major problems or improvements in final quality in applications such as foundry and drilling muds.
                  The technological characteristics of activated bentonites fluctuate depending on the type of bentonite and the kind and amount of additive and curing time. This study examines variations of the characteristics of activated bentonite with some process parameters and ageing time in order to model and optimise the specifications of activated products for drilling mud and application of geosynthetic clay liner using Response Surface Methodology.Low-grade bentonites, especially in calcium form, are upgraded by using either Na Activation is generally classified into three activation categories: (i) with bentonite moisture of 22.5% or less (dry activation), (ii) with moisture of 22.5%, which represents the moisture of the flow point of the mud and (iii) with moisture higher than the moisture of the flow point of the mud. In industrial applications, activation is mostly performed with bentonite moisture of 35% to 45%, which allows kneading and at the same time retains minimum moisture to avoid extra drying costs. For sustainable bentonite production, a consistent quality of bentonite is crucial for commercial applications. In order to provide this, bentonite producers have to control the product quality and optimise process variables such as bentonite moisture, soda addition/dosage and ageing time. It is very difficult to optimise all of these parameters at the same time to achieve the desired properties. There are some techniques used to draw correlations among process variables such that experimental works to achieve a specific property are minimised. One popular technique for modelling and optimising the process variables is the Response Surface Methodology (RSM). In this study, changes of product quality of bentonite for the use in drilling mud and geosynthetic clay liner (GCL) applications were identified together with underlying mechanisms (activation and degradation) and also, some properties of activated bentonite with ageing time were modelled and optimised by using the RSM. Response surface methodology (RSM) is a collection of statistical and mathematical methods that are useful for modelling and analysing engineering problems. In this technique, the main objective is to optimise the response surface that is influenced by various operating/process parameters. RSM also quantifies the relationship between the controllable input parameters and the obtained response surfaces ( The design procedure of the RSM is as follows ( designing a series of experiments for the adequate and reliable measurement of the response of interest, developing a mathematical model of the second-order response surface with the best fittings, finding the optimal set of experimental parameters that produce a maximum or minimum value of response, and representing direct and interactive effects of process parameters through two- and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) plots. If all variables are assumed to be measurable, then the response surface can be expressed as follows: The goal is to optimise the response variable The coefficients, i.e., the main effect (bi) and the two-factors interactions (bij) can be estimated from the experimental results by computer simulation through application of the least squares method using “MINITAB 14”. There are several successful applications of the RSM for clay processing. In this study, Resadiye Na-bentonite (BentRes) with a CEC of 77.4 The technological characteristics of the bentonite sample are presented in Although BentRes is a sodium type bentonite, its swelling index (SI) of 18.5 The mineralogical analyses were performed following earlier works ( Initial tests indicated that the bentonite moisture in the activation process is the most effective parameter for controlling the product properties. For example, as shown in Prior to the soda activation, the bentonite samples were initially water sprayed to adjust the desired moisture content from 10% to 94%. The effect of specific cations on the process was eliminated by using filtered water with 30–35 The representative samples were prepared for swelling ( The theoretical background is successfully achieved by the MINITAB commercial software, and the only requirement is to load the collected experimental data into the program. The collected experimental data were evaluated with uncoded units of response surface regression method using the MINITAB 14 software. The response surface analysis studies were performed as follows: modelling the response of bentonite characteristics namely the Swelling Index (SI), viscosity (V) and Filtration Loss (FL) ( establishing the relationship between the responses of SI, V and FL ( optimising the operational factors of ageing time and soda dosage to obtain suitable bentonite product for drilling mud and GCL in compliance with the standards/industrial practices (using the overlaid contours in response surface regression analysis). In optimisation studies, the specifications of the drilling mud standards (API standards) and required levels for industrial applications of GCL, given in Following the activation process, the basic technological characteristics of activated products were analysed, and the results are illustrated in If the activation process and the ageing characteristics of the bentonite is summarised based on the soda dosage and ageing time, it is obvious that Na The ageing time, soda dosage and bentonite moisture were found to be effective process variables controlling the technological characteristics of the activated products. Although correlation of each individual parameter with bentonite characteristics was not possible with satisfactory regression coefficients (e.g., ageing time—SI), the RSM can be applied to model the ageing characteristics successfully when all the process variables are used. The knowledge obtained from the statistical model of the RSM was used with the overlaid contours considering the boundaries requirements (as seen in  Blocked and non-blocked statistical models were converted into second-order quadratic equations and summarised in In application, In industrial applications, soda activation is carried out with bentonite containing 28% to 40% moisture. This study showed that the ageing characteristics and/or quality of activated products depend on the bentonite moisture and soda dosage. That is, the ageing process runs faster with bentonite moisture of 40% compared with other bentonite moisture. At 40% bentonite moisture, the ageing periods take longer than 4 Activation process at different bentonite moisture changes the product quality, and hence, bentonite moisture should be taken into consideration and controlled by the producers. Production of consistent quality bentonite products has been receiving more attention and many customers in Turkey have been complaining of variations in the quality of activated bentonite products specified in the contracts. This is most common for non-integrated producers that ignore minor changes in the activation process. This study made an attempt to show that although the activation process appears easy to apply, some factors, such as bentonite moisture, ageing time and soda dosage (ageing characteristics) should be closely controlled because they affect the final specifications of activated bentonite products. This study shows that the statistical model of the RSM is one of the controlling methods of product specifications. The application of the RSM to model the ageing characteristics was successfully achieved with mostly high regression coefficients of at around 0.7 and higher. The second-order quadratic equations responded well to the actual and predicted data with high correlation coefficients (PCor: mostly This study also showed that the ageing characteristics of the products and activated bentonite specifications can be formulised as a function of process variables and the statistical model can be used to estimate the product quality which can be used for consistency on production. The author would like to thank the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK 106G106 Project) for financial support throughout this research.