This paper presents an experimental study to assess the effects of physical and mechanical properties of carbonate rocks and diamond/metal matrix characteristics on performance and tool life of segmented circular sawblades. For this purpose, pertinent rock properties including strength, hardness, abrasivity, water absorption, porosity and unit weight were measured by laboratory tests and compiled into a database for subsequent analysis. The testing program including using six commercially available sawblades with different segment compositions in full scale tests. The related characteristics of the sawblades were diamond concentration, Vickers hardness of the hard facing matrix, mean diamond grain size, cobalt, tin, copper, and ferrous content. Thirteen different carbonate rocks including marble, limestone, and travertine samples from various sites in Turkey were used in the experimental program. The experimental data was analysed by multiple linear and nonlinear regression analysis to develop models for estimation of specific energy (SE) and specific wear (SW) rates using rock properties and sawblades segment parameters. The proposed models were validated by comparing the results of their prediction with those of actual test results and showed good agreements. The concept of optimum total (cutting) cost (OTC) estimation for natural stone cutting is also discussed in the context of estimating sawblade wear life.Tool wear and energy consumption are mainly cost items in the cutting of natural stones using segmented circular diamond sawblades. During the cutting process, mechanical interaction between diamond segment and rocks is important for cutting performance and tool life. In recent years, increased use of carbonate natural stones for building construction around the world have led to increased use of circular diamond sawblades in the natural stone cutting industry. These sawing tools mainly consist of a metal disc body and a number of diamond segments brazed to the disc. The segments consist of diamond grains which act as the cutting parts and also a matrix in which the diamond grains are randomly distributed. In order to improve diamond retention, the matrix is produced from metallic powders such as copper, cobalt, tin, bronze, nickel or irons, which are combined at proper ratios and grain size in the matrix powder before incineration and attachment to the blade. To compact the composition of the grit and eliminate internal porosity, the mixture is usually hot pressed on the blade under the simultaneous application of heat and pressure. In application, the performance and cost of a natural stone sawing, is so affected by the correct selection of the circular diamond sawblade. When choosing an insert composition, the properties of the natural stone to be cut should be the first thing to consider. As a result of a large variety of stones, showing different cuttability characteristics, so many different segment matrix/diamond compositions are being produced by the circular diamond sawblade manufacturers. The concentration, size, quality and type of the diamond grains play a significant role in the productivity of a circular sawblade, characteristics of matrix. The main objective for proper selection of the sawblade is to choose or design a segment to saw at high speed and offer an acceptable life. Even small changes to the segment composition can result in considerable changes to the blade's sawing characteristics. Cutting experiments with circular diamond segmented sawblades were performed on an automated laboratory cutting machine. The experimental setup's schematic illustration given in Optimum sawing conditions can be determined for a given rock type as has been discussed in previous studies. Three type of carbonate natural stones including marble (M), limestone (L) and travertine (T) were collected from variety of commercial stone processing plants in Turkey. Rock blocks having dimension about 50 × 20 × 11cm were obtained from the field and prepared according to the testing standards for each tests. At least five samples were prepared and tested for each rock type and the database was established based on thirteen rock samples as planned in Various standard mechanical and physical property tests were conducted to evaluate pertinent rock properties for this study. The prepared samples were free from visible cracks, joints, and weathering to minimize the impact of rock anisotropy effects on the result. Uniaxial compressive strength (UCS), Brazilian tensile (BTS) and bending strengths (BS) tests were conducted on the samples according to the ISRM Suggested Methods. Various hardness tests including Knoop (KH), Shore Scleroscope (SH), Schmidt Hardness (SHH), and Rosiwal Hardness (RHR) were conducted on each specimen to obtain the hardness properties of carbonate rocks. Knoop hardness test is performed according to the suggested standard. The test was originally introduced by CERCHAR Institute of France in the 1970s In this study, index properties of rocks including apparent porosity (P To select the optimum cutting system, six sawblades (S1–S6) with different segment compositions were used in this study ( Depending on the quality and properties of the sawblades, cost, specific energy (SE) and specific wear rate (SW) could vary for each rocks type Statistical analyses, including simple and multivariable regression analyses were carried out to estimate the specific energy (SE) and specific wear rate (SW) of the sawblades as a function of both rock properties and segment parameters using statistical analysis software (IBM-SPSS). One of the most common methods to obtain an empirical relation among target variables is simple regression. However, a large quantity of data is needed to both determine the correlations between the variables and to establish predictive models. In this study, linear and non-linear regression analyses were performed to develop modes for calculation of SE and SW from measured rock properties. The non-linear regression includes power, exponential and logarithmic relations between the variables. The result of seeking correlation between the variables is shown Simple regression analysis shows that segment properties also have great influence on the sawability of rock as represented by SE and SW. The best correlation was obtained between the SE and both Cons and Fe of the segments with correlation coefficient of 0.847 and 0.844, respectively; but, the lowest correlations were found between the SE and other parameters such as Sn, Cu, HV and Co with correlation coefficient of 0.177; 0.199; 0.315 and 0.324, respectively ( To consider the effects rock properties on the SE and SW, the non-linear multivariable regression analyses were performed. While the porosity and BTS and BS of rock have good relation with SE, SW shows good relation with KH, CAI and BTS. The most Similarly, in order to estimate the segment properties effects on the SE and SW, non-linear equations are also developed; however, since the number of sawblades are 6, non-linear regression model could not give any output, so multiple linear analysis are conducted as below; In equations In this study, linear and nonlinear multiple regression analysis were performed to estimate the SE and SW as a function of rock properties and segment properties of sawblades. Developed models are compared to each other to choose the most reliable and efficient relationship among the target and input vales for use in practice. Several performance indices are utilized to examine the performance of proposed models. This includes root mean square error (RMSE) and variance account for (VAF) and performance index (PI). In order to estimate the SE and SW of circular sawblades for rock cutting, several equations and models developed based on rock properties and segment parameters. Although there are more than 10 equations developed to estimate each target parameter, the best equations were introduced (Model 1–4) herein for estimating the SE and SW as a function of rock properties including BTS, BS and P The relationship between SE and SW based on segment properties including Cons, HV, Sn, MDS and Cu are listed in The experimental program explained in this paper shows the relationship between critical rock properties and sawblade segment characteristics and resulting Specific Energy (SE) and Specific Wear rate (SW) for rock cutting by rock saw using a rotary sawblade. The best indicators of the cuttability of the rock, as shown by SE are BTS, Po and BS; however, for estimating SW, the critical rock properties are BTS, CAI and KH. Meanwhile, characteristics of the sawblade segments do show good correlations with SW and SE obviously the concentration rate of diamond has the best performance together with Sn, Cu, MDS and HV. It is found that Model 4 for both SE and SW using rock properties are the most accurate among the others with R The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The