The low C/N ratio and low carbohydrate content of sewage sludge limit its application for fermentative hydrogen production. In this study, perennial ryegrass was added as the co-substrate into sludge hydrogen fermentation with different mixing ratios for enhancing hydrogen production. The results showed that the highest hydrogen yield of 60mL/g-volatile solids (VS)added was achieved when sludge/perennial ryegrass ratio was 30:70, which was 5 times higher than that from sole sludge. The highest VS removal of 21.8% was also achieved when sludge/perennial ryegrass ratio was 30:70, whereas VS removal from sole sludge was only 0.7%. Meanwhile, the co-fermentation system simultaneously improved hydrogen production efficiency and organics utilization of ryegrass. Kinetic analysis showed that the Cone model fitted hydrogen evolution better than the modified Gompertz model. Furthermore, hydrogen yield and VS removal increased with the increase of dehydrogenase activity.Hydrogen is a promising fuel for sustainable development due to its high heating value (122 Among these wastes, sewage sludge, the byproduct of sewage treatment process, has drawn increasingly attentions recently due to its stable source, abundance, high organics content (more than 60% of dry weight), and low cost. Taking China for example, about 6.5 Co-fermentation of sludge with carbon-rich and high C/N ratio wastes have been proposed as a feasible and an economic way to solve above-mentioned limitations. Co-fermentation process has some unique advantages such as better substrates condition, more balanced nutrients condition, and the dilution of inhibition compounds ( In addition to above-mentioned co-substrates, grass biomass is another kind of promising green wastes for co-fermentation with sludge due to its plentiful yield, high sugars content (50–80% of dry weight), high C/N ratio (26–50) and low lignin content (<10%) ( In this study, perennial ryegrass was added as the co-substrate into sludge hydrogen fermentation with different mixed ratios, aiming to explore an effective and a practically feasible method to enhance hydrogen production from sewage sludge. The kinetics of hydrogen production was analyzed by three classical models (modified Gompertz, Cone, and first-order kinetic models). In addition, the effect of co-fermentation with perennial grass on hydrogen yield, waste reduction, organics utilization and final soluble metabolites composition were comprehensively examined. Finally, the relationship between hydrogen fermentation and dehydrogenase activity was also evaluated. Thickened sludge was obtained from the thickening tank of a wastewater treatment plant located in Beijing, China. Then, the thickened sludge was sterilized at 121 Anaerobic sludge was used as the inoculum in this study, and was collected from the mesophilic anaerobic digester in the same wastewater treatment plant. The anaerobic sludge was heat-shocked (100 150 Before the start-up of fermentation tests, the initial pH of each flask was set as 7.0. Nitrogen was purged for 3 VS, TS, soluble chemical oxygen demand (SCOD) and volatile suspended solids (VSS) were determined based on the standard methods. Carbohydrate and protein were determined by the phenol-sulfuric acid method and the Bicinchoninic Acid method ( The sterilization of feeding sludge eliminated the influence of local microorganisms on the analysis of dehydrogenase activity in this study. The activity of dehydrogenase was measured by the method reported in Modified Gompertz (Eq. The Student-Newman-Keuls’ method was applied to test the significance of hydrogen production results, and p  Most of previous studies only chosen the modified Gompertz equation to kinetically analyze fermentative hydrogen production ( As for the cumulative hydrogen production potential (P), results from all three models revealed that hydrogen production from sludge was enhanced by co-fermentation with ryegrass at various mixed ratios, and the highest cumulative hydrogen production was obtained at the sludge/perennial ryegrass ratio of 30:70 (p Furthermore, it is worthwhile to mention that the Cone model achieved lower differences between predicted hydrogen production and measured hydrogen production (1.94% and 0.88%) than the modified Gompertz equation (2.08% and 0.91%) at sludge/perennial ryegrass ratios of 30:70 and 0:100, respectively ( The essence of hydrogen fermentation is converting organics in feedstock to hydrogen by fermentative bacteria ( Clearly, the highest hydrogen yield of 60 Although the main purpose of this study was to enhance hydrogen production from sewage sludge by co-fermentation with ryegrass, this co-fermentation could also improve hydrogen conversion efficiency from ryegrass. Hydrogen yield from sludge/perennial ryegrass ratio of 30:70 was 5 Organics degradation directly determines the waste reduction efficiency, which is another important index for assessing the efficiency of sludge fermentation. VS removal is the most commonly used index for assessing organics degradation. Effects of the addition of ryegrass on VS removal in sludge fermentation was studied, and the results are illustrated in Carbohydrate and protein are main organic components of both sludge and ryegrass, which accounted for 69.5% and 87.3% of total organics in sludge and ryegrass, respectively ( As for total carbohydrate ( As for total protein ( During the fermentation process, particular organics in sludge and ryegrass are firstly hydrolyzed into soluble phase, and then these hydrolysates are utilized by fermentative bacteria for hydrogen production ( As shown in As for soluble carbohydrate ( As for soluble protein ( After the hydrolysis stage, acidogenic bacteria could utilize the soluble organics for VFAs production in the acidification stage. As shown in Hydrogen production is commonly accompanied by the formation of some soluble metabolites such as VFAs and ethanol during the fermentation process ( As shown in As for the proportions of these soluble metabolites, acetate was the dominant metabolites in all groups, which accounted for 74.7%, 79.7%, 87.8%, 75.5%, 79.0%, 67.4% and 76.1% of total soluble metabolites at sludge/perennial ryegrass ratios of 100:0, 90:10, 70:30, 50:50, 30:70, 10:90 and 0:100, respectively. The results indicated that acetate type fermentation was dominant in all groups. Acetate type fermentation was also observed to be predominant in hydrogen fermentation with alkaline pretreated sludge ( Besides, the pH value usually decreased with the production of VFAs during hydrogen fermentation ( Dehydrogenase activity was observed to be a good index for characterizing the overall microbial activity in anaerobic fermentation ( Furthermore, dehydrogenase is responsible for catalyzing the oxidation of organic compounds in hydrogen fermentation, and functions in concurrence with hydrogenase enzyme in transferring proton between metabolic intermediates with the help of redox mediators under anaerobic condition ( This study showed that the addition of ryegrass could significantly enhance sludge hydrogen fermentation. The highest hydrogen yield of 60 The research was supported by the