Leaching studies of a sludge produced by the physico-chemical treatment of wastewaters generated by a Ni/Cr plating plant were carried out in both sulphuric acid and ammoniacal media aiming to decide which of them would be the best treatment for this kind of waste material. The dissolution behaviour of some metals (Cu, Ni, Cr and Zn) was studied in order to assure the best metal recovery conditions in subsequent processes by the use of some separation methods such as solvent extraction and precipitation techniques. Therefore, the study here presented deals with the first chemical stage of an integrated treatment process. For the sulphuric acid leaching, maximal conversions obtained were 88.6% Cu, 98.0% Ni and 99.2% Zn for the following experimental conditions: a 100gL−1 acid concentration, a 5:1 liquid-to-solid ratio (L/S), a particle size less than 1mm, a digestion time of 1h, a stirring speed of 700rpm (all at room temperature and under atmospheric pressure). As expected, no selectivity was achieved for the sulphuric acid leaching, despite this option yielding much higher metal ion dissolution when compared with that reached by ammoniacal leaching. The use of this latter medium allowed the extraction of Cu and Ni without Cr species, but rates of conversion were only about 70% for Cu and 50% for Ni, much lower than those obtained for sulphuric acid leaching.Metal plating has been identified as an environmental risky industrial sector concerning the potential hazardous nature of its own waste streams, since they often contain reasonable amounts of metals (e.g., nickel, copper, zinc, chromium, etc). The concentration of those metals in the wastewater might reach 30% (w/w, dry weight) making their recovery an interesting issue as environmental and economical reasons are also subjacent A good way to treat and recycle these sludges seems to be achieved by the use of hydrometallurgy. Hydrometallurgical processes have been applied in metallurgy since the Middle Age, and actually one of their utilisations has been in the reduction of the environmental impact of several waste streams, either by lowering the build up of hazardous materials on the earth's crust or by recovering the involved metals for re-use. In fact, this area has proved to be a fruitful sector for innovation. The use of hydrometallurgical techniques is becoming more attractive, since the need of high energy requirements or eventual gas collectors and cleaning systems, always necessary in the pyrometallurgical processes, are avoided The most determinant step of a hydrometallurgical process is generally the first, which is the leaching or dissolution of the valuable metals presented in the raw material suffering this sort of treatment. The overall recovery of each metallic species and the difficulty of their separation from other undesirable metals are generally governed by the efficiency and selectivity of the leaching process. After ammonia, sulphuric acid is the main solvent used in the industrial leaching of laterite, the most important nickel ore, and chalcopyrite, the major source of copper In many hydrometallurgical processes, sulphuric acid has been selected as the cheapest and the most effective leachant On the other hand, ammonia leaching has been applied to metal extraction for a long time The work described in this paper is an attempt to optimise a leaching process to recover nickel, copper and zinc from an industrial galvanic sludge under room temperature/atmospheric pressure and without gas injection. These sludges generally contain a unique mixture of metallic species not normally found in natural ores and concentrates. Furthermore, recycling processes must be as simple and inexpensive as possible. With this idea in mind, a hydrometallurgical process was selected since it can be developed at lower operational costs than those required for the treatment of mineral deposits. This particular paper focuses on the leaching operation itself as a part of an integrated process involving neutralization, precipitation methods, solvent extraction (SX), crystallization, etc, aiming to find an efficient, eco-friendly and economical hydrometallurgical route to recover valuable/hazardous metals and reduce the hazardous character of the waste stream before final disposal. The waste used in this study is a sludge produced by the physico-chemical treatment of wastewaters generated by a Ni/Cr plating plant located at Braga, in the north of Portugal. This sludge is mostly composed of metal hydroxide gels, sulphate salts and occasionally chlorides, thus showing a relatively complex structure and a reasonable high chemical variability, depending on the producing unit, time, product specifications, processing/operation variations and stocking age The characterisation of the sludge involved determinations of density (Micromerits helium picnometry, model 1330) moisture content (Adam balance, model AMB 310) and specific surface area (SA) for samples either in a dry or dispersed form (BET method – Gemini II 2370 equipment Leaching experiments with sulphuric acid and ammoniacal solutions were carried out at room temperature in semi-closed, cylindrical 2000 Based on the knowledge of the sludge composition and assuming that the main reactions involving Cr-, Cu-, Fe-, Ni- and Zn-hydroxides with sulphuric acid are of the type: In ammoniacal leaching tests, the L/S ratio was kept constant at 10:1. Aqueous solutions were prepared by varying the dissolution of known amounts of reagents grade NH During leaching tests, samples were withdrawn at regular intervals using a pipette (10 The conditions adopted for each set of experiments are shown in As can be seen in Results given in Concerning the sulphuric acid leaching, as can be concluded from analysis of Regarding the ammoniacal leaching, the comparison of the results obtained on tests 1 and 3 (see For the general conditions tested, one can say that sulphuric acid proved to be an efficient leaching medium for the most valuable metals present in the sludge, although with a quite low selectivity, whereas the inverse situation occurred when ammoniacal media was used instead. For the sulphuric acid leaching, the comparison of results obtained from the tests performed by utilising the same acid concentration, i.e., {1,2,3} or {4,5,6} groups – In the ammoniacal leaching experiments, the L/S ratio was kept constant for all the tests. However, the pH control in all these experiments was of fundamental importance. As can be inferred from analysis of The selectivity values obtained for the sulphuric acid leaching tests were quite close, however a relatively higher [Ni In the ammoniacal leaching, as can be inferred from results of The dependence of the metal ion dissolution by sulphuric acid (expressed as wt.% of their initial concentration) on leaching time is shown in On the other hand, the effect of the leaching time on the dissolution of the metal ion elements (expressed as wt.% of the initial concentration) by ammoniacal media is shown in Bell et al. Another possibility that could be considered would be the application of a dynamic leaching process in repeated steps, involving leachant renewal. Further work is in progress to promote that operation, in order to evaluate the possibility of reaching higher dissolution yields while keeping a high selectivity towards the metals of interest. The economical feasibility of this alternative at a pilot plant scale would also be an important key step to evaluate, the ammonia regeneration process surely being an important contribution. On the other hand, subsequent processes have already been performed successfully using the liquor generated from the sulphuric acid leaching. Concerning the copper and chromium metal species, Cu was recovered as a powder metal by a cementation process, whereas the characterisation of the Cr–CaCO The leaching efficiency of sulphuric acid towards several metallic elements such as Ni, Zn and even Cu, contained in a galvanic sludge, is much higher than that observed by using ammonia/ammonium carbonate. In fact, the metals dissolution by H Subsequent processes have already been performed successfully using the liquors generated from the sulphuric acid leaching, which allowed the effective recovery of some valuable metals. Anyway, further work at a pilot-plant level is now in progress in order to confirm the promising results already achieved, as well as to test the viability of other leaching alternatives based on ammoniacal digestion systems.