Machine vision has been proposed as an ideal non-intrusive instrument to obtain meaningful information relating to the performance of the froth phase of flotation for the purposes of process control. Many attempts have been made to use machine vision to predict performance factors such as mass recovery rate and concentrate grade. These approaches have largely been empirical, and have been shown to be accurate under limited operating conditions.
                  The most commonly used application of machine vision technology is the measurement of froth velocity within a control strategy to balance the concentrate recovery rate down a bank by manipulating either froth depth or air rate.
                  This paper investigates whether the measurement of physical machine vision measurements are able to provide accurate measures of mass recovery rate and concentrate grade across variations in operating conditions.
                  The results show that although good relationships are found in narrow conditions, a mechanistic understanding and model is needed to determine relationships that are useful over a wide range of operating conditions.A number of performance measurements exist that are useful in the control and operation of a flotation bank. The most important measures are generally considered to be the concentrate solids recovery rate and concentrate grade and recovery of valuable minerals or elemental species. Previous authors have attempted to predict these values based upon the use of froth surface descriptors derived from machine vision systems. The measurement of the concentrate grade is important within flotation, as most flotation plants operate to a target grade performance, based upon the requirements of downstream processes. Concentrates below the target grade may be uneconomical to process, and subject to penalty fees, whilst the cost of above target concentrate grade is lower recovery. Generally, within routine flotation operation, samples are obtained on a shift basis and take a number of hours to process. On-line instruments are used to measure grade, however, these instruments are relatively expensive to maintain and may have low sample frequencies. Therefore, the response time to deviations from the target grade is slow. Hence, a cheap, non-intrusive, reliable and fast alternative is attractive. A number of authors, such as In addition to colour parameters, Work performed by  Thus, from the literature, froth stability and transport factors have been shown to be a good indicator of concentrate grade, while colour has been discounted as an unreliable measurement within this context. Mass flow, or mass recovery, measurements indicate the rate of solids recovery to the concentrate. This measurement is important, as it relates to the recovery of the desired mineral species and it enables easy identification of areas of a circuit that perform sub-optimally. Machine vision measurements can be used to determine the mass flow rate of solids recovered to the concentrate (  The superficial gas velocity is related to the froth transport factors in the flotation cell. The machine vision froth velocity measurement is a robust measurement that relates to the solids recovery rate. This relationship is non-trivial; however, no work has been performed to investigate the nature of this issue. To date research investigating froth velocity and recovery have assumed that froth stability and transport factors are consistent across a range of operating conditions within a single flotation cell across changing feed conditions. This has been the basis for the empirical modelling of the concentrate grade and solids recovery rate, using froth stability and velocity measurements. However, this relationship has only been demonstrated under narrow and specific conditions. Thus, the objective of this paper is to test this assumption by considering the relationships between the froth surface descriptors and flotation performance factors in the presence of different concentrations and type of floatable solids. Two experimental systems were considered. Copper and platinum flotation systems were chosen, to represent slow and fast floating material respectively. The copper test work was performed in industrial flotation cells at NorthParkes Mine in New South Wales, Australia. This plant processes an ore, where the majority of the copper mineralisation occurs in bornite (Cu The bank feed, each cells concentrate and bank tails were sampled to obtain a mass balance for the circuit. A number of additional measurements were taken in the first and third cells of the bank. These cells were chosen to represent the presence of high and low amounts of floatable material within the pulp. Machine vision measurements were taken, which consisted of 20 In both systems, experiments were performed where the operating conditions were varied according to a rigorous experimental design. In the copper system the frother concentration, froth depth and air rate to each cell were varied for each experiment ( The conditions in each system and flotation cell are not directly comparable as the operating variable changes differed in level and magnitude. Thus, an analysis method was chosen to only determine the overall relationship between factors by measuring the significance and direction of the relationship. Flotation performance has a distinct optimum and is a non-linear system. Many researchers have shown that the froth phase in particular exhibits non-linear behaviour. However, within this work, linear regression was chosen as a tool to determine whether the direction in which a factor changed related to a change in flotation performance consistently over the range of operating variables and ore types tested. Thus, only two levels of change, usually high and low, were made when investigating the effects of the factors in the system. Therefore, linear regression was only used to analyse the data and determine the significance and direction of the relationship between the operating conditions and the measured froth surface descriptors. It is not proposed as a method to model these relationships. The study investigated the relationship between specific froth surface descriptors and the frother concentration to the solids recovery rate and concentrate grade. The froth surface descriptors chosen were related to physical or dynamic froth characteristics. Froth stability behaviour is related to flotation performance factors, such that froths containing high amounts of solids are stable and result in high recoveries at a low grade. Conversely, froths that contain low amounts of solids are unstable and result in low recoveries at a higher grade. Thus, the characterisation of froth stability behaviour is an important component in explaining froth phase performance behaviour. The importance of the factors were determined and ranked based upon the level of significance of the factor and the direction of the correlation. Highly significant relationships (++ or −−) require a   The results for the solids recovery in In addition, Comparing the first rougher results for each system shows that in the case of the copper system, an increase in one or more of the burst rate, velocity, frother concentration or bubble size correlated with an increase in solids recovery rate. However, in the platinum system, a decrease in either the burst rate, frother concentration or bubble size correlated to an increase in solids recovery rate. The number of factors that were significantly related to solids recovery rate decreased in the third rougher cell in both systems. An increase in velocity was consistently observed to correlate with an increase in solids recovery rate and, in the case of the copper system, burst rate correlated to an increase in solids recovery rate whereas, in the platinum system, the frother concentration correlated to a decrease in solids recovery.  Comparing the first rougher results for each system shows that the intercept, burst rate and bubble size all correlate significantly to concentrate grade. However, as with the relationships with solids recovery rate, the relationship between the factors and concentrate grade reverses between the copper and platinum results. The regression results show that the solids recovery rate and concentrate grade were inversely related, such that when a significant factor was positively related to the solids recovery rate the factor corresponded to a negative relationship to concentrate grade. These results also show that, while velocity measurement is robust in that it was always positively correlated with solids recovery rate, in some of the conditions tested, other factors had a more significant relationship with solids recovery. This finding has important consequences, as currently the froth velocity is the most often and commonly used froth surface descriptor to relate to solids recovery rate. These findings illustrate that, while it is a robust measurement, it is often not the most sensitive or direct indicator of solids recovery. In addition, the nature and significance of this relationship has been shown to change across different ore conditions. The high solids concentration conditions resulted in better regression models when the bubble size measurement was used instead of the solids loading measurement, and the converse was true for the low floatable solids conditions. The significance of this finding may be that in systems where high amounts of floatable solids are present, the solids loading on the froth surface remains relatively consistent, while a variation in bubble size relates to the conditions and performance of the froth phase. Conversely, within a flotation cell where the amount of floatable solids present is low, the bubble size may be largely invariant (usually small) with a larger variation of solids loading on those bubbles that reflects the selectivity of the froth phase more effectively. However, in the cases investigated in this work, while the solids loading measurement did not have a significant correlation with either solids recovery rate or concentrate grade, its impact on the overall regression model in the third rougher cells was large. In the copper system, an increase in the burst rate resulted in an increased solids recovery rate, and a decreased concentrate grade. However, in the platinum system, an increase in burst rate resulted in a decreased solids recovery rate and an increased concentrate grade. This is attributed to two different mechanisms driving the froth behaviour. In the case of the copper system, an increased burst rate results in an increased loading of bubbles and increasing the solids present in the Plateau borders, resulting in increased solids recoveries. However, in the platinum system, an increased burst rate results in a decrease in the froth transport rate, and an increased drainage rate, lowering the bubble surface area flux and solids concentration being recovered to the concentrate. This evidence illustrates two conditions where different mechanisms dominate the froth phase behaviour. While the different mechanisms dominate the behaviour in the two different systems tested, a system may exist where the dominance of these mechanisms may interchange across a narrow band of operating conditions, such as a feed change from an ore type containing highly floatable minerals to an ore type of slow or low mineral floatability. These findings indicate that a model which considers specific mechanistic behaviour within the froth phase is required to robustly determine which factors are the most significant for the current ore processing conditions. In each flotation cell in both systems, good relationships were found relating the froth surface descriptors and specific operating variables to solids recovery rate and concentrate grade. Where significant relationships between the modelled factors and either the solids recovery rate or concentrate grade were determined, the direction of the corresponding relationship between the solids recovery rate or concentrate grade was inversed, indicating that solids recovery was inversely proportional to grade, as expected. The solids recovery rate varied over a wide range in the first rougher cell of both systems. In these cases, the factors used in the regression analysis related well to the solids recovery rate. The concentrate grade was shown to be strongly related to froth stability under conditions where high amounts of floatable solids or highly hydrophobic solids were present. However, in conditions where low amounts of floatable solids were present, other factors, such as froth velocity, were more significantly related to the concentrate grade than the froth stability. In the case of the copper system, an increase in stability correlated to a decrease in concentrate grade and an increase in solids recovery rate, whilst in the platinum system this relationship was reversed. This finding illustrates that different mechanisms acted within the froth phase to influence the froth behaviour and performance characteristics. Thus, this work shows that, although in narrow operating conditions links between froth surface descriptors and flotation performance occur, no universal link exists to directly relate froth surface descriptors to froth performance behaviour. Hence, further mechanistic understanding is required and empirical approaches used to relate froth surface descriptors to flotation performance behaviour are likely to fail.