This paper shows that tax policy toward investment, by changing the relative prices of capital varieties even within narrow classes of equipment, can have a direct effect on the quality composition of capital goods that firms purchase. Detailed data on farming, mining, and construction machinery suggest that this impact is economically important. Firms significantly shift investment toward higher quality varieties when they receive investment subsidies (and do not do so when investment is high for other reasons). In the aggregate, all of the new investment generated by tax subsidies appears to come from firms shifting to higher quality capital goods rather than buying a larger number of their existing capital types. The paper also applies a methodology for calculating the implied deadweight loss from the quality distortion and shows that its magnitude may represent a substantial efficiency cost from capital taxation that is neglected in conventional work.The conventional analysis of tax policy toward investment treats capital as a homogeneous good and asks how quantity responds to the cost of capital. This approach abstracts away from the heterogeneity of actual capital goods. In reality, buyers of capital must choose between heavily differentiated products even within relatively narrow classes of assets, routinely deciding not just how much capital to buy but also what type and what quality of capital to buy. This paper shows that investment tax policy may directly alter the incentive to buy different types and qualities of capital, even within categories where tax treatment is nominally identical and that the impact of tax policy on these margins is an especially important a part of understanding its impact on the capital stock and its efficiency cost for the economy. There is, unfortunately, no previous empirical work on the subject of taxes and the quality of capital. This is somewhat surprising for two reasons. First, in related areas of macroeconomics and growth theory, there is a large literature emphasizing the importance of heterogeneity for understanding investment and the capital stock. This paper will examine the role of tax policy on the quality of capital investment using data on the prices, maintenance costs, and quantities of highly disaggregated capital varieties of mining, construction, and farm machinery and by adapting empirical methods from the international trade and productivity literatures on index number theory to measure changes to the quality composition of investment and calculate the deadweight loss of tax induced quality distortions. In a conventional model, changing the cost of capital leads a firm to change its capital–labor ratio by expanding the capital stock. In reality, tax policy may do more than just induce neutral investment expansion because investment taxes apply only to direct investment spending and not to things like future maintenance, worker training, or machine supervision (which may substitute for initial spending). Because of this, taxes may change the composition of goods the firm buys even if all the goods appear to have identical tax treatment. A fixed rate subsidy, for example, will tend to increase investment in expensive but reliable types of investment goods more than in inexpensive but unreliable ones. The empirical results in this paper suggest that there is relatively robust cross-sectional evidence of such composition shifting. Subsidies do not expand investment symmetrically even within classes with identical tax treatments. As predicted by the theory, investment in capital types with higher prices per machine increase more than those with lower prices per machine following subsidies (and vice versa following tax increases). This quality response appears to be specifically tied to tax policy. When investment increases for other reasons, it does not generate this composition shift. The paper develops a method of aggregation and documents that the impact of taxes on the quality composition of the capital stock is important quantitatively. Indeed, The paper proceeds in six sections. The paper will look for the effect of taxes on quality changes in the choice of investment goods. Intuition for how investment policy can change relative prices of different varieties with the same tax treatment centers on the fact that tax policy applies only to the purchase and installation costs of a capital good. Future costs such as the repairs and maintenance required to keep the capital good in operation, although part of the economic price of the good, are generally expensed when they occur rather than depreciated as investment expenses. I will focus on future maintenance expenses being lower for high quality goods but this same idea would apply for any factor associated with the capital that is directly expensed—different training or labor requirements, for example. Consider the simplest possible world in which there are two types of capital (denoted type A and type B) and the relative demand function for the goods, So long as To look for tax induced quality changes requires data on the prices and quantities of highly disaggregated capital goods. The most disaggregated investment studies in the literature, however, have data on only about 25 different varieties of equipment ( Every Unit value data have been criticized in the productivity literature for providing inadequate long-run measures of quality change since even the seven digit product codes of the It is necessary at the outset to eliminate potential confusion over the meaning of quality change as used in this paper. As discussed in The basic issue is understanding how investment responds to tax policy. The conventional approach suggests that subsidies lead firms to expand their homogeneous capital stocks. Since all of the disaggregated varieties within a class of equipment such as mining machinery are assumed to have the same demand elasticity and face the same tax treatment, changes to tax policy ought to generate a the same percentage increase for all the varieties within the class (holding other things equal). The argument presented here suggests something different and it is something that cannot be seen in conventional aggregate investment data. The same subsidy rate should give more stimulus to higher quality types of mining machinery than lower quality ones and should induce a change in the composition of investment. To examine the role of taxes, I match the Other control variables used in the analysis will include the real baa bond rate, the GDP growth rate, a variable for the Nixon price controls (equal to the number of months the controls were in effect for the year divided by twelve), the ratio of equipment investment to GDP, and year dummies. Real prices are deflated by the GDP deflator. All these macroeconomic variables come from The predicted tax induced composition shifts only make sense if the relative future expenses are, indeed lower for the higher priced varieties. Unfortunately, the The construction and mining machinery maintenance data include more detail than the I construct a net present value of future repair costs for each type of equipment, as described in To test whether repair expenses are lower per dollar for higher priced machines, I regress the log of repair expenses for each good on the log of the purchase price. If the relative maintenance expenses are smaller for higher priced types of capital, the coefficient should be less than one (implying maintenance costs rise less than proportionally with the price). I do this in two different ways with the same results. In the top panel of Although it will not allow for the calculation of aggregate empirical magnitudes, the most straightforward way to document effects on the quality composition of capital is to examine the micro-level data on cross-sectional responses in years of large tax cuts and tax increases. The basic specification in a given year is The first two columns of These composition effects within categories receiving identical tax treatment are of just the form predicted by the theory but do not control for other factors such as the business cycle, interest rates, fuel prices, and so on. Column (3) combines all the years in the sample and includes industry-year dummies to absorb any macroeconomic effects that affect the industry as a whole (e.g., technology shocks, business cycle, etc.). The regressions still identify the impact of taxes using the within-year demand composition changes by including an interaction term of the change in the tax cost of capital with each variety’s initial quality level. The coefficient should be negative if lowering the cost of capital raises investment in the higher quality varieties. I have first differenced the data to eliminate unobserved fixed effects by asset type. The coefficients are significant and negative in both the OLS and the median regressions indicating that even controlling for other factors, taxes appear to change the quality composition of the capital stock in the predicted way. Columns (4)–(6) repeat the regressions but split them by industry and the results are the same in all three. To get a sense of the plausibility of these composition effects, I compute the implied elasticity of substitution between some select capital varieties in the construction machinery sector by comparing the relative price change and relative quantity change across assets. I use construction machinery because that is where the data are the best but the results were quite similar for mining machinery (the farming repair data are not complete, as described above). The actual price of a capital type is the tax adjusted price plus the NPV of future expenses, here assumed to be only the maintenance expenses. If tax changes lead to large shifts in the relative amount of investment of different types of capital but the change in relative prices caused by the tax change is small, this will imply a large elasticity of substitution between capital varieties within asset group (and too large might cast doubt on the proposed mechanism). The elasticity of substitution, With a corporate tax rate of 0.45 (the mean in the sample), and a present value of depreciation allowances of 0.8, enacting a permanent unanticipated investment tax credit of 7 percent would reduce the cost of capital from 1.163 to 1.036, (a change of −0.127). According to the weighted OLS results for construction machinery at the bottom of The implied elasticity of substitution between the two varieties is, then, the ratio of 0.03 and 0.007 or 4.1. This value was quite robust to comparing varieties from different parts of the quality distribution. The values for mining machinery were around 3. These substitution elasticities are large but are similar in magnitude to those found between similar types of equipment in other industries such as different types of jet aircraft in The results show that in response to a tax subsidy, there is a shift in the quality composition of investment and of a plausible magnitude. In this section, I deal with two potential alternative explanations: mismeasured quality and spurious correlation between tax policy and other factors. Column (1) of Finally, column (4) documents that taxes’ influence on the quality composition of investment does not appear to result from a spurious correlation of tax policy with other factors. A basic scale effect on quality, for example, might imply that whenever investment is high, firms buy better machines. Alternatively, a Leontief production function at the micro level could generate a similar pattern. Any time a firm wanted to expand the capital labor ratio (as, for example, when the cost of capital fell), it would have to buy machines with greater embodied capital–labor ratios. In these stories, all new investment generates changes in the quality composition, not just a tax induced investment. Likewise, there might be quality biased trends over time in investment which the results are confusing with tax changes. The regression in In this section I move from the product level analysis to an aggregate analysis in order to measure the magnitude of the effects. Although it involves throwing away much of the detail available in the micro data, aggregation is the only way to quantify the importance of quality changes for aggregate investment or for the deadweight loss of investment tax policy. The theory extends the basic idea presented above that tax policy can change relative prices and alter aggregate quality. The model follows on the work of It begins with an economy having a production function where one argument in the function is a capital aggregate A good measure of capital quality, In words, quality is the weighted average price per capital good (also known as weighted average unit value or UV) divided by the unit cost function at the same price vector. Using Defining the periods as pre- and post-tax, this equation can be used to determine the amount of quality change induced by a tax subsidy toward investment. For a general ad valorem subsidy with a rate, We know that the weighted unit value (average price) given a vector of prices In general, the sign on this expression will be indeterminate. Subsidies could raise or lower quality depending on which goods get the larger subsidies. This is important, in practice, because the measure of quality change between any two years as described in Assuming Translog cost function and using the price index of The percent change in quality is then the percent change in the unit value minus the percent change in the price index. This measure of quality change is also a component of real investment. If a tax change increases real investment, this can come from an increase in the physical amount of capital or from an increase in the quality of the capital goods. The share of total investment accounted for by quality upgrading can be directly calculated. Traditional work makes no such distinction and assumes firms expand investment by replicating the capital stock they already have. This should appear in the current framework as an increase in the amount of capital with no change to the composition. Alternatively, the theory here predicts that the amount of quality change should depend on changes to the tax treatment of investment (as the earlier cross-sectional results suggested). The increase in real investment will be weighted toward quality change rather than just expanding the capital stock of the existing composition. The first column of The results on quality show that, just as in the micro level data, tax policy significantly affects the aggregate quality of capital in the direction predicted by the theory. A 10% ITC at the mean corporate tax rate raises quality by 11.8%. The second column then puts these numbers in context by examining how taxes affect the amount of real investment. The change in real investment is computed by subtracting the change in the log of the price index from the change in the log total value of the products. This measures what the conventional literature calls “real investment” and it includes changes in both the number of investment goods sold and the quality of those investment goods. The point estimates show that real investment does rise when investment is subsidized, though the standard errors is large. Total investment rises by about 5.2% from a 10% ITC. This magnitude is between those found in the conventional estimates described in More importantly, though, I cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficient on quality and the coefficient on value are the same ( The aggregate results therefore both confirm the cross-sectional results that taxes influence capital quality and emphasize how important such composition shifting is for understanding the impact of taxes on investment. The important role of tax policy on the quality of capital goods in these sectors means that the aggregate level of quality will differ from the optimum whenever the tax treatment of investment differs from full expensing (in either direction) because this will induce people to invest too much or too little in current quality in order to take advantage of the tax treatment relative to future expenses. This distortion implies that tax policy creates an additional deadweight loss (DWL) which is forgotten in conventional studies because they use only price deflators and real investment would create. A major advantage of the index number approach to aggregation used above is that, as shown in Defining DWL, as in  One problem with the measure in Dividing the DWL by the average change in the cost of capital for these same years implies a “coefficient” of about 0.1 indicating that a 10% ITC at the mean corporate tax rate (which lowers COC by 0.18) could create a quality-induced DWL of around 1.8% of investment expenditure—almost 20% of the revenue spent on the subsidy. Likewise, raising the tax on capital so that the cost exceeds neutrality, such as occurred in the Tax Reform Act of 1986, will also generate a quality induced DWL. Compare this to a conventional calculation of the DWL from taxation (i.e., a calculation ignoring quality). Without quality change, the DWL of a tax/subsidy can be approximated by Standard estimates normally assume that the supply curve is perfectly elastic and estimate the elasticity of demand between 0 and −1 implying a DWL and a supply elasticity between 1 and infinity yielding a DWL of between 0 and 0.9% of investment expenditure for a 10% ITC subsidy (or equivalently sized tax). In other words, the conventionally calculated DWL from an investment tax or subsidy amounts to between 0 and 9 percent of revenue. The short-run character of the calculation does not take into account any externalities associated with quality change. In the long run, for example, providing better quality goods may induce more research and development, reduce pollution emissions, or create some other externality which would make the DWL of a subsidy smaller than these calculations suggest. In such cases, however, the DWL from an equivalent tax would be even larger than indicated here. This paper puts forward the idea that tax policy can change the relative price among capital varieties and thus lead to shifts in the quality composition of investment demand even within narrowly defined asset classes. Using data on mining, construction, and agricultural machinery, the cross-sectional evidence indicates that when the cost of capital falls, the sales of higher quality (i.e., more expensive) capital varieties disproportionately increase and the reverse when the cost of capital rises. This effect is not a general feature of investment but rather is specific to tax policy. The paper then establishes a means of aggregating the micro-data and shows that the overall effect of the tax induced quality change is large. The entire increase in investment caused by tax subsidies comes about from an increase in the quality of the machines, not the number of machines. Finally, the paper presents calculations suggesting that the quality distortion created when tax policy differs from full expensing generates an additional deadweight loss which has been neglected in previous work and that this efficiency cost may be quite large. Taken together, these results have important implications for evaluating the costs and benefits of investment tax policy and they suggest that the role of taxes on quality may be a fruitful area of further research. I would like to thank Andrew Lee for superb research assistance and Alan Auerbach, Steve Davis, Robert Feenstra, Robert Gordon, Roger Gordon, Zvi Griliches, James Hines, Charles Hulten, David Hummels, Pete Klenow, Steve Levitt, Derek Neal, James Poterba, Canice Prendergast, Lars Stole, two anonymous referees and seminar participants at the Johns Hopkins University, University of Texas, the University of Wisconsin, and the N.B.E.R for helpful comments. The results in the text are based on the quantity and unit value data from the The data in this study come from industries classified by the Each Some particular issues for each industry are as follows: For construction machinery, the time period with continuous data was 1961–1988. I removed tractors since they often experienced different tax treatment from other types of construction equipment in this sample. For farm equipment, there are a number of product types with very low unit values which would not, sold individually, be counted as capital goods. I restrict the sample to only those machines with a real price of more than $200 in 1987 dollars. The results were not qualitatively different varying this cutoff point, however. For farm machinery, I again excluded tractors and lawn and garden equipment which often faced different tax treatment. The consistent time period available for this industry is 1966–1988. For mining machinery and mineral processing equipment, the data are reported consistently from 1962 to 1988. For information on the relationship of base prices and future repair costs for construction machinery and for mining machinery, I use the In it, for each of the several thousand types of capital equipment, the report gives, among other things, the estimated base price of the capital (the list price for a new model), estimated total hours of use in the good’s lifetime, the average annual hours of use, and the estimated hourly cost of repair expenses (including preventive maintenance, overhaul, parts, supplies, tires, and lubrication). The data are classified in several levels. There are general categories of equipment such as Air Tools. Within them there are types of equipment such as Air Track Drills. Within those there are equipment types such as Ingersoll-Rand or Gardner-Denver or, in other cases diesel powered or gasoline powered, and within those a model variety such as the Ingersoll-Rand CM345/ARH. Of the broad categories, Asphalt and Bituminous, Compaction, Concrete, Excavating, Lifting, and Road Maintenance contain varieties of capital found in the construction machinery data of the To calculate the NPV of future repair costs for these types of capital, I take the average hourly repair expenses, multiply by the annual hours and calculate the NPV of expenses using a real discount rate of 0.05 and the effective service life of the machine (calculated by dividing the equipment’s economic hours by its average annual hours). These lives ranged from 3.4 to 11.8 years for mining machinery and 3.2 to 17.5 years for construction. machinery. Agricultural machines are not included in the AGC guide so I must rely on less comprehensive information to estimate the future maintenance expenses. For them I turn to maintenance costs estimates computed from AGMACH$, a computer software program created at Oklahoma State University to estimate the costs of operating agricultural machinery ( To calculate the NPV of future repair costs for these types of capital, I use the annual repair costs, a real discount rate of 0.05 and the service life of the machine as given by AGMACH$. With a general ad valorem subsidy whose rate is greater for more expensive products, quality upgrading is not certain but is likely. Before showing this, first note the quality change induced in two special cases as proven in The other special case is where the subsidy is a constant dollar amount of In this paper I consider the more general subsidy which alters the price vector to Since a constant dollar subsidy across goods reduces quality, Likewise, an Taken together, Returning to the general formulation of A simple guarantee that this is true is for the subsidies to be greater than average for the To isolate the DWL generated by the quality change induced by tax policy, consider a subsidy of the same size as the one with rates that vary by quality but with a constant rate Using (B.1′) and canceling terms, the difference between the DWL of the two subsidies (given by To express this measure of the DWL from quality change in a form that can be calculated but is also intuitive, note that the total expenditure on capital after a general subsidy is Basic index number theory, however, defines the Paasche index of the price change caused by the subsidy, The additional DWL caused solely from the quality change, from (B.5′), can be calculated as