The potential of soils as a sink of atmospheric carbon and the implications related to mitigate greenhouse-gas emissions are well recognized. The raising of tree crops on agricultural soils can augment soil-carbon sequestration more than do other agricultural uses such as corn crops. Thus, 6 plots with different durations of use as poplar plantation (5, 10, 20, 30, 50, and 100 years) were studied in comparison with 6 adjacent plots with corn crop. The carbon pool in poplar-plantation soils was positively correlated to the time of use at the three soil depths studied (0–20, 20–50, and 50–100cm), the mean annual increase being 1.16Mg C ha−1 year−1. Poplar-plantation soils also increased the total carbon content in a more effective way because the duration of use was also correlated with the most recalcitrant carbon forms. Therefore, land-use change from corn crops to poplar-plantation soils is economically profitable as well as positive both for the total organic-carbon pool as well as for the efficiency of carbon sequestration by the increase of non-oxidizable forms in the soil.Soil organic matter can be defined as the complex mixture of different compounds coming from the plants and soil microorganisms ( Soils play a central role in the global carbon cycle and constitute a large carbon reservoir ( The duration of sequestration can be separated into two components: flow duration and stock duration. Flow duration represents the time period of active sequestration, or the time in which annual changes in soil organic carbon occur. Stock duration represents the time period following active sequestration, and can be defined as the period of passive sequestration, or the time in which organic carbon remains sequestered ( The main mineralization process of soil organic matter is the oxidation by abiotic mechanisms or biocatalysed by metabolic processes. Therefore, the first methods used to analyze soil organic matter were based on oxidative pathways, such as the potassium-dichromate method ( Now, the global emission of CO With rising concern about the climatic consequences of greenhouse-gas emissions, worldwide efforts are being made to augment carbon sequestration and reduce CO The present work studies the differences between the amounts of organic carbon fixed in the soils of the alluvial plain of Granada (Spain) under poplar plantations in comparison with soils under corn crops. The aim is to establish the differences in the amount and stability of the soil carbon as a mechanism to assess the efficiency in carbon sequestration by these soils. The study area is located in the alluvial plain of Granada (Spain), in the municipality of Santa Fe (30S 435860-4117155). This area contains fertile soils under irrigated conditions, and is located in the geological basin of Granada, which is surrounded by unirrigated lands. This is a post-orogenic basin closed on all sides except for the west and formed by an alluvial plain crossed from east to west by the Genil river, one of the main tributaries of the Guadalquivir river. The climate is typically Mediterranean, characterized by mean annual precipitation of 385 The soil type in all cases was haplic Regosol (calcaric) ( In general, the soils in the study area are deep with a high water-holding capacity (>100 Soils in 6 poplar-plantation plots in the alluvial plain of the Genil river were studied. The soil type and topography were very homogeneous in all the study plots, and poplar was The soil management for the poplar plantation included soil conditioning for planting that consisted of crossed subsoiling followed by a pass with a cultivator, after which the cuttings were planted on 4 Bulk samples of mineral soil taken at each depth level, were thoroughly homogenized, air dried at room temperature and passed through a 2-mm sieve. For chemical analysis, an aliquot of the soil was ground in a ball mill. Total carbon (C Carbon oxidized by 33 Differences of soil organic-carbon fractions, total organic carbon, and bulk density in soil depth and between different ages of poplar plantation were tested by one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and Tukey's test ( The selected soils showed slight variation in the main properties and constituents ( The mean organic-carbon content in the poplar-plantation soils was higher than in the corn crops ( Soil bulk density increases in samples according to the soil depth, although this increment was more pronounced in the corn crop soils than in the poplar-plantation soils. This difference may be related to the different soil management, because in the corn crops the continued tilling increased porosity in the surface layer but compaction in the subsurface samples. Below 50 The carbon pool positively and significantly correlated with the age of the crop in the poplar-plantation soils at all the depths sampled ( Considering the organic-carbon pool and the age of the poplar plantation at the three depths sampled and compared with the corn crops ( Therefore, the organic-carbon sequestration capacity of the poplar-plantation soils was higher than the corn crop soils, not only over the short term but also over the long term, increasing the carbon content even at the deepest levels. Taking into account the differences of the organic-carbon pool in all the soil profile (1 The C:N ratios were comparable in poplar plantation soils, and ratios slightly decreased with depth due to progressive decomposition ( Total soil organic-carbon measurements have been widely used for monitoring soil organic matter. A drawback of using the total soil organic-carbon measurement alone is that soil organic matter changes gradually and thus short-term variations in organic carbon may be difficult to detect against a high background level. Chemical techniques can be used to determine the partitioning into different pools with variable turnover times and stability ( In the present study, the distribution of the different fractions separated by the resistance to oxidation differed throughout the soil profile ( According to the age of the soil used for the poplar plantation, there was a significant increase ( The results in the poplar-plantation soils of the area suggest that there is high efficiency in the organic-carbon sequestration capacity over time both quantitatively, by the increase of the organic-carbon pool throughout the soil profile, as well as qualitatively, by the increase of more non-oxidizable forms of carbon. The carbon pool in poplar-plantation soils increased over time with a mean annual value of 1.6