The conventional hydrometallurgical process routes for the recovery of rare earth elements (REEs) from ores employs sulfuric acid. After being leached, the rare earth sulfate liquor presents impurities that need to be removed before they can be used in the production of marketable products. In this sense, a non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor obtained from a rare earth mineral processing and containing low rare earth oxides (REOs) concentration (∼4.6 g/L) and high Ca2+, Mg2+, Mn2+, Fe3+, Al3+, Th4+, UO2
                     2+, PO4
                     3− and SO4
                     2− content were used in this study. In order to remove all the Fe3+, Th4+ and PO4
                     −3 ions and reduce Al3+, Ca2+, UO2
                     2+ and SO4
                     2− concentrations, the liquor was purified in two consecutive steps: first by addition of limestone to pH of 3.5 and then with a dosage of lime until it reached a pH of 5.0. Only about 7% of the REEs mass feed in the liquor was lost in the purification step. The REEs precipitation experiments were carried out with two liquors, non-purified and purified, using Na2SO4 and Na2HPO4 as reagents. The rare earth products with the highest purity were obtained with purified rare earth sulfate liquor. In the best condition, the consumption ratio was 0.31 ton of Na per ton of REEs and it resulted in the precipitation of 100% of the REEs feed in the liquor by addition of Na2HPO4. In the experiments in which Na2SO4 was used, the consumption was 0.82 ton of Na per ton of REEs and only 88% of the REEs feed was precipitated. The temperature to precipitate the REEs using Na2HPO4 ranged from 20 °C to 70 °C, whereas precipitation with Na2SO4, only occurred at 70 °C. The rare earth products obtained with Na2SO4 (sodium and rare earth double sulfate) and with Na2HPO4 (a mixture of rare earth phosphate and sodium and rare earth double sulfate), containing respectively 41.4% w/w and 42.9% w/w of REOs, seemed to have enough purity to be processed in downstream steps. As a result, a flowsheet for a process route to recover the rare earth elements from a non-purified rare earth liquor was proposed.The rare earth elements (REEs) is a group of chemical elements which include all the lanthanides, yttrium and scandium ( Monazite is commercially processed either by sulfuric baking or alkali digestion ( Additionally, a process route was developed for a selective extraction of REEs from a low grade rare earth ore rich in iron and other impurities when the rare earth mineral concerned is monazite ( A study was carried out with the objective to purify a rare earth sulfate liquor aiming at minimizing REEs losses as much as possible before the rare earth products precipitate ( In this sense, the objective of this work is to compare the performance of the reagents sodium sulfate (Na A 99.8% w/w sodium sulphate supplied by MERCK and 99.0% disodium hydrogen phosphate supplied by SYNTH were used in the experiments. The concentrations of aluminum, iron, phosphorous, sulfur, lanthanum, praseodymium, neodymium and samarium in the liquid samples were determined by ICP-OES (Inductively Coupled Plasma – Optical Emission Spectrometry), a Varian instrument – model VISTA-PRO. Other REEs and impurities were determined by ICP-MS (Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometry), a PerkinElmer model NexION 300D. The Fe The pH measurements were obtained with a Mettler Toledo type M400, having a reference electrode InPro3250SG/325/Pt10. Samples for X-ray diffraction were ground below 74 µm and analyzed on PANalytical – Model X́PERT PRO MPD (PW 3419) with PW3050/60 (θ/θ) goniometer, X-ray ceramic tubes, Cu anode (Kα1 = 1,540,598 Å) model PW3373/00 – (2000 W–60 kV). The rare earth sulfate liquor was obtained through the following steps: Beneficiation: Separation of fine particles in the ore (100% smaller than 74 µm) according to the procedure described by Drying: The wet beneficiated rare earth ore was dried at 100 °C for 2 h. The product resulting from this step was the dry beneficiated rare earth ore. Sulfation: Reaction of the dry beneficiated rare earth ore with a 97.5% w/w sulfuric acid. A dosage of 430 kg of sulfuric acid 97.5% w/w per tonne of the beneficiated rare earth ore was used. The product resulting from this step was the sulfated rare earth ore. Pyrolysis: Thermal treatment of sulfate rare earth ore. It was carried out in a muffle at 700 °C for 2 h. The product resulting from this step was the roasted rare earth ore. Cooling: The roasted rare earth ore was cooled at room temperature (20 °C). The product resulting from this step was the processed rare earth ore. Water leaching: The processed rare earth ore was leached with 10% w/w of the solids content, temperature of 20 °C, stirring rate of 150 rpm and a residence time of 30 min. It was used distilled water. Filtration and washing of cake: The pulp was filtered and the cake was washed with distilled water. The condition carried out to wash the cake was 25% w/w of the solids content, temperature of 20 °C, stirring rate of 150 rpm and a residence time of 15 min. The first filtrate obtained was mixed with the second filtrate generated by washing the cake. The products resulting from this step were the non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor and the wet cake. Drying of the cake: The wet cake was dried at 100 °C for 2 h.  The pH of the non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor was raised in two consecutive steps, first to pH of 3.5 ± 0.2 using limestone 10% w/w and second to pH of 5.0 ± 0.2 adding lime 10% w/w. All the experiments were carried out at room temperature (20 °C) and the reason to be used limestone and lime is due to the good results obtained in the study done by After the desired pH was reached, the pulps were stirred at an adequate stirring rate (approximately 150 rpm) in order to maintain the solids in suspension for 2 h and then the pulps were filtered after resting for 1 one day. The cakes were washed with distilled water. The condition carried out to wash the cakes was 25% w/w of the solids content, temperature of 20 °C, stirring rate of 150 rpm and residence times of 30 min. The first filtrate obtained after filtration of the pulp from the first step of purification was mixed with the second filtrate generated by washing the cake generated by addition of limestone. The products resulting from this step were the partial purified rare earth sulfate liquor and the first wet cake. The first wet cake was dried at 100 °C for 2 h and the product resulting from this step was the first dry cake. The same procedure was used in the second purification step, generating the purified rare earth sulfate liquor and the second dry cake. A purification procedure in two consecutive steps was developed by Each experiment was carried out with 2 L of non-purified and with purified rare earth sulfate liquors. The liquor in question was poured into a jacketed container with a condenser on the top to maintain the water balance. A Na The amount of Na Most of the experiments were conducted at 70 ± 3 °C, however, some tests were carried out at 20 ± 2 °C. The reagents were added for 2 h while the pulps were being stirred at an adequate stirring rate (approximately 150 rpm) in order to maintain the solids in suspension. Then, the pulps were filtered and the cakes were washed with distilled water. The condition carried out to wash the cakes was 25% w/w of the solids content, temperature of the respective experiment (20 °C or 70 °C), stirring rate of 150 rpm and a residence time of 30 min. The first filtrate obtained in first filtration step was mixed with the second filtrate generated by washing the cakes. The cakes were dried at approximately 100 °C for 2 h in an oven, cooled and assayed. The outcome was the rare earth products and a final filtrate with a low content or without REEs. The procedure is illustrated in The chemical analyses of non-purified and purified rare earth sulfate liquors are presented in As depicted in the table above, the LREEs/REEs, SEG/REEs and HREEs/REEs mass ratios in both liquors were about 95.6%, 3.4% and 1.0% w/w, respectively. The highest mass ratio found in the non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor was SO These mass ratios in the purified rare earth liquor were 95.8%, 3.3% and 0.88% for LREEs/REEs, SEG/REEs and HREEs/REEs, respectively, 2.3 kg/kg for SO The difference between total cations and anions concentrations in both liquors were lower than 5%, indicating that all cations and anions were assayed. The total cations and anions concentrations in the non-purified liquor was 388 mmol/L and in the purified liquor was 180 mmol/L. This difference is explaining by the fact that most of cations and anions of impurities were removed from the liquor in the purification step and due to the addition of limestone and lime pulps and wash water. Considering a mean molecular weight of 569.60 g/mol for the rare earth sulfate, represented by (REEs) The result showed that the U(IV) ions were not present in the purified rare earth sulfate liquor due to the fact that it was fully co-precipitated with an increase of pH to 5.0. The species U(VI), represented by the UO After purification, the total REEs losses observed were of only 6.9%, being 2.9% of REEs losses due to limestone and 4.0% in the case of lime. The REOs content in the first dry cake (residue) obtained with addition of limestone were 0.88% w/w and when lime was used, the REOs content in the second dry cake (residue) was 6.70% w/w. It was generated about 5.37 and 2.50 kg per m Over 99% of the initial iron, aluminum, phosphate, thorium and titanium were removed and a reduction of approximately 20%, 65%, 50% and 50% in the calcium, uranium, silicate and sulfate concentrations, was observed. All reactions involved in the purification step were detailed by  Based on results attained, it is observed that the highest REEs recoveries occurred in the experiments with purified rare earth sulfate liquor, either at 20 °C or 70 °C, reaching a REEs recovery over 99%. On the other hand, there was a huge difference in the REEs recoveries in the experiments carried out with non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor at 20 °C and 70 °C, reaching, in this case, the highest REOs recovery (80.2%) in the experiment at 70 °C. The temperature of 20 °C caused a high decrease in the REEs recovery in the experiment carried out with non-purified liquor, recovering only 10.4% of REEs feed in the liquor. Both pH of first filtrates decreased due to the fact that it was added a reagent with acid character. The reaction as written in the Eq.  The chemical analyses of the rare earth products show that the impurities Fe, Al and Th precipitated preferably in the experiments carried out with non-purified liquor, mainly at 20 °C. The highest Fe The difference in the results can be explained by the fact that the addition of Na In the experiments using Na  In the same way, there was not significant variation in the initial pH due to the addition of a reagent (Na In both products there was precipitation of CaSO It was necessary to heat the solution (maximum 70 °C) to achieve the precipitation of NaREEs(SO  The maximum REOs recovery was approximately 92.4%, with a dosage of approximately 0.82 tons of Na per ton of REEs feed in the non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor. This value corresponds to 5.1 times (5.1 = 0.82/0.16) the stoichiometric dosage of Na These results are due to the fact that most of the reagents added were consumed by the impurities. With a dosage of 0.82 ton/ton of Na/REEs, the difference in the amount of calcium precipitated with both reagents was not significant, however the precipitation of other impurities such as Fe, Al, Th and U in the experiments using Na When using Na These impurities are acknowledged to affect the quality of rare earth products and therefore should be avoided in the downstream step. It is not economically justified to progress the precipitation of REEs with a dosage above 0.82 tons of Na per ton of the REEs in non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor.  The amount of rare earth elements from SEG and HREEs groups precipitated with addition of Na  The dry rare earth products obtained with Na The high sodium and sulfate content in the product obtained with Na In the experiments carried out with addition of Na Due to high impurities content in both products obtained with non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor, they are undesirable as a feed for the downstream steps. These impurities can lead to low process performances, such as formation of a third phase in solvent extraction step (  The experiments carried out with purified rare earth sulfate liquor show that the precipitation of REEs was more efficient with addition of Na With these dosages, there was a very high precipitation of calcium (∼60%) and uranium (∼47%) in the liquor by addition of 0.31 tons of Na per ton of REEs from Na The high content of uranium in the dry rare earth product attained by the addition of Na  No significant difference was observed in the tendency of precipitation of rare earth elements in the LREEs, SEG and HREEs groups with an addition of Na Again, in the experiments carried out with Na  From a dosage of 0.31 tons of Na per ton of REEs in the feed liquor using Na The highest REOs content (41% w/w), in the product obtained with Na There was a reduction in the calcium content in the products with increasing of dosage of Na As expected, a high sulfate and sodium content was observed in the product (sodium and rare earth double sulfate) obtained using Na  Note in The chemical quality of both products can be used in the downstream step such as the conversion to REEs hydroxides, i.e. REEs(OH)  Based on the results, a flowsheet with a mass balance is proposed for a process route for the recovery of REEs from a non-purified liquor (see According to the experiments, the maximum REEs recovery will be 88% in the step of precipitation using Na What was considered in the investigation was a REOs content of 70% w/w in the REEs hydroxides, a removal of 94% of cerium and losses of 35% of all other rare earth elements (except cerium) feed in the REEs hydroxides. In the drying and HCl leaching steps, also regarded was a REOs content of 99.0% in the CeO On the other hand, the amount of sodium phosphate (Na Despite a REEs loss of 6.9% in the purification step, it was assumed no REE losses occurring in the precipitation or hydroxides conversion, not even in the drying and HCl leaching steps. A recovery of about 93.1% of the total REEs feed in the non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor is expected to occur in purification step. Two products are expected to form: (i) a cerium oxide solid (CeO The rare earth products with the highest purity were obtained from a purified rare earth sulfate liquor containing 3.95 g/L of REOs, free from Fe, P and Th with low concentrations of Al, U and sulfate. These products were attained through the use of Na The liquor was purified in two consecutive purification steps, first with the addition of limestone pulp in order to raise the pH to 3.5, followed by an addition of a lime pulp to raise the pH from 3.5 to 5.0. The result was a loss of only 6.9% of the REEs mass feed in the non-purified liquor, a complete removal of Fe, P, Th and a significant reduction in the U, Al and sulfate concentrations. The lowest consumption of reagent occurred with an addition of Na The temperature expected to precipitate the REEs with Na The rare earth products obtained with Na Based on our experimental study results, a process is proposed to recover REEs from a non-purified rare earth sulfate liquor encompasses purification, precipitation using Na The authors would like to thank Vale S.A. especially Patrice Mazzoni, Cássia Souza and Keila Gonçalves for authorizing the publication of this work. The authors are also thankful to technicians at Valé Mineral Development Centre, who were dutifully engaged in this study. We would also like to thank Aline Tavares, Wesley Silva and Julius Martins for proofreading the paper. Éder Oliveira and Carlos Morais acknowledge the support from