Attempts at improving comminution machines generally have been directed towards increasing the performance efficiency, particularly increasing throughput rate and decreasing energy consumption. The latest and most successful new comminution technology has been the high-pressure grinding rolls (HPGR), which have proved to be highly efficient in energy consumption and to have a relatively high throughput rate at low steel consumption. Already used extensively in cement plants worldwide, the first HPGRs in the mineral industry were installed in plants processing diamond ores. They are now finding their way into the large-scale base-metal mining industry. Since feed constituents in natural ores vary in their physical properties such as hardness, plasticity and brittleness, the present paper is concerned with an investigation of the behavior of a heterogeneous feed as it passes through the HPGR. The effect of feed composition on operational parameters, the energy efficiency of comminution, and energy distribution among the feed components is addressed. Mineral particles with high hardness act as energy transfer agents in the roll gap and enhance the grinding of softer mineral particles in a mixed feed.In mineral processing, comminution accounts for a substantial portion of the energy consumed in the plant, almost 80%. Efforts to increase comminution efficiency come not only from the need for high production rates but also because of higher energy costs associated with the inherent low-efficiency of conventional comminution systems and the lower grade of ores that have to be milled. In addition, steel consumption in the form of grinding media and machine liners is also an energy-intensive item in the comminution of ores. The rate of steel consumption may go as high as two kg/ton of ground product for fine grinding of taconite ores. Furthermore, steel abraded from liners and grinding media can be a harmful contaminant in some down-stream mineral processing operations. The escalation of energy costs and the effort to reduce steel consumption has accelerated interest towards installing high-pressure grinding rolls (HPGR) in mineral processing plants. First of all, because an ore is an admixture of two or more minerals that differ in their chemical and physical properties, variations in the ore being comminuted can have significant effects. Some constituent minerals are soft, some are hard, brittle or plastic, or may exhibit distinct cleavage. In addition, ores from different areas in a mine may be highly variable, not only due to changing composition but also to the degree of weathering. For grinding such heterogeneous feed in large tonnages, understanding of how the different constituents behave individually and in admixture and how they interact with each other is of high priority in modeling, optimizing and controlling the comminution operation ( Over the years, most of the more fundamental research directed at understanding comminution mechanisms, estimating energy requirements, and formulating phenomenological models has been conducted with single mineral systems. However, investigating the comminution of mineral mixtures provides a means for quantitatively assessing the behavior of complex mineral systems. Fairly extensive studies have been carried out to evaluate the behavior of mineral mixtures in laboratory tumbling (ball and rod) mills ( It is well known that energy utilization in conventional comminution machines is only a fraction of that required for crushing single particles under slow compression ( After the use of HPGRs in the cement industry had become established, the mining industry began to direct attention to use them in ore comminution circuits. The first installations were at diamond mines, followed by some use in the iron ore industry for crushing pebbles that accumulate in SAG mill circuits ( To learn more about how feed materials affect the performance of HPGRs, this paper is concerned with the comminution of mineral mixtures in a laboratory high-pressure roll mill. The various feed mixtures have a range of compositions of a hard and a soft component. The study is directed towards evaluation of the effect of mixture composition on mill parameters and operating variables, energy expenditure and energy distribution among the mixture constituents, and the product size distributions. Two materials different in their physical properties and chemical composition, namely, limestone (99.8% CaCO The laboratory-scale HPGR at the University of California, Berkeley, is constructed with two counter-rotating rolls, each 200 mm in diameter and 100 mm in width ( Three main aspects of our investigation are presented and discussed in this paper, namely, the effect of mixture composition on mill parameters and operating variables, specific energy expenditure and its distribution among the mixture constituents, and the product characteristics. Although interrelated, each of these aspects will be discussed separately, and then interactions with each other are illustrated. As already stated, the reference parameter levels are their values when pure quartz is fed to the mill. Under the set conditions, the specific energy was set for quartz at 0.75, 1.45, and 2.5 kWh/ton. The effect on mill operating parameters for the three conditions all exhibited similar trends, and hence, only those results for 1.45 kWh/ton experiments are shown in   As the roll gap increased with increasing limestone/quartz ratio in the feed, the thickness of the compacted product from the mill increased. The result was an increase in throughput as the fraction of limestone in the feed mixture was increased, as can be seen in  From the foregoing discussion, one can deduce the following parallel effects as the fraction of limestone in the feed is increased. First, the applied load increases, and hence, the specific expended energy is expected to increase. Second, the roll gap increases and consequently the throughput increases, leading one to expect that the specific energy should decrease. As can be seen from the plots given in The particle size distributions of each of the two materials, quartz and limestone, ground alone and in admixture were determined. Examples of these distributions are presented in  Let us now look at the amount of minus 200-mesh particles produced in various products at different feed compositions and specific energy levels. As can be observed from the plots given in For pressurized roll mill grinding, it is of interest to determine how the energy expended in grinding a mixed feed is distributed among the mixture components. To quantify the utilization of comminution energy by the various components in the feed being ground, an energy split factor was developed by From Eq. Hence, by definition of the energy split factor in Eq. For limestone, component 2: The energy–reduction ratio relationship for each of the components, limestone and quartz, at the different compositions is shown in The changes in the split factor for each of the two components, quartz and limestone, at different mixture compositions, are plotted in The baseline for assessing energy efficiency in comminution is the energy required for the breakage of single particles in slow compression ( The energy split factor was used together with the ratio of the components in the feed for the various grinding conditions and the specific energy supplied to the mill to calculate the energy share for each component as follows: In the case of ball mill grinding, from the size distributions of the products from grinding Ls/Qz mixtures, the sum of the calculated energy utilized for grinding limestone and that for grinding quartz is the same as that measured for the feed mixture. Similar calculations were made for the energy required to achieve the size distribution of quartz and of limestone in our current experiments on grinding Ls/Qz mixtures in the HPGR system for the three energy levels and for the range of compositions. In As representatives for soft and hard feed components, limestone and quartz were ground in admixtures of different compositions in the HPGR. The study aimed at investigating the effect of the mixture composition on mill parameters and operating variables, product characteristics as reflected on each of the two components, and the expended specific energy and its distribution between the mixture constituents. The mill parameters and operating variables (applied load, roll gap, roll speed, mill throughput, and specific energy) are interrelated. As the limestone/quartz ratio in the mixture is increased, the applied load, roll gap, and throughput increase, whereas the roll speed decreases. By changing the energy level, the trend of change of all these parameters as a function of mixture composition remains the same. The effect of the foregoing parameters balance out each other at all energy levels, that is, specific energy is independent of the mixture composition. The breakage behavior of the two components is different. Particles throughout the size spectrum of the soft component are subjected to breakage, whereas in the case of the hard component, the coarse fractions are highly broken while rebreakage of the finer particles is a strong function of mixture composition and energy level. That is, the hard component is more sensitive to mixture composition and energy level than the soft component. As a result, the median particle size of the limestone is not significantly affected by the mixture composition, whereas in the case of quartz, the median particle size is a strong function of the feed mixture composition and the specific energy level. These effects appear to be more dependent on differences in hardness than in differences in grindability of feed components. The median particle sizes of both components decrease with increasing expended energy. Furthermore, the expended energy is split between the two components such that the split factor for the soft component (limestone) increases as the ratio of the hard component (quartz) in the mixture is increased. For the hard component (quartz), the energy split factor decreases as the percentage of the soft component is increased. The difference in energy share between limestone and quartz increases as the product becomes finer. The energy efficiency of particle-bed comminution depends on energy transfer to the particles being broken and the extent of energy loss by friction between particles within the bed. The presence of the harder quartz particles in the feed leads to greater energy utilization in the HPGR by enhancing the utilization of the energy input to the bed. The added hard mineral essentially acts as a grinding aid in the system. When quartz becomes the dominant component in the feed mixture, this enhancement disappears. If materials in a feed mixture had the same grindability and hardness, this would not be expected.