The recovery of magnesium from magnesite tailings in aqueous hydrochloric acid solutions by acid leaching was studied in a batch reactor using hydrochloric acid solutions. Subsequent, production of magnesium chloride hexahydrate (MgCl2.6H2O) from leaching solution was also investigated. The effects of temperature, acid concentration, solid-to-liquid ratio, particle size and stirring speed on the leaching process were investigated. The pseudo-second-order reaction model seemed to be appropriate for the magnesium leaching. The activation energy of the leaching process was estimated to be 62.4 kJ mol−1. Finally, MgCl2.6H2O in a purity of 91% was produced by evaporation of leaching solution obtained at a temperature of 40 °C, 1.0 M acid, solid-to-liquid ratio of 10 g/L, particle size of 100 µm, stirring speed of 1250 rpm and leaching time of 60 min.Natural magnesite (MgCO There are a few studies on the leaching of magnesite in hydrochloric acid solution. The aim of this study was to investigate magnesium recovery from magnesite tailings by leaching in hydrochloric acid solution. The effects of temperature, acid concentration, solid-to-liquid ratio, particle size and stirring speed on the leaching process and the leaching kinetics were investigated. Subsequent production of magnesium chloride hexahydrate was also examined. The magnesite tailings used in this study was provided from the Kümaş Magnesite Plant in Turkey. It was crushed, ground and then sieved to different size fractions of (− Leaching experiments were carried out with a fixed amount of magnesite tailing sample using 100 mL of hydrochloric acid solution at a desired concentration and in a 150-ml jacket-heated batch reactor at the desired temperature. The reactor contents were stirred at selected agitation speeds for 60 min. 2 ml samples of solution were taken at selected time intervals and filtered using a white filter paper. The magnesium and calcium amounts in the solution were analyzed volumetrically by EDTA method ( The parameters used in the experiments were chosen as temperature, acid concentration, solid-to-liquid ratio, particle size and stirring speed. The values of these parameters are given in After leaching studies, MgCl XRD of the magnesite tailings indicates MgCO The effect of temperature on the magnesium recovery was studied in the temperature range of 20–40 °C. For the acid concentration range of 0.1–2.0 M, the increase in acid concentration increased the leaching rate ( The effect of solid-to-liquid ratio on the magnesium recovery was investigated in the range of 10–80 g/L. As seen in The effect of particle size on the magnesium recovery was investigated using average particle sizes of 750, 375, 188, 100 and 75 µm ( To investigate the effect of stirring speed on the magnesium recovery, the experiments were performed by applying five different stirring speeds in the range of 250–1250 rpm. The magnesium recovery was independent of the stirring speed, and 90% of magnesium was recovered in approximately 60 min at all stirring speeds. These results related to the effects of parameters are in agreement with the literature ( Almost all of calcium in the magnesium tailings passed to the leach solution within about the first 15 min of reaction time for all temperatures. So, if the magnesite tailings are scrubbed by dilute acid solutions and then leached, the leach solution will be obtained in a higher purity. The kinetics model of the leaching process was analyzed by applying shrinking-core models of solid–liquid heterogeneous reaction ( As a result, it was found that the experimental data fit the pseudo-second-order reaction model. The plots of MgCl The composition of the crystal was mainly 20.3% MgO, 4.1% CaO and 71% loss on ignition. The loss on ignition consists of chloride and crystal water. XRD of the produced crystal indicated that it consisted of bischofite (MgCl The magnesium recovery from magnesite tailings in hydrochloric acid solution was studied under the conditions of different temperature, acid concentration, solid-to-liquid ratio, particle size and stirring speed, and the production of magnesium chloride hexahydrate and the leaching kinetics were examined. The major conclusions derived from the present work are as follows: The leaching rate increased with increasing temperature and acid concentration and with decreasing solid-to-liquid ratio and particle size. The leaching process was not affected by the stirring speed. The leaching kinetics fit the pseudo-second-order reaction model. The activation energy of the reaction is 62.4 kJ mol About 92% of the magnesium in the magnesite tailings could be recovered at a temperature of 40 °C, 1.0 M acid, solid-to-liquid ratio of 10 g/L, particle size of 100 µm, stirring speed of 1250 rpm and leaching time of 60 min. Finally, MgCl