Elbow fracture-dislocations are considered as difficult injuries to treat. Anterior olecranon fracture-dislocation consist an uncommon pattern which is likely to be under-diagnosed. Eight patients identified as anterior fracture-dislocation of the elbow were retrospectively reviewed. There were seven men and one woman with an average age of 35 years (range, 22–58 years). Proximal ulna fracture was comminuted in seven and simple oblique in one patient. Associated fractures were of coronoid in four and radial head in two. Reconstruction plate was used in seven patients and tension band wiring in just one. Nevertheless, tension wiring failed and was successfully revised to plate fixation combined with bone graft. Patients were followed for an average of 37.4 months (range, 10–50 months). The end results were two excellent, five good and one fair, based on Broberg and Morrey scale. An average score of 89 points was obtained using American Shoulder and Elbow Surgeons elbow scoring system. Treatment of anterior olecranon fracture dislocation is mostly satisfactory if contour and dimension of greater sigmoid notch is accurately restored.Dislocation of the elbow joint and associated fracture comprises a variety of traumatic patterns of injuries with different treatment pitfalls and prognosis. The purpose of this study is to document the treatment results of transolecranon fracture-dislocation of the elbow. It also provides data regarding the characteristics of these particular patterns of injury. All cases being coded as Monteggia fractures at the University–Hospital from 1997 to 2003 were reviewed. Five patients whose medical records and available radiographs were consistent with the definition for transolecranon fracture-dislocation The mechanism of injury was car accident in four, motor bike accident in one, direct blow in one, fall from a three stories high building in one and fall onto step in an 58-year-old woman with an underlying osteopenia. One patient who had a high-energy trauma had associated polytrauma. Two patients had an injury of ipsilateral upper extremity. There was one fracture of the surgical neck of humerus and one calcaneal fracture. The fracture of the ulna was simple and oblique in one case ( All the patients had been managed by two surgeons. The mean interval between the injury and operation was 3.8 days. General anaestheisa was used in six patients and supraclavicular block in two. A single dose of cephalosporin was given intravenously before operation. Patients were positioned supine with the involved arm across the chest. Under tourniquet control, a dorsal midline skin incision over the olecranon is made. The proximal ulna fracture was fixed in seven cases, using a dorsally applied contoured 3.5 Patients were contacted and returned for clinical and radiographic evaluation under a protocol approved by the ethical committee. Personal interview and physical examination was carried out by an independent examiner not involved in their initial surgical treatment. Particular attention was paid to any history of instability. The overall outcome was evaluated using Broberg and Morrey functional rating index, In one patient postoperative course was complicated by loosening of the tension band wire construct and ulna metaphysial nonunion about 12 weeks after surgery. The patient declined a reoperation at that time, but, after three years she underwent revision surgery. Plate fixation plus autogenous corticocancellous iliac crest bone graft in combination was used at reoperation. Patients were evaluated at an average of 37.4 months (range, 10–50 months) after the injury ( None of the radiographs had evidence of degenerative joint disease. The latest roengenographic analysis showed a gap of 4 All but one patient returned to their pre-injury activities and work. He was a building construction worker who was not able to do the original job any more. His functional outcome was rated as fair. One press machine operator had to modify his previous work. No patient reported symptoms of instability, nor was objective evidence of elbow instability detected. Three patients requested elective plate removal. One was removed about 3 months after surgery. The other two were on the waiting list for plate removal after 10 and 29 months. Fracture-dislocations of the elbow present a challenging therapeutic problem because of the combination of the osseous and soft tissue damage. As a basic tenet in complex elbow fracture management, stable rigid anatomic fixation to allow early mobilisation is the rule. In a retrospective review of 17 transolecranon fracture-dislocation cases by Ring et al., The overall results of this study compare favourably with other reports. The only fair outcome was assigned to a man who had lost 50° of pronation. He also suffered from a flexion contracture of 25° and some residual pain and discomfort on final evaluation. Although rated as fair, he was pleased with the function of upper extremity. Rotational limitation in this case may be ascribed to severe comminution involving the lesser sigmoid notch and the following sequelae on proximal radio-ulnar articulation. Our limited experience shows that tension band wiring may not be a proper fixation method in comminuted anterior fracture-dislocation of the elbow, in particular when the radial head is excised. It seems that the compromised stabilising influence of the lateral column caused by the absent radial head, in the presence of less than an optimal fixation by tension band wiring might be in part responsible for implant failure and non-union in the first case. Rigid plate fixation may possibly be a better option to prevent similar complication. Finally, this experience is consistent with the conclusion from a recently reported series that rigid internal fixation of the proximal ulna in the treatment of an anterior olecranon fracture-dislocation yields satisfactory and predictable results providing the contour and dimension of the trochlear notch is restored.