This study is focused on the develop of a cost effective physicochemical beneficiation process for low grade ferruginous manganese ores to recover a valuable iron bearing by-product (Fe Oxalate or Mn Ferrite) and manganese ore concentrate. It was found the one molarity solution of oxalic acid can leach five times more Fe than Mn from ferruginous manganese ores during treatment at temperature 333 K for 2 h. Photoreduction of the leached solution with sunlight for four hours provided ferrous oxalate dihydrate of >75 % purity which was further converted into Mn ferrite by roasting it at 773 K for 4 h. Residue samples were roasted in a controlled atmosphere tubular furnace (temperature: 573 - 973 K; time: 1, 3, 5 h) and muffle furnace (temperature: 523- 773 K; time: 2, 4, 12 h) to study the formation of maghemite coating on the surface of iron bearing particles. Chemical analysis, XRD, SEM, magnetometer tests were carried out to characterize the products recovered at different stages of the process. Davis tube magnetic separation tests were conducted using different current intensity (0.5, 1, 2 A) to establish grade and yield of the ore concentrate. The proposed process can recover 0.12-0.25 tons of iron oxalate and 0.33-0.50 tons of manganese ore concentrate (Mn: 42-55 % and Mn/Fe: 2.91-4.5) by processing of one ton of low grade ferruginous manganese ore (Mn: 19.3-31.3 % and Mn/Fe: 0.48-1.16).Manganese is an important element of steel and around ninety five percent of the manganese produced every year is consumed by steel industry. The other five percent is used by the non-alloying industries, such as chemical, paint, fertilizer and battery industries. Currently, there is a stiff rise in the demand of manganese ferroalloys but there is a scarcity of cheap high grade Mn ores in the global market. Use of high grade ores for manganese alloy production reduces the process cost as well as it supports the industry to follow stringent environmental regulations on CO Manganese minerals are mostly found associated with iron however the presence of high iron content in manganese ores makes these ores unsuitable for ferroalloy production ( Almost half of the Indian manganese ore resources are ferruginous in nature and iron cannot be removed by conventional gravity separation method mainly due to the narrow density difference among Fe and Mn minerals ( A hydrometallurgical route is another possible option to upgrade these kinds of complex ores. The Eh-pH stability diagrams of Fe and Mn do not show significant difference in the stability of ionic species for beneficiation purposes. It is known that manganese in these ores is in the form of Mn  The objective of the current study was to develop a hydrometallurgical process flow sheet which can recover a valuable iron bearing by-product (Fe- Oxalate & Mn Ferrite) and manganese ore concentrate for ferroalloy production process using low grade ferruginous manganese ores. Samples were collected from Tata Steel captive mines at Joda, Orrisa, India. The experimental work that has been carried out is shown in The chemical composition of these low grade ores show huge variation (Mn: 10-35%, Mn/Fe: 0.5-1.6, SiO A magnetic stirrer IKA C-MAG HS 7 with ceramic heating plate was used. It was made for stirring quantities up to 10 l (H The solution recovered from filtration was photoreduced to produce iron oxalate and the precipitate was further roasted to produce Mn ferrite. Photovoltaic reduction of solution was carried out to get the ferrous oxalate precipitate. Solutions were kept in sunlight for 2, 4 and 10 h. The mechanism of iron leaching using oxalic acid is well explained by The treated samples were filtered to separate solution and residue. The residue was dried and the solution was processed through photovoltaic reduction to get a precipitate of ferrous oxalate. The recovered products were roasted at different temperatures in slightly moist condition as reported in literature ( The residue recovered by filtration was roasted in different conditions to produce magnetic iron particles. The roasted products were subjected to magnetic separation to produce manganese ore concentrate. The residue contains partially leached particles which have a coating of ferrous oxalates compounds. Roasting experiments were carried out to convert this coating into magnetic compounds (maghemite and magnetite) to separate the magnetic materials. Experimental studies were carried out as shown in Roasted samples were passed through a Davis tube (Make: Davis Tube Tester Model EDT) in the form of slurry. Sample weighing around 15 to 20g was taken and fed into the Davis tube. Three different current intensities (0.5, 1, 1.5 A) were applied to create the magnetic field of different intensity. The magnetic compounds were trapped in the magnetic field and the nonmagnetic ones were collected in the buckets as underflow. The trapped magnetic compounds were collected by removing the surrounding magnetic field, followed by decantation and drying. The same was done with the nonmagnetic ones collected in the buckets. The percentage of the obtained magnetic part was calculated and the material was used for further analysis. Characterization studies were carried out to measure the properties of the products generated during the test work. The main characterization methods used in this study are described below:    Process flow sheet was developed by a sequential arrangement of the processes explored during experimental studies. The developed process flow sheet was validated by repetitive processing of three different samples. Characterization studies revealed that the samples studied contain Mn percentage between 10 to 35% whereas Fe in the samples varies between 15 to 40%. The studies were conducted using manganese ore samples with representative variation in the chemical composition (Mn: 19.3 & Mn/Fe:0.48; Mn: 31.3 % & Mn/Fe: 1.16). Leaching studies have been carried out to know the selective leachability of the iron and to optimize the identified process conditions. Leaching studies were carried out to estimate the importance of different process variables (particle size, time, molarity and pH) on iron leaching. It was found that particle size is the most commonly studied variable during the experimental studies. Two different samples of particle size < The literature suggests that Mn is in the + It was found that Fe solubility is five times higher than Mn in oxalic acid in the identified conditions. So, ferrous oxalate can be recovered as a byproduct which can be used by fertilizer industry. It was found that the addition of more NaOH or any other base used for pH adjustment produces an additional compound, like Sodium oxalate, which causes purity issues. The targeted byproduct, Ferrous Oxalate, is insoluble in water and it remains in the residue. This causes a separation issue as it cannot be recovered by filtration. So, it was found that higher molarity can help to produce ferric oxalate which has higher solubility than ferrous oxalate in water ( Roasting of ferrous oxalate was conducted to produce ferrite. Roasting of ferrous oxalate in controlled atmosphere converts it into maghemite which has a huge demand in ferrite industry. TGA studies conducted at the ferrous oxalate sample are shown in The major challenge faced during these studies was the characterization of maghemite. Magnetite and maghemite have same XRD signature and it is very difficult to differentiate their presence using XRD. Both minerals are magnetic in nature which makes hand magnet test ineffective to separate both of these phases. Chemical analysis can reveal oxidation states of Fe in the sample. Iron in + Roasting of residue was done to convert the iron ligands on the particles surface into magnetic maghemite coating. First of all microscopic studies were carried out to observe the presence of ligands on the particles surfaces. Ligands are ions or neutral molecules that bond to a central metal atom or ion. The scanning electron micrographs shown in Roasting of head and residue samples were carried out in tube furnace in controlled atmosphere and muffle furnace in a closed container, respectively. It was found that magnetization was not imparted in the sample treated below 573 K. Theory also suggests that before 543 K iron complexes do not liberate CO or CO The XRD analysis of the residue samples roasted in a muffle furnace is given in Magnetometer test indicated that roasting of leached samples imparts magnetism which increases with roasting temperature. Davis tube tests were conducted to estimate the possible grade recovery of concentrate at different operating conditions (Feed Grade, Particle size, Roasting Temperature). The results of Davis tube magnetic separation are given in Process flow sheet was tested using samples with variation in particle size, Mn & Fe (%) and roasting temperature. The detail process flow sheet has been given in  Oxalic acid can be used to selectively leach Fe than Mn from ferruginous manganese ores. Mn/Fe ratio in the leach liquor found to vary between 4 to 5. This phenomenon can be used to recover ferrous oxalate dihydrate (Purity > Magnetic coating of maghemite can be created on the surfaces of iron rich ore particles by roasting at 573 K to 773 K for 2 to 4 h treatment time in a closed container. This process can impart magnetism (~ The proposed physicochemical process can recover 0.12-0.25 tons of iron oxalate and 0.33-0.50 tons of manganese ore concentrate (Mn: 42-55 % and Mn/Fe: 2.91-4.5) by processing of one ton of low grade ferruginous manganese ore (Mn: 19.3-31.3 % and Mn/Fe: 0.48-1.16). We express my sincere thanks to Dr. Sanjay Chandra, Chief R&D and SS, Tata Steel for his suggestions and guidance to carry out these studies. We would also like to thank Mr. Chenna Rao Borra, KU Leuven, Belgium and Dr. V.M.S. Verenkar from Goa University, India for their valuable inputs during discussion on these studies.