The adsorption of collectors at the solid–liquid interface to impart and enhance a mineral’s hydrophobicity is essential to mineral froth flotation. During adsorption, collectors must conform on the mineral surface with their nonpolar tails facing the aqueous phase to enhance the mineral’s hydrophobicity. This conformation is subject to conditions prevailing in the aqueous phase, such as the pH and nature of ions present. Since this conformation can affect the degree of hydrophobicity, molecular-level understanding of this phenomenon also is beneficial to improve hydrophobicity via adsorption layer manipulation. In this study, the structural conformational changes of cationic collector behenyl trimethyl ammonium chloride on a silica surface were studied using an in situ quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM–D) coupled with contact angle measurements. Two electrolytes, NaCl and CaCl2, were used to investigate the effects of ionic strength (IS) and ion valence. The QCM–D data at different pHs, both with and without a background electrolyte, revealed complex changes in the collector conformations and structure of the adsorption layer. Two distinct adsorption characteristics were also observed depending on ion valence: the presence of NaCl led to a thin, rigid layer (low dissipation), while a thick, soft layer (high dissipation) formed in the presence of CaCl2. Meanwhile, the increase in the IS of NaCl resulted in a more rigid adsorbed layer on the silica at both pHs. For CaCl2, the adsorbed layer became softer and highly dissipated at pH 5.7, whereas it became less soft at pH 10. This inconsistency in the rigidity with IS in the presence of CaCl2 was likely due to the strong sorption of Ca(OH)+ at a high pH. Interestingly, the imparted hydrophobicity decreased as the IS increased, with a greater extent of reduction at a high pH regardless of ion type. Moreover, it had a strong relationship with the ratio of dissipation and frequency change, with a lower contact angle at a higher ratio due to greater imbibition of water molecules and/or hydrated cations. These findings have implications for silica flotation systems wherein Ca2+ and Na+ cations are present in appreciable amounts.In mineral froth flotation, the collector adsorption phenomenon is of critical importance regarding particle surface hydrophobicity for bubble–particle interaction. The ability of a collector to form strongly hydrophobic surfaces on the solid phase is determined by its chain length, composition, solid phase surface properties, and water chemistry. Various components of water chemistry—such as pH, ionic strength (IS), and ion valence—may have a profound effect on the collector adsorption layer structure on the solid phase. For example, solid phases such as that of silica, whose surface charge density is dependent on pH, tend to possess different surface charge densities at acidic and alkaline pHs. The average surface charge of silica has a low negative value at acidic pH but a high negative value at alkaline pH. Thus, the adsorption density of cationic (positively charged) collectors on such negatively charged surfaces tends to increase with the pH of the aqueous solution. Moreover, inadvertent ions such as magnesium and calcium that are present in the aqueous phase may compete with the collector for adsorption sites on the solid phase. This competition greatly affects the amount of collector adsorbed as well as the collector layer structure, ultimately affecting the flotation of mineral particles. For instance, based on a study by Ionic collectors at low concentrations adsorb as monomers on mineral surfaces and as aggregates at higher concentrations ( With the advancement of in situ adsorption techniques such as the quartz crystal microbalance with dissipation (QCM–D), further investigations into the effects of electrolytes on adsorbed collector structures can be outlined. This technique has been successfully employed in polymer adsorption studies but only in a few on collector adsorption in regard to flotation ( The QCM–D technique measures mass change in nanograms per unit area by continuously monitoring changes in the frequency of a quartz resonator with high sensitivity. Additionally, this technique provides molecular information about the bound layers, such as their viscoelastic properties, based on the energy dissipation factor. With such a reservoir of information, collector structural conformations on solid surfaces can be determined. Therefore, in this study, we investigated the effects of pH, IS, and ion valence on collector conformation using a QCM–D supplemented with contact angle measurements to relate adsorbed layer structural conformational changes to imparted hydrophobicity. We also employed behenyl trimethyl ammonium chloride and hydrophilic silica mineral as the representative cationic collector and oxide mineral, respectively. This study contributes to the knowledge on collector adsorption phenomena in solutions containing electrolytes important to flotation recovery systems. Behenyl trimethyl ammonium chloride (BTAC) (C In situ adsorption experiments were conducted using a QCM–D (Q-Sense Explorer, Biolin Scientific AB, Sweden) to investigate the effects of pH, IS, and ion valence on the properties of adsorbed layers and their associated conformational changes. The quartz-coated sensor used (QSX 303, Batch 17E313, Biolin Scientific AB, Sweden) was an AT cut quartz disc (14 mm diameter and 0.3 mm thickness with an active sensor area of 0.2 cm The data obtained from the adsorption tests were modeled and analyzed using the QTools 3.0 and Qsense Dfind software incorporated in the QCM–D. The models were based on the Sauerbrey equation (Eq. The Sauerbrey equation (Eq. For the Voigt model (Eq. The data obtained from both the Sauerbrey equation and Voigt model, especially concerning the relationship between Δf and ΔD, were used to analyze the conformations and structural changes of the adsorption layer during adsorption. In short, the ΔD–Δf plots provided crucial information regarding the energy dissipation per unit of mass adsorbed onto the sensor. The slope of a ΔD–Δf curve, defined as The contact angles of a BTAC-adsorbed silica-coated sensor were measured (>3 repetitions) via the captive bubble method using a drop shape analyzer (DSA 100S, KRUSS, Germany) to investigate the hydrophobicity at the silica surface after interaction with BTAC at different pH, salt IS, and ion valence values (  To understand the structural conformations of the adsorbed collector layer, Δf was plotted against ΔD, as shown in At both pHs investigated, increasing the IS of NaCl did not increase ΔD above 1 × 10 It was further observed that the new silica sensors, on which the adsorption test at this condition was conducted, could not be used again for the second round of tests due to the difficulty in obtaining a stable stabilization profile prior to the collector injection. This strongly suggests that the dissolution phenomena suspected on the silica surface indeed occurred. Meanwhile,  Contact angle measurements at different solution chemistry conditions are presented in The contact angle values in The structural conformational changes of BTAC on a silica surface in both the absence and presence of NaCl and CaCl In the absence of electrolytes, BTAC adsorbed onto the silica surface without structural conformational changes at pH 5.7, and two structural conformational changes with time were induced at pH 10, with the BTAC-adsorbed layer converting from a flexible to highly rigid layer. In the presence of NaCl, the BTAC-adsorbed layer was thin and rigid, independent of variations in IS and pH. In detail, at pH 5.7 and pH 10, an increase in the IS led the BTAC-adsorbed layer to conform from highly rigid to less rigid, accompanied by a decrease in the adsorbed mass. In the presence of CaCl There existed a strong correlation between structural conformational change, i.e., the K-value, and imparted hydrophobicity (contact angle). The contact angle was lower at higher K-values, that is, as the BTAC-adsorbed layer became more dissipated, the contact angle (hydrophobicity) diminished, and this was more significant at a higher pH. The information provided in the present study could be relevant for salt flotation—which has recently attracted great attention and is considered economical to save on operational costs for water supply in flotation circuits—because the IS and major ion types are similar. However, further studies involving variables such as usage of real sea water, different types of collectors and minerals, different collector concentrations, and so on are still required to better reflect reality.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. Preliminary results were presented in the Flotation'19 Conference. Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: