This work considered the influence of Cr3C2 particle loading on microstructure and mechanical properties of Zn-SiC-Cr3C2 nanocomposite produced via electrocodeposition are investigated. The surface nature of the nanocomposite coatings were characterized using scanning electron microscope (SEM) coupled with the energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS). Abrasive wear behaviour and hardness property of Zn-SiC-Cr3C2 nanocomposite produced were investigated using CERT UMT-2 multi-functional tribological tester and Dura Scan hardness tester. The corrosion property was evaluated through linear polarization approach. The result showed that the coatings exhibited good stability and Cr3C2 nanocomposite loading significantly improved the microstructural performance, hardness property, wear resistance as well as corrosion resistance of the coatings.Studies on nanocomposite coatings production through the electrolytic co-deposition with metal from plating baths has been carried out extensively [ Varied distinctive properties of nanocomposite materials include self-lubricity, ability to resist high temperature oxidation, high corrosion and wear resistance [ The electrodeposition of Zn-SiC-Cr The activation of the prepared mild steel samples was attained by inserting it into 10% 0.5 M HCl solution for some period of time and then rinsed with deionized water. Chemicals used for bath preparation were technical grade. The constituents of the bath considered during coating are 75  g/L ZnSO Some of the analyses carried out on the Zn-SiC-Cr The wear rate of the composite coatings was analysed using CERT UMT-2 multi-functional tribological tester (at 25 °C). The reciprocating sliding tests involved the application of 5 N and 10 N load (separately) at 5 mm/s speed. A 4 mm Si Corrosion resistance of the samples was investigated through the use of Autolab PGSTAT 101 Metrohm Potentiostat connected to an electrical cell consisting of three electrodes (silver electrode was used as the reference electrode) and 3.5% NaCl solution at 25 °C. The potentiodynamic potential scan was fixed from −2.5 V to +0.5 V with scan rate of 0.012 V/s. SEM/EDS analysis in The hardness test shown in The hardness value obtained for Zn-SiC sample was 82.0 μHV, while the hardness values of 264.5 and 280.5 μHV were obtained for Zn-10SiC-15Cr Also, the figure shows that the hardness property of the samples increased when subjected to heat treatment. Increase in hardness due to heat treatment, as observed, could be attributed mainly to the increased strain energy in the periphery of the particles in the matrix thereby making the sample to be more compact [ To further evaluate the microstructure of the Zn-SiC-Cr  That is, increase in coating concentration produces better anti-wear activities by forming a more stable compound between Cr Comparatively,   Cr SEM/EDS analysis established the incorporation of Cr The hardness property of the substrate was enhanced by the incorporation of the SiC/Cr Increase in the concentration of Cr 