Severe shot peening (SSP) as a surface severe plastic deformation (S2PD) process over a wide range of coverages was applied to generate gradient microstructures with the grain size increasing from nanometer- and micron-scale to initial grain size on the surface layers of 321 stainless steel. The microstructural evolutions including the grain size distribution and phase transformation were systematically investigated in-depth for different surface coverages. GI-XRD, FE-SEM and TEM techniques were used to reveal the microstructure modification mechanisms as a function of the surface coverage. Experimental results show that dislocation slip plays a key role in the grain refinement of this alloy so that with increasing the surface coverage, different structures including dislocation walls, dislocation tangles, and lamella-shaped cells sequentially appear in the initial coarse grains. The results confirmed that these dense dislocation structures during ultrahigh plastic deformation produce ultrafine- (115–192nm) and nano-grains (68–82nm) to minimize the total energy of the system. In line with the grain refinement, the γ (austenite)→α′ (straininduced martensite) phase transformation is more affected as the plastic strain increases. So that the volume fraction of α′ phase increases to 58.4% for ultrahigh strains. Gradient variation of microhardness with the depth was also obtained for various samples.Corrosion, wear, fretting fatigue and corrosion fatigue are among the major causes of failures in machinery, structures, and equipment. Since these failures originate from the surface, microstructure and properties of the surface layers play a key role in retarding or preventing the initiation of mentioned failures In recent years, different S Since the stacking fault energy (SFE) plays an important role in the deformation process of most metals and alloys, it is more convenient to attribute the grain refinement mechanism of metallic materials after S Among different S The aforementioned studies have focused on the grain refinement and nanocrystallization in the top surface and not illuminated the microstructure/grain evolution in the sub-surface layers; however, in-depth microstructural evolutions (especially nanocrystallization and ultrafine-graining) during SSP can be more important than the topmost surface. In fact, this matter should be considered that the surface roughness increment is the perforce change after SSP. Since larger surface roughness can lead to higher stress concentration and worsening in mechanical properties, sometimes the top surface must be ground or polished to achieve a smooth surface. Thus, a thick nanocrystalline/ultrafine layer on bulk metallic materials with a small surface roughness will be the ideal state after SSP. Hence, knowledge of the in-depth grain refinement of metallic materials during SSP processes helps in better understanding of their microstructure and performance for subsequent applications. In this paper, SSP process with different surface coverages as a S As-received 321SS alloy bar containing (wt%) 0.021C, 0.557 Si, 1.485 Mn, 18.104 Cr, 0.113 Mo, 9.697 Ni, 0.016 P, 0.011 S, 0.461 Ti and balance Fe was purchased from STOOSS Company. The bar with 80  XRD patterns of various samples from the top surface to different depths after SSP are shown in  Thus, with increasing the coverage of SSP a complete surface grain refinement evolution (from several microns to several tens of nanometer) is obtained in the surface layer. This microstructural refinement is also reflected in the SAED patterns shown in  At this depth, CSP sample does not show a well-defined microstructure but it can be stated that a grain growth compared with the 40-micron depth has been obtained ( Typical SEM and TEM images at about 120   As reported by many researchers First of all, multidirectional stresses of shots lead to activation of slip systems and consequently the density of dislocations is gradually increased. With the continuous increase in the plastic strain, the density of dislocations and their interactions are increased, and some dislocation jungles are formed in the original grain. The increase of plastic strain on the 321SS alloy results in more movements and significant accumulation of dislocations. This procedure produces complex and completely random dislocation structures in the form of dislocation walls and dislocation tangles. As Grum et al. With the progression of plastic deformation, in addition to the densification of dislocation structures, some mechanical twinning is also formed. In fact, formation of the mentioned structures can cause the critical resolved shear stress (CRSS) for dislocation slip in some areas to be greater than the CRSS for deformation twinning. So, deformation twinning is capable of taking place along with the dislocation slip A further increasing amount of strain results in the subdivision of original coarse grains into subgrains with elongated dislocation tangles and lamella-shaped cells. In the next step, the total energy of original grain is minimized by dislocation annihilation and formation of ultrafine grains (115–192 In the case of ultrahigh strains, formation of ultrafine and nano-grains is the only way to minimize the total energy of the system. Under these conditions, equiaxed nano-grains (68–82 Thus, according to the introduced plastic strain to each grain, it will experience one of above evolutions. For instance, in the case of 200% coverage, only surface grains will meet the first one and deeper layers are immune. On the other hand, in the case of 1000%, a complete microstructure evolution from (I) to (VII) can be gradiently observed for grains down to about 120-micron depth to the topmost surface. We have extensively studied the in-depth grain refinement in the present study; however, based on SAED and XRD patterns in line with this phenomenon from the top surface to subsurface layers, the γ In this work, in-depth microstructural evolutions during shot peening with different surface coverages were assessed by means of XRD, SEM, TEM and microhardness tester. The main conclusions can be drawn as follows: A series of gradient ultrafine-grained/nanocrystalline microstructures were successfully fabricated on the surface layers of 321SS alloy by means of SSP. As the coverage of SSP (plastic strain) increases, depth and degree of microstructural evolutions (grain refinement and γ Dislocation slip and deformation twinning are of great importance in plastic deformation mechanisms; however, the role of deformation twinning in the grain refinement of 321SS during SSP is nearly negligible compared with the dislocation slip. The average grain sizes measured by XRD at the surface of severely shot peened samples are 355, 190, 87 and 53 Microhardness values at a depth of about 10 The authors would like to appreciate the support from the