From changes of volumes of the aqueous and organic phases it was found that the extraction of HAuCl4 from hydrochloric medium by dibutyl carbitol (DBC) involves co-extraction of about 6mol of water per one mole of gold(III). The changes of phase volumes are equal to ΔV
                     org
                     =0.17
                     n
                     Au, ΔV
                     aq
                     =−0.20
                     n
                     Au, where n
                     Au is the number of moles of gold(III) extracted. Distribution coefficients have been obtained for C
                     Au org
                     =10−6–1.25M, C
                     HCl
                     =1M and for some other conditions. The electro-conductivity of extracts and solutions of HAuCl4·3.3H2O in dry DBC has been measured. In the organic phase the contribution of the ionic subsystem increases with the concentration of gold(III) and at high C
                     Au org exceeds 50%. A set of species in the organic phase H+, AuCl4
                     −, HAuCl4, (HAuCl4)2, H(AuCl4)2
                     −, and H2(AuCl4)+ containing molecules of DBC and water, is sufficient to adequately explain the experimental data on distribution and electro-conductivity of extracts. However, it is necessary to take into account medium effects, which were simulated using simple models by Born and Debye. It has been shown that for this system the method based on the correspondence of the organic phases (equality of C
                     Au org) gives satisfactory results in recalculating data from 1M to other C
                     HCl.It is well known that gold(III) may be readily extracted into oxygen-containing organic solvents from aqueous solutions of hydrochloric acid, and these processes are widely used for the recovery and purification of gold. Many extractants and techniques have been proposed, but currently the most frequently employed is the method with the use of dibutyl carbitol (DBC, dibutyl ether of diethylene glycol, butyl diglyme, butex, C The object of this work was to study the extraction of HAuCl Initial concentrated solutions of HAuCl Solutions of HAuCl The gold(III) concentration Fischer titration is impossible in the presence of gold(III). Therefore, the quantity of water co-extracted with gold(III) was evaluated using the change of the volume of the aqueous phase. Due to the wetting of the tube wall, the direct measurements of Δ The conductivity measurements of the solutions and extracts were conducted at 25 The densities of the aqueous and organic phases were measured by hydrostatic weighing of a standard body or by using a pycnometer ( The viscosity of the extractant was measured with the help of a glass capillary viscosimeter ( The solubility of water in DBC from 1 The distribution coefficient of HCl in the DBC/1 The analysis of the data was performed using the weighted least squares method. In addition, the program to calculate the equilibrium composition for the given total concentrations and constants was used. The double standard deviations are given as the errors. The densities of the extracts and solutions of HAuCl The dependence of the distribution coefficient Of particular interest is the determination of The distribution coefficients decrease rapidly with increasing temperature: ∂log The dilution of DBC by inert solvent CCl In comparison with the results for the aqueous solution, in the UV absorption spectra of the extracts, the principal band of HAuCl The IR absorption spectra of water in DBC, in a solution of HAuCl The extracts and the solutions of HAuCl Thus, a quantitative description of the system, in addition to polymerization, requires the consideration of other factors, such as the presence of neutral and ionic subsystems, medium effects (activity coefficients) and the influence of water. The volume decrease of the aqueous phase after extraction is caused by the removal of HAuCl The extracts and solutions of HAuCl In aqueous solutions, HAuCl For brevity, the constant fragment AuCl According to the data on κ ( The dependence of logκ upon log For The interpretation of data for high The calculations were performed with the constants log The results presented here are mainly attributed to The addition of sodium chloride influences the distribution appreciably compared with what can be expected considering only Another important point relates to the extraction of other elements by DBC and to the purification of gold. Because of its practical importance, this problem has been studied in detail ( For the extraction of HAuCl The author expresses the appreciation to Troshin V. V., Mironova G. N., Gavriljuk E. I., Natorkhina K. I. for help in the preliminary experiments.