In this study, the flotation and adsorption of Pb(II)/benzohydroxamic acid (BHA) complexes on the surfaces of ilmenite and titanaugite were compared to achieve their separation flotation. Single and synthetic mixed mineral flotation tests, zeta potential measurements, Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy, as well as microcalorimetry analyses were carried out. The results of the flotation tests indicated that the separation of the minerals is feasible by using complexes with the molar ratio of Pb(II):BHA = 1:3 at pH = 6.0. Moreover, the Pb/BHA complexes exhibited better performance than sequentially added Pb(II) and BHA species. The zeta potentials indicated that Pb/BHA complexes might selectively adsorb on the surface of ilmenite in the mixed system. The FTIR results demonstrated that the Pb/BHA complexes exhibited higher adsorption capacity on the surface of ilmenite than by sequential dosing of Pb(II) and BHA. In contrast, on the titanaugite surface the adsorption ability of Pb/BHA complexes was similar to that of BHA, indicating that titanaugite could not be activated by Pb(II) ions. The microcalorimetric results revealed that the adsorption heats on the surfaces of ilmenite and titanaugite were ranked as Pb/BHA > BHA > Pb(II) ions, indicating that Pb/BHA complexes interacted most strongly with the two mineral surfaces, and chemisorption occurred on both surfaces by using BHA and Pb/BHA collectors. Thermodynamic analysis revealed that complexes with BHA are easier to generate when using Pb(II) than Ca2+ and Fe2+ ions, and the Pb/BHA complexes preferred to adsorb on the active sites of ilmenite (e.g. Fe2+ or Fe3+) rather than titanaugite (e.g. Ca2+), indicating that selective separation is feasible.Following iron (Fe) and aluminum (Al), titanium (Ti) is one of the most important metals [ Surface activation, especially by metal ions, is a powerful tool in flotation. It has been a topic of immense interest ever since the initial report in 1911 by Bradford that sphalerite could be activated by Cu(II) ions [ Benzohydroxamic acid (BHA), consisting of two large organic moieties capable of binding metal ions, has been applied to ilmenite and other oxide ores as one of the most selective hydroxamate collectors [ In our previous studies, we investigated the underlying activation mechanism of Pb/BHA complexes in ilmenite flotation [ Pure ilmenite and titanaugite samples were obtained from Panzhihua (Sichuan Province, China), and were the same as in our previous study [ After being hand-selected, washed, dried, crushed, ground, and screened, samples with particle sizes of 38–75 μm were used for most of the experiments, while particles with size below 2 μm were used for FTIR and zeta potential measurements. Note that the mixed collector must be freshly prepared. Deionized (DI) water (resistivity = 18.3 MΩ × cm) was used in all experiments, and all reagents were commercially available from regular manufacturers (for detailed information, see Flotation tests of single and artificial mixed minerals all used the same flotation machine (XFG, Changchun, China) with an impeller speed of 1700 rpm [ where K and X are the weights of the froth products and tails, respectively. The zeta potentials of the samples were measured by a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 instrument (Malvern Instruments, Britain). In each test, 30 mg of purified mineral sample (−2 μm) was mixed with 40 mL electrolyte solution (10 The FTIR spectra were recorded using a Spectrum One (Version BM) spectrometer (Perkin Elmer, America). The prepared mineral sample (2 g, particle size below 2 μm) was added to the flotation cell, followed by the same regulating methods of single mineral tests and conditioning for 30 min. After filtration, the obtained samples were washed several times with DI water to remove excessive reagents on the mineral surface [ Microcalorimetric measurements of the reactions among the minerals were carried out at 30 °C in the membrane mixing cell of a SETARAM C80 calorimeter (Paris, France) with a temperature stability of ±0.0001 °C ( where n  Owing to the low performance in flotation recovery and selective separation, adding BHA alone could not achieve the separation flotation of ilmenite from titanaugite. Therefore, the mixed complexes were considered. The effect of the molar ratio of Pb and BHA on the recovery is shown in We further considered the separate addition of Pb and BHA for separating the minerals. As shown in The flotation data for the synthetic mineral mixture are shown in The zeta potential values of ilmenite and titanaugite particles in the presence of BHA and Pb/BHA collectors are shown in  The spectrum of BHA is shown in  The corresponding FTIR spectra of titanaugite are shown in   The standard Gibbs free energy change ( where log  The corresponding Gibbs free energy change is −46.9 kJ/mol (negative value implies spontaneous processes), demonstrating that some Fe According to all the above experimental findings, models for the adsorption of Pb/BHA complexes on the surfaces of ilmenite and titanaugite are proposed. As shown in In the present work, the adsorption of Pb/BHA complexes on the surfaces of ilmenite and titanaugite as well as the flotation separation of ilmenite were investigated, via flotation tests of single and artificially mixed mineral samples and zeta potential, FTIR, and microcalorimetry measurements. The flotation results revealed that the separation of ilmenite from titanaugite could be achieved by using Pb/BHA complexes with the molar ratio of Pb(II) to BHA = 1:3 at pH = 6.0. Besides, Pb/BHA complexes exhibited higher separation performance than sequentially added Pb(II) and BHA species. The zeta potential of titanaugite was reduced slightly while that of ilmenite decreased greatly in the presence of Pb(II)/BHA species at pH 4–6, resulting in selective adsorption on the surface of ilmenite in the ilmenite-titanaugite system. The FTIR results further support the higher adsorption capacity of Pb/BHA complexes on the surface of ilmenite, and the weaker collecting ability on the titanaugite surface. The microcalorimetric data revealed that the adsorption heats on the surfaces of ilmenite and titanaugite decreased in the order of Pb/BHA > BHA > Pb(II) ions. Therefore, the Pb/BHA species interacted most strongly with the two mineral surfaces, and chemisorption of BHA and Pb/BHA collectors occurred on both surfaces. Furthermore, relatively stronger Pb/BHA adsorption occurred on the surface of ilmenite than titanaugite, and the Pb The authors would like to thank the