Silicalite-1 samples of uniform sub-micron size with two distinct morphologies were prepared using colloidal silica extracted from geothermal fluids. The colloidal silica used was provided by a New Zealand Company, GEO40 Ltd, and was produced by them using their patented process for recovering colloidal silica from geothermal brine. Spherical crystals with an average size of ca. 250 nm (S1N) as well as typical MFI-type coffin-shaped crystals with a size of ca. 900 nm (S1M) were prepared from clear synthesis solutions made from colloidal silica and aqueous tetrapropylammonium hydroxide of different concentration. The silicalite-1 samples prepared showed very similar characteristics to samples prepared using a conventional silica sol, Ludox SM, as a silica source. Silicalite-1 samples prepared with geothermal and conventional silica sols were used as supports for TiO2 nanoparticles. The hybrid TiO2/silicalite-1 materials were tested as photocatalysts for the photocatalytic degradation of trichloroethylene for air pollution control. The hybrid samples reduced the formation rates of non-desirable reaction products, promoting the mineralization process in comparison with a reference TiO2 xerogel and high Si/Al ratio ZSM-5-based hybrid materials.Growing water and air pollution with a plethora of pollutants specific for different parts of the world requires urgent attention. The development of clean technologies, which are applicable to non-selective treatment of contaminants in solution and in the gas phase and capable of degrading the pollutants into benign products, is of upmost importance. Heterogeneous photocatalysis based on the use of TiO Nanozeolites have attracted much attention because of their potential to overcome drawbacks of conventional zeolites such as diffusion limitations, their use for preparation of zeolite membranes and as model systems for zeolite crystallization mechanism studies [ Most of the studies above deal with TiO The colloidal silica (GEO40™ SOL-1030Na) used for the synthesis of silicalite-1 was provided by a New Zealand Company, GEO40 Ltd, and was produced by them using their patented process for recovering colloidal silica from geothermal brine. It was obtained as a 30 wt% suspension in water stabilized by sodium hydroxide. Silicalite-1 was prepared from clear solutions containing GEO40™ SOL-1030Na, tetrapropylammonium hydroxide (TPAOH, 1 M aqueous solution, Alfa Aesar) and distilled water. Two molar compositions were used, namely 25SiO TiO The morphology of the silicalite-1 samples was studied by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a Carl Zeiss Ltd Supra 40VP Scanning Electron Microscope. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were measured with an X'Pert PANalytical X-ray diffractometer, employing Cu Kα radiation (40 kV and 30 mA) and a PIXcell detector. Nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms were collected at −196 °C with a Micromeritics ASAP2020 instrument. Calcined samples were degassed at 300 °C overnight prior to analysis. Surface areas S High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL 2100HT) operated at 200 kV, was used to examine the particle size and dispersion of TiO The photocatalytic activity experiments were evaluated in a continuous-flow flat reactor, at different total gas flows between 500 and 900 mL min The photocatalytic reaction was performed according to the following steps: (i) Air flow in by-pass mode, to obtain a zero reference point; (ii) Incorporation of the pollutant to the total gas flow and stabilization of the trichloroethylene signal in by-pass mode; (iii) Flow of the total gas containing the pollutant through the photocatalytic reactor where the sample was placed in dark conditions, until stabilization of the inlet trichloroethylene signal; and (iv) UV-A irradiation of the sample and evaluation of the photocatalytic activity. The amount of C Silicalite-1 was prepared at 90 °C in the form of milky suspensions. The size and the particles size distribution of the silicalite-1 samples prepared were studied by DLS. DLS graphs for S1N samples displayed similar particle size distributions ( Nitrogen adsorption-desorption measurements were performed to determine the textural characteristics of the silicalite-1 samples prepared. The nitrogen adsorption-desorption isotherms for all samples were type I isotherms typical of microporous materials with an initial steep increase in the volume of gas adsorbed followed by a plateau ( The silicalite-1 samples prepared using geothermal and Ludox colloidal silica were used to prepare TiO The photocatalytic performance of the TiO The C Longer residence time or the presence of water vapor on the stream may lead to hydrolysis reaction even in the dark improving the mineralization process (Eq. The GS1-Ti samples were further studied by electrophoretic migration measurements. The variation of the zeta potential with pH for silicalite-1 and TiO Submicrometer-sized silicalite-1 samples were prepared using two types of colloidal silica sols, Ludox SM and a silica sol recovered from geothermal fluids, GEO40™ SOL-1030Na. The silicalite-1 samples prepared from the two silica sources showed similar characteristics independently of the synthesis solution used. This shows that geothermal silica sols can be successfully used for synthesis of zeolites. Two silicalite-1 samples were prepared with each silica sol with sizes of about 250 nm (S1N) and 900 nm (S1M), respectively. The former had spherical morphology, whereas larger crystals characterized by typical coffin-shape silicalite-1 crystal morphology. TiO The authors declare no competing financial interest.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The following is the Supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at