We undertook a trial with 60 patients who had undergone operative reduction and internal fixation of bimalleolar, AO type B2 ankle fractures with comminution. Patients were randomized into 2 groups, one of which received postoperative treatment using a noninvasive interactive neurostimulation device (InterX®) and the other with a sham device. The trial was designed to test the hypothesis that incorporation of noninvasive interactive neurostimulation into the rehabilitation protocol would result in reduced pain, increased range of motion, reduced edema, and reduced consumption of pain medication, in comparison with the sham therapy group. Outcome measurements included the patient's subjective assessment of level of pain, range of motion, and the extent of edema in the involved ankle, and the use of ketorolac for postoperative control of pain. The results showed significantly better results in the patients receiving treatment with active neurostimulation (repeated measures analysis of variance, P < .001).Ankle fractures derive from a diverse set of traumatic injuries, collectively comprising one of the most common categories of fracture seen by foot and ankle surgeons. Several epidemiological studies in North America and Europe describe incidence rates of 107 to 187 events per 100,000 person-years Most ankle fractures are isolated, affecting only the lateral malleolus Less evidence exists, however, to determine the most appropriate postoperative care for surgically repaired ankle fractures. Many clinicians advocate early weight bearing within days of the operative intervention, combined with a regimen of ankle exercises to foster bone strength and promote restoration of mobility The study described in this article was undertaken to determine whether NIN could be helpful in improving immediate postsurgical outcomes for patients undergoing operative restoration and internal fixation of unstable bimalleolar ankle fractures. The randomized controlled trial was designed to test the hypothesis that incorporation of NIN therapy into the rehabilitation protocol could result in (1) lower levels of reported pain, (2) accelerated restoration of the injured ankle's mobility, (3) more rapid alleviation of swelling and edema in the traumatized site, and (4) reduced patient consumption of pain medication. The protocol for this investigation received formal approval from the institutional ethics committee and the study review board of the Department of Traumatology and Orthopedics - City Clinical Hospital No.71, Scientific Educational Medical Centre of Federal Government Institution of the President of the Russian Federation, Moscow, Russia. Patients were recruited over the 8-month period from April to November 2006. Eligible patients were between the ages of 20 and 60 years and had undergone operative reduction and internal fixation of bimalleolar, AO type B2 ankle fractures with comminution and displacement of fragments For this prospective, randomized, controlled study, sample size was determined by considering observed variation in pain scores from earlier studies of NIN All patients were treated with a similar surgical protocol, consisting first of a direct lateral incision to access the fibular fracture, and use of a one-third tubular plate and screws to restore fibular length and achieve fixation. Next, the medial fracture site was opened and the fragment was adjusted, after which the fracture was stabilized with partially threaded lag screws. All individuals were provided with standard interdisciplinary postoperative care, including routine assessment and daily care by an orthopedic surgeon (authors A.I.G. and O.N.U.), supported by a physiotherapist and nurse. Rehabilitation goals were achieved by daily physiotherapy sessions focused on exercise to increase range of motion, and mobility to support ambulation. A non-narcotic analgesic (ketorolac) was given as needed up to 3 times per day. Starting no more than 24 hours after surgery, patients assigned to the active treatment group underwent twice-daily NIN therapy sessions using a portable, handheld device (InterX 5000, Neuro Resource Group, Plano, TX). The InterX 5000 device has been previously described Individuals assigned to the control arm of the trial also received twice-daily treatment sessions, which were initiated within 24 hours of surgery. However, for these patients a sham instrument was used which, although identical in appearance to the active NIN device (including the generation of similar audio/visual signals and tactile sensations of vibration), was disabled so as not to produce any electrical neurostimulation. The clinician (author O.N.U.) delivering the treatment was not blinded to the patients' group status because the active treatment involved interactive feedback from the device to determine optimal treatment point location. Any therapist trained to correctly apply NIN can immediately recognize a sham device, which does not offer the same feedback to the operator. Treatments with either the active or sham device were conducted over 10 consecutive days, once each morning and once each evening. All therapy sessions required approximately 20 minutes and included delivery of NIN to the target sites identified in All patients received baseline evaluations by the attending physician before their first NIN session. Outcome measurements included the patient's subjective assessment of level of pain, range of motion (ROM) in the injured ankle, and the extent of swelling (edema) in the affected limb. Each of these measurements was repeated within 30 minutes of the initiation and conclusion of all morning therapy appointments. Additionally, intake of prescribed non-narcotic medication was recorded on a daily basis. A standard visual analog scale (VAS) was used to determine pain levels. This tool has been well established as a reliable and sensitive measure of pain intensity in acute conditions The extent of edema or swelling was determined using a standardized measuring procedure to compare the circumference of the injured ankle with that on the unaffected, contralateral side. Indelible lines were marked proximal to the lateral malleolus of both ankles, and a paper measuring tape was used to obtain consistent recordings of limb circumference from the same position each time. Based on similar measurements obtained by 2 different observers for a common subject, we found this approach to be sufficiently reliable and considerably more practical than alternative methods based on volumetric displacement. Longitudinal data were analyzed using repeated measures analysis of variance (with treatment as the between-group factor and time as the within-group factor) to determine significant differences between the 2 treatment groups across the entire time period, as well as treatment-time interactions. Comparisons between individual means for continuous variables were carried out with Student 2-sample All patients gave informed consent to participate in the study. The completed trial included 60 patients, of which 30 were assigned to the active treatment arm receiving daily NIN therapy and 30 were assigned to the control arm receiving the sham treatment. A total of 69 consecutive patients with AO type B2 ankle fractures with comminution were admitted to the study institution during the trial's enrollment period ( Baseline characteristics for the study population are summarized in Just before initiation of NIN therapy, both treatment groups experienced similarly high levels of pain, with an average VAS score of 8.20 ± 0.92 for controls and an average VAS score of 8.40 ± 1.02 for the NIN group ( Evaluation of medication usage by trial participants supported the findings described previously. In addition to reporting considerably lower pain levels, NIN subjects consumed less pain medication over the 10-day period than did the controls ( Mobility of the surgically repaired ankle improved with NIN therapy ( Treatment with NIN also reduced the amount of edema present in the injured limb ( The hypothesis of this study was that NIN could help improve immediate postsurgical outcomes for individuals recovering from operative restoration and internal fixation of unstable bimalleolar ankle fractures. The results demonstrated a beneficial effect in regard to pain reduction, medication usage, joint mobility, and edema for these types of cases during the near-term postoperative period. The impact of NIN was evident after a single session of stimulation, and became more apparent with subsequent therapy. By the completion of 5 days of the protocol, patients in the active treatment group on average experienced a reduction in VAS pain scores that was 2.6 times the magnitude observed in subjects from the sham group. Similarly after 5 days of NIN therapy, the improvement in ROM was 2.9 times that of controls, and the reduction in circumference of the injured ankle was 3.2 times that of controls. It is commonly assumed that operative reduction and internal fixation of unstable ankle fractures generally produces good clinical outcomes, and several studies with intermediate-length follow-up periods support this view Despite numerous clinical investigations, relatively little objective data has been produced to establish the lasting advantages of various postoperative care regimens for ankle fractures The clinical trial described here had several limitations, arguably the most significant of which was its restricted duration of follow-up. Although the benefits of improved ROM and less pain and edema are widely accepted, longer-term studies will be needed to verify with other objective criteria the benefit of improvement in these parameters. Hopefully, communication of the near-term results that can be achieved with this emerging technology will lead to increased awareness and the initiation of more definitive research. It also should be acknowledged that the postoperative NIN treatment protocol used for this analysis (twice-daily sessions for 10 consecutive days) could present logistical challenges for clinical settings in which patients are typically discharged from the hospital less than a week following operative reduction and internal fixation procedures. Further study will be needed to reveal whether the therapeutic benefits of NIN are sufficiently robust to allow more streamlined treatment regimens that may be more compatible with the time constraints of many surgical practices. Since this study began, it is interesting to note, the manufacturer of the InterX device has designed and marketed an unattended method of application of NIN, which could also be taken home by the patient upon discharge. Further study of this newer and more efficient method of application is also warranted. Additionally, the patients in this investigation were of the same race, and none of them was elderly (range 21 to 58 years). Evaluation of NIN on a larger and more demographically diverse set of subjects will be required in order to objectively assess the extent to which these results can be generalized to a broader population, including individuals with other injuries and surgical procedures. Moreover, the methodology used in this trial to measure and quantify edema is recognized as less reliable and precise than alternative volumetric techniques In conclusion, the results of this investigation provide clear evidence that NIN can improve short-term outcomes, namely pain and edema reduction, and increased ROM, for individuals recovering from operative restoration and internal fixation of displaced bimalleolar ankle fractures. We believe the results suggest that early introduction of NIN in these cases affords considerable patient benefit and warrants further investigation.