A low grade Western Australian slow-leaching limonite ore (Ore G) was selected to investigate the effect of thermal pre-treatment (roasting) upon the extraction kinetics of nickel and cobalt. The optimised thermal treatment conditions were established using batch roasting and bottle roll leaching tests to determine the effectiveness of each treatment relative to the leach performance of the untreated Ore G. The optimum treatment conditions were then applied to Ore G on a larger scale to provide a bulk sample for subsequent column leach tests. The faster leaching kinetics of both nickel and cobalt of the roasted ore were believed to be partially due to extra surface area created through water escape from goethite during the dehydroxylation process. Interestingly, however, the roasted ore consumes essentially the same amount of acid compared to untreated ore per unit of nickel extracted. Thus roasting of selected ores prior to heap leaching is a pre-treatment that could be applied to the vast WA resource of refractory goethitic ores which are currently not economic to process. The economics, however, would need to be assessed on a case by case basis with the additional processing costs needing to be at least off-set by the value of the recovered value metals.Western Australia holds about 90% of total Australian economic nickel resources ( The HPAL process, normally operating at 240–270 Several studies have reported on atmospheric leach (AL) process options and the use of alternative lixiviants, but the economic viability of these options remains uncertain. Similarly heap leaching (HL) has been investigated as an alternative to HPAL to process low-grade nickel laterite ores in the past decade ( The HL process is much more sensitive to ore mineralogy than the HPAL process. Thus when HL is used, the recovery of nickel from laterite ores varies significantly between different ore types, geological locations and deposits. For instance, nickel is more readily leached from smectite, saprolite and high-magnesium ores than from limonitic ores ( It is well known that nickel, cobalt, aluminium and chromium often partially substitute for iron in natural goethite found in laterite ( Thermal treatment of goethite can lead to the formation of hematite. A number of research papers ( The aim of the current paper is to identify the optimum thermal pre-treatment conditions for a slow-leaching goethite-rich nickel laterite ore (Ore G) from Western Australia and confirm the anticipated benefit of thermal pre-treatment by leaching the roasted ore under simulated HL conditions. A second ore (Ore S), lower in goethite content but higher in smectite and quartz, was also leached under HL conditions without pre-treatment. Two nickel laterite ores from Western Australia were used in this study. The ores were air dried, and crushed to less than 10 The mineral compositions of the ores were analysed by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD). XRD traces were acquired using a Philips X’Pert Automated Powder Diffractometer fitted with a Cobalt Long Line Focus X-ray tube using Kα radiation operating at 40 The element compositions of the ore samples (and leached residues) were determined by ICP-AES after digestion with borate flux. For bottle roll leaching: approximately 20–50 For column leaching: 2–3 After roasting, the samples were removed from the furnace and cooled to room temperature. After cooling, the ore samples roasted at the same conditions were combined, mixed well, and riffled into several batches for the column leach tests. For bottle roll leaching: approximately 50 For column leaching: roasted or untreated ores (5–6 Element concentrations in the leach solutions were determined using ICP-AES. Free acidities in the leach solutions were analysed using an EDTA method: 0.25 Two ore samples of different mineralogy were used in this study, designated Ore G and Ore S. The element and mineralogical compositions of the ore samples on dry basis are listed in Manganese oxides containing high concentrations of nickel and cobalt are often present in nickel laterite as either asbolane [(Ni,Co) Less than 212 It is well known that the dehydroxylation of goethite to form hematite (α-FeOOH Proto- and/or hydro-hematite or mixtures of the two are the expected products from the roasting temperatures used in this study. The bottle roll acid leach was carried out for untreated and roasted Ore G samples at room temperature for up to 57 The thermal treatment conditions for Ore G and the leaching recovery of nickel, cobalt, iron and manganese from untreated and roasted Ore G samples after 30 These leaching results indicate that metal recoveries are significantly higher in thermally treated ore samples compared to untreated ore samples for nickel, iron, cobalt and manganese. Recoveries of nickel are similar in ore samples roasted in the temperature range 300–400 Iron dissolution data from days 0 to 30 fit well to the modified Kabai equation with Before roasting, goethite particles are single crystal particles; during roasting, water is eliminated from goethite particles, creating voids and forming hematite ( It has previously been suggested that increases in surface area after roasting are only partially responsible for the increase of reaction rate ( The recoveries of cobalt and manganese follow similar trends, but differ from nickel and iron in that there is a steady increase with increasing roasting temperatures between 300 Thermal treatment of Ore G could potentially modify Mn oxides/hydroxides as it did the goethite. The effect of saline water on metal recovery was investigated for the untreated Ore G and a sample of Ore G roasted at 450 From the findings described above, roasting conditions of 400 Eight columns were set up to investigate the effect of roasting on recovery of nickel, iron, cobalt and manganese; the operating conditions for each column are listed in The nickel and cobalt recovery data versus leaching time are illustrated in It was also noted that Co recovery from Ore G roasted at 450 Recoveries of nickel and cobalt from Column 7 (1:1 mixture of material used in Columns 2 and 8) are very close to the average recoveries from Column 2 and Column 8. This indicates that the mixing of roasted ores and untreated ores does not impact on metal recoveries. This has significant implications for a real heap leach situation since some nickel laterite ores can be roasted to enhance metal recoveries and rates, and the roasted ores blended with untreated ores to form a normal heap with overall improved metal leaching. Recoveries of nickel and iron were compared for untreated ore G (Column 1) and roasted Ore G (400 Acid consumption in nickel laterite heap leaching is notoriously high, compared to copper heap leaching ( Acid consumption data from Columns 1–8 after 120 Goethite is the primary acid consuming phase in Ore G and each mole of goethite will consume 1.5 The ratio of acid consumption (kg) and nickel extraction (kg) from the column leach is compared in A slow-leaching limonite ore was chosen to investigate the effect of roasting temperature and duration of roasting on the recovery of nickel and cobalt after roasting. The dissolution rate constants calculated using Kabai equations showed a 10–20-fold increase for the thermally treated ore samples compared to untreated ore samples in bottle roll tests. This increase is partially due to the increased surface area created through roasting. Optimum thermal treatment conditions were selected for this ore and applied to treat the same nickel laterite ore on a much larger scale for a subsequent column leach investigation. Similar faster leaching kinetics of nickel and cobalt were observed in the column leach tests for the roasted ore samples. Mixing thermally treated ore with untreated ores did not affect the leaching performance of both ores. This has implications for the composition of a heap, which can be constructed using a blend of roasted-refractory ore and untreated fast-leach ore. Preferential leaching of nickel over iron was observed in thermally treated ore samples. This might indicate that nickel is partially liberated from the iron oxide crystal structure during the dehydroxylation of goethite. However, thermal pre-treatment does not result in lower acid consumption per unit of nickel extracted. It is proposed that thermal pre-treatment of refractory nickel laterite ore can be applied before heap leaching to overcome the slow leaching kinetics observed for some nickel laterite ores, especially limonite ores. Potentially, thermal pre-treatment could bring us one step closer to converting vast nickel-laterite resources, which are currently un-economic to process, into valuable reserves. The economic viability of the current process would take into account the cost of roasting, which is outside the scope of the current research. The financial support of the Australian Government through CSIRO Minerals Down Under Flagship and the Parker Cooperative Research Centre for Integrated Hydrometallurgy Solutions is gratefully acknowledged. The authors are grateful for Angus McFarlane for his help in agglomerating the nickel laterite ores for column leach.