Active, stable and low-cost electrocatalysts are in high demand to replace the traditional noble metal catalysts towards efficient water splitting. Here we report a type of nickel-manganese (Ni–Mn) layered double hydroxide (LDH) with controllable doping content of cobalt as an oxygen evolution reaction (OER) electrocatalyst with excellent performance in alkaline media. Co-doped Ni–Mn LDH nanoplates were synthesized via a facile hydrothermal method. It was found that the doping content of cobalt significantly affected the OER activities. The best electrocatalyst was based on a doping ratio of 21.1% Co, exhibiting a low overpotential of ~310 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, a Tafel slope of ~59 mV dec−1 as well as excellent stability. This work demonstrates a facile synthetic method of rationally doping transition-metal hydroxides to develop new OER electrocatalysts with remarkable performance in water splitting.The global increasing demands for new energy and environmental pollution concerns have promoted the exploration of the most recyclable and sustainable energy to replace conventional fossil fuels ( Recently, a large variety of economically attractive OER catalysts such as, transition metal oxides, layered double hydroxides and carbon based materials, has been reported ( In this work, we have designed and prepared Ni–Mn LDH nanoplates with tunable Co doping content based on a simple and scalable hydrothermal method. The doping content of Co in Ni–Mn LDH nanoplates has a significant influence on the OER activities. The catalyst with an optimized content of Co doping is highly active and stable during the OER, exhibiting an overpotential of ~310 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm NiCl As-prepared samples were studied by an X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku D/max 2500) with Cu Kα-radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM; Quanta-200) and transmission electron microscope (TEM; Tecnai G2 F20) were applied for the morphology and structure analysis. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS; ESCALAB 250Xi) measurements were performed to analyze composition information of the Co doped LDH. CHI 760E electrochemistry workstation was utilized to study the electrochemical properties. A rotating disc electrode (RDE) loaded with the glassy carbon electrode in a diameter of 3 mm was used as working electrode. The catalyst ink which prepared by dispersing 5 mg of catalyst in 1 mL solution mixed with water and ethanol with the ratio of 8:2, then 10 μL of nafion (5 wt%) was added into the suspension. In addition, a coiled platinum wire and a Hg/HgO were respectively used as counter electrode and reference electrode. The electrolyte was 1 M aqueous KOH solution. During all the electrochemical tests, the catalyst electrode was rotated at 1600 rpm continuously to facilitate the release of the O The crystal structures of the as-prepared products were characterized through X-ray diffraction (XRD). As shown in To investigate additional information on the chemical composition of the as-prepared products, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was used to analyze the valence states of Ni, Co, Mn and O in the 21.1% Co-doped Ni–Mn LDH, as given in Fig. S2. The full scan pattern of 21.1% Co-doped Ni–Mn LDH exhibits that the catalyst is basically composed of Ni, Co, Mn and O elements. As shown in The SEM images of Co-doped Ni–Mn LDH with different doping ratio are shown in The electrocatalytic OER activity of as-prepared Co-doped Ni–Mn LDH was evaluated by linear sweep voltammetry (LSV), which was recorded in 1 M KOH solution at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm. The LSV polarization curves with iR compensation obviously indicate that Co doping played a significant role in improving the OER performance, as shown in The conductivity of the electrocatalyst, which has a great influence on its electrocatalytic performance, is derived from both electrical conduction and ionic diffusion ( In summary, a facile hydrothermal approach is developed for the preparation of Co-doped Ni–Mn LDH nanoplates with different doping ratio, which exhibited gradually promotional electrocatalytic performance with the increase of doping Co. The influence may mainly attribute to the substitution of Co The authors acknowledge the financial support by  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at