Computational combustion modeling is an essential complementary tool to engine experiments and the combination of computational fluid dynamics and detailed chemical kinetics provides the promise for optimizing engine performance. However, predicting the effects of chemical and physical properties of fuels on engine performance is a great challenge since transportation fuels are composed of several hundreds to thousands of chemical species. Surrogates are simpler representations of real fuels and are comprised of selected species of known concentrations that exhibit combustion characteristics similar to those of the real fuels. In this paper, drawing from our previous work on surrogate formulations, we investigate the effects of surrogate components on the autoignition characteristics of conventional and alternative jet fuels, using a combination of experimental and modeling approaches. As target fuels, we analyzed a conventional jet fuel (Jet-A) and two alternative jet fuels (coal-derived IPK, natural-gas-derived S8). Experimental data on the properties of surrogate mixtures, such as liquid density and threshold sooting index, their combustion behaviors, together with those from their corresponding target real fuels are compared and analyzed using predictions obtained from the surrogate model. Results from a modified CFR engine show that the ignition reactivity of Jet-A and Sasol IPK surrogates are stronger than their target fuels, while the S8 surrogate displayed an ignition behavior very similar to the target S8. Results from a constant volume spray combustion chamber provided reasonable agreements between the surrogates and their target jet fuels in terms of physical and chemical ignition delay times and apparent heat release trends, with the S8 surrogate showing the best agreement. In addition, surrogate mixtures that were modified from the original Jet-A and IPK surrogates to achieve a better agreement with CFR experiments performed poorly when tested in a spray chamber. These results imply that the agreement between the behaviors of surrogates and real fuels in one device or in one condition does not guarantee similarity in other devices or in other conditions. This study also highlights the need for improvements in the current surrogate formulation methodologies to provide a more universal emulation of the autoignition behaviors of target transportation fuels.Conventional and alternative liquid fuels for jet engine applications, as well as for gasoline and diesel engines, are composed of several hundreds to thousands of unique species, most of which belong to the classes of n-alkanes, There is a relatively long history of surrogate developments, going from models for conventional jet fuels (JP-8 and Jet-A) to emulate ignition characteristics Over the last several years, our group has developed a new surrogate formulation method to include both physical and chemical properties of conventional and alternative jet fuels In this paper, drawing from recent experimental results obtained by our group The real jet fuels considered in this study include Jet-A POSF 4658 (Jet-A), S-8 POSF-5018 (S8) derived from natural gas by Syntroleum Inc., and Iso-Paraffinic Kerosene POSF-7629 (IPK) derived from coal via Fischer-Tropsch (FT) process by Sasol. These fuels have been experimentally characterized by our group, which is reported in Each surrogate is composed of four hydrocarbons, and the relative concentrations are reported in As a note, the real fuels considered during the development of the surrogates reported in Liquid density of the target fuels and their surrogates were measured using an ASTM hydrometer method in the temperature range of 280 K–360 K The sooting tendency of the surrogate components was determined using an empirical correlation, defined as the Threshold Sooting Index (TSI) shown in Eq. A black-painted steel frame was placed around the apparatus to minimize ambient air drafts. The same length of wick exposed to the flame was applied throughout all test fuels, thus keeping identical liquid fuel flow rate to the wick. The smoke point was identified by a specific flame shape, which is well illustrated with photographs taken from the current apparatus A modified Cooperative Fuel Research (CFR) octane rating engine was used to experimentally observe heat release characteristics during preignition period in engine-like conditions. Only a brief description of the engine is given here, as details on the experimental setup are reported elsewhere A constant volume spray combustion chamber from PAC L.P., which is referred to as Cetane Ignition Delay (CID) 510, was used to investigate the ignition characteristics of fuel spray, which mimics the diesel combustion process. This device is used to measure DCN of target fuels and their surrogates using ASTM  The formulation used in the surrogate optimizer      As previously discussed, we used a constant volume spray chamber in addition to the CFR engine. While the modified surrogate matches the target fuel significantly better in the CFR engine experiments,  The experimental results of the target Jet-A, the original and the modified Jet-A surrogates from the CFR engine and the CID provide important implications for future surrogate development. In terms of ignition characteristics, the results clearly show that the surrogate performs well at the conditions or with the combustion device that was considered during its formulation (CID for the original Jet-A surrogate, CFR for the modified surrogate), but the agreement gets poorer away from that specific condition/device. Thus, a good agreement at one condition does not guarantee successful emulation of ignition characteristics in other cases. This observation highlights the importance of accurate target property selections for successful surrogate formulation. If the intended application of the surrogate is diesel combustion but the ignition quality target is from the CFR engine experiments, it is likely that the ignition behavior in diesel-relevant conditions would be substantially different. Thus, depending on what combustion conditions the surrogate will be used, the properties that are actually influential to the phenomena inside that system should be selected as targets. The results reveal also a limitation of the widely used surrogate formulation methodology, which often attempts to emulate the ignition reactivity of the target fuel by matching the total ignition delay time (or a number derived from it) under one condition. Although the total ignition delay time is the same, the chemical/physical processes that occur during ignition delay can be substantially different. One example may be the two-stage ignition behavior. Recent studies IPK is comprised of three classes of chemical compounds including a significant amount of  The apparent heat release rates of IPK cases at equivalence ratio of 0.25 are displayed in  Regarding the modified surrogate,  Overall, the experimental results with IPK and its surrogates are quite consistent with the conclusions drawn from the Jet-A cases discussed in the earlier section. The surrogate that was formulated based on matching DCN (the original IPK surrogate) showed better agreement in spray chamber experiments, while the mixture that was modified to perform better under lean, gas-phase only CFR engine (the modified surrogate) provided poorer agreement with the target IPK. It should be also mentioned that all the characteristics observed for IPK and its surrogate may or may not be influenced by the discrepancy in distillation curve. Unfortunately, with the current experimental data from the CFR engine and the spray chamber, any meaningful conclusions on how such deviation in distillation curve affects the ignition behavior could not be drawn. However, previous studies consistently indicated that for the ignition of fuel spray, the contribution from chemical reactivity is much more significant compared to the physical processes in liquid phase S8 fuel is a very reactive synthetic jet fuel and composed of two chemical classes, n-alkane, and   In this paper, we report a study of the effect of surrogate components of a conventional jet fuel (Jet-A) and two alternative synthetic jet fuels (IPK, S8) on their properties and combustion behaviors, using a combination of experimental and computational approaches. Chemical and physical characterization of the three fuel surrogates (previously formulated computationally by our group), that include liquid density, sooting tendency, and autoignition behavior, are compared with experimental data on the three real fuels, reported in The agreement between liquid fuel densities of the target fuels and the corresponding surrogates were well captured, showing an overall deviation of about 1%. The assumption of ideal mixture, which was used to compute the density of the mixture, is also shown to be reasonable for hydrocarbons relevant to jet fuel surrogate and can be used during the surrogate formulation process with uncertainty less than 1%. The sooting tendency (TSI) of IPK and S8 surrogates showed reasonable agreement with the corresponding target fuels, while Jet-A surrogate resulted in significantly lower TSI (13.4) than its target Jet-A fuel (20.6). This discrepancy may be attributed to the lower aromatic content of the surrogate as compared with the target Jet-A. In addition, predicted TSI of surrogates calculated using the mole fraction average of components’ individual TSI did not agree well with measured values. Thus, development of more reliable TSI prediction methods for surrogate mixtures will benefit future efforts to formulate surrogates. The modified CFR octane rating engine and the constant volume spray combustion chamber (CID) were utilized to evaluate surrogates’ capability for emulating the autoignition behaviors of the target fuels. In general, autoignition characteristics of all three surrogates were quite similar to target jet fuels. Meanwhile in CFR engine experiments, Jet-A surrogates and IPK surrogates presented somewhat higher reactivity than their target fuels. When the compositions of Jet-A surrogate and IPK surrogate were manually adjusted to achieve a better agreement with CFR experiments (Jet-A Surr-MOD, IPK Surr-MOD), the result improved, but it generated a considerably poorer agreement compared to the original surrogates in the CID experiments. The current work highlights the suitability of the surrogates presented to successfully emulate the autoignition behaviors of their respective target jet fuels (conventional and alternative), particularly in diesel-relevant conditions in a spray chamber. Moreover, inconsistent agreement in different devices observed from the original and modified surrogates indicate that similar autoignition behaviors between the target fuel and surrogate in one condition or one device cannot be easily generalized to other conditions. Therefore, future improvements for the surrogate formulation should aim at including multiple target conditions or incorporating the two-stage behavior in addition to total ignition delay time as an ignition quality target. Funding for this work was partially provided by the Automotive Research Center ( Reference herein to any specific commercial company, product, process, or service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise, does not necessarily constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the United States Government or the Department of Army (DoA). The opinions of the authors expressed herein do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government or the DoA, and shall not be used for advertising or product endorsement purposes.