Nineteen patients with a dorsal fracture–dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal joint of a finger were treated with either closed reduction and transarticular Kirschner wire fixation (eight cases) or open reduction and internal fixation, using either one or two lag screws (six cases) or a cerclage wire (five cases). At a mean follow-up of 7 (range 6–9) years, most patients reported satisfactory finger function, even though some of the injuries healed with proximal interphalangeal joint incongruency (seven cases) or subluxation (four cases). Those treated by open reduction complained of more “loss of feeling” in the affected finger and those specifically treated by cerclage wire fixation reported more cold intolerance and had a significantly larger fixed flexion deformity (median, 30°: range 18–38°) and a smaller arc of motion (median, 48°: range 45–60°) at the proximal interphalangeal joint, despite having the best radiological outcomes. Closed reduction and transarticular Kirschner wire fixation produced satisfactory results, with none of the eight patients experiencing significant persistent symptoms despite a reduced arc of proximal interphalangeal joint flexion (median=75°; range 60–108°). The results of this relatively simple treatment appear at least as satisfactory as those obtained by the two techniques of open reduction and internal fixation, both of which were technically demanding.Dorsal fracture–dislocations of the proximal interphalangeal joint can cause significant finger stiffness and loss of function ( There are no comparative studies which assess the outcomes of these different treatment methods and thus it is not known whether the outcome of internal fixation techniques is superior to those of simpler treatment options. This study had ethical committee approval as a randomized prospective study for the recruitment of 60 patients. Between April 1993 and March 1995, 19 patients with dorsal proximal interphalangeal joint fracture–dislocations were prospectively randomized (sealed envelope technique) on presentation for treatment by either closed reduction and transarticular Kirschner wire fixation or open reduction and internal fixation. The original protocol was to consider lag screw fixation for all the fractures which were randomized to open reduction and internal fixation, though resort to cerclage wire fixation using the technique described by A final clinical follow-up was performed at a mean follow-up of 7 (range 6–9) years, when all 19 patients who were entered into the original study were traced. Demographic data was collected, all completed a questionnaire and 17 were available for a clinical review in their home. The questionnaire compromised the clinical outcome section of the patient evaluation measure outcome questionnaire which has been validated ( A radiographic assessment was not possible at this time as patients were assessed in their homes in the evening. However, the pre- (all available) and postoperative (when available) radiographs were assessed in all cases. The percentage of the articular surface of the base of the middle phalanx which was damaged by the fracture was assessed using the lateral views of the original and immediate post-reduction radiographs. The quality of the fracture reduction and the restoration of proximal interphalangeal joint congruency were assessed on the final postoperative radiographs. A retrospective notes review revealed any postoperative complications. Although the numbers of cases in the study was small, the non-parametric Kruskall–Wallis test was used to test for statistical differences between the three treatment groups (transarticular Kirschner wire, lag screw and cerclage wire). If this demonstrated a significant difference between the groups, then the Mann–Whitney test was used to identify which of the three groups were significantly different from the others. All patients undergoing open reduction and internal fixation were given an intravenous bolus of 1.5 A dorso-lateral longitudinal incision was made and the lateral band of the extensor mechanism was excised to expose the lateral aspect of the proximal interphalangeal joint. The collateral ligament was divided close to its origin, and the palmar plate was split to allow lateral dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal joint. Impacted central fracture fragments were elevated and supported with bone graft as necessary and the palmar fracture fragment was reduced as best possible and held with a 1.0 If the surgeon decided the fracture was too comminuted, or that no fragment was large enough to hold a lag screw, then the fragments were reduced and held by a monofilament stainless steel cerclage wire ( At the end of the procedure a check X-ray was obtained and if satisfactory, the collateral ligament was reattached using a pull-through suture which was passed through a drill hole in the neck of the proximal phalanx at the site of its origin. The skin was then closed with interrupted 4/0 nylon. In the latter part of the study, this technique of cerclage wire fixation was used for internal fixation. The flexor tendon sheath was exposed through a palmar Bruner incision and the flexor sheath was opened between the A2 and A4 pulleys. The flexor tendons were reflected to expose the palmar plate which was released from the base of the middle phalanx, allowing the proximal interphalangeal joint to be hyperextended through 180° to clearly show the fractured articular surface. The articular surface was then reduced with elevation of central impacted fragments and, as appropriate, placement of very small bone grafts in the metaphysis behind the elevated fragments. The fracture reduction was then stabilized with a thin stainless steel cerclage wire which was passed around the complete circumference of the base of the middle phalanx ( The finger was splinted in 10° to 20° flexion after both lag screw and cerclage wire fixation. Active and passive physiotherapy exercises were commenced at 48 hours, with the splint being worn between hourly exercise sessions in order to prevent the development of a fixed flexion deformity. The fracture–dislocation was reduced under a local anaesthetic finger ring block by flexing the proximal interphalangeal joint. With the proximal interphalangeal joint flexed just sufficiently to achieve a congruent reduction of the joint, a 1.0 Eleven patients underwent open reduction and internal fixation using either a cerclage wire (five cases) or one or two lag screws (six cases). The other eight underwent closed reduction and transarticular Kirschner wire fixation. One of the six lag screw and two out of five cerclage wire fixations required supplementary Kirschner wire stabilization of the proximal interphalangeal joint reduction. The treatment groups were reasonably matched for age, sex, hand dominance, injured finger and the percentage of the articular surface at the base of the middle phalanx damaged by the fracture ( Although only four of the 19 patients felt that they had made a full functional recovery from their injury, another 12 reported only “niggling” persistent problems. Three complained of minor, and one major, functional restrictions, all of whom had been treated by operative fixation ( Summation of the scores for the 10 PEM questions of each patient allowed an overview of the subjective outcome ( The reported pain levels in the finger at follow-up were very low in the Kirchner wire and lag screw groups. Although higher pain levels were recorded in the cerclage wire group, this difference was not statistically significant (  The outcomes were not influenced by the percentage articular surface involvement. In the lag screw group, one patient had a significant postoperative infection causing fusion of his proximal interphalangeal joint in a position of function. He found this finger awkward and subsequently requested and underwent amputation of the finger through the proximal interphalangeal joint. In the cerclage wire group, two patients required a secondary tenolysis.  Assessment of the quality and congruence of the articular surface of the base of the middle phalanx on the final postoperative radiographs showed good results (reconstitution of a normal joint space with no marked increase in the anteroposterior height of the base of the middle phalanx and no resorption of comminuted central articular fracture fragments) in four of the five cases treated with a cerclage wire. Fair results (reconstitution of a normal joint space, though with an increase in the anteroposterior height of the base of the middle phalanx but no resorption of comminuted central articular fracture fragments) were found in four of the six cases treated by closed reduction and Kirschner wire fixation of the proximal interphalangeal joint. Poor results (poor articular congruence with increased anteroposterior height of the base of the middle phalanx) were found only in the Kirschner wire and lag screw groups as a result of either recurrent subluxation/dislocation alone or (in the lag screw group only) resorption of central articular fracture fragments ( Proximal interphalangeal joint fracture–dislocations may result in permanent and severe disability if they are not adequately treated (  Treatment by open reduction and internal fixation may be valuable, particularly for two part fractures without comminution and with a large single fracture fragment ( Stabilization of the proximal interphalangeal joint can also be achieved with a transarticular Kirschner which is retained for 3 to 4 weeks, after which good movement is quickly regained ( This study, though small and including three techniques of internal fixation in its operative arm, is the first to prospectively compare any form of internal fixation with closed reduction and transarticular Kirschner wire fixation. Although the study was initially designed as a randomized comparison of transarticular Kirschner fixation and lag screw fixation of the fracture, the senior author found that these fractures were often unsuitable for lag screw fixation due to poor purchase of the screw in the palmar cortex of the main palmar fracture fragment which is thin and frequently comminuted. He thus could not justify to himself continuing with the original study protocol and introduced cerclage wire fixation as the internal fixation technique, only to later abandon the study because of the apparently satisfactory outcomes of closed reduction and percutaneous Kirschner wire fixation. Also cerclage wire fixation required extensive soft tissue dissection which in his opinion often resulted in an arduous and slow rehabilitation. It is possible that the quality of his internal fixations would have improved if he had persisted with them and that better outcomes would then have been achieved. In addition, other techniques of internal fixation, such as lag screw fixation using smaller screws introduced in a palmar to dorsal direction, might have produced better results. Some of the injuries treated by either Kirschner wire joint transfixion or lag screw fixation healed with articular incongruency or even persistent joint subluxation, though caused little disability. This makes one wonder whether the long-term prognosis for dorsal fracture–dislocation of the proximal interphalangeal joint is better than generally perceived. Perhaps patients accept and tolerate some persistent stiffness, provided there is no pain. The diminished sensation reported with both fracture fixation techniques might be explained by traction injuries to the digital nerves which occurred during the surgery, but it should be stressed that no patient had a severe objective loss of sensation. Open reduction and lag screw fixation of the fracture requires lateral dislocation of the joint, which will place tension on the ipsilateral digital nerve and its dorsal branch, and the technique of cerclage wire fixation described by The outcome after cerclage wire fixation was worse than that after the other two techniques used in this study, even though more accurate reductions of the fractures were achieved and maintained with this method. Although fractures treated by cerclage wire fixation regained satisfactory proximal interphalangeal joint flexion, significant fixed flexion deformities occurred such that the arc of motion at this joint was less than with the other two methods. This might be because of the inevitable damage to the palmar plate. The increased problems with cold intolerance are probably explained by further soft tissue damage during the extensive operative exposure. Despite these problems most patients were generally satisfied with their outcomes after cerclage wire fixation and some surgeons might perceive the results which we achieved with this technique as quite satisfactory, based on the assumption that the outcomes of other simpler treatments are poor. However, the presence of a comparative transarticular Kirschner wire treatment group in this study suggests that there is no obvious benefit to cerclage wire fixation which requires much more postoperative rehabilitation and utilizes many more health resources than treatment by closed reduction and transarticular Kirschner wire fixation. Furthermore, the work of This study was supported with a grant from the AO foundation