Microalgae with wide range of commercial applications have attracted a lot of attention of the researchers in the last few decades. However, microalgae utilization is not economically sustainable due to high cost of harvesting. A wide range of solid - liquid separation techniques are available for microalgae harvesting. The techniques include coagulation and flocculation, flotation, centrifugation and filtration or a combination of various techniques. Despite the importance of harvesting to the economics and energy balance, there is no universal harvesting technique for microalgae. Therefore, this review focuses on assessing technical, economical and application potential of various harvesting techniques so as to allow selection of an appropriate technology for cost effectively harvesting of microalgae from their culture medium. Various harvesting and concentrating techniques of microalgae were reviewed to suggest order of suitability of the techniques for four main microalgae applications i.e biofuel, human and animal food, high valued products, and water quality restoration. For deciding the order of suitability, a comparative analysis of various harvesting techniques based on the six common criterions (i.e biomass quality, cost, biomass quantity, processing time, species specific and toxicity) has been done. Based on the order of various techniques vis-a-vis various criteria and preferred order of criteria for various applications, order of suitability of harvesting techniques for various applications has been decided. Among various harvesting techniques, coagulation and flocculation, centrifugation and filtration were found to be most suitable for considered applications. These techniques may be used alone or in combination for increasing the harvesting efficiency.Fast and easy technique Used for large scale Less cell damage Applied to vast range of species Less energy requirements Auto and bioflocculation may be inexpensive methods Chemicals may be expensive Highly pH dependent Difficult to separate the coagulant from harvested biomass Efficiency depends upon the coagulant used Culture medium recycling is limited Possibility of mineral or microbial contamination Suitable for large scale Low cost and low space requirement Short operation time Needs surfactants Ozoflotation is expensive Applicable to all microalgal species No chemicals required Metal electrodes required High energy and equipment costs Metal contamination High recovery efficiency Cost effective No chemical required Low energy consumption (natural and pressure filter) Low shear stress Water recycles Slow, requires pressure or vacuum Not suitable for small algae Membrane fouling/clogging and replacement increases operational and maintenance costs High energy consumption (vacuum filter) Fast and effective technique High recovery efficiency (>90) Preferred for small scale and laboratory Applicable to all microalgae Expensive technique with high energy requirement High operation and maintenance costs Appropriate for recovery of high-valued products Time consuming and too expensive for large scale Risk of cell destruction Algae are eukaryotic photosynthetic microorganisms with variety of species living in an extensive variety of ecological circumstances such as freshwater, sea water, snow, soil, hot spring, etc. About 50,000 species of algae are present, but only around 30,000 of them have been analyzed ( The use of algae is very old and the phycologists are continuously working to get hold of their economic importance and many beneficial as well as harmful economic aspects of algae. Some of the beneficial roles exhibited by the algae are as primary producers, source of food for animals and humans, antibiotics and medicines, purifier of wastewater, biofuel, fertilizer and pollution controller by fixing CO In the present paper current techniques used for harvesting and concentrating microalgae are reviewed to assess their technical, economical and application potential and to suggest order of suitability of the techniques for four main microalgae applications i.e. biofuel, human and animal food, high valued products, and water quality restoration. Algae harvesting refers to the separation or detachment of algae from its growth medium. The harvesting method intensely depends on the physiognomies of the micro algae chosen, density and size of the microalgal cell, specifications of the final product and on allowability for reuse of the culture medium ( Currently algae harvesting involves mechanical, chemical, biological and electrical based methods. The macroalgae harvesting is simple and laborious work, whereas for microalgae harvesting relatively elaborated chemical or mechanical means are used. RE = CF = The mass and concentration of microalgae cells can be estimated by measuring Chlorophyll-content, microalgae cell count, absorbance (optical density), dry weight and ashfree dry weight of the culture. Centrifugation is an expansion of gravity sedimentation where centrifugal force replaces gravity for separating microalgae from their growth medium. Centrifugal separation of the microalgae depends on the cell settling characteristics (cell size and negligible density difference of microalgal cells to their culture medium), cell slurry retention time in the centrifuge. Disc stack centrifuges are the common industrial centrifuges with force applied equal to 4000–14,000 times gravitational force ( Decanter centrifuges are as effective as solid bowl centrifuges but require high energy consumption ( In membrane process algae culture is allowed to pass through filters operating under gravity, pressure or vacuum force to hold back algae in a thick paste form. The system can either be continuous or discontinuous. The quality of the harvested biomass is good as compared to other harvesting techniques as the cells are less disrupted and no chemicals are required in membrane harvesting ( Ultrafiltration is a potential substitute for recovery but because of its high flux requirement and high operating and maintenance costs, they are generally not used for microalgae harvesting ( Algal secretions of organic matter during growth period or upon cell lysis mostly contribute to fouling and along with them iron and manganese may also contribute to the fouling ( According to the flow of feed water filtration can be Tangential flow filtration (TFF) or Dead end filtration (DEF) using either UF or MF membranes. TFF also known as Cross Flow Filtration is a high rate method with about 70–89% removal efficiency ( Microalgae cell have negative surface charge, density near to the growth medium and found in dispersed state. This stable system results in slow natural sedimentation. These microalgae can be successfully harvested using pre flocculation or coagulation ( Inorganic chemical flocculants are multivalent cations such as aluminium sulfate, ferric chloride and ferric sulphate which form polyhydroxy complexes at optimal pH resulting in neutralization and reduction of negative surface charges on micro algal cells are used for flocculating microalgal cells ( Flocculation can be carried out by chemicals or by microorganisms but the excess flocculant requirement often makes this method too costly for large scale operations. Other disadvantages such as high sensitivity to pH, contamination of harvested biomass and recycling of flocculants, limit its applicability for food or feed purposes downstream and probably making it uneconomical for commercial use ( Flocculation of certain microalgae can occur naturally without addition of supplementary chemicals in response to environmental stresses such as changes in nitrogen, pH and dissolved oxygen and it is known as auto-flocculation ( Electro-flocculation technology is used for algae harvesting with advantages such as non-species specific, easy to control, low chemical usage, more expected results, no left over anions (e.g., chloride and sulfate) and low power consumption compared to centrifugation ( Bioflocculation is the process where other micro-organisms produce some bioflocculants which flocculates algae in suspension. Bio-flocculants can be the EPS produced by bacteria, microalgae, and fungi ( Flotation is a gravity separation process in which air or gas bubbles are used to carry the suspended matter to the top of a liquid surface where they can be collected by skimming process ( Dissolved air flotation (DAF) uses small bubbles of sizes ranging from 10 to 100 μm, generated when air is dissolved in water under very high pressure ( In dispersed air flotation (DiAF) bubbles of 700–1500 μm size are produced by continuously passing air through a porous material (diffusers or spargers) or through a high speed mechanical agitator. This system consumes less energy, but requires costly equipment and high pressure drop for generating bubbles ( Electroflotation is a process of floating of microalgae cells to water surface with the formation of fine hydrogen bubbles by electrolysis. Hydrogen evoluted at cathode separates microalgal biomass from the growth medium. Hydrogen bubbles sticks to the microalgal flocs and force them to float to the surface. No chemicals required and non-species specific are few benefits of this method while cathodes fouling and high power requirements, are the main disadvantages of this method ( Nowadays, flotation with ozone (Dissolved Ozone Flotation, DOF) is getting more attention among the researchers even though this method is considered as costly process for water and wastewater treatment. In this technique instead of atmospheric air ozone gas is used to produce charged bubbles. Ozone being a strong oxidizing agent oxidise the soluble organic compounds and the charged bubbles separates the microalgae, thus interaction of these two processes can lead to better treatment effects. The biopolymers which are released during cell lysis acts as coagulant which is beneficial for effective separation. Ozoflotation was successfully applied to remove To decide order of suitability of the harvesting technique for four main microalgae applications (i.e. biofuel, human and animal food, high valued products, and water quality restoration), six criterions as described in  Based on the order of various techniques vis-a-vis various criteria ( Coagulation and flocculation, filtration and centrifugation are among top preferences of harvesting techniques depending on microalgae applications. Based on the six important criterions, coagulation and flocculation is best option for production of biofuels and water quality restoration. Similarly for human and animal food and high valued products, the best options for harvesting biomass are filtration and centrifugation, respectively. For biofuel, filtration is preferable over centrifugation to maintain low harvesting cost but for human and animal feed, centrifugation is preferable over coagulation and flocculation because of toxicity in later case. However, for high valued products, coagulation and flocculation is preferable over filtration as low dose of coagulants are required for specific species of microalgae and for water quality restoration, filtration is preferable over flotation because large quantity of water is involved in water quality restoration. Electrolytic process is not efficient for any of the considered application because of their non-feasibility for large scale application, high energy and equipment cost, damaged harvested cells, and metal contamination. Overall coagulation and flocculation, filtration and centrifugation may be used alone or in combination for harvesting microalgae for various uses of microalgae and water quality restoration. Based on the six important criterions i.e. biomass quantity, biomass quality, cost, processing time, species specific and toxicity, coagulation/flocculation, centrifugation and filtration are the top three preferred harvesting techniques for applications such as biofuel, human and animal food, high valued products, and water quality restoration. These techniques can be used alone or in combinations for increasing the harvesting efficiency. The combinations of several harvesting techniques depending on the species under consideration, desired final product concentration and its quality may be used for algae harvesting. The combinations using flocculation as primary harvesting step to concentrate the algal biomass from the growth medium lead to the effective harvesting. Filtration and coagulation both techniques yield high quality as well as high concentrations of solids in harvesting. Nonetheless they are time consuming with high operating and capital cost. Flotation and flocculation concentrates microalgae upto 6% solids algal biomass at low cost compared to filtration and coagulation. Flotation and flocculation are easy, fast and used at large scale with low space requirement but required chemicals may be expensive and contaminate the harvested algal biomass. Centrifugation harvesting is fast, effective and suitable for all microalgal species but high operating and maintenance cost makes them too expensive for large scale application. Centrifugation or filtration can be used after flocculation as the less volume of biomass is to be processed which proves to be economical. Among various combination, flocculation and sedimentation is better and low cost option for harvesting microalgae. Replacing chemical coagulants with natural organic ones can solve the problem of high cost and contamination of harvested algal biomass. The author would like to thank University Grants Commission (