Oral processing of solid foods is an extremely dynamic and complicated activity that involves multiple processes in tandem such as comminution, mixing, dilution, hydration and enzymatic breakdown that gradually transform the food from a morsel or a bite to a bolus that is ready for swallowing. It is hypothesised that just after “first bite” and initial particle reduction and hydration of solid brittle foods, the response to deformation of food particles is analogous to studies on the flowability and cohesion of wetted powders, which are effectively characterised using a Ring Shear Tester (RST). We examine this hypothesis and determine whether the RST measures properties of solid snack foods (potato chips or crisps, PCs) that are relevant to their dynamic sensory response, which includes capturing the effect of hydration on comminuted PCs. The RST is found to differentiate PCs obtained from different manufacturing sources (e.g. baked versus fried), and its measurements of cohesion and friction can be considered in context of the structure and composition of the PCs as well as oral processing. Remarkably, RST measurements for this small set of PC samples correlate with several sensory attributes that arise during mastication, which includes Sharpness and Ease of Clearance. This study highlights the potential of the RST as a new tool for oral processing research.From the first bite to the point of swallow, food undergoes tremendous transformation, which often also takes place in a very short period of time. The process is extremely dynamic and complex as it involves multiple processes such as comminution, mixing, dissolution, dilution, hydration and enzymatic breakdown that occur in tandem. The breakdown of particles, their interactions with other particles, saliva and the oral surface, the rheology of the resulting bolus along with heat and mass transport mechanisms result in different sensory perceptions as the process of mastication progresses ( If we were to simplify the oral processing of brittle snack foods, we can identify three separate phases ( The first bite or early chews, where mechanical measures such as breaking force and the stress at fracture, critical stress intensity factor govern the sensory perception of hardness, crunchiness and crispiness. ( The mastication phase, where size reduction and hydration occur in tandem to create a sticky, solid agglomerate of hydrated food particles. ( Once the bolus is formed, it is further diluted by addition of even more saliva until it reaches a desired degree of structural breakdown or lubrication ( Despite its relevance in the entire oral processing phenomenon, as noted in the review of A Ring Shear Tester (RST) can be used to characterise dry as well as wet granular powders ( The first attempt to use the RST as a tool for studying the physical mechanisms that affect the agglomeration and hydration in food oral processing was recently carried out ( Granular materials are routinely encountered in industry and hence problems relating to their storage and transport have been widely studied ( In terms of bulk solid, the term Indirect shear testers: In these type of testers, the sample is subjected to a known state of stress and the sample develops its own shear zone or shear plane due to failure. These type of testers are very complicated to build and operate and hence are not very widely used ( Direct shear testers: Here the location of shear plane or shear zone is determined by the design of the tester. Most commercial shear testers are direct Ring Shear Testers. Depending on the manner in which shear is applied, they could be further classified into Translational (e.g. Jenike shear tester) ( For our measurements, we use the Schulze Ring Shear Tester (RST). The shear cell consists of an annular chamber which contains the sample. The chamber is covered by a serrated lid and normal load ( The test begins with an under-consolidated bulk solid sample. To ensure that the sample is homogeneous, it is consolidated by subjecting it to a normal stress ( The slope The RST has already been proven to effectively measure cohesion between particulate semi or soft-solid foods ( In this study, we consider 4 types of PCs: Regular Fried Chips(FPCs): Regular crinkle cut chips Reconstitued Fried Chips(RFPCs): Potato based stackable snack chips Reconstituted Baked Chips(RBPCs): Potato based baked chips Kettle Fried Chips(KFPCs): Sliced chips fried in a kettle instead of a continuous fryer. All the samples were commercial, ready to eat potato chips. Among themselves, these samples cover most of the variety in terms of oil content (baked v/s fried), manufacturing process (whole tissue v/s reconstituted), frying process (continuous frying v/s kettle frying) that is currently found among the commercial potato chips. The FPCs are regular chips that are made by dicing potatoes into slices having a corrugated cross-section and then frying these potato slices in a continuous fryer. KFPCs are made by dicing potatoes and frying them with a unique technique called ‘Kettle frying’ which involves not washing the chips before frying them ( FPCs, KFPCs and RFPCs were procured locally off the shelf. RBPCs were procured off the shelf in the USA and shipped to Australia. All the PCs were stored in a freezer at −18 °C to prevent oxidation of oil. The PCs were crushed using a standard protocol ( The comminuted PC samples were hydrated by mixing 6 g of comminuted PCs in 40 ml PBS buffer in a Rotary Viscoanalyser (Newport Scientific, RVA model 4, New South Wales) at 100 s The equipment used for the experiments is a Schulze Ring Shear Tester (RST-XS, Dietmar Schulze). The measurement cell consists of an annular cylindrical space which is approximately 30 ml in volume and has serrations on the bottom as well as on the top lid to avoid any slip. Samples are loaded using gravity wherever it was possible and filled until they were in line with the top lip of the cell. For very sticky samples, samples are added using a spoon and smoothed to be in line with the top lip of the cell. For all samples, we take due care while sample loading, to avoid over consolidation. Additionally, the first preshear step is a check to ensure that there was no over consolidation ( For preparing the hydrated PC sample, crushed PCs were weighed in a Petri dish. While the dish was kept on the weighing balance, water was carefully added to the crushed samples using a bottle spray that created a fine mist of tiny water droplets. This ensured that the water was evenly distributed over the sample and the weight of the water being sprayed was also simultaneously measured. We waited for 15 min before transferring the sample to the RST for measurement. Whole FPCs were immersed in n-Hexane for about 30 min. Most of the oil in the FPCs dissolves in the solvent leaving the chips virtually oil-free. The chips were then removed from the solvent and dried overnight in a vacuum oven at 25 °C. These ‘oil-free’ chips were then crushed in the food processor using the protocol described in section 2.1, and tested in the RST. In a separate experiment, a measured quantity of sunflower oil was added to a known weight of RBPCs such that the final weight fraction of oil matched the oil content in FPCs(∼35%). The oil was added evenly over the chips and left overnight in a sealed container to be soaked up by the chips. After that, these ‘oily’ RBPCs were crushed in the food processor using the protocol described in section 2.1, and tested in the RST. Conventional quantitative sensory descriptive analysis was the method used to characterise the textural and mouthfeel properties of the four samples potato chip samples. Four training and one formal assessment sessions were conducted. Each session was up to 2 h in duration and sessions were conducted over a period of one week. Eleven trained sensory panellists (9 female and 2 male) participated in the study, aged between 26 and 62 years (with an average age of 45). The panellists were sourced from a pool of experienced trained assessors who had previously been screened for sensory acuity. Most of the panellists have participated before in sensory trials of potato chips where textural sensory attributes were evaluated during the food oral processing. The training involved familiarizing the panellists with the samples; refining and understanding the assessment protocol including a selection of palate cleansers; developing a concise vocabulary to describe the sensory properties of the samples; defining the sensory attributes; developing corresponding sensory reference standards; and developing scales and anchors for rating the attributes. In each training session a maximum of 16 samples were presented together with filtered water, sparkling water and green apple provided as palate cleansers. All samples were introduced to the panellists eleven times during training. A practice session was carried out at the end of the training phase with the same number of samples and replications that were going to be held at the end of the training phase that mimicked a formal evaluation session, wherein panellists' discrimination performance and repeatability were assessed. The evaluation of the sensory attributes during the food oral processing of PCs was divided into three phases as follows: Mastication Phase I ( Mastication Phase II ( Mastication Phase III ( During the training sessions the panellists generated and defined by consensus 17 textural sensory attributes. Five sensory attributes were evaluated in mastication phase I, eight in mastication phase II and four in mastication phase III. In total, 17 attributes were rated by the panellists in an unstructured 0–15 line scale in quadruplicate. Hence, for the purpose of this study, we have decided to limit our focus on 3 attributes (one in each mastication phase) namely; Sharpness ( Sensory data was collected using FIZZ sensory software and exported into Microsoft excel for analysis. XLSTAT (version 5) was used to analyse panellist performance, for product characterisation and data exploration and analysis. For testing discrimination power and repeatibility of the panellists, Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was performed on the sensory scores provided for each panellist; the ANOVA model used for testing discrimination power was attributed = f (product) and that for repeatibility was attribute = f (session). A mixed model ANOVA, with product as the fixed effect and panellists, sessions and interaction between product and panellist as random effect was conducted on the whole data set for each attribute (p≤0.05). For all sensory attributes scores, minimum, maximum, mean, standard deviation and coefficient of variation were calculated. The mean scores of all sensory attributes for each product were calculated and a Tukey-Kramer HSD was conducted after the ANOVA to evaluate whether the PC were significantly different from each other based on the sensory attributes (p≤ 0.05). We check for cross correlation between the sensory attributes by performing a simple regression between two attributes. The matrix of Pearson correlation coefficients (R) thus calculated is provided in Table ST2 in the supplementary information. The minimum and maximum scores for each sensory attribute (data not shown) showed a good spread in the use of scale, being a first indication that the assessors were able to discriminate sensorily the four potato chips samples. The robustness of the data was supported by a low number of attributes affected by assessor as a source of variation and only the attribute ease of clearance was affected by replication. The panel performance scores (data not shown) also backs up the strength of the sensory data as the discrimination power and repeatability of each of the eleven panellist was quite high. Comparison between the minimum and the maximum score of the attributes such as fracturability Different types of chips seem to break down differently, as seen in  As measured in the RST, the flowability of the system, as the same suggests, is a measure of how easily the system flows. A large value of The AOIF depends strongly on the shape and size of the particles( In case of highly hydrated samples however, the reconstituted chips exhibit a rapid decrease in the AOIF. This could be a result of two mechanisms. Upon hydration, the particles in reconstituted chips disintegrate into smaller cells or clusters and release the starch that is used as a binder. This starch dissolves in the excess water to form a lubricating layer resulting in a fall of AOIF. Another possible explanation for the fall in AOIF could be the swelling of particles due to hydration. Swelling of particles will result in reduction in the roughness of the particles which could possibly also contribute to the fall in AOIF. Our hypothesis regarding two parallel mechanisms contributing to the reduction in AOIF is driven by the fact that FPCs and KFPCs also exhibit a reduction in AOIF upon increasing level of hydration. FPCs and KFPCs owing to their intact tissues do not end up releasing any starch that can form a lubricating layer between particles. The reduction in AOIF in these systems must hence come from the swelling and softening of the tissue fragments. On the other hand, in reconstituted chips, the disintegration of chips into smaller cells or clusters should ideally lead to higher friction. However, the swelling of particles combined with the lubrication provided by the dissolved starches result in a rapid decline in the AOIF for moisture content above 45%. As seen in The effect of oil can be quantified by two separate experiments, the results of which are shown in The physical origins of the sharpness sensation lie in the shape and size of the particles, which also govern the friction between the particles. Hence, AOIF could be a good measure of the sharpness sensation. Cohesiveness of a food bolus is critical during the swallowing phase ( In the sensory analysis, sharpness is defined as the sharp abrasive sensation experienced when biting on the chip or during chewing. The fracture mechanics governs the size and shape of the chips during the initial bites, which in turn will reflect in the AOIF. The unique ‘kettle frying’ technique results in the KFPCs being extremely hard ( Cohesion or cohesiveness is an important attribute in oral processing of snack foods such as PCs especially during the swallowing phase. Higher cohesion in RBPCs and RFPCs upon hydration can be attributed to easy breakdown of these PCs into particles and release of starch molecules that are added as co-texturizer to form sticky phase between particles. This increased cohesion can be used to explain that RBPCs and RFPCs have been rated to be very easy to clear as compared to FPCs and KFPCs. The cohesion between the bolus particles at 50% moisture content correlates almost perfectly ( The discovery of correlations between the RST and sensory measurements should be treated with some caution considering only a few different PC samples have been examined. However, the observation that these correlations were found across the three mastication phases provides evidence to support the notion that granular mechanics and powder physics plays a key role in the dynamics of oral processing. The utilisation of this field of knowledge and techniques should be advantageous to the rational design of PC structures and many other similar snack foods. The RST provides insight into the properties of comminuted food particles upon hydration and shear deformation under confinement, which are potentially relevant to oral processing of potato chips during mastication phases. This is demonstrated by RST measurements of cohesion and internal friction (AOIF) correlating with several textural attributes, which includes Sharpness and Ease of Clearance. This finding supports the hypothesis and concept that the oral processing of dry foods follows the principals of granular mechanics. The oil content of the PCs is shown to play an important role in the RST flowability when very little (or no water) is added to the PCs, emulating the early stages of oral processing. Presence of free oil from comminuted FPCs, KFPCs and RBPCs results in higher cohesion and slightly delayed onset of hydration as compared to RBPCs. The onset of hydration is characterised by a peak in the AOIF values that occurs due to the surface layer of PCs getting soft upon hydration thereby increasing the contact area between the particles. This peak in AOIF also corresponds to a slight dip in the bulk density and cohesion, which occurs due to the agglomeration of these particles. Upon further addition of water, the hydration and swelling of particles becomes a governing factor in the flow behaviour. The reconstituted PCs (i.e. RBPC) break down into individual particles or small clusters of partially hydrated particles. The comminuted and hydrated KFPCs and FPCs on the other hand consist of chunks of potato tissue. The breakdown of reconstituted PCs causes the starch acting as a binder to be released and dissolved in the water. This solution of starch polymers forms a sticky, viscoelastic layer between hydrated particles. This effect leads to an increase in the cohesion between the particles. The RST shows potential as a new tool in oral processing research for understanding the effects of hydration and agglomeration of brittle snack foods and other systems. As all the specimens under consideration in this study are hydrating, the addition of water affects the measured friction and cohesion between the particles, while these measurements also capture differences between constituent PC particles. Future work should seek to investigate whether the RST provides insights into the textural sensory attributes across a broader range of food material systems, and to study the effect of hydration and agglomeration on these systems. A good physical understanding of these phenomena using granular mechanics may contribute to a rational design approach for creating food materials with desirable and/or consumer acceptable sensory properties throughout oral processing. Stefan K. Baier and Michael W. Boehm are employees of PepsiCo Inc. The views expressed in this article are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position or policy of PepsiCo Inc. The authors would like to thank Dr. Torsten Witt for insightful discussions. This work was carried out as a part of the  Supplementary data to this article can be found online at