Different sources of lime for the production of precipitated calcium carbonate were studied. The reactivity of lime, its optical properties and those of the final products are reported and discussed, and a comparison made between lime from different sources. The influence of the temperature of hydration water on the optical properties and particle sizes after hydration and precipitation was also studied. It was found that coarser granulations of lime have better optical properties than finer granulations. The hydration temperature does not have an appreciable impact on the optical properties, but influences the intermediate, i.e. the calcium hydroxide particle sizes and subsequently the particle sizes of the precipitated calcium carbonate. Furthermore, the maximum temperatures of lime hydration from different European sources do not vary significantly, but they differ in the kinetics of the hydration process.Lime has been used for the cement industry and civil engineering for a long time. In recent decades it is now becoming used in other industries, for example for the production of precipitated calcium carbonate (PCC). This particular industrial production is increasingly important because its products are used for the paper, plastics and pharmaceutical industries, in personal care and cosmetics, for food and beverages, nutritional supplements, adhesives and sealants and for some other industries ( Precipitated calcium carbonate is produced in three sequential processes. Calcination of limestone is followed by the hydration of thus prepared lime and finally by the precipitation of calcium carbonate. All three production sequences were extensively studied in the past. These processes can be represented by the following reactions: Calcination: Hydration: Precipitation:  There are many studies describing the Solvay route ( The source of lime and its characteristics are the most important parameters in the production of precipitated calcium carbonate (for all three sequential processes). The composition and the purity of lime are very important. If lime contains excessive admixtures (such as iron or manganese) the precipitated calcium carbonate will have lower values of brightness and whiteness, and higher values of yellowness. These optical properties are very important for the paper industry. With the use of purer starting materials, less optical additives need to be added to the paper pulp and the production costs of the product are reduced in this way. On the other hand, the source of lime is also important because its reactivity has an impact on the hydration process and consequently on the hydration product, i.e. the calcium hydroxide, and further also on the precipitated calcium carbonate. During calcination carbon dioxide is released from limestone. This causes the calcium oxide to have a porous structure. Higher lime porosity enables better contact of the calcium oxide with water and the kinetics of hydration is consequently faster. The optimum temperature and residence time of the limestone in the kiln are needed in order to obtain the proper porosity of lime ( Lime reacts with water vapour present in the atmosphere which partly or completely results in a thin surface layer of calcium hydroxide on the outside of lime particles ( Samples from naturally occurring limestone deposits were collected from three European sites and are further designated as: lime from Slovenia (S) lime from Austria (A) lime from Croatia (C). Samples were ground and milled already at the production site. Particle size and distribution were determined by the sieving process with sieves of 40 µm, 63 µm, 100 µm, 160 µm, 250 µm, 400 µm, 800 µm, 1000 µm, 1600 µm, 2500 µm and 3000 µm for granulations of 0–3 or 0–5 mm, and 1600 µm, 2000 µm, 2500 µm, 3150 µm, 4500 µm, 6300 µm, 7100 µm and 9000 µm for granulations of 3–5 mm, 3–8 mm or 3–9 mm. Average particle sizes are listed in 2660 g of water was first heated to 20 °C or 50 °C. Hydration was carried out under stirring at a rate of 500 rpm. 380 g of calcium oxide was added. After the addition of calcium oxide, the temperature of the suspension was measured each minute at 10 min intervals and then stirring was stopped. The suspension was filtered through a 250 µm sieve in order to remove unreacted material (excessively or insufficiently calcinated material). After the slurry was filtered it was transferred to a reaction vessel where calcium carbonate was precipitated. This was a double walled glass reactor of 5 L volume. The initial temperature of the reaction was 30 °C. The flow rate of carbon dioxide was 120 L h Lime with coarser granulations (3–9 mm, 3–8 mm and 3–5 mm) was ground in a Fritsch ball mill, model Pulverisette 6, for 4 min. Afterwards it was sieved by a vacuum Air jet sieve from Alpine Hosokawa for 1 min on a 250 µm sieve. Lime with finer granulation (0–3 mm, 0–5 mm) was also sieved on the vacuum 250 µm sieve for 1 min. The material which was left on the sieve was used for measurement of optical properties (yellowness, brightness, whiteness) on a Data Color Elrepho Spectrum TM optical apparatus. The slurry of precipitated calcium carbonate was analysed for particle size distribution and The lime sample from Slovenia and lime from Croatia have similar optical properties (yellowness, brightness and whiteness) that are better than the optical properties of the lime from Austria. This is the case for both the finer (0–3 mm, 0–5 mm) and the coarser granulations (3–9 mm, 3–8 mm, 3–5 mm) ( As can also be seen from Differences in the optical properties of lime, as can shown in As mentioned above the coarser granulation of lime has better optical properties than the finer granulation. This is also true for the precipitated calcium carbonate made from this lime. Precipitated calcium carbonate made from calcium hydroxide with coarser particles has a lower yellowness value and higher brightness and whiteness values than that produced from calcium hydroxide with finer granulation. This is in accordance with the previously mentioned relationship between the purity of the starting raw material and of the product. The hydration temperature of lime does not have a large impact on the optical properties of the calcium hydroxide obtained in hydration. Lime from Slovenia and lime from Croatia have good optical properties and so have the precipitated calcium carbonate made from it. The differences between the values of yellowness for all Slovenian and Croatian precipitated calcium carbonate samples are small and are not affected by the initial temperature of the water. These small differences can actually be attributed to measuring errors. The yellowness of the precipitated calcium carbonate made out of lime from Austria is higher, but there are also no significant differences between products obtained at different temperatures ( According to The process of hydration is dependent on the following: the reactivity of lime, the particle size distribution of lime, amount and quality of water added, temperature of the water, the presence of admixtures in the lime and the presence of ions in water, and agitation during hydration. The initial conditions of hydration are very important as they determine how rapidly calcium oxide dissolves. When lime is mixed with water, the most reactive particles dissolve first, producing a high level of supersaturation. This results in “primary” nucleation, i.e., the formation of a very large number of calcium hydroxide nuclei. Less reactive particles dissolve at a slower rate and produce a lower degree of supersaturation, which largely results in crystal growth on the primary nuclei ( As mentioned above, the quality of calcium oxide depends on the limestone used for the production of lime and the calcination process itself. The hydration process was followed by measurement of temperature of the suspension 2 min after the addition of water and the maximum temperature reached in the system. The time needed to reach the maximum temperature was also recorded. As can be seen below in As can be seen above, the size of the calcium oxide particles does not have a pronounced impact either on the maximum temperature or on the shape of the hydration curve. Also different sources of lime do not differ significantly in maximum temperature but they differ in the shape of the hydration curve. Optical properties are important for the final user of precipitated calcium carbonate and therefore it is very important to choose the right lime source. Besides the lime source, the optical properties of the final product (precipitated calcium carbonate) are also affected by the lime granulation. Coarser particles have better optical properties than finer ones, which is a consequence of the impurities that adhere to a greater extent to the finer particles with a larger specific area. The initial temperature of the hydration water does not have a great impact on the optical properties of the precipitated calcium carbonate particles. But it has an appreciable impact on the size of the particles of the calcium hydroxide obtained. At lower temperatures coarser particles were obtained than at higher temperatures. The source of lime also influences the reactivity of lime. The maximum temperatures of hydration under the same conditions do not differ significantly, but they differ in kinetics of hydration and so consequently on the time that is needed for the suspension of lime to reach the maximum temperature. Also the granulation of the lime does not have a significant effect on the maximal temperature, but again it has an impact on the kinetics of hydration. This work was supported by the Slovenian Ministry of Higher Education, Science and Technology under projects (3211-06-000476) and by Calcit d.o.o.