Activity of zinc in liquid Sn–Zn–Ga alloys has been measured by electrochemical technique based on molten salt electrolyte galvanic cell in the temperature range 723–823K along three pseudo-binary lines of Zn
                        x
                     (Sn
                        y
                     Ga1−y
                     )1−x
                      where y
                     =0.75, 0.50 and 0.25. The excess molar free energy, enthalpy and entropy have been computed by the Darken's treatment of the ternary solutions using published data of the relevant binary solutions and ternary system investigated. Slope–intercept method has been used to compute the partial molar quantities. The activities of tin and gallium are computed from the partial molar excess free energies of three components at 750K. The activities of all the three components show positive deviation from the Raoult's law. Thermodynamic properties of Sn–Ga binary system have been predicted at 750K from the ternary data and compared with those published in the literature.Zn–Sn eutectic system is one of the most promising lead free solders among various alloy systems. However, tendency towards oxidation, poor wetting ability and higher melting point of this alloy system confines its applications. Addition of the third element viz. Ag, Bi, Sb, Ga, etc. The paper highlights activity measurement of zinc in liquid Sn–Zn–Ga alloys by electrochemical technique based on fused salt electrolyte: LiCl–KCl High purity (99.999%) zinc, tin and gallium obtained from Johnson Matthey, U. K were used. The following analytical reagent grade salts were used for the preparation of the electrolyte: lithium chloride (Qualigens, India, 99% purity), potassium chloride (Qualigens, India, 99.8% purity) and zinc chloride (MERCK, Germany, 96% purity). The activity of Zn in the liquid Sn–Zn–Ga system was determined by measuring the reversible open circuit electromotive force (emf) of the following electrochemical cell: The experiment was performed by charging pieces of zinc, tin and gallium (frozen prior to weighing) in suitable proportion to form the appropriate alloy electrode [Zn The temperature of the cell was controlled to an accuracy of better than ±0.5 The virtual cell reaction in the galvanic cell [I] may be represented as follows: As the activity of only one component of the ternary solutions (zinc in the present case) can be determined experimentally by the use of the cell [I], the activity of other components has been estimated by Gibbs–Duhem equation. Darken The excess partial molar free energy and enthalpy of zinc at 750 The excess partial molar free energy ( The ternary excess molar free energy as function of composition of Sn was plotted for various pseudo-binary lines ( Activity of zinc, tin and gallium as a function of composition in nine pseudo-binaries were computed from As shown in The positive values of excess molar free energy and enthalpy of the ternary solutions at 750 Activity of zinc in liquid Sn–Zn–Ga alloys has been measured in the temperature range 723–823 The authors are thankful to the Head of the Department of Metallurgical Engineering, Banaras Hindu University for providing necessary laboratory facilities.