Objective
                  The purpose of this study is to evaluate a surgical strategy for pilon fractures based on ankle position/initial direction of fracture displacement at the time of injury.
               
                  Methods
                  Sixty-nine patients were categorized into groups based on ankle position at the time of the injury: Group I (varus), Group II (valgus), Group III (dorsiflexion), Group IV (plantarflexion), and Group V (neutral). The American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score was determined at 12 months.
               
                  Results
                  More than 90% of participants in Groups I–IV as well as 57.2% of participants in Group V had anatomic/good fracture reduction, respectively. Fracture healing/union was significantly slower in Group V vs Groups I, III, and IV, and in Group II vs Group IV (P < 0.005). AOFAS scores were significantly higher (P < 0.005) in Groups III (96.0, IQR: 90.0–96.0) and IV (95.0, IQR: 90.0–100.0) vs Groups II (86.9, IQR: 75.0–90.0) and V (83.0, IQR: 73.0–86.0). Wound breakdown was the most common complication (n = 11).
               
                  Conclusions
                  Determining the surgical strategy for managing pilon fractures based on ankle position at the time of the injury/initial direction of fracture displacement may be effective. What is already known on this topic? Surgical management of pilon fractures are known to make reconstruction of the fibula and articular surface of tibia, restoration of the joint's mechanical axes, and stabilization of the tibia. What this study adds? A surgical strategy based on position of the ankle at the time of injury. Pilon fractures are relatively rare, comprising approximately 1% of all lower extremity fractures and 5–10% of tibial fractures The keys to surgical management of pilon fractures are reconstruction of the fibula and articular surface of tibia, restoration of the joint's mechanical axes, and stabilization of the tibia to help facilitate early postoperative movement In our practice, we have observed that pilon fractures appear to have certain characteristics depending on orientation of the ankle at the time of injury (ie, varus, valgus, dorsiflexion, plantarflexion, neutral). This led us to hypothesize that the surgical strategy could be determined by the position of the ankle (and hence the initial direction of fracture displacement) at the time of injury, and that such a strategy may minimize soft tissue complications and facilitate reconstruction of the articular surface of the tibia. Herein, we report the results of a prospective study designed to test this hypothesis. Patients who sustained pilon fractures were invited to participate in this prospective study, which took place between June 2008 and June 2012 at a Level 1 trauma center. All participants provided written informed consent. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of our Hospital. Patients were eligible for inclusion if they were aged >18 years and had pilon fractures suitable for treatment via open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) or limited internal fixation with external fixation. Patients were excluded if they had: compartment syndrome; undergone amputation before fracture management; concomitant injuries to the brain, chest, and/or abdomen; a history of peripheral angiopathy and/or arthritis in the injured leg; uncontrolled diabetes (i.e., poorly controlled blood glucose concentrations and/or diabetes-related complications); or pathologic fracture. Participants were grouped according to ankle position at the time of the injury/initial direction of fracture displacement (determined by X-ray and/or computed tomography). Ankle position at the time of injury was determined according to: the patient's description of posture at the time of injury and the direction of fall; and the initial imaging findings, showing the direction of fracture displacement and tilting of the articular surface. For Group I (varus), the ankle was in a varus position at the time of injury (i.e., the axial force was medially deviated), the medial part of distal tibial articular surface was compressed, and the major fracture fragments were located in the medial aspect, with or without medial talus tilt. For Group II (valgus), the ankle was in a valgus position at the time of injury, the lateral part of distal tibial articular surface was compressed, and the major fracture fragments were located in lateral aspect, with or without lateral talus tilt. For Group III (dorsiflexion), the ankle was in dorsiflexion at the time of injury, the anterior part of distal tibial articular was damaged, and the major fracture fragments were located in the anterior aspect. This type of injury is commonly due to jumping from a height with knee flexion and dorsal flexion of the ankle. For Group IV (plantarflexion), the ankle was in plantarflexion at the time of injury, the posterior part of distal tibial articular surface was damaged, and the major fracture fragments were located in the posterior aspect. This type of injury is commonly due to slipping backwards, with the heel bearing the brunt of impact. For Group V (neutral), the ankle was in a neutral position at the time of injury, the full ankle articular and metaphyseal surface were compressed and impacted, and the talus had no obvious tilt or shift. This type of injury is uncommon, but may occur, for instance, following a fall into a hole. Age, sex, smoking status, cause of injury, Rüedi–Allgöwer pilon fracture classification The timing of surgery was determined according to occurrence of the Wrinkle sign. If skin blisters were apparent, surgery was delayed until there was re-epithelialization, and the subsequent incision was made as far away from the damaged skin as possible. During the time between injury and surgery, treatment (eg, cold therapy, ultrashort wave therapy) was given to help reduce swelling. For surgery, participants were placed in supine or floating position on a radiolucent operating table and a pneumatic tourniquet was placed. All participants were operated on by the same, experienced surgeon. The surgical approaches described below were selected in accordance with previous recommendations In Group I, for AO/OTA Type B fractures, an anteromedial approach was used. The medial part of the articular surface was reduced and a buttress plate was placed on the medial aspect of the distal tibia. The lateral part of the joint surface was used as the reference for reduction. For AO/OTA Type C fractures, a posterolateral approach was used to reduce fibular fractures. The Volkmann and Tillaux–Chaput fragments were used as the reference for reduction. The major plate (3.5 mm locking compression) was placed on the medial aspect. For comminuted fractures, additional small plates were placed on the anterior and/or posterior aspect of the distal tibia ( In group II, for AO/OTA Type B fractures, an anterolateral approach was used. The medial part of the articular surface was used as the reference for reduction and the major plate was placed on the anterolateral aspect of distal tibia. For AO/OTA Type C fractures, a posterolateral approach was used. The fibular fracture was reduced and fixed. The Volkmann fragment was then reduced and fixed. Thereafter an anterolateral or anterior approach was used. The Volkmann and Tillaux–Chaput fragments were used as the reference for reduction. The major plate was placed on the anterolateral aspect of the distal tibia. For comminuted fractures, additional small plates were placed on the medial and/or posterior aspect of the distal tibia. External fixation combined with limited internal fixation was applied for open fractures ( In group III, an anterior approach was used. The posterior part of the articular surface was used as the reference for reduction and the major plate was on placed anterior or anterolateral aspect of the distal tibia ( In Group IV, a posterolateral approach was used. The fibular fracture was reduced and fixed. The posterior malleolus was positioned at the level of the true joint line and a posterior plate was placed. If the posterior malleolus fracture involved the medial malleolus, a posteromedial incision was used ( In group V, if the soft tissue was intact, a combined approach was typically used. Fibular length was firstly restored. The Tillaux–Chaput and Volkmann fragments were used as the reference for reduction, with plate's fixation. External fixation combined with limited internal fixation was applied for open fractures ( Participants received low molecular weight heparin for 6 weeks. Early mobilization of the ankle joint commenced four weeks after surgery; however, participants were advised to avoid full weight bearing until fracture union. Follow up X-ray examinations were performed at 3 and 6 months after surgery to assess fracture union, which was defined as a bridging callus across 3 of 4 cortices on orthogonal radiographs The quality of fracture reduction was assessed after surgery as anatomic, good, fair, or poor using a Pacs workstation according to the Teeny–Wiss radiologic scoring system Time to fracture union was recorded for each participant and the American Orthopedic Foot and Ankle Society (AOFAS) score was determined at 12 months. Postoperative complications were recorded, including superficial infection, deep infection, delayed union, and nonunion. Delayed union and nonunion were defined as a lack of radiographic union at a minimum of 8-months follow-up or the requirement for secondary bone grafting to achieve union. Continuous variables are presented as median (interquartile range [IQR]) and were compared by Kruskal–Wallis test. Categorical variables are presented as count (percentage) and were compared by Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test. When a significant between groups difference was apparent, multiple comparisons were performed using the Bonferroni procedure, with type I error adjustment. Statistical analyses were performed using SAS software version 9.2 (SAS Institute Inc., Cary, NC). A two-sided Of the 89 patients included, 20 were excluded due to loss to follow-up ( The study outcomes are summarized in Postoperative complications are summarized in There were no instances of loss of fracture reduction over time. In this prospective study, we examined use of a surgical strategy for managing pilon fractures based on ankle position at the time of the injury/initial direction of fracture displacement. Application of this strategy was associated with relatively few postoperative complications, a high level of anatomic/good fracture reduction, and AOFAS scores ≥83.0 at 12 months. Various surgical approaches and means of fixation have been described concerning the management of pilon fractures As already noted, participants in our study were separated into five distinct groups based on ankle position at the time of injury/initial direction of fracture displacement. The choice of surgical approach and positioning of the major plate was based on the location of the main fracture fragments and the major fracture line. Local soft tissue conditions were also considered. Plates are generally used for buttressing against the deformity in a biomechanically advantageous manner. For comminuted high-energy (Type C) fractures, low-profile implants, such as small fragment plates, one-third tubular plates, and the newer pilon plates should be applied, in combination with locking plates for patients with poor bone quality Most authors agree that open reduction and internal fixation (ORIF) for management of low energy pilon fractures yields good results Although damage to the cartilage, which occurs at the time of injury, is a significant mediator of clinical outcome None of the patients in our cohort experienced loss of reduction during follow-up. This is consistent our suggestion that the plate should be placed on the side of initial displacement as a support to antagonize the direction of original displacement. For fracture lines distributed in the coronal and sagittal planes, our results support the previously published suggestion that the plate should be placed with the screw direction perpendicular to the main fracture line This study has a number of limitations, including the short duration of follow-up, the relatively small number of participants, and the lack of any control/comparator group. Further, the role of combined force was not considered, although we did attempt to account for variations in injury mechanism and fracture characteristics. In conclusion, the results of our study suggest that managing pilon fractures based on ankle position at the time of the injury/initial direction of fracture displacement may be an effective means of optimizing surgical efficacy and reducing complications. Further research concerning the utility of this approach is warranted. The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare. No funding was provided for this study. No funding was provided for this study.