Subsoil degradation in agriculture is an increasing problem worldwide, particularly due to compaction caused by heavy machinery. Here, we describe a numeric assessment of subsoil structural quality in relation to soil as a crop growth medium and illustrate its utility with results from compaction experiments and from fields under minimum tillage. The scoring scheme resembles the topsoil visual evaluation of soil structure (VESS) (Guimarães et al., 2011) with more emphasis on examination of the profile wall and of soil fragments. The focus is on identification and evaluation of the anthropic ‘transition layer’ immediately below the topsoil, usually >30cm depth. Layers of contrasting hardness and colour were identified and the overall subsoil quality of each layer was scored from separate, sequential assessments of soil mottling, soil strength, visible soil porosity, the pattern and depth of root penetration and aggregate size and shape using a colour diagnostic flowchart. Use of the method enabled identification of extent and severity of compact transition layers in both well-drained and imperfectly drained soils. Porosity and strength assessments were particularly relevant. Reference soils under forest or long-term grassland helped to distinguish whether subsoil structural quality resulted from the natural soil composition or from degradation by land management. The derived scores may be used to judge the requirement for amelioration by subsoil loosening by mechanical inputs (e.g. deep tillage) and/or natural processes (e.g. shrinkage crack formation). The method was also used to identify differences in subsoil structural quality within fields associated with field traffic levels (Oxisol in Brazil) and with moisture status (Luvisol in France). The focus of SubVESS on structure rather than on texture may not permit recognition of effects such as low water holding capacity that influence agronomic potential. In such cases the more comprehensive evaluation of overall agronomic potential by methods such as the ‘profil cultural’ is required.The subsoil is highly important for the storage of plant available water, particularly in semi-arid regions or in areas with frequent water shortages, and for the conduction of water and air, particularly in humid areas where drainage of excess rainfall is required. It also stores nutrients for plant growth. The subsoil regulates rooting depth and is seen as increasingly important for storing recalcitrant carbon ( Where the emphasis is on pedology i.e. the morphology and genesis of soils, subsoils are normally described in considerable detail during soil profile description. Such methods include the FAO standard for the World Reference Base for Soil Resources ( Subsoil compaction is one of the major threats to future crop productivity because farm machinery is becoming heavier and is used more frequently in unsuitable conditions. Thus, large areas of Europe are vulnerable to degradation ( Descriptions of topsoil structure and subsoil structure are not identical. Many of the methods developed for visual assessment of topsoil attach great importance to compaction status. However, the bulk density of subsoil can be high initially for some types of soil, and consequently the increase in bulk density is possibly small. For example, The rapid numerical assessment of subsoil structure is thus a priority and the systematic and careful examination of the subsoil is to be encouraged. The Visual Soil Examination and Evaluation Working Group of ISTRO recognised this at their meeting in Peronne in 2005 and further encouraged its development at their next meeting in Flakkebjerg in 2011. Subsoil structure classifications, e.g. The test has been designed as a rapid method for practitioners with some soils knowledge in order to evaluate whether the management practices in use by farmers have resulted in soil damage. It can also be used to assess compaction damage in land disturbed during surface mineral extraction, the installation of cables or pipelines, or after landscape re-shaping. A further objective was to indicate from the profile the depth and thickness of layers where remedial operations can be targeted. With some training, non-soils experts should be able to use the system. The emphasis is on how the intrinsic potential of the upper subsoil (∼30–60 Nevertheless, it is important to assess those properties that determine the inherent capability of the soil as a whole. Much of this capability relates to the abilities of the soil to supply water to the crop and to allow good drainage. This is related to texture and to the content of coarse fragments in the root zone. We realise the importance of texture in influencing the function of soil structure. For example, in subsoils dominated by sand, root penetration may be poor without obvious signs of compaction or hardness ( In addition to cracking, The depth of subsoil to be evaluated is not a constant (compared to a spade depth for the VESS assessment of topsoils). Here, we consider the upper limit of assessment as being below the top 30 The assessment can be done at any time in the cropping cycle, though the best time is when the soil is moist, i.e. at field capacity or drier because digging wet soil can cause damage. The method cannot be used if the soil is waterlogged resulting in the pits filling with water or near wilting point when cohesion is too high. The optimum time is at full extension of the roots when they can be better assessed. Also for ease of access and to avoid crop damage during excavation, a convenient time is soon after harvest while roots of the past crop can still be seen. In drier climates, digging and assessment conditions would be better during active crop growth when the soil would be moister. Wherever possible sites should be selected to present contrasting soil conditions such as may occur between high yielding and low yielding sections of a field. In a large field, split the field into sections where the crop or soil surface looks uniform and evaluate within each section. Pits may be examined both in compacted turning areas at field edges and within the main body of the field. To identify the intrinsic potential of the soil to develop good structure with minimal anthropic damage, examine a nearby profile in a ‘fenceline’ or under native forest. Although holes may be dug by hand, it is recommended that a trench is dug using a mechanical digger. The width should be comfortable enough to stand in, i.e. >60 Evaluation of the subsoil has a major objective of identifying any anthropic ‘transition layer’, lying just beneath the topsoil, that may have been compacted or smeared by machinery during tillage, planting or harvest. For ploughed soil normally cultivated to ca. 25 Remove soil from any surfaces compacted or smeared during digging the pit using a spade, spatula or knife. Observe the soil below the topsoil and to the expected rooting depth (∼30 Identify layers of contrasting colour and hardness by prodding with the point of a knife or a pen. We stress the importance of distinguishing man-made features of the subsoil from natural features. The signs of compaction are hardness due to high density, reduced hydraulic conductivity leading to accumulation of water above the compact layer, and a marked change in structure with horizontal, laminated or platy aggregates and low or absent porosity ( Score each layer, starting with the top layer, layer 1. Examples of completed forms are given in Mottling (a) refers mainly to the degree of anaerobism as revealed by the extent of mottling (patches or spots of orange/rusty red colour) and grey/blue soil that is likely to be evidence of anthropic waterlogging. The best score (1a/2a/3a) is where there is either no mottling or where mottling is faint and diffuse indicating that, although the water table can rise into that zone, aeration is unlikely to affect productivity. Soils without mottling have a wide range of strong, bright, uniform colours. Any non-uniformity is due to inclusions of material from adjacent horizons such as organic material from the topsoil. Poorer scores (4a/5a) correspond to progressively more distinct mottling in a layer that is uniformly grey/blue with rust coloured mottles only present around pores or blocked channels. Mottles become more distinct when the water table is high for a long period of the year. In cracking soils, the colour on the face of cracks is often paler due to the removal of iron and other elements under temporary anoxic conditions associated with the decomposition of roots ( Strength (b) refers to the resistance of the soil to penetration by a knife or to the removal of soil fragments. Strength is a function of the vulnerability of the soil structure. Soil resistance is assessed either by jabbing the side of the profile with a knife progressively moving from the top to the bottom or by extracting fragments of the layer. Fragments of soil (∼5–10 Break these fragments apart by holding the ends and snapping like a twig ( Porosity (c) distinguishable by eye is macroporosity. Porosity is one of the ‘form’ components of soil structure. Macropores are taken to be of several types: between sand grains or aggregates or within aggregates or fragments (<0.5 Roots (d) are evaluated if present. Roots are geotrophic and respond sensitively to soil physical conditions. Live roots are pale in colour. After a crop is removed, roots become darker, shrivelled and brittle after a few months but may not disappear for a year or more, dependent on species and climate. Graminaceous plants have thin, multi-branched fibrous roots; other crops may have fewer, thicker roots such as field beans or onions. Roots are biologically responsive indicators and tend to grow more vigorously in zones that show least physical resistance, for example down earthworm channels or shrinkage cracks (e.g. Rooting is assessed from frequency and distribution within the layer and the extent of any distortion. The best score (1d/2d) is where roots grow throughout the layer with no signs of restriction. Poorer scores correspond to roots localised within cracks and worm channels (3d) and thickening (4d). The poorest score is no roots (5d). A dense interlocking web of roots may develop on the surface of a compact layer or roots will follow cracks or wormholes. Rooting depth is also important as it indicates whether any transition layer can be successfully penetrated and is assessed by looking for roots at depth. To find such roots it is necessary to pick at the vertical face of the soil profile, penetrating with the point of a knife the profile face by only a few mm. The rooting depth can be determined by the presence of the deepest root detected. Aggregate shape/size (e) is the primary determinant of Ssq as it is the main ‘form’ component of structure and is thus the last diagnostic factor leading to Ssq ( More information on mottling, porosity, rooting depths and soil structural forms and sizes is provided in the supplementary material that accompanies the flowchart and is shown in Ssq is given for each subsoil layer according to the most frequently occurring quality with structure usually being the dominant factor ( The structure is friable and crumbles easily with high porosity and fissures. The colour appears natural and is appropriate to the parent material. Drainage and aeration are good. This class is most likely to occur in the layer immediately below the topsoil and there may be no break in consistence or moisture content between topsoil and subsoil. Live roots or those of recent crops are plentiful and evenly distributed. Aggregates are readily broken apart by hand when wet or dry and the internal structure of larger aggregates appears crumb-like. In fine-textured soils frequent vertically-orientated fissures may contain inclusions of topsoil that fall in while the fissures are open. Channels made by earthworms or other soil fauna may provide significant pathways for roots and improve permeability. The structure is friable with sub-angular aggregates. The colour is similar to Ssq1. Any mottling due to anaerobism is diffuse and scattered. There are slightly fewer pores and fissures than Ssq1, but this only has a minor effect on rooting. As for Ssq1, this layer may occur immediately below the topsoil and may contain ploughed-down organic material that under wet conditions may result in anaerobism. The structure is angular or weak-grained with some compaction as either natural or man-made layers. Aggregates are likely to have amorphous internal structure. Fragments are angular with sharp edges and snap in two easily but without crumbling. Visible porosity occurs mainly as fissures, isolated pores and root and earthworm channels. Permeability to air and water is likely to be low unless there is a network of prismatic or polyhedric cracks (e.g. in orthic luvisols). This layer can restrict rooting depth and length. Few roots are able to penetrate the larger aggregates and are mostly confined to earthworm channels or shrinkage cracks. Such cracks may be hard to locate even when dry. Fibrous roots can be thickened if unable to penetrate compacted zones. A zone of ploughed-in organic matter is possible that may be anaerobic. Some mottles may be present due to anaerobism within aggregates caused by periodic impairment of water movement and aeration, but mottles are diffuse and faint. Aggregates are large and may be natural peds, possibly prismatic, columnar, laminated or single grained. There is little or no porosity, earthworm channels are rare and roots are usually distorted. Fragments are angular, retain their shape and may be hard to break, especially when dry. If drainage is poor, grey colours and marked mottling are common due to anaerobism. Aggregates may be strongly mottled within and show pale-coloured iron-depleted zones on the edge of cracks. The structure is massive or the structural units are dense or highly compacted with smooth, unbroken faces or weak, single-grained structures, possibly laminated. The soil is very hard when dry and difficult or impossible to break apart by hand. When wet it is tough and plastic or so dense that it remains brittle when saturated. When broken apart no internal structure is visible with individual grains or micro-aggregates pressed tightly together. No porosity, channels or roots are present. Roots may form a web on the upper surface of the layer because they are unable to penetrate further. Similarly, after rain the upper surface of this layer may be visibly wet due to very low permeability. If drainage is poor, the colour is mostly grey and brightly mottled with rust coloured zones around blocked pores where air can enter. Grey-blue redoximorphic colours are dominant and there may be grey anaerobic pockets with a sulphidic smell. The method is illustrated using two profiles from a well-aerated soil and two from a poorly-aerated soil. The well-aerated soil is from a compaction experiment initiated in 2010 at Research Centre Aarslev, Denmark (10°27′E. 55°18′N). The soil is a sandy loam developed on Weichselian moraine deposits and classified as a Glossic Phaeozem according to the World Reference Base (WRB) system. Six levels of compaction were applied prior to sowing with spring barley ( The poorly aerated soil ( The profiles at Aarslev were on the non-compacted reference plot and on a plot of the most compacted treatment. The profiles at Crichton were on discard areas either adjacent to the entrance to the tractor compacted plot and subjected to heavy wheel traffic or on an adjacent area where wheel and cattle traffic were much lower. Completed score sheets for Aarslev are shown in For testing the methodology under tropical conditions we choose a Latosol (Oxisol of clay content ∼70%) under long term no-tillage, in a crop rotation with soybean, corn, wheat, oats and barley. Within the same field, areas at the ends where tractors manoeuvred were compared with areas without visible machinery compaction. The soil structure under adjacent native forest was evaluated as a reference. Evaluations of VESS were made in the 0–25 Where Ssq score was judged to differ within the same 0.25 The variability of Ssq within a field was illustrated by assessments made by postgraduate students in each of six pits (labelled A–F) dug in a regular grid across a 5.8 The pits were on a sloping area, with A–C at the base of the slope and D–F on the plateau. Ssq assessments ( The method is based on collective extensive experience in evaluating subsoil structural quality under a wide range of conditions from clayey Australian vertisols to sandy Northern European podsols. The method proved good at identifying the severity and depth extent of compaction in all soils tested. In practice, scores for the different properties could vary within a layer and the overall layer score (Ssq) tended to reflect the strength and porosity scores. The extraction of fragments proved helpful for these assessments. In most cases, colour was not an important factor. At Aarslev, Ssq score in the transition layer was similar to topsoil Sq in the lower topsoil. By contrast, at Crichton, the Ssq in the transition layer was better than the topsoil Sq in the lower topsoil. This may result from the greater emphasis on description of cracking and porosity patterns than in the VESS spade test. The method showed the wide spatial variability of structure to 1.3 The method was tried out amongst ourselves and with postgraduate students and proved relatively easy to teach. Some prior knowledge of soil science, particularly the terminology, is useful. In such cases, a short talk followed by a demonstration in two or three locations proved enough to provide a working knowledge of the method. After a pit was dug, each profile location could be characterised within 20 We compared the method with the ‘profil cultural’ ( The detailed analysis, labelling and recording required for ‘le profil cultural’ demands up to 2 Other relevant techniques are SOILpak ( In order to identify anthropic features, it is important to distinguish shrink/swell (interpedal) pores from pores created by biological or climatic action. The continuity and size of biopores for root exploration are of great importance. They could be identified from the presence of elongated macropores, though they can be underestimated. Initial visual estimations could be confirmed using white paint as described in Section A limitation that we commonly encountered was the difficulty in distinguishing compacted layers of anthropic origin from changes in compaction status due to differences in texture between horizons and due to indurated layers in some coarser textured soils which are relics from the Ice Age ( Although structure is the main criterion for determining Ssq other factors may sometimes dominate quality such as aeration where saturated soil directly overlies rock. Stone content within a soil profile can also have an effect on aeration, water movement and rooting as shown by the data from France. Also for some specific soil types such as Vertisols, supplementary evaluation may be required. When assessing field variability in the luvisol, at soil pit F ( Interpretation of the subsoil quality scores in terms of management recommendations requires at least some local or regional knowledge about soil management options. It is important to distinguish, if possible, the extent to which a given score can be ascribed to natural conditions and to management history, e.g. whether compaction is anthropic or natural. Having established that the agronomic potential is being influenced by compaction or other management problems, it is worthwhile considering how the subsoil structural quality could be maintained or improved. The potential effect of poor quality at a specific depth on plant production will differ substantially between soil types, climates and cropping systems ( When answering the “what to do” question it is important to distinguish between indicator and management thresholds as discussed by The Ssq is an indicator threshold value and is expected to differ markedly, across soil types and climates. Nevertheless, depending on cropping, a Ssq value of >3 may be critical for a fertile and highly productive soil whereas Ssq5 may be critical, e.g. sandy soils in a cold and humid climate. Despite these differences we are proposing threshold values of the upper subsoil down to 60 Ssq values of 1, 4 and 5 are assessed as good, fair and poor, respectively. For Ssq1, there is only a need to focus on how to maintain good quality, whereas for Ssq5 there is a need for short term improvement. Ssq values of 4 (and 3 under intensive production) indicate a need to consider management options to improve the subsoil quality in the medium to long-term. Where Ssq is 3 or 4, it may be worthwhile monitoring any change of the Ssq over the season before changing crop management. Although it is important to distinguish man-made features from natural features that can increase density due to a change in soil texture with depth, such a layer, dependent on thickness, may also be capable of being loosened by a subsoiler or through biological processes. Mole drainage also may be an option. The type and intensity of soil management needed to maintain or improve subsoil quality will also differ between sites. For instance, traffic with lower axle weights, or the minimisation of compaction via GPS-guided controlled traffic systems will most likely be needed to maintain Ssq1 or 2 for a clayey humid soil than for a sandy soil in a semi-arid climate. For Ssq The assessment of subsoil quality by visual scoring within soil pits enables identification of anthropic layers due to compaction that limit the agronomic potential of soil. These were mostly in the zone immediately below the topsoil, the ‘transition layer’. The method could identify the severity and depth extent of compaction in all soils tested. The use of a decision flowchart for the separate assessment of mottling, strength, porosity, rooting and aggregate size and shape in each layer enables a relatively objective and rapid assessment of subsoil quality. Porosity and strength assessments were particularly relevant. Distinguishing whether the quality of these subsoil layers reflects the natural soil composition or degradation by land management is helped by comparison of the test soils with reference soils nearby under forest or long-term grassland. The scores of structural quality derived can be used to judge the requirement for amelioration by soil management, mainly by subsoiling. Lothar Mueller and Mandy Liesch helped in the early stages of development. Britton Wilkinson and Mansonia Pulido provided helpful comments. Anne Weill provided some photographs and helped with the chart. Masters students from ISARA, Lyon, France suggested several improvements of the method. The work was partly supported by the Scottish Government and by a soil compaction project granted by Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at The following are Supplementary data to this article: