Halide perovskites are known to have grain boundary defects and there are continuous efforts in the community to overcome them by various passivation techniques, like the use of various small organic molecules as additives, solvent additives, mixing of larger cations to decorate the grain boundaries at interfaces with quasi-2D perovskites. This paper reports an additive-engineering strategy which provides moisture resistance and passivates defects of CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) absorber layer of perovskite thin film via introducing organic molecule 4, 4′-Bis (N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl (CBP). GIXRD results show that CBP molecules do not enter into the perovskite crystal. Contact angle measurement and XPS studies suggest that CBP plays a role in boosting moisture resistance. XPS also supports that a small amount of CBP reduces carbon related impurities. CBP causes improved optical properties via bulk defect passivation. These results are found to be in accordance with steady-state and transient photoluminescence studies, where improved photoluminescence is observed for CBP added MAPbI3 films with reduced non-radiative recombination centers. Defects passivation and moisture resistance imparted by CBP molecules result in improved photovoltaic parameters and electroluminescence efficiency eventually. The study leads to a rational approach towards choosing other additives of appropriate molecular size for enhancing perovskite solar cell performance.Organic-inorganic lead halide perovskites have received tremendous attention due to their excellent optoelectronic properties and easy fabrication techniques ( Accompanying the rapid progress in device performance, the morphology of perovskite films is explored to improve performance of solar cells by understanding of molecular interactions and crystallization ( In this work, we optimized 4, 4′-Bis (N-carbazolyl)-1, 1′-biphenyl (CBP) addition in MAPbI By varying concentration of CBP, the impact of CBP addition on morphological, structural, optical properties of perovskite films and photovoltaic performance of the devices is analyzed in good detail. We have deposited MAPbI To develop a deeper understanding of the role of CBP in passivation of defects, we analyzed crystallization mechanism. The impact of addition of CBP can be seen in terms of its effect on crystallization kinetics owing to slower volatilization of DMF in presence of CBP ( To investigate the role of CBP in moisture stability, contact angle measurement and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies are performed. The hydrophobicity of perovskite is confirmed by contact angle measurement between MAPbI In addition, high resolution XPS of CBP added perovskite film shows a significant reduction in O 1 s peak with respect to pristine MAPbI We have performed steady-state photoluminescence (PL) and time resolved PL (TRPL) measurements to understand the recombination process and carrier dynamics. The impact of CBP on photovoltaic performance is investigated in detail. There are significant differences in average values of V In In nutshell, CBP is introduced to passivate bulk defects of MAPbI     Structural characterization by using XRD is carried out in PANalytical X-ray diffractometer with Cu K Optical studies were carried out measured using a spectrometer (PerkinElmer LAMBDA 950) and photoluminescence (PL) spectrometer (Horiba FluoroMax 4). Steady-state PL measurement was done on thin-film in vacuum at a pressure of 10–3 mbar in a custom made chamber. Excitation energy and wavelength were 30 nJ and 355 nm, respectively. For transient PL, a gated i-CCD (ICCD, Andor iStar) was used for detection with excitation laser (3rd harmonic Nd:YAG with emission wavelength of 355 nm) pulse width of 840 ps pulse with 1 kHz repetition rate. Steady-state current–voltage–luminance characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source meter, Keithley 2000 multimeter, and calibrated Si photodiode (RS components). Surface chemical states were obtained from high resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, KRATOS) with an Al Kα (1486.6 eV) X-ray source. Electronic states are derived from ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS, KRATOS) with He (I) source (21.22 eV). Chamber pressure was below 5.0E-9 Torr for XPS and UPS measurement. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. The authors acknowledge the support of Supplementary data to this article can be found online at The following are the Supplementary data to this article: