Laboratory-scale research has focused on the treatment of EAF steel making dusts by an alkaline caustic leach process, combining both hydro- and environmentally suitable metallurgical methods to recover zinc and lead. Optimum conditions were found to be: 95 °C, 1/7 solid/liquid ratio, 10 M NaOH and 2 h leaching time. Under these conditions, 85% Zn and 90% Pb were recovered. The leachate was further purified by zinc cementation at 50 °C to remove the metallic impurities (Pb, Cu, Cd, etc.) and to make it suitable for alkaline zinc electrolysis. The cementation process was chemically controlled with an activation energy of 26.7 kJ mol−1.A considerable degree of dust is recovered in gas cleaning units during the production of steel from scrap in electric arc furnaces (EAF). In recent years, the presence of leachable Zn, Pb, Cd, Cr, and other metals within the dust has caused the material to be widely regarded as a toxic waste that is unsuitable for the disposal at landfills. The amount of Zn, Pb, Cu, Cr, and Cd in EAF dusts is on the rise, as the quantity of scrap coming from the automotive industry is used with an ever-increasing ratio. The largest metallic portion of the EAF dusts, comprising 10–15 kg per ton of steel produced, is zinc ( Worldwide steel production was 902 million tons as of 2002 with 60% coming from integrated steel works. Plants equipped with EAFs and utilizing scrap was 35%, but in Turkey, the share was 64%, corresponding to 9.6 million tons of steel production. Stockpiling EAF dusts is strictly prohibited in developed countries, where stringent rules mandate their metallurgical re-evaluation. The treatment of these wastes and the recovery of metallic values are good examples to “waste to raw material” recycling. Numerous pyro- and hydrometallurgical processes have been developed for the treatment of EAF dusts. Today, most of the commercially available processes for the treatment of EAF dusts are pyrometallurgical, such as, rotary kilns, plasma, and flame reactor processes. This enables the recovery of zinc bonded in a stable ZnFeO A method, combining hydrometallurgical (alkaline leaching + cementation) and electro-metallurgical (alkaline electrolysis) techniques was introduced industrially in France, in 1986 ( The major impetus for the development of hydrometallurgical processes for the treatment of EAF dusts is that a small-scale, environmentally suitable, on-site process could be economic due to low capital and operating costs as well as the providing potential recovery of the valuable metal-containing products. Some of the studies, conducted on the alkaline leaching of EAF dusts can be summarized as follows. U.S. Bureau of Mines investigated the recovery of zinc from oxidized ores by using NaOH. They studied zinc leaching from a zinc oxide ore which contained 21.2 wt.% zinc using 4–6 M NaOH solution and obtained 85% zinc recovery (  The aims of the present study are to evaluate the EAF dusts as secondary raw material sources, to assess the possibility of recovering the metallic values and eliminating the environmental hazard, and to investigate the kinetic aspects of the cementation in alkaline medium. Experiments were conducted with the EAF dust, kindly supplied by a private Turkish steel company (Colakoglu A.Ş.). EAF dust, when received, contained some moisture, probably owing to its storage conditions, and was therefore in the form of agglomerates. It was dried first, then ground for a short period, and screened. The particle size of the dust used in the experiments was below 90 μm and it was not exposed to any other metallurgical pre-treatment operation. The chemical composition and the X-ray diffraction pattern of the dust are given in A general flow sheet describing this present study is given in The optimum amount of zinc powder, stirring speed, temperature, and time were explored in the cementation part of the study. A kinetic study was also conducted to determine the activation energy of Pb–Zn cementation reaction. EAF dust was dried at 105 °C and then ground by a vibrating mill. Ground dust was screened by Retsch brand sieve equipment. The apparatus used for leaching is shown in An ICP spectrophotometer (Spectroflame) and an atomic absorption spectrophotometer (Perkin Elmer 1100 B) were utilized for the analyses of the aqueous samples from the leaching and cementation experiments. Phase analyses of the raw material and reaction products were conducted by an X-ray diffractometer (PHILIPS PW 3710). All the chemicals used were Merck brand, while distilled water was used throughout the experimental study. The investigated concentrations of NaOH were 2, 4, 6, 10, and 12 M, while keeping the stirring speed at 600 rpm, S/L ratio at 1/5, and solution temperature at 70 °C constant. As shown in The overall recovery of zinc and lead increases by increasing the amount of NaOH used. However, the formation of gelatinous SiO The effect of S/L ratio on the leaching rate is shown in A series of experiments were conducted to optimize the leaching temperature. Increasing the leaching temperature from 25 to 95 °C increased the rate of zinc leaching as shown in The optimum conditions for the recovery of metals such as zinc, lead, etc. from the EAF dusts via alkaline leaching technique, can be summarized as: 10 M NaOH, 1/7 S/L ratio, 95 °C and 2 h leaching which recovers 85% Zn and 90% Pb. The most important factor limiting higher recoveries is the co-existence of zinc ferrites in the EAF dusts along with zinc oxide. In fact, X-ray analysis of the leaching residue ( The recoveries of other metals present in the EAF dust under the optimum alkaline leaching conditions (1/7 S/L ratio, 10 M NaOH, 600 rpm) at 25 °C and 95 °C are shown in Copper, lead, and cadmium also dissolve along with zinc during the alkaline leaching operation. However, the solution must be extremely pure for the recovery of zinc in metallic form via alkaline electrolysis. Therefore, prior to the electrolysis, zinc cementation is applied to eliminate more noble metals from the zinc solution. The experimental parameters investigated to determine the optimum cementation conditions were as follows: zinc powder (stoichiometric Series of cementation experiments were carried out at 160 rpm and 25 °C for 2 h in order to optimize the zinc powder added.  Thus the optimum conditions for cementation of the alkaline leaching solutions were as follows: stoichiometric × The quality of the solution, obtained after the cementation, is believed to be suitable for electrolysis to produce metallic zinc. The effect of impurities on electrolysis operation of zinc is less pronounced in alkaline solutions than in acidic solutions ( Although a lead concentration above 50 ppm would not disturb the purity of cathodic zinc during the electrolysis operation, it does affect the morphology of deposited zinc, which is more porous and contains dendrites ( The following equation (Eq. Fractional changes of zinc were calculated from the lead ion concentrations at certain time intervals of the experiments, carried out at constant temperature, starting with an initial fixed Pb In Alkaline leaching of a local electric arc furnace dust, with no prior metallurgical treatment, dissolved 85% Zn and 90% Pb under the optimum conditions of: 1/7 S/L ratio, 95 °C, 10 M NaOH, stirred at 600 rpm for 2 h. The leach residue contained about 2.2% Zn, 37% Fe, 0.39% Pb, 0.35% Al, 0.27% Cu, 0.055% Cd and 0.26% Cr. Further increases in leaching efficiency were not possible, as the zinc ferrites could not be dissolved. To decompose ferrites, a pre-reduction operation could be utilized to enhance recovery ( The optimum conditions for zinc cementation conducted on the alkaline leach solutions were found to be: stoichiometric × After cementation, concentrations of Fe, Cu, and Cr were <