It is inevitable for the presence of dissolved ions, especially inorganic cations or anions, in the process water of an industrial flotation system. They could alter the chemistry of a flotation system and interfere with the interaction between minerals and reagents. The purpose of this study was to identify the relationship between anion distribution in the process water and the flotation performance of a typical industrial iron ore concentrator when the process conditions were stable. An effort was also made to understand how the anions affect the flotation properties of the iron ore through a series of water chemical analyses by Inductively Coupled Plasma Atomic Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-AES), ore sample analysis by X-ray Diffraction (XRD), bench flotation tests by using the industrial iron ore, micro-flotation tests by using pure quartz, and zeta potential measurement. The data from water chemical analyses indicated that sulfate ion concentrations in the process water, especially from the roughing stage, are more relevant to the SiO2 content and Fe recovery in concentrate than chloride ion. This can be explained by the results from flotation tests, suggesting that the anions at higher valence tend to have more significant influences on lowering the SiO2 content. But it substantially depends on anion concentration, pulp pH, and type of metal ions. At 8.5–9.2, SO4
                     2− ions have promotive effects on the recovery of the quartz pre-modified by FeCl2, or FeCl3 in the water. This is probably due to a shift towards acidic direction on the zeta potential of quartz surfaces in the presence of sulfate ions. These anions, however, have negative effects on the quartz recovery with the occurrence of Ca2+ ions. The precipitation of CaSO4 on the mineral surfaces could be attributed to it.The quality of process water, especially dissolved ions and their compounds, has significant effects on flotation, as they could alter the surface properties and flotation performance of iron oxides unpredictably ( The influences of these dissolved ions, especially metal ions, such as Na The role of anions in plant water during flotation have been mentioned by a couple of studies. Studies as described before mostly focus on how dissolved ions, especially cations, impacts the flotation performance of iron oxides on a laboratory scale. The well-prepared water samples with known chemistry and pure minerals was more likely introduced into these investigations. The water chemistry of an industrial flotation system has rarely been involved. While in an industrial flotation process of iron ores, the distributions of dissolved ions in the process water may not be static and stable due to their continuous build-ups. They could greatly influence mineral dissolution, chemical composition of mineral surfaces, and their interactions with flotation reagents. What is the role of ion distributions, especially anions, in the process water on the flotation efficiency of an industrial system? In this study, the dominant anionic species concentrations in the process water samples from different locations in an industrial iron ore concentrator were analyzed by ICP-AES instrument periodically. An effort was also made to understand how these anions affect the flotation properties of iron oxides through a series of bench flotation tests by using the industrial iron ore, micro-flotation tests by using pure quartz, ore sample analysis by XRD, and zeta potential measurement. The iron ore sample that has been pre-concentrated by magnetic separator was collected and sampled from an iron ore mine in Yunnan, China. It was at a size range of about 87.6% passing 74 µm. The ore basically contains 56.25% Fe, 10.5% SiO The flowsheet of the cationic reverse flotation system of an industrial iron ore concentrator is shown in The water samples were taken from five locations through the concentrator: ① the local freshwater, ② the rougher cell, ③ the cleaner cell, ④ the overflow from dewatering units, and ⑤ the recycled tailing water. All water chemistry data presented refer to these location numbers. A one-liter glass bottle was used to collect each water sample periodically from different locations in the industrial flotation process by centrifuging and filtrating. All the samples were tested for the contents of the cations by an ICP-AES instrument from Research Center for Analysis and Measurement of Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming, Yunnan. To prepare the sample to do bench flotation tests, 500 g of the iron ore sample was weighed and mixed with tap water at room temperature. The flotation test was conducted by using a 1.5L cell (XF-D) for roughing and cleaning stages at an impeller speed of 1200 rpm for a certain time based on the flowsheet shown in To prepare the sample for a flotation test using a Hallimond cell, a 1 g quartz was weighed and mixed with 100 mL of distilled water. A 10 mg/L DDA as a collector was used for each test and its conditioning time was 1 min. Calcium chloride, magnesium chloride, or ferrous/ferric chloride at a concentration of 1 mmol/L was added and conditioned for 5 min before the addition of sodium sulfate at a dosage of 1 mmol/L if needed. All micro-flotation tests were performed at an air rate of 0.2 m The zeta potentials of quartz were measured with the use of a ZetaPALS zeta potential analyzer manufactured by Brookhaven Instruments Corporation, USA. To prepare samples for the zeta potential measurements, a 100 mL 0.5% (5 g/L) quartz solution was mixed with 100 mL of calcium, magnesium, or ferric chloride at a concentration of 1 mmol/L at room temperature. The mixed suspension was stirred at room temperature for 10 min. Then the mixture was agitated with sodium sulfate at the same concentration for another 10 min if needed. Five mL of the mixed suspension was withdrawn and diluted to 100 mL with a 10 The average distributions of the main ions in the process water from different locations in the industrial flotation system were analyzed as shown in The relationship between the flotation performance and the distribution of the main anions, such as Cl   It has been seen from The influences of sulfate ions on the flotation of iron oxides with the presence of metal ions in water at the natural pH were observed in  There is a different case for the quartz pretreated by CaCl The zeta potential values of the quartz pretreated by CaCl No reversal, but only the slightly less zeta potential on quartz occurs in the presence of CaCl In terms of the data from The distribution of SO Xiong Tong only contributes to the section of methods and Min Tang contributes to the rest of this paper. All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript. This research received no external funding.  The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.