Open-pit mining operations often produce large amounts of waste rock that are characterized by large particle size distributions (PSD). Waste rock are normally deposited in surface piles that contain grains varying from a few microns to meters in size. Furthermore, the mineralogical and textural properties of the waste rock are influenced by their PSD. The diameter of physical locking of sulfides (DPLS) is a newly suggested parameter that was defined using an automated mineralogy system to separate waste rock according to their geochemical reactivity. Three lithologies (A, B, and C) were extracted from an open-pit gold mine and their geochemical behaviors, with respect to degree of sulfide liberation, were evaluated using column kinetic tests. The main results of this study showed that fine fractions of the studied waste rock were more sulfidic compared to coarse fractions. Moreover, sulfide liberation was negligible for fractions >2.4 mm. Consequently, 2.4 mm was defined as the critical diameter of sulfide reactivity for the three studied waste rock. Column kinetic tests were used to confirm this hypothesis and to assess the geochemical behavior of the three lithologies. Geochemical analyses of leachates from the column tests showed that pH values remained between 7 and 8 and the instantaneous concentrations of metals such as iron (Fe) and zinc (Zn) were below environmental limits over the entire test duration (543 days). Considering sample reactivity, the data showed that the fine fractions primarily control the geochemical behavior of total samples. Sulfide oxidation rates were high for fractions <2.4 mm, whereas they were negligible for fractions >2.4 mm; total samples showed intermediate rates. For example, in lithology B, pyrite oxidation rates were 12.46 μmol/kg/day, 2.43 μmol/kg/day, and 0.27 μmol/kg/day for the fine fraction (<2.4 mm), total sample (<5 cm), and coarse fraction (>2.4 mm) respectively. Sulfide and carbonate contents and their liberation were defined as key factors controlling the geochemical behavior of the studied waste rock, which was confirmed by the correlation factor between calcium leaching vs. carbonate liberation and between sulfur leaching vs. sulfide liberation. The coarse, unreactive fraction (>2.4 mm) comprised a high proportion of the total sample weight (up to 90 wt. %). Screening waste rock, after blasting, according to the critical diameter of sulfide reactivity could be an efficient technique for global waste rock management that will reduce the economic costs related to waste rock pile reclamation.Over the last few decades, ore exploitation methods have evolved. Increasing metal prices and the availability of new equipment and technologies have allowed for the exploitation, usually by open-pit methods, of high-tonnage/low-grade ores. This type of exploitation generates large volumes of blasted and non-economic material called waste rock. Waste rock is part of the ore body that must be mined but is not treated because its metal content is lower than the operationally define cut-off grade. In general, waste rock is deposited in unsaturated piles that can be hundreds of meters in height and cover thousands of hectares ( The environmental behavior of waste rock is controlled by their chemical, biological, mineralogical, and physical parameters ( Three lithologies from an existing mine were sampled and characterized using a multi-disciplinary approach ( The three studied lithologies were sampled in an open pit mine in Québec (Canada). The deposit constitutes a part of the Cadillac-Larder Lake tectonic zone ( The three lithologies were sampled from three sub-piles constructed in the field immediately after waste rock blasting. The three lithologies (A, B, and C) were homogenized using a quartering technique and a part of each lithology was sampled. The remaining samples were sieved with an aperture of 2.4 mm following the conclusions of the study by A total of nine columns was set up and run for 543 days: three columns for lithology A (total, fine, and coarse samples), three for lithology B (total, fine, and coarse samples), and three for lithology C (total, fine, and coarse samples). Columns were constructed from Plexiglas with a 28-cm inner diameter and 1-m height for the total samples and coarse fraction samples. For the fine fraction samples, a 14-cm inner diameter was used. Due to the PSD and column size, the masses of samples used in column tests were 64 kg for total samples and coarse fraction samples, and 10.25 kg for fine fraction samples. The columns with coarse and total samples were flushed monthly with 18 L of deionized water and columns with fine samples were flushed monthly with 2.7 L of deionized water. The water volume was chosen so as to keep the same liquid/solid ratio (L/S) for all columns. Samples were allowed to dry in ambient air between flushes. The leachates were collected and analyzed after 4 h of contact with samples. At the end of the test, only columns with fine fractions were dismantled by collecting samples at depths of 1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 25, and 38 cm. The solid samples were homogenized and analyzed for total sulfur and carbon content (wt.%) using an induction furnace (ELTRA CS-2000) with a detection limit of 0.009% and a precision of ±5%. Soluble sulfates were analyzed using acid extraction with 40% HCl. Chemical composition for the first depth (1 cm) was analyzed using inductively coupled plasma atomic emission spectroscopy (ICP-AES). Samples collected at 1 cm depth were also analyzed using QEMSCAN Leachate waters from the columns were analyzed for pH, Eh, electrical conductivity (EC), acidity, alkalinity, and chemical composition. The pH, Eh, and EC were analyzed using pH-Eh-conductivity meters. The acidity and alkalinity were analyzed using automated titration. The chemical composition of the leachates was analyzed using ICP-AES after sample acidification and filtration to 0.45 μm with 2% HNO The mineralogy of initial samples and the 1-cm depth dismantled fine fractions was studied using Quantitative Evaluation of Minerals by Scanning Electron Microscopy (QEMSCAN Samples post kinetic tests were sized by wet screening and Ro-Tap sieve shaking to produce two fractions: < 300 μm and >300 μm to evaluate sulfide coating in these two fractions. This was used to identify if there was any preferential oxidation of sulfides dependent on the PSD. The polished sections for each fraction were analyzed by particle mineralogy analysis (PMA) mode. Measurement resolution varied from 2.5 μm to 6 μm depending on the particle size. Results of the chemical analyses of samples are summarized in The mineralogical composition of the studied samples was determined using QEMSCAN ( Quantitatively, the 3 lithologies contained low sulfide contents (<1 wt. %) and higher carbonate contents (>2.2 wt. %). The sulfide minerals are enriched in fine to mid-size fraction (+53 μm/-300 μm) ( The mineralogical composition of the studied samples shows Ca occurring in four minerals: calcite (CaCO Sulfur within the studied waste rock was associated with pyrite and barite. The two minerals differ in their involvement in mine drainage processes. In terms of mineral distributions/associations and textures, carbonates and sulfides within the studied lithologies displayed different degrees of liberation with respect to the particle size fractions ( Chemical results from the column kinetic tests (543 days) in terms of leachate quality are illustrated in Calcium, magnesium, and manganese were chosen to indicate neutralizing minerals dissolution ( Sulfate, iron, and zinc leaching from the column tests is illustrated in Characterization of post-testing samples allowed for interpretation of the geochemical behavior and confirmation of assumptions. Only columns containing the fine samples for each lithology were dismantled and analyzed for total S, inorganic C, and sulfates. Results of the dismantlement are illustrated in Automated mineralogical characterization was performed on dismantled samples to evaluate sulfide coating. Automated mineralogical characterization (QEMSCAN) of fine samples confirmed that carbonate and pyrite liberation degree depended on particle size ( Waste rock samples B and C could be considered to have similar lithologies, as they presented comparable mineralogical and chemical properties. Lithology A was slightly different in terms of sulfide and carbonate contents. In fact, lithology A was characterized by the highest carbonate content and the lowest sulfide content. These mineralogical and chemical differences influenced the geochemical responses in the kinetic tests performed on the three samples of each lithology. In general, these three lithologies are considered as non-acid-generating in the short-term since the leachate pH values were between 7 and 8 for the duration of the column tests. Additionally, concentrations of Fe and Zn ( Moreover, calculated pyrite oxidation rates for the nine studied samples were: 4.8 μmol/kg/day, 2.5 μmol/kg/day, and 0.3 μmol/kg/day for the fine, total, and coarse samples, respectively of lithology A; 12.5 μmol/kg/day, 2.4 μmol/kg/day, and 0.27 μmol/kg/day for the fine, total, and coarse samples, respectively of lithology B; and 9.4 μmol/kg/day, 2.5 μmol/kg/day, and 0.3 μmol/kg/day for the fine, total, and coarse samples, respectively of lithology C. These results confirmed the conclusions drawn from the study by Long-term predictions of geochemical behavior for the nine samples were performed using the oxidation/neutralization curves proposed by Since the three fine fraction samples of each lithology are characterized by a different liberation degree of sulfides and carbonates, Ca and S leaching rates were different for each sample. Calcium and sulfur concentrations were normalized to the initial mass of Ca and S for each sample to avoid the effect of initial chemical/mineralogical differences. Calcium and sulfur concentrations were recorded over the kinetic test period and plotted against the liberation degree of carbonates and sulfides, respectively. The linear regressions for both elements are displayed in Considering these results, which confirm the conclusions of The proposed methodology for waste rock management is illustrated in The main objectives of this study were to confirm that 2.4 mm is the diameter of physical locking of sulfides within the three studied lithologies and to evaluate the geochemical behavior of these lithologies through kinetic testing. The results showed that fine fractions are the most sulfidic and where mineral liberation is higher relative to coarser fractions. The three studied lithologies showed similar geochemical behaviors. Within the three studied samples, carbonate contents were higher than sulfide contents, which explains the neutral behavior observed during the 534-day kinetic test. However, sulfide oxidation rates and species release rates were completely different depending on the sample (<2.4 mm, > 2.4 mm, < 5 cm). The sulfide oxidation rate was higher for lithologies B and C than for lithology A due to their initial sulfide contents. Sulfide content was significant within lithologies B and C, which are considered to have the same petrogenesis (greywackes). With respect to the effect of particle size distribution, fine fractions (<2.4 mm) showed high oxidation rates compared to coarse fractions (>2.4 mm) and to total samples (<5 cm) due to different degrees of sulfide mineral liberation. Fine fractions were characterized by high sulfide mineral liberation compared to total samples. The samples containing only fractions >2.4 mm showed very low oxidation rates and low species release rates due to their low sulfide mineral liberation. Linear regressions of sulphate releases vs sulfide mineral liberation and Ca release vs carbonate mineral liberation showed correlation coefficients; about 0.95 for sulphates and 0.93 for calcium. The two equations established for mineral liberation (sulfides and carbonates) and species release (Ca and S) could be used as a tool for predicting species leaching for samples with known carbonate and sulfide mineral liberation. The authors thank URSTM staff for their support with materials testing and analysis. Funding of this study was provided by the The following are the supplementary data to this article: Supplementary data to this article can be found online at