Introduction
                  While recommendations for early exploration and nerve repair in cases of open fractures of the humeral shaft associated with radial nerve palsy are clear, the therapeutic algorithm for the management of closed humeral shaft fractures complicated by radial nerve palsy is still uncertain. The purpose of this study was to determine whether patients with complete sensory and motor radial nerve palsy following a closed fracture of the humeral shaft should be surgically explored.
               
                  Patients and methods
                  Twenty-five patients with closed humeral shaft fractures complicated by complete radial nerve palsy were retrospectively reviewed during a 12-year period. Surgical intervention was indicated if functional recovery of the radial nerve was not present after 16weeks of expectant management.
               
                  Results
                  Surgical exploration was performed in 12 patients (48%) after a mean period of expectant management of 16.8weeks (range: 16–18weeks). In 2 of them (10%) total nerve transection was found. In the rest 10 patients underwent surgical exploration the radial nerve was found to be macroscopically intact. All intact nerves were fully recovered after a mean time of 21.6weeks (range: 20–24weeks) post-injury. In 13 patients (52%) in whom surgical exploration was not performed the mean time to full nerve recovery was 12weeks (range: 7–14weeks) post-injury.
               
                  Conclusions
                  We proposed immediate exploration of the radial nerve in case of open fractures of the humeral shaft, irreducible fractures or unacceptable reduction, associated vascular injuries, radial nerve palsy after manipulation or intractable neurogenic pain. Due to high rate of spontaneous recovery of the radial nerve after closed humeral shaft fractures we recommend 16–18weeks of expectant management followed by surgical intervention.Fractures of the humerus often are complicated by radial nerve palsy. The overall incidence of radial nerve injury after humeral shaft fractures is 11.8% representing the most common peripheral nerve injury associated with long bone fractures. While recommendations for early exploration and nerve repair in cases of open fractures of the humeral shaft associated with radial nerve palsy are clear, the therapeutic algorithm for the management of closed humeral shaft fractures complicated by radial nerve palsy is still under debate. The purpose of this study was to determine whether patients with complete sensory and motor radial nerve palsy following a closed fracture of the humeral shaft should be surgically explored. The time of such surgical intervention is also investigated. Between January 1996 and December 2010, 34 closed humeral shaft fractures complicated by radial nerve palsy were treated in our center. The inclusion criteria for this retrospective study were: (1) closed fractures of the diaphyseal humerus; (2) complete motor and sensory radial nerve injury; (3) age 16 Patients’ charts were retrospectively reviewed after obtaining Institutional Review Board approval. From the 25 patients meeting the inclusion criteria, 17 were men and 8 women with a mean age of 36 Twenty fractures were the result of a high-energy injury, while the remaining 5 fractures occurred during a simple fall from a standing high. The mechanism of injury was a motor vehicle accident in 15 patients, a fall in 7 patients, and a crush injury in 3 patients. Eleven patients had isolated fracture to the humeral shaft. Thirteen patients had fractures to another limb or the spine. More specifically, 8 patients sustained fractures to 2 or more long bones except the humerus, and 5 patients had a fracture to another long bone or the spine (3 patients with ipsilateral radial fracture, 1 patient with femoral fracture, and 1 patient with fracture to the body of the second lumbar vertebra). One patient had fracture of the humeral shaft associated with ipsilateral lateral humeral condyle fracture. Baseline electrophysiological studies (i.e. nerve conduction velocity studies and electromyography) were obtained 4–6 Surgery was performed under general anaesthesia with the patient placed in the supine position. In all cases a standard anterolateral approach was used through straight skin incision. Using loopes magnification the radial nerve was identified distally between the brachialis and the brachioradialis muscles. A thorough exploration of the radial nerve at a distance of 7–10 Postoperative follow-up examination included radiographic evaluation of the fracture, physical examination (i.e. Tinel's sign), and monthly electrophysiological studies for motor and sensory nerve recovery. Surgical exploration, nerve repair or reconstruction, if needed, was performed in 12 patients (48%) with unrecovered radial nerve palsy after a mean period of expectant management of 16.8 In 10 patients the radial nerve was found to be macroscopically intact during surgical exploration ( Surgical exploration was not performed in 13 patients (52%). In all these patients, repeated clinical examination and electrodiagnostic studies demonstrated initial signs of nerve recovery almost simultaneously. The mean time to full nerve recovery was 12 Uncomplicated humeral fracture healing was obtained in all patients except 1 treated with open reduction and fixation with plate and screws. The mean time for fracture healing was 11.8 Pathoanatomically, the radial nerve is at greater risk for injury along the distal third of the humerus due to the absence of interposed muscle protection. This was in accordance with the assumption of the Holstein–Lewis fracture pattern in which laceration of the nerve occurs between the bone fragments of a spiral fracture at the distal third of the humerus. Humeral fractures may be associated with contusion, laceration or interposition of the radial nerve at the site of the fracture. Iatrogenic damage may also occur during manipulations of closed reduction or following internal fixation of the fracture with a compression plate or an intramedullary nail. Nerve conduction velocity studies and electromyography can be used in the management of radial nerve palsy to determine the location and extent of nerve damage. Furthermore, electromyography is helpful in a patient underwent radial nerve exploration and reconstruction to monitor radial nerve recovery. Electrodiagnostic evaluation cannot be performed to distinguish between a severed nerve and an intact nerve during the first days after the injury. Whereas there is general agreement for surgical exploration in radial nerve palsy associated with open fracture of the humeral shaft, the proper treatment of closed fractures complicated by radial nerve palsy is still under debate. Those in favour with expectant management claim that spontaneous recovery occurs in the majority of cases if the fracture is closed and the nerve lesion develops at the time of the injury. Indeed, spontaneous recovery of the radial nerve function after such injuries is reported to occur in 73–92% of patients. Advocates of delayed surgical intervention support that nerve regeneration may occur in a more adequate manner if fracture healing is complete. Furthermore, thickening of the neurilemmal sheath allow easy determination of the extent of the nerve lesion and facilitates nerve repair. From a reconstructive point of view, the optimum time for nerve repair is still under debate. Degeneration of the motor endplate and irreversible muscle atrophy occurs if sufficient reinnervation is not present within 12–18 If transection of the radial nerve is found during immediate surgical exploration, a primary or delayed primary nerve repair is indicated. The outcome of the repair is mainly affected by the violence of the injury. Radial nerve palsy following humeral shaft fractures usually involves a contusion or a mild stretch. Due to high rate of spontaneous recovery a policy of expectancy is recommended. Having in mind the different personality of humeral shaft fractures, each of them should be approached individually. If the humeral fracture is open, surgical exploration, repair or reconstruction is indicated. However, in cases of closed fractures associated with radial nerve injury 16–18 There are no financial and personal relationships with other people or organisations that could inappropriately influence (bias) this work.