A new insight into the way in which the mineralogical composition and texture (liberation) of sulfides govern the geochemical behavior of the tailings in terms of acid mine drainage (AMD) generation is presented. Two samples were taken from Dundee Precious Metals Chelopech (DPM-Ch) tailings management facility (TMF). They were likewise subjected to flotation to recover reactive (liberated and partially liberated) pyrite whilst the unreacted (locked) pyrite was kept in the tailings fraction. Geochemical (static and kinetic) tests were performed on the collected samples and tailings after flotation. A scanning electron microscope based automated mineralogy system was used to characterize them in terms of modal mineralogy, liberation degree and particle size. The absolute acid-generating potential (AP) defined by the Sobek method most likely overestimates the effective AP when pyrite is locked into non–reactive gangue minerals. Hence, the locked pyrite may unfavorably lead to increased tailings management costs. Therefore, the automated mineralogy data was used to calculate the effective AP of the tailings taking into account pyrite grade and its liberation degree. Based on these findings, it could be assumed that the amount of lime required to neutralize the acidity produced by pyrite oxidation would be considerably reduced (in the studied case nearly 4 times) if environmental desulfurization by flotation is practiced and the liberation degree of the acid-producing minerals is taken into account.Acid rock drainage (ARD) constitutes an acidic runoff formed under natural phenomena when sulfide-bearing rocks are exposed to oxygen and moisture. Sulfide minerals are thermodynamically unstable under ambient conditions, which leads to oxidative weathering and release of H Static and kinetic tests are commonly used to assess the AMD potential of an unknown material. The static test, also called acid-base accounting (ABA), measures the balance between acid-generating potential (AP) and acid-neutralizing potential (NP) present in the material ( The ABA test defines the Net Neutralization Potential (NNP) and the Neutralization Potential Ratio (NPR) of an unknown sample by comparing its AP and NP values (NNP=NP-AP and NPR=NP/AP). The AP and NP parameters are usually obtained through chemical and mineralogical methods. The first one uses geochemical data as proxies, whereas the mineralogical approach is based on calculated AP and NP through equations that take into account the mineralogical composition of the mining waste ( The traditional protocol to conduct an ABA test is the Sobek method. However, this protocol is notorious in generating biased results due to its capacity to overestimate the NP and AP ( To overcome these problems, the standard Sobek method has been modified over the years and protocols that take into account mineralogical features have been developed ( Although these modifications are strengthening the reliability of AMD assessment, they still bear uncertainness because they neither consider the exact mineralogy nor the degree of liberation of acid-generating and acid-neutralizing minerals inside the sample ( The aim of this study is to improve the understanding of how the geochemical behavior in terms of AMD generation of a sulfide tailings is dictated by mineral reactivity in relation to their liberation degree (e.g., locked, liberated and partially liberated pyrite, explained below in the text). Specific objectives are: (i) to perform flotation of the tailings in a way to pre-concentrate the reactive pyrite as potential contributor to AMD generation, and (ii) to evaluate the efforts to re-classify the tailings from an acid–generating to neutral ones by recalculating their AP based on their intrinsic mineralogical features. An automated mineralogy (AM) analysis has been conducted on two composite samples from DPM-Ch tailings management facility (TMF) and on selected products after pyrite flotation. Additional studies involving static and kinetic tests were prepared to (i) characterize the extent of metals (iron, aluminum) immobilization and release of sulfate ions and their relation to tailings properties, mainly pH and particle size, and (ii) to calculate with more accuracy the quantity of lime (CaO) required to neutralize the acidity produced by pyrite oxidation when environmental desulfurization by flotation is envisaged and the liberation degree of the acid-producing minerals is taken into account. The Chelopech deposit is located within the northern part of the Panagyurishte metallogenic district, in the central part of the Srednogorie zone - Bulgaria. This mineral province was formed as a result of the calc-alkaline magmatism related to the successive accretion of island arcs during Late-Cretaceous ( The basement of the Panagyurishte metallogenic district is composed of high-grade metamorphic rocks (two-mica migmatites with thin intercalations of amphibolite), low metamorphic phyllites and granite gneiss. This basement is overlain by the Late Cretaceous volcanic and sedimentary succession. The top of this sequence consists of foreland sediments ( The mineralization presents lithological control and can occur disseminated, as veins, stockwork, mineralized breccia and massive sulfide replacements ( Dundee Precious Metals Chelopech (DPM-Ch) mining complex, encompasses an underground mine, a processing plant, a tailings management facility and a paste fill plant. The main target minerals are copper sulfosalts (enargite, luzonite and tennantite) followed by chalcopyrite and minor copper oxides ( The processing flowsheet currently used in DPM-Ch was completed in 2012 and allowed the company to treat around 2 Mt of ore per year. The beneficiation process involves a grinding circuit, bulk sulfide flotation and copper and pyrite flotation circuits. Thus, the two main commodities are a copper and pyrite concentrate. The final tailings are a combination of bulk flotation tailings and pyrite tailings. After thickening, these tailings are diverted either towards the paste fill plant or towards the TMF ( Two composite samples collected at the TMF belonging to Dundee Precious Metals Chelopech (DPM-Ch) mine were used. The TMF occupies a surface area of about 110 ha and receives annually about 1.2 Mt of tailings material. Composite sample 1 was collected close to the main embankment wall, whereas composite sample 2 was taken from the tailings pond in proximity to a point of discharge ( To avoid further oxidation after sampling, the material was immediately dried at 60 °C for 24 h and kept in a refrigerated room. Then, both samples were homogenized and divided into 2 sub-samples. To ensure homogeneity and representativeness of the sub-samples, riffle splitter and/or quartering were used depending on the mass of needed material. The first sub-sample was sent to Liege University (ULg) for mineral characterization and AMD assessment while the second was used for flotation and chemical assays at the DPM-Ch R&D lab. Subsequently, the products from flotation were mineralogically characterized and examined for AMD generation at ULg. Bulk chemical composition of the samples was analyzed at the SGS laboratory located at the mine site. Iron (Fe) was assayed by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) after aqua regia digestion, analyses for As and Cu were made using an Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy (AAS), whereas total carbon and sulfur content was determined by induction furnace (Leco). The leachates recovered from the kinetic tests were filtered using a 0.45 μm nylon filter. The filtered leachates were acidified with concentrated HNO3 for sample preservation and analyzed for sulfate ions via ion chromatography (kinetic test explained in section In order to assess the influence of pyrite liberation degree on AMD generation, three flotation tests were performed at slightly variable flotation regimes with a common aim to find out the conditions leading to an optimum flotation yield of the reactive pyrite while keeping the locked one in the tailings. Two flotation tests were accordingly performed in ULg and one at the DPM-Ch facility. Before flotation, composite samples 1 and 2 were dry sieved using a Ro-Tap sieve shaker to eliminate the 150 μm oversize fraction. No attempt was made to refresh particle surfaces therefore samples were not reground. The flotation was performed in a 2-L Denver laboratory machine using each time 500 g as feed. The collector was PAX (potassium amyl xanthate) supplied at different dosages, while MIBC (methyl isobutyl carbinol) was used as frother. No reagent was added to control pH. To mimic industrial conditions, the batch flotation performed at DPM-Ch lab was undertaken using process water from the plant, whereas the tests at ULg lab were performed with tap water. The first orientation trials (referred as ULg 1) were done under addition of collector in amount higher than usual (90 g/T) and flotation was run until froth loading was clear. The reason was to guarantee elimination of the entire amount of free pyrite. The optical microscope inspection of the concentrate revealed however that both locked and liberated pyrite floated. Therefore, collector dosage and flotation time were reduced. These steps led to better flotation recovery of free from locked pyrite. The trend was particularly pronounced for composite 1 sample. Moreover, dispersant was introduced at the ULg 2 test to decrease the amount of agglomerate observed. However, this measure did not improve the efficiency. After each flotation test, the recovered products were dried and a representative sample mounted in an epoxy polished block for observation under a reflected light microscope (ZEISS AxioImager M2m). The optical inspection enabled visualization of the extent to which liberated pyrite was recovered in the concentrate and if locked pyrite remained in the tailings. Detailed mineralogical investigation was addressed using a ZEISS Automated Mineralogy “Mineralogic” system yielding modal mineralogy, particle size distribution and pyrite liberation degree. The Mineralogic system is equipped with two Bruker xFlash 6|30 x-ray energy dispersion spectrometers (Silicon drift detector). The SEM-EDS analyses were carried out using a probe current of 2.3 nA with an accelerating voltage of 20 kV at a working distance of 8.5 mm. A mapping mode was performed using a 3–5 μm step size and a dwell time of 55 ms. Magnification was set to 1300 and a total of 5000 particles were analyzed on each sample. The “Mineralogic” system gave as output BSE (backscattered secondary electrons) images and a fully quantitative EDS analysis. For data processing, a minimum and maximum ranges for elements occurring in the mineral formula were defined and a specific gravity for each mineral was selected. Following data processing, the elemental ranges found in the minerals were further refined for optimal mineral distinguishing and classification. Automated mineralogy (AM) was also performed on sieved fractions from composite 1 and tailings 1 of DPM-Ch test. The reason for focusing on composite sample 1 only was its better behavior in terms of free pyrite concentration by flotation. The NP of the studied samples was determined using the sequential HCl addition protocol as proposed by a, b: normality of HCl and NaOH respectively (N) x, y: volumes of added HCl and NaOH respectively (mL) m: sample weight (g) The acid-generating potential (AP) is calculated based on the total sulfur content, (AP = 31.25* % S : Pyrite content in the sample (Wt.%) Lp: percentage of reactive pyrite in the sample (100 - locked pyrite) (%) : pyrite to sulfur conversion factor The AP and NP are expressed in kilograms of CaCO The liberation degree of minerals is commonly used in the field of mineral processing. It is generally agreed that a liberated particle is one that contains only one mineral. By extension, particles which contain two or more minerals are described as partially liberated, locked or composites particles. In this study, “liberated” minerals (or grains) are typically those with the 80–100% liberation degree in the containing particles, “locked” minerals are those with liberation degree lesser than 20%, and in between, are “partially liberated” particles. In this paper, we consider that the pyrite with liberation degree greater than 20% (liberated and partially liberated) will be fully reactive. However, the pyrite grains with liberation degree lesser than 20% are considered locked and are not reactive. As displayed in In order to validate the results obtained by the ABA static test while taking into account pyrite liberation degree, kinetic tests were performed on both flotation feeds (composite 1 and 2) and the resulting tailings from “DPM-Ch flotation” test (tailings 1 and 2, The composite samples collected from the TMF are characterized by high sulfur and very low carbon contents ( Pyrite is the main sulfide mineral (brighter phase, The granulometry and the pyrite liberation degree obtained by the AM are likewise summarized in The high collector concentration and long flotation time used for the first flotation test (ULg 1) resulted in the flotation of both free and locked pyrite whereas a limited amount of very fine grains (mostly free pyrite) remained in the tailings ( Although dispersant was introduced in ULg 2 test aiming to decrease the amount of agglomerates observed in the head samples, this test did not achieve the desired selectivity, as the optical inspection of ULg 2 flotation products confirmed that free pyrite reported to the tailings whereas gangue minerals floated ( The use of process water in the DPM-Ch flotation test immediately reflected in a higher pulp pH. The microscopic observations of the DPM-Ch flotation products reveal that a large part of the locked pyrite remained in the tailings while the liberated one floated (  The granulometric distribution (d As a rule, flotation performance is influenced by variety of factors, such as particle size, degree of mineral oxidation, type and concentration of reagents, water chemistry, pulp physico-chemistry (pH and Eh) ( The results from the chemical assay and the automated mineralogy, depicted in Another factor that might have contributed to the observed flotation differences is the possible activation of pyrite by copper ions at low pH ( In order to follow closely the liberation degree of pyrite in terms of granulometric repartitioning, composite 1 and tailings 1 from the DPM-Ch flotation test were sieved at 38 μm, 75 μm and 125 μm classes and polished blocks were prepared for each fraction (<38 μm, +38/-75 μm, +75/-125 μm and >125 μm). A mapping mode analysis was done at 3–5 μm step size depending on sample's granulometric tranche with an acquisition time (dwell time) of 55 ms per step. The pyrite liberation degree obtained for each size fraction and the frequency of the size class were used to recalculate the degree of pyrite liberation for the entire composite sample using equation Ci: average liberation class Ai: frequency of class Ci The pyrite liberation degree in each granulometric fraction is displayed in Composite 1 and 2 and tailings 1 and 2 were subjected to static test investigation. The NP was determined through a sequential HCl addition. On the other hand, the AP, was calculated based on the total sulfur content given by the chemical assay. The results from the static test are depicted likewise in The traditional Sobek test (  To verify if the weathering response of the samples likewise depends on pyrite liberation degree, kinetic tests were performed as next step. The kinetic test conducted in weathering cells has served to confirm the ABA forecast obtained by the static test using the AM results. The acidity evolution of the leachates recovered from the weathering cells is shown in The initial acidity released by composite 1 and tailings 1 is two orders of magnitude higher than that of composite 2 and tailings 2. The acidity curves for composite 2 and tailings 2 show a continuous increase in acidity and after 45 days, tailing 2 turns the sample releasing the highest acidity. When compared to composite 2, the elevated acidity generated by tailings 2 is most likely due to the largest amount of reactive pyrite (  There is a clear indication that the geochemical behavior of the samples during weathering is highly dependent on their textural parameters. The degree of liberation of a given mineral could be translated as expression of its exposure level. Liberated particles are more reactive than the partially liberated ones, whereas fully locked particles are not available for reaction (  Because the surface area available for reaction depends on particle size it is imperative to consider the particle size distribution as a key factor in assessing AMD risks of mine tailings. Finer fractions are as a rule more reactive than coarser ones and therefore they tend to oxidize faster. Looking at The almost nonexistent intrinsic neutralization potential (NP) of the samples dictated by their mineralogy imposes an adequate AMD management strategy to be practiced at the DPM-Ch mine site. The AMD prevention and control are therefore realized by lime (CaO) addition to maintain pH around 8 in the TMF. The known principle behind this approach is neutralizing the acidity produced by pyrite oxidation and immobilizing the metals under alkaline conditions. The presented results reaffirm the importance to consider mineralogical, textural and physical properties of the acid generating minerals when evaluating the geochemical phenomena in management sulfide mine tailings and when choosing the control strategy to mitigate associated environmental impacts. Using mineralogy-based correction the projected amount of alkaline agents for AMD neutralization could be accurately forecasted, which has a direct impact on mine economics. Although preliminary, the following conclusions can be drawn, which could be likewise used as guidelines in handling AMD related issues linked to handing sulfidic mine tailings: An integrated approach that combines mineralogical and geochemical tests should be used to better predict the AMD potential of sulfide mine tailings. The AMD potential of the tested process tailings depends strongly on its mineralogical and textural characteristics. The absolute AP defined by the traditional Sobek method overestimates the effective AP when pyrite is partially locked (tailings 1). The response to weathering of the tailings depends on sulfides liberation and their particle size. The geochemical behavior of a bulk sample is dictated by the most reactive fraction of sulfide minerals. The amount of lime required to neutralize the acidity produced by pyrite oxidation could be considerably reduced (in our case nearly 4 times) if an environmental desulfurization is envisaged and the liberation degree of the acid-producing minerals considered. The above findings could be very relevant to upscaling remediation projects in general mine waste management. The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper. CM wishes to acknowledge the study fellowship under the