Objective
                  The aim of the present study was to develop a Jagged1-coated polycaprolactone (PCL) membrane and to evaluate the response of human periodontal ligament cells (hPDL) on this membrane in vitro.
                  
               
                  Methods
                  Membranes were prepared from PCL and PCL-incorporated hydroxyapatite (PCL/HA). The membranes’ surface roughness, surface wettability, and mechanical properties were examined. An indirect affinity immobilization technique was used to coat the membranes with Jagged1. Membrane cytotoxicity was evaluated using LIVE/DEAD and MTT assays. The morphology of the cells on the membranes was observed using scanning electron microscopy. hPDL alkaline phosphatase (ALP) enzymatic activity and mineral deposition were examined using an ALP assay and Alizarin Red S staining, respectively. Notch target gene mRNA expression was determined using real-time polymerase chain reaction.
               
                  Results
                  The PCL/HA membranes exhibited a significantly reduced surface contact angle, decreased maximum tensile strain, and ultimate tensile stress. However, the surface roughness parameters were significantly increased. The PCL and PCL/HA membranes were not cytotoxic to hPDL in vitro. hPDLs attached and spread on both membrane types. Further, indirect affinity immobilized Jagged1 on the membranes upregulated hPDL Notch target gene expression. After culturing in osteogenic medium, Jagged1-immobilized PCL/HA membranes significantly enhanced hPDL ALP enzymatic activity.
               
                  Conclusion
                  Indirect immobilized Jagged1 PCL/HA membranes could be further developed as an alternative guided tissue regeneration membrane to promote osteogenic differentiation in periodontal defects.Guided tissue regeneration (GTR) is a successful clinical procedure to regenerate periodontal tissues ( GTR membranes act as a physical barrier to prevent gingival epithelial cell downgrowth, reducing long junctional epithelium formation in periodontal defects ( A systematic review assessing the clinical efficacy of non-resorbable and bioresorbable GTR membranes indicates that the use of non-resorbable membranes results in better clinical outcomes compared with bioresorbable collagen ( A disadvantage of a conventional GTR membrane is its lack of osteoconductive and osteoinductive properties. However, hydroxyapatite (HA) has demonstrated both osteoconductive and osteoinductive effects. HA supports osteoblast attachment and proliferation. The calcium and phosphate ions released when HA dissolves enhanced the osteogenic differentiation of osteoblasts ( Jagged1, a canonical Notch ligand, stimulates Notch signaling and enhances the osteogenic differentiation of human periodontal ligament stem cells and human bone marrow derived mesenchymal stem cells as indicated by significantly increase alkaline phosphatase (ALP) expression and mineralization ( PCL (Mw 80,000 g/mol), Bovine serum albumin (BSA), Alizarin Red S, β-glycerophosphate, and dexamethasone (Dex) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM), fetal bovine serum (FBS), The PCL membrane fabrication technique was modified from a previously described method ( The membrane surface morphology was evaluated by a scanning electron microscope (SEM; Quanta 250, FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA). The surface chemical composition was determined using energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis (JSM5401LV, JEOL, Tokyo, Japan). The surface wettability was analyzed using static contact angle measurement (DSA 10, Kruss, Hamburg, Germany). Briefly, 10 μl deionized water was dropped on the specimen surface. The contact angle was measured 20 times per sample. Four samples per membrane type were tested. The membrane ultimate tensile strength, maximum strain, and Young’s modulus were analyzed using a Lloyd LRX universal testing machine (Lloyd Instruments Ltd., West Sussex, UK). Eight samples per membrane type were used for the physical tests. The surface roughness evaluation was performed using a contact profilometer (Talyscan 150, TaylorHobson, Leicester, UK). The average surface roughness (R An indirect affinity immobilization method was performed as previously described ( The hPDL isolation protocol was approved by the Ethics Committee, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University (HREC-DCU 2016-007). Periodontal tissue was obtained from surgically extracted impacted third molars of healthy adult subjects. The isolation protocol was performed as previously described ( For osteogenic induction, the cells were maintained in osteogenic medium (growth medium supplemented with 50 μg/mL ascorbic acid, 100 nM dexamethasone, and 10 mM β-glycerophosphate). The medium was changed every 48 h. A standard cell line toxicity test was employed. A mouse fibroblast cell line (L929) was maintained in DMEM (Gibco BRL, Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing 10% FBS, 2 mM Cell morphology was evaluated using SEM (Quanta 250, FEI, Hillsboro, OR, USA). Sample preparation was performed as previously reported ( Total cellular RNA was extracted with Isol-RNA Lysis (5Prime, Gaithersburg, MD, USA). RNA samples (1 μg) were converted to cDNA using a reverse transcriptase reaction kit (ImProm-II™ Reverse Transcription System, Promega, Madison, WI, USA). Real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was performed in a MiniOpticon system (Bio-rad) with FastStart ALP activity was determined using ALP staining and substrate cleavage assays ( Calcium deposition was determined by Alizarin Red S staining as previously described ( Statistical analyses were performed using the Mann Whitney The PCL membrane exhibited a smooth surface compared with the PCL/HA membrane ( Mouse fibroblast cell line (L929) cells were seeded on the PCL and PCL/HA membranes. Tissue culture plate (TCP) was used as the control. At 48 h, the live/dead staining revealed that most of the cells on the PCL and PCL/HA membranes were stained with calcein (green) similar to the cells on TCP ( SEM analysis revealed that the hPDLs attached, spread, and proliferated on the PCL and PCL/HA membranes. At 2 and 4 h, initially attached cells were seen as round cells with extended filopodia ( First, we confirmed that indirect affinity immobilized Jagged1 function was functional ( Cells were seeded on Jagged1-coated surfaces and maintained in growth or osteogenic medium. Cells seeded on hFc-immobilized surfaces served as the control. At 12 d, markedly increased mineral deposition was observed in the Jagged1 treated hPDL group ( The PCL and PCL/HA membranes were indirectly immobilized with Jagged1. The hPDLs were then cultured on the Jagged1-immobilized membranes for 24 h. Membrane cytotoxicity was evaluated using an MTT assay. There was no significant difference in cell number between the PCL and PCL/HA membrane immobilized with Jagged1 or hFc groups, demonstrating that the Jagged1-immobilized membranes were biocompatible with the hPDLs ( The hPDL cell morphology on the Jagged1-immobilized PCL and PCL/HA membranes was examined using SEM ( The hPDLs were seeded on the membranes and maintained in osteogenic medium for 7 d. Subsequently, ALP enzymatic activity was determined. The results demonstrated that although the Jagged1-coated PCL group demonstrated higher ALP activity compared with the hFc-coated group, these results were not consistent across the four donors ( The present study described the characterization of PCL and PCL/HA membranes. Neither membrane exhibited cell toxicity. The PCL/HA membranes had higher surface roughness, hydrophilicity, and mechanical strength compared with the PCL membranes. After indirectly immobilizing Jagged1 on the membranes, Notch signaling activation was confirmed by significantly upregulated Notch target gene expression by hPDLs. Further, Jagged1-coated PCL/HA membranes induced higher hPDL ALP activity. There was no significant difference in cell viability on the PCL and PCL/HA membranes, as determined by the live/dead staining. Indirect cytotoxicity evaluation using an MTT assay also exhibited similar cell viability results. Further, hPDLs attached, spread and proliferated on the PCL-based membranes. These results indicate that the PCL-based membranes are biocompatible HA at 1% w/v was used in the present study. A previous study found that mesenchymal stem cells responded to PCL nanofibers incorporated with 1% w/v HA ( The PCL/HA membranes exhibited lower ultimate tensile strength and maximum strain compared with the PCL membranes. However, Young’s modulus was not significantly different between the two membrane types. Reduced ultimate tensile strength after HA incorporation in PCL was previously reported ( HA incorporation changed the physical properties of the PCL membranes, which enhanced its biological behavior. The PCL/HA membranes exhibited increased hydrophilicity and surface roughness compared with PCL membranes. It has been shown that a rough surface increased osteoblast-like cell spreading and proliferation ( Our results demonstrated that indirectly immobilized Jagged1 on PCL and PCL/HA membranes upregulated Jagged1 could be a candidate molecule to use in GTR therapy. Jagged1 promoted hPDL and bone marrow mesenchymal stem cell osteogenic differentiation as determined by increased alkaline phosphatase enzymatic activity and mineralization ( Jagged1 also enhances angiogenesis. Notch signaling inhibition results in reduced Jagged1 expression and endothelial cell function ( Jagged1 has been shown to inhibit osteoprotegerin (OPG) expression in hPDLs ( A significant increase in ALP enzymatic activity was observed in the indirectly immobilized Jagged1 PCL/HA group, as determined by the ALP staining and substrate cleavage assays. These results suggest that the Jagged1-immobilized PCL/HA membrane promotes hPDL osteogenic differentiation. However, mineral deposition was not significantly different between the Jagged1-immobilized PCL/HA and the control groups. The Jagged1-immobilized PCL/HA membranes may have accelerated the mineralization by the increasing ALP activity. However, the increased ALP activity varied between cell lines. This could be explained by several hypotheses. First, the HA crystals in the membrane is a significant confounding factor. HA particles incorporated in the PCL membranes also stained with Alizarin Red dye, making the identification of newly deposited mineral crystals difficult. Second, Jagged1 may enhance early osteogenic differentiation by upregulating ALP expression and function, but not directly influence the mineralization process. Osteogenic differentiation and mineral deposition are related processes. However, these processes may be independently regulated. The present study described the characterization of PCL-based membranes and the bioactivity of Jagged1-coated membranes. However, this study was conducted The present study successfully developed a Jagged1-coated PCL-based membrane. These membranes exhibited biocompatibility. HA incorporation improved surface hydrophilicity. Further, immobilized Jagged1 on the PCL-based membranes promoted Notch signaling activation in hPDLs All authors have none to declare. Dr. Nowwarote and Miss Manokawinchoke performed the cell culture experiments and analyzed the data. Miss Chanjavanakul, Miss Kongdecha, and Miss Clayhan performed the material characterization and cell culture experiments. Miss Chumprasert performed the SEM analysis. Dr. Egusa and Dr. Pavasant interpreted the results and critically revised the manuscript. Dr. Osathanon contributed to the conceptual design, data analysis and interpretation, and manuscript preparation. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The protocol for the isolation of human periodontal ligament cells was approved by the Ethical Committee, Faculty of Dentistry, Chulalongkorn University (HREC-DCU 2016-007). This study was supported by the