Dielectric properties of liquid-phase-sintered alumina (LPS) ceramics prepared using commercial powders of different particle size distribution and impurities (Na2O) content were studied. So far as the particle size distribution of the commercial powder is concerned, LPS ceramics, those derived from powders of both medium (3.1–8.4 μm) and coarse (70–100 μm) grades, showed similar dielectric loss, whereas it was higher in the case of LPS derived from the reactive powders (<1 μm). While considering the impurity levels of the powders, higher Na2O content (0.57 wt.%) in the powder showed significantly higher dielectric loss compared to that of the lower Na2O content (<0.2 wt.%). Furthermore, the MgO/(CaO+BaO+KNaO) ratio in the chemical composition of the LPS within the range of 0.4–1.8 was found to influence the dielectric properties in the frequency range of 102–107 Hz. The dielectric loss in the frequency band of 102–103 Hz was found to be higher in the case of the LPS with a MgO/(CaO+BaO+KNaO) ratio of 1.6. Besides the starting powder and the chemical composition, the orientation of alumina platelets arising out of fabrication route (e.g. tape casting) was also found to have a profound influence on the dielectric properties. A higher loss was observed in the tape cast specimen.Ceramic materials have been broadly classified into insulators and semiconductors based on dielectric constant Impurities at the grain boundary are known to influence the electrical characteristics In our previous report, it was shown that the MgO/(CaO+BaO+KNaO) ratio and SiO The objective of the present study is to investigate the role of particle size and impurity level (Na All the starting powders are from commercial sources. On the basis of the particle size, the alumina powders of the lowest size range (<1.0 μm) are termed here as reactive or those with higher size range as non-reactive as similarly designated elsewhere Different LPS ceramics were prepared using the above powders and different sintering additives. The proportion of the constituents’ e.g. Na Alumina powder along with the required amounts of sintering aids were thoroughly mixed in the appropriate ratio and ball-milled using alumina bowl and balls for 16 h in deionsed water medium. The mixed composition was then oven dried, fabricated in the form of pellets by uniaxial pressing and fired in air following the same procedure as mentioned earlier The grain size and shape of the LPS alumina ceramics are dependent on the MgO/(CaO+BaO+KNaO) ratio in the chemical composition Specimens for these tests were thin discs of 12–14 mm diameter with thickness of nearly 1 mm. Uniform thickness (±0.05 mm) and smooth surface finish was maintained by grinding and lapping with SiC grits and diamond paste successively. After cleaning in an ultrasonic bath, specimens were oven dried at 110 °C for 24 h and then cooled in a desiccator. Both faces of the specimen were gold coated by sputtering. In addition, layers of silver paste were applied repeatedly until the surface resistance was less than 1 Ω. A digital LCR meter (Sortester made by Aplab, India) measured both the surface resistance and the volume resistance. The layer of conducting metal at the outer face of the specimen was carefully removed with the help of a fine SiC (No. 800) paper and acetone so as to avoid direct contact between the faces. If the resistance within the plane of the specimen was low and a value of the order of 10 Leakage current was measured by a ‘break down tester’ (model RM 215G of BPL India) at 10 kV d.c. applied voltage. Specimens of diameter 74–77 mm and thickness 0.9–1.2 mm were prepared by uniaxial pressing. The specimens were cleaned in an ultrasound water bath and oven dried at 110 °C for 24 h and then allowed to cool down in a desiccator. A conducting silver paint (resin bond) of ∼5 mm diameter was applied on the same spot of the opposite faces using a zig. The resin was heated to set in an oven at 110 °C for a period of 2 h. A set of two such spots in each face of the specimen was marked at a distance of 25 mm. Opposite spots of the specimen with a conducting layer was tightly held in between the pointed electrodes for the purpose of applying the voltage. The applied voltage was gradually increased in steps of 1 kV and held for duration of 1 min. Both the leakage current and the applied voltage at the time of discharge were recorded. After the test, the specimens were subjected to a ‘die penetration test’ for the porosity check. The test was conducted at a pressure of 25 MPa and for duration of 8 h. The penetration of the die-solution into the subsurface area was visually examined after breaking the specimen. The discharge path was also carefully observed later on under an optical microscope (×50) for identification of defects. In order to determine the effect of MgO/(CaO+BaO+KNaO) ratio on the capacitance (Cp) and the dissipation factor (d.f.), tests were conducted on the two non-reactive 91–94 wt.% LPS of low and high MgO/(CaO+BaO+KNaO) ratio. A1 The loss factor is obtained by multiplication of In the case of other LPS ceramics, The test set up has been described in ASTM D150-92  LPS derived from coarse and medium powders (91–94 wt.%) had different grain size and shape depending on the MgO/(CaO+BaO+KNaO) ratio. As for example, the grains were more elongated in the case of A1  Electrical conduction in glasses is mainly attributed to the migration of mobile ions such as Li  The energy loss is proportional to frequency, so also the dissipation factors.  In general,  The study showed that the alkalis and alkaline earth oxides present as impurities in the grain boundary glass influenced the dielectric properties of the LPS alumina ceramics. Because of impurities, the dielectric constant of the LPS materials was higher and the resistivity was lower compared to that of the pure alumina. Use of low Na The authors (A.P.G. and S.R.) are grateful to BHEL management for necessary support. The authors are also thankful to Professor A.M. Umarji, Indian Institute of Science for valuable discussions.