This study aims to provide a geometrical description of biomass particles that can be used in combustion models. The particle size of wood and herbaceous biomass was compared using light microscope, 2D dynamic imaging, laser diffraction, sieve analysis and focused beam reflectance measurement. The results from light microscope and 2D dynamic imaging analysis were compared and it showed that the data on particle width, measured by these two techniques, were identical. Indeed, 2D dynamic imaging was found to be the most convenient particle characterization method, providing information on both the shape and the external surface area. Importantly, a way to quantify all three dimensions of biomass particles has been established. It was recommended to represent a biomass particle in combustion models as an infinite cylinder with the volume-to-surface ratio (V/A) measured using 2D dynamic imaging.particle surface area [m aspect ratio particle width [m] specific heat capacity [J (kg K) diameter [m] dimensionality factor particle length [m] chord length [m] number of size classes number of counts per size class class midpoint [m] class number perimeter of a particle projection [m] particle radius [m] distances from the area center to the particle edges [m] histogram frequency particle distribution, based on volume [% mm cumulative particle distribution, based on volume [%] circularity (sphericity) symmetry time [s] temperature [ volume [m size class weight smallest maximal chord [m] Martin minimum diameter [m] Feret maximum diameter [m] density [kg m thermal conductivity [W (m K) effective particle solid phase total Biomass firing is used for power generation and is considered an important step in the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. Anthropogenic CO      The characteristic diameters, obtained from sieving and 2D dynamic imaging, were defined based on three sizes within the entire population: d10, d50, d90. The d50 value is the median particle size within the population, with 50% of the population greater than this size, and 50% smaller than this size. Similarly, 10% of the population is smaller than the d10 size; while 90% of the population is smaller than the d90 size    The results of a particle size analysis by FBRM are always presented as an unweighted chord length distribution. For any particle shape, the number of small chord length counts statistically outweighs the large particle chord length counts The weights ( In Eq. Similar to volume-weighted distributions, the square-weighted distributions are sensitive to the amount of large particles. The square-weighted mean chord length is equivalent to the Sauter mean diameter The FBRM results of Heath et al. Because of the coupling between chemistry and heat and mass transfer during particle conversion, fuel particle size has a noticeable effect on combustion process characteristics. Thus, the choice of the suitable particle size descriptors is relevant. In 2D dynamic imaging, the minimal Martin diameter ( The particle shape was characterized using both the 2D dynamic imaging instrument and light microscopy. The small biomass particles of size <0.5 In suspension firing, biomass particles undergo rapid heating, drying and devolatization with the formation of char and volatiles. Devolatilization models often assume non-isothermal biomass particles, and include external and internal heat transfer The parameters in equation As it has been shown in this work, biomass particles possess large aspect ratios so that a spherical representation should be avoided. A cylindrical shape allows treatment of biomass particles as one-dimensional Prior to combustion modeling, biomass samples are usually analyzed to obtain the shape parameters (i.e. sphericity, symmetry and aspect ratio) by using one of the discussed techniques. Various biomass shapes result in different volume-to-surface area ratios which determine heat and mass transfer An experimental study was carried out to investigate the particle size and shape characteristics of woody and herbaceous biomass. The particle size results obtained by 2D dynamic imaging were in agreement with the sieving data. A significant disparity was observed in the laser diffraction and the focused beam reflectance measurements. 2D dynamic imaging was found to be the most convenient characterization method, providing additional information on particle shape and external surface area. Light microscopy and 2D dynamic imaging showed that pulverized wood formed square-shaped particles, while the poplar and wheat straw particles were elongated and of rectangular-shape. It is recommended to represent biomass particles in combustion models as infinite cylinders, where the particle width is represented either by The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support received from the Supplementary data associated with this article can be found, in the online version, at 