Fusarium head blight (FHB) of small grains is a worldwide spread disease that reduces yield, causes mycotoxin production in grain and reduces seed quality. Previous crop residues such as maize stalks and grain, and straw of barley, wheat, and other cereals are considered the principal inoculum sources for Fusarium graminearum and Fusarium culmorum, the most important Fusarium spp. causing FHB in Europe. The residues present on the soil surface and in the first 10cm of soil in tilled and not tilled fields were quantified and their relative influence on Fusaria infection and deoxynivalenol contamination was evaluated. The total amount of residues in the first layer of the soil (10cm) and on its surface was found to be correlated with DON contamination (R
                     2=0.848), but ANOVA showed that tillage was not significant (P>0.05) and that the major role in Fusarium spp. infection and DON contamination was played mainly by the residues lying on the surface of the soil (P<0.05). These results were used to evaluate management strategies of four different previous crop residues by comparing their effectiveness in reducing crop residues from the surface of the soil and the consequent contamination and their costs.Fusarium head blight (FHB) of small grains is a fungal disease caused by The EC Reg. 1881/2006 has fixed the It has already been stressed ( Soil and seeds can be sources of inoculum, but previous crop residues like maize stalks and grain, and straw of barley, wheat, and other cereals are considered the main inoculum sources for The aims of the present work were (i) to assess the amount of maize residues on the surface and in the first layer (10 The experiments were carried out in three different locations during 2004–2006. The agronomical and geographical information about the experimental fields are given in Planting was held in 12 Each year, two adjacent experimental fields were prepared:   The fields’ dimensions were between 8000 and 9000 The following treatments were applied, in not inoculated condition:  No removing of previous crop residues. Normal not tilled field (NTR+) Manual removing of previous crop residues from the soil surface (NTR−)  Replacing of the residues removed from NTR− (TR+) Normal tilled field, without any replacing of residues. (TR−) Here NT=not tilled; T=tilled; R+=presence of previous crop residues in the soil surface; R−=absence of previous crop residues on the soil surface. Residues from NTR− to TR+ were moved at the beginning of stem elongation (GS 30). The treatments were assigned to experimental units using a randomized complete block split-plot design with three replications for each sub-plot, in which the experimental block factor was the effect year/variety/location, the main plot factor was the effect of tillage (NT vs. T), and the sub-plot factor was the effect of the crop residues on the soil surface (R− vs. R+). Each sub-plot was 16 Each year, the previous crop residues in the first 10 The residues were harvested and weighed after dividing them into two groups: (a) Then, the residues in NTR− and TR+ were easily calculated as follows: deep residues present in NTR−=deep residues present in NTR+; superficial residues in NTR−=absent for manual harvesting; superficial residues in TR+=superficial residues in TR±superficial residues in NTR+; deep residues in TR+=deep residues in TR−. The FHB incidence and severity were recorded for each plot, carrying out visual evaluations of the disease at soft dough (GS 85). The FHB incidence was calculated as the percentage of plants with symptoms that were noted on analyzing 200 ears per plot. The FHB severity was computed as the percentage of kernels per ear with symptoms. The affected areas were grouped into eight classes, classified according to codes 1–7, which correspond to a percentage of surface showing symptoms (1=0–5%, 2=5–15%, 3=15–30%, 4=30–50%, 5=50–75%, 6=75–90%, 7=90–100%). Then, the percentage of ear infection was calculated. Evaluation of the fungal infections was carried out using 10 ears per sub-plot randomly collected at harvesting. The wheat kernel was surface disinfested for 3 A 5 Normal distribution and homogeneity of variances were verified by performing, respectively, the Kolmogorov–Smirnov normality test and the Bartlett–Box test. Difference between the weights of the superficial and deep residues was tested for the tilled andnot tilled fields by analysis of variance (ANOVA) (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, Version 13.0) using a completely randomized block design in which the weight of the residues was the independent variableand the factor year/variety/location was the random factor. The effect of treatments on FHB incidence and severity, fungal infection, and DON content was tested by ANOVA (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL, Version 13.0) using a randomized complete block split-plot design in which the experimental block factor was the effect year/variety/location, the main plot factor was the effect of tillage (NT vs. T), and the sub-plot factor was the effect of the crop residues on the soil surface (R− vs. R+). When significant, the block means and the means of the interaction between mean-plot and sub-plot factors were compared using Bonferroni's test at The 3 years showed different meteorological trends from the shooting stage to harvesting ( Both in the not tilled and tilled fields the amount of deep residues was significantly higher ( No significant effect of the factor year/variety/location on the weight of previous crop residues was observed for the tilled or not tilled field ( Ploughing reduced the amount of previous crop residues by 94% both on the surface and in the first 10 The most frequently isolated fungal species in the samples from the field were In 2006, the mean contamination was significantly higher than in 2004 and 2005, when similar low percentages of kernels infected by DON-producing Incidence and severity of FHB symptoms registered during the visual evaluations were very similar in 2004 and 2005 and significantly higher in 2006 ( All samples were positive to DON contamination over the 3 years. In 2004, DON concentration varied from 125 to 4750 The mean of the total amount of previous crop residues in each sub-plot showed a positive correlation with the DON contamination ( ANOVA showed a significant effect of the block factor ( As for fungi infection, any effect of tillage was observed. However, a significant effect of the presence of residues on the soil surface was clearly evidenced; their presence determined a significant ( The results showed a high variation of Visual evaluation of the symptoms did not give significant and clear results as was pointed out by Tillage did not show any significant effect on The litter layer formed by previous crop residues protects the soil from rain and consequently from erosion but breaks down into organic matter, enriching the surface of the soil in carbon and organic forms of nitrogen, and modifying its chemical and biological characteristics. Stores of inorganic carbon increase, the supply of soil mineral nitrogen decreases very slowly and the mineralization process is delayed. The microbial biomass (bacteria and fungi) increases at the surface and its turnover rate increases in the first 10 The residues keep the water on the surface of the soil favouring the release of the spores of The mechanic of the splash dispersal of Thus, the decrease in the density of residues on the surface of the soil in the sub-plots TR− and NTR− helped to decrease (i) the production of inoculum, (ii) the quantity of spores available for dispersal, and (iii) the dispersal itself. Each sub-plot in this trial can easily find its correspondence with four different management strategies of previous crop residues. Direct drilling, corresponding to the NTR+ sub-plot, has no costs of residues management but, determining a high density of crop residues on the surface of the soil, provokes a critical In conclusion, the trial clearly underlined the importance of previous crop residues management for winter cereals on determining the sanity of the grain, above all if they are in rotation after maize, whose debris are the principal substrate where the process of infection starts its cycle: wheat cultivated after maize is in average more contaminated than wheat in succession with all other crops due to the larger amount of residues that maize leaves on the soil ( Consequently, all agricultural practices that can reduce the amount of previous crop debris on the first layers of the soil and above all from the surface of the soil, stalk bailing, or that can move the residues deeper in the soil, ploughing, can represent effective and valid agronomic choices above all in those locations where wheat is in rotation with maize. Previous crop debris management, together with a correct variety selection and the application of chemical fungicides, can determine higher grain sanity, a reduction of the incidence and of the gravity of FHB symptoms, and a better quality of yields.