Comminution tests aim to measure the comminution properties of ore samples to be used in designing and sizing the grinding circuit and to study the variation within an ore body. In the geometallurgy context this information is essential for creating a proper resource model for production planning and management and process control of the resource’s exploitation before and during production.
                  Standard grindability tests require at least 10kg of ore sample, which is quite a lot at early project stages. This paper deals with the development of a method for mapping the variability of comminution properties with very small sample amounts. The method uses a lab-scale jaw crusher, standard laboratory sieves and a small laboratory tumbling mill equipped with a gross energy measurement device. The method was evaluated against rock mechanics tests and standard Bond grindability test. Within this approach textural information from drill cores is used as a sample classification criterion.
                  Experimental results show that a sample of approximate 220g already provides relevant information about the grindability behavior of iron ores at 19% mill fillings and 91% fraction of the critical mill speed. The gross energy measured is then used to calculate an equivalent grinding energy. This equivalent energy is further used for predicting the variations in throughput for a given deposit and process.
                  Liberation properties of the ore connected to grindability elaborates energy required for grinding and significances of it when deciding to move to higher grinding energy considering the improvement of liberation of the desired mineral. However, high energy significantly enhanced the degree of liberation of magnetite and is expected to improve the concentrate grade after downstream treatment. The higher the magnetite content the better is the liberability of magnetite and the lower the energy required to liberate the desired mineral. Liberability of magnetite is also affected by texture classes containing low magnetite content. A methodology that combines this information has been developed as a practical framework of geometallurgical modeling and simulation in order to manage technical and economic exploitation of resource at early, project stages and during mining operations.Ore testing is an important part of the geometallurgical experimental framework and modeling. Tests are used in characterization of ore processing behavior at different process stages, such as comminution. Several test methods are available for testing comminution behavior but they require comparatively large (>10 Mineral processing properties within an ore body can vary a lot and bring several challenges for production. For the Collahuasi copper mine This study aims at establishing a comminution test method for geometallurgy and evaluating it with a case study from Malmberget iron ore, Northern Sweden. Another aim of the study is to demonstrate how and why modal mineralogy, mineral textures and liberation should be considered already in comminution tests. A short review on existing comminution tests is here done to estimate their directly usability and easiness to modify for geometallurgical purposes. A suitable geometallurgical comminution test should fulfill the following requirements: The test should be relatively simple and use instruments available in common analytical and mineral processing laboratories. The test should be repeatable and not dependent on person. The test should be easy to execute so that technicians with basic skills in sample preparation should be able to do it with short training. The test should be fast (max 1 The amount of sample per test should be less than 0.5 The test, or rather a combination of tests, should give measured values on both crushability and grindability. It should be possible to use the parameters derived from the test directly in the modeling and simulation of a comminution circuit. It should be easy to extend the test to include mineral liberation information. Comminution tests are here classified into three groups, compare Rock mechanics test are used to measure the mechanics strength of the rock in the coarse particle size range (A). They are commonly used in geotechnical studies. The most potential ones for geometallurgical tests are point load test and unconfined compressive tests. They are used for testing small scale drill core samples. It has been shown that the mechanical strength of rock measured from point load can be correlated with comminution parameters ( Single particle breakage tests such as JK Drop Weight tests, SAG Mill Comminution test (SMC) by Grindability tests are done for multiple particles to characterize the material properties in milling in a middle particle size range (B). The most widely used is the Bond grindability test ( A literature survey and simple evaluation showed that no single fracture test method fulfills all eight criteria ( Samples for this study ( Two sample sets were collected. The first one consists of drums of composite magnetite and hematite ore samples which were collected from the Malmberget process plant on 11th and 12th of April in 2012. These samples represent sample types and sample sizes used normally in comminution characterization. As the plant feed includes country rock (wall rock dilution) the ore samples used in the study consisted of the FAR and HAR concentrates from the cobbing plant. For more information of the Malmberget process and flow sheet see The experimental work is divided into three parts. The first part describes the work done to downscale the Bond ball mill grindability test to be applicable for small drill core samples. The second part incorporates modal mineralogy, mineral textures and mineral liberation for the geometallurgical testing. The third part brings the geometallurgical test to the practical level, i.e. the full procedure is developed and described. In addition mechanical test results are compared with results from the developed test. Rock mechanical tests were conducted using two different experimental set-ups. The point load test (PLT) was carried out according to D5731-08 standard (ASTM 2011). Quarters of drill core were clamped between the tops of cone-shaped tools giving a point load on the outer perimeter of the specimen. For the unconfined compressive test (UCS) the specimen was pressed between two parallel planes of a universal testing machine. Fracture patterns observed were variable and usually not symmetric. Crushing tests were done with a laboratory scale jaw crusher (model Retsch Type BB mach. no. 31648). Fixed closed size setting of 3.35 The grinding tests were evaluated according to the Bond approach by using the recorded electrical energy consumption meter (corrected by the mechanical efficiency of the device) together with the change in the 80% passing particle size in order to determine grindability which describes specific work index of a given ore. The grinding experiments were conducted using two different ball mills (see Mineralogical analyses on modal composition and liberation distribution were made using scanning electron microscope (SEM) based automated mineralogy. Zeiss Merlin SEM and IncaMineral system ( The starting point selected for the new grindability test was the Bond ball mill grindability test ( The average mass per number of revolution of the undersize materials of the last three cycles of the grinding test is used to determine the grindability and the work index according to the Bond formula in Eq.  BWI     To be applicable for geometallurgy the test should be faster and it should use smaller sample (<2 In down-scaling the Bond ball mill grindability test, the principle was to keep the impact effects similar in the Bond and in a smaller mill ( The Bond mill gives bigger impact because of its large diameter compared to the small ball mill. By prolonging the grinding time in the small ball mill the material experiences higher number of impacts. Sample FAR was used to determine the grinding time in the smaller mill that gives identical particle sized distribution in the mill discharge compared to the Bond test. It was found that 17 By shifting the Bond grinding conditions to the small ball mill the kinetics are changed because of the differences in geometry. Another thing to consider is the change from a closed circuit test to single pass test. Therefore a scale factor is needed to equalize the results with the Bond test. From geometrical relationship the kinetic scale factor (square root of the ratio of the diameter of large to small ball mill) between the Bond and the small mill is 1.63. This is reached by considering the geometric similarities of the standard bond ball mill (L) and modeled small ball mill (S) and geometric scaling factor ( For receiving the same fracture effects the impact from ball motion has to follow the similarity principles (i.e. dimensionless factor Applying the principles of the Buckingham Pi theorem gives      The dimensionless factor for the impact velocity is defined by    Keeping the kinematic similarity between the two mills the expression for the scale factor is calculated as With the FAR iron ore sample the measured specific energy with 17  BWI  P80 F80      Four different samples of know Bond work indices were used to validate the developed test method ( Grindability, expressed as estimated Bond work index, does not appear to correlate with crushability, expressed the crusher reduction ratio ( Direct relationship means that the larger the grain size of magnetite the higher is the P80 and therefore the harder is the material to grind. As the P80 is between 110 and 140 In a composite sample of feldspar breccia from Malmberget the degree of liberation (i.e. mass proportion of mineral in particles containing more than 95% of mineral in question) shows inverse relationship with particle size, as expected ( The grinding test gave a certain particle size distribution, which was measured by sieving. The degree of liberation for the bulk sample was estimated as described above. To estimate how the liberation changes with grinding energy a simple approach was used (a–f in the following refer to a worked out example given in The received P80 (b) was converted to a full particle size distribution by using the Rosin–Rammler equation and taking the parameter describing the variance of the distribution (e) from the 17 Significant difference is observed between the liberability and the grindability (see Based on the work done a small-scale test method for mapping variation of ore comminution properties in geometallurgy was established and the flow chart is shown in The test is designed for drill core samples and each sample is ideally a 30 The comminution test designed is suited to the normal sample preparation scheme used for chemical assays. The crusher product can be split and one part can be used for determining the bulk chemical composition of the sample e.g. with X-ray fluorescence. For the modal mineralogy an element to mineral conversion method can be applied ( In the grinding test (step 8) the used sample size is defined by mass rather than volume as in the Bond test. Therefore the volume of the sample can be significantly varying in e.g. massive sulphide and iron ores. However, this is considered as one part of material properties in this methodology. The outcome of the test results when combined with chemical assays are then: Chemical composition of the sample. Crushability index as a reduction ratio (F80/P80). Grindability index as P80 and calculated BWI. Degree of liberation for the key minerals and their association indices (Lamberg et al., 2012; Modal mineralogy. Liberability curves ( To be cost effective within the geometallurgical program one might come to a solution where chemical assays are done for all samples, crushability and grindability for 50% of samples and liberation analysis for 10% of samples. The developed test method aims to characterize the essential comminution properties of small samples in a single (combined) test. This is an ambitious goal since most of the geometallurgical programs use different tests for different particle sizes. It is common to do separate characterization tests for crushing, SAG grinding and ball mill grinding (e.g. In geometallurgical programs comminution characterization aims to provide a reliable model to be used to forecast plant throughput. As the comminution circuits consists of several different type of comminution units like crushers, SAG mills and ball mills also the models must be capable in to treat these units separately but in a circuit. Parameters like scat handling (e.g. does the circuit includes a pebble crusher), transfer size between the SAG and the ball mill and handling of slimes may be more important for the throughput than the actual grindability. This addresses that the methodology developed here can’t provide all this important information needed for reliable forecasting. Rather the developed test is designed to be used in early project stages for identification of variability in the comminution properties. This information is to be used in geometallurgical domaining. After this the sampling and testing can be done in larger scale to economically and efficiently serve circuit design, sizing of the unit operations and to model and simulate the throughput. This ensures the quality of the process as circuit configurations are based on material properties and their variations as given by the geometallurgical program. Linking of the liberation and comminution characteristics in geometallurgy is not very common. The methodology proposed here requires validation for each deposit to prove that the assumptions lying behind the test do hold. These are that (i) the bulk liberation can be estimated only using one size fraction and that (ii) the assumption that liberation within a narrow size fractions is constant regardless of particle size distribution of the bulk material ( The question how much energy is needed to achieve required liberation when the feed composition (texture) is changing is crucial and important for production planning. An interesting observation from this study is that there is a significant difference between grindability and liberability at the same grinding energy when the mineral texture is different. It implies that domaining an ore body based on grindability (hardness) may mislead the ore classification and may result in ineffective resource utilization. Therefore it is important to collect information on mineral liberation, grinding energy and particle size relationships before the geometallurgical domains are defined. Mineral liberation may not be sufficient information because the associating minerals and the type of particles is important for downstream processes in order to produce a salable product. Comminution test methods commonly used in geometallurgy require large samples and are time demanding and therefore expensive. Small scale comminution tests are needed to be applied early in the ore characterization for collecting information on the variability of crushability and grindability for proper geometallurgical domaining. A review of existing rock fracture testing showed that none of the available methods fulfills the criteria set for proper geometallurgical testing. The most promising ones were found to be small scale Bond ball mill test, instrumented drop weight test and rotary breakage tester (RBT). The Bond grindability test was scaled down to use about 220 The developed test (GCT) makes possible to use small sample amount and to do about 10 times more measurements in given time compared to traditional Bond ball mill test. Preliminary results from the Malmberget case study show that the comminution properties are related to modal mineralogy and mineral texture (i.e. grain size of magnetite). A new finding is that samples with similar grindability and modal mineralogy may have different liberability. The developed method is still a prototype and before applying it routinely in geometallurgical programs the following studies are suggested: Study how accurate the estimated Bond work index is compared to full scale Bond grindability test using different ore samples. Study whether the crushability test can be used for estimating SAG characterization parameters like A Study whether the degree of liberation can be estimated reliably for the bulk samples based on one size fraction also with other ore types. Study whether the observation and assumption that liberation in narrow size fractions is independent of overall particle size distribution holds with different ore types. Study how the mineral grade varies by size and how large this effect is for evaluating the degree of liberation for full sample based on analysis on one size fraction. Study how grindability and liberation information can be combined in process simulations using the concept proposed by The financial support of the CAMM Centre of Advanced Mining and Metallurgy at Luleå University of Technology is appreciated. We are grateful to Kari Niiranen, Therese Lindberg, Charlotte Mattsby (LKAB) Cecilia Lund, Ulf Nordström, Pierre-Henri Koch, Mehdi Amiri Parian, Friederike Minz, Bertil Pålsson, Alireza Javadi Nooshabadi (Luleå University of Technology), Kurt Aasly and Ingjerd Bunkholt (Norwegian University of Science and Technology) for their advice and support.