Mineral extraction and processing industries have been cited as sources of environmental contamination and pollution. The inclusion of wastes into productive cycles represents an alternative form of restoration, which is interesting from both environmental and economic standpoints. In this work, the development of ceramic tile formulations containing kaolin processing and granite sawing wastes was investigated using the statistical design of mixture experiments methodology. Ten formulations using the raw materials, red clay, kaolin processing and granite sawing wastes, were selected and used in the mixture design. Test specimens were fired and characterized to determine their water absorption, linear firing shrinkage and modulus of rupture. Regression models were calculated, correlating the properties with the composition. The significance and validity of the models were confirmed by statistical analysis and verification experiments. The regression models were used to optimize the waste content in ceramic compositions. The results showed that formulations containing up to 62% of waste could be used in the production of ceramic tiles.Economic and demographic growth demands increasingly high indices of industrial activity, which implies two major environmental problems. First, it ultimately feeds on natural non-renewable resources that are becoming scarce and will be sooner or later depleted; and second, it produces increasing amounts of waste materials, which are more and more difficult to dispose of. Around the world, millions of tons of inorganic wastes are produced every day. Traditionally, these wastes have been disposed of in landfills and often dumped directly into ecosystems without adequate treatment. However, possible reuse or recycling alternatives should be investigated and implemented. The inclusion of wastes into alternative productive cycles may represent an alternative form of reclamation, which is interesting from the environmental and economic standpoints. Restoration and recycling is the best environmental solution to save raw materials and to reduce the amount of industrial wastes discarded. In this regard, interesting opportunities are found in the traditional ceramics industry, particularly the sector devoted to the fabrication of building products. Natural raw materials used in the fabrication of clay-based ceramic products show a wide range of compositional variations and the resulting products are very heterogeneous. Therefore, such products can tolerate further compositional fluctuations and raw material changes, allowing different types of wastes to be incorporated into ceramic tiles and bricks. Kaolin is an important raw material in various industrial sectors. However the kaolin mining and processing industry produces large amounts of waste. The kaolin industry, which processes primary kaolin, produces two types of wastes. The first type derives from the first processing step (separation of sand from ore). The second type of waste results from the second processing step, which consists of wet sieving to separate the finer fraction and purify the kaolin. The granite processing industry also generates large amounts of wastes worldwide. Granite sawing waste contains feldspar, quartz and mica as major constituents and metallic dust and lime (used as abrasive and lubricant, respectively) as residual materials. Various studies The current optimization procedure for developing ceramic compositions using waste materials consists of an experimental rather than a comprehensive approach. In general, the approach involves selecting and testing a first trial batch, evaluating the results, and then adjusting the mixture's proportions and testing further mixtures until the required properties are achieved. The conventional method of optimization is time consuming and does not allow the global optimum to be detected, particularly due to interactions among the variables. In contrast, statistical design methods are rigorous techniques both to achieve desired properties and to establish an optimized mixture for a given constraint, while minimizing the number of trials. In the development and manufacture of ceramics using waste materials the properties of fired bodies are determined basically by the combination of raw materials and process parameters. When the processing conditions are kept constant, a number of properties of dried and fired bodies are determined principally by the combination (or mixture) of raw materials. This methodology has found important applications in various areas and is becoming popular in the field of glasses and ceramics. Statistical experimental design methodology is an established and proven methodology, The kaolin waste utilized was obtained from the second kaolin processing step, while granite waste came from the sawing process during granite processing. The wastes were dried at 110 Physical and chemical characterizations of kaolin processing waste and granite sawing waste are described elsewhere A {3,2} centroid simplex-lattice design, augmented with interior points, was used to define the mixtures of raw materials to be investigated. Mixtures with the selected compositions were processed as follows: wet mixing/milling (using ball mill), drying, de-agglomeration (by gently grinding in a mortar), moisturizing (6.5 The water absorption (WA) was determined using the Archimedes liquid displacement method by immersion in water for 24 The results of the four replications were used to calculate the coefficients of the regression equations iteratively until statistically relevant models and response surfaces were obtained, relating the WA, LFS and MR with the proportions of raw materials. The calculations were carried out with Statistica 6.0 (StatSoft Inc., 2001) software. The resulting statistical analysis involves fitting of mathematical equations to the experimental results (i.e., water absorption, linear firing shrinkage and modulus of rupture) to get the entire response surface, and validation of the model through an analysis of variance. The compositions of the 10 mixtures ( Based on the data obtained (  The significance of the derived models can also be evaluated by comparing the To evaluate the adequateness of the regression models, the analysis of the residuals is also required. According to To counter-check the statistical models, test specimens of the compositions M The mathematical equations Comparing the values and signs of the coefficients of the models in Eqs. From Eqs. The most synergistic interaction affecting the MR after firing at 1000 and 1100  An analysis of It is interesting to note that the highest MR values after firing at 1100 and 1150 Another way of visualizing the effect that changes in composition might have on the WA and MR and improve the interpretation of the statistical results is through the use of response trace plots. The response trace is a plot of the estimated property values as the composition moves away from a reference point, along lines that go through one of the triangle apexes (i.e., it is a vertical section through the property prism in which the fraction of one of the components is changed while the proportion between the other two is kept constant). In this way, the effect of each raw material on those properties can be best visualized.   Based on As an example of the suitability of the response surfaces intersection methodology to produce the desired formulations, maximizing the waste content and producing tiles with the desired technological characteristics, the compositions M The statistical design of mixture experiments and response surface methodologies proved to be powerful tools for planning and analyzing experiments to ascertain the influence of waste materials content on the technological properties of ceramic bodies and to optimize ceramic formulations containing large amounts of waste materials. The calculated regression models were found to be statistically significant at the required level and presented little variability. These regression models can be used to select the optimal wastes content to produce ceramic bodies with specific properties. The authors would like to thank the Brazilian research funding agencies: FAPESQ/MCT/CNPq (State of Paraíba Research Foundation, processes nos. 003/03 and 004/06) and CNPq (National Council for Science and Technology, process no. 471415/04-9) for their financial support of this work.