The Floatex Density Separator (FDS) is a classifier-concentrator. In the concentrator fluidization coupled with hindered settling leads to separation in a teeter bed column. Due to the apparent density of the suspension, the viscosity of the bed offers more resistance and particles settle in terms of the drag force. The separation principle of the FDS is complex, hence it was decided to study separation based on size alone by considering interactions between different process parameters to predict the performance of FDS. The effects of four important operating parameters—set point, teeter water flow rate, feed rate and pulp density of feed—on the performance of the FDS have been studied through simulation. From the theoretical values, interaction between various process inputs has been studied. A detailed understanding has been established about particle behavior under different feed input conditions for pure silica (S.G. 2.65). The predicted values are validated against the experimental results. It was found that variations in TW flow rate and feed rate are predicted with considerable degree of accuracy.Floatex Density Separators (FDS) are relatively new, affecting separation based on both size and density of the solids. A FDS is a classifier-concentrator in which fluidization coupled with hindered settling (resulting in a pseudo liquid) results in effective separation in a teeter column. Feed slurry of definite solid concentration is fed from top through a feedwell and teeter water (TW) is introduced from the bottom uniformly throughout its cross section. The heavier particles settle through the dense medium, whereas the lighter particles are hydraulically transported to the overflow. Separation in FDS is quite complex, since besides the apparent density of the suspension, the viscosity of the bed offers more resistance to particles from settling due to the drag force. Unlike in dense media separation, where the media density alone dictates the separation, in FDS both the pseudo liquid density and upward liquid (teeter) velocity have substantial influence on the separation. Among all operating parameters, the set point and the teeter water flow rate are the most important operating parameters which govern the nature of the bed. A schematic diagram of FDS is shown in  Though, it is well established that in a teeter bed separator both the density and size play significant role (  Referring back to the original literature ( The methodology used to calculate the different parameters specific to the FDS equipment have been discussed elsewhere ( Average suspension density is calculated as The Richardson and Zaki index ( Re is the Reynolds Number which is calculated from the Archimedes Number (Ar) using the correlation: The present study proposes to examine the effects of different process variables of a Floatex Density Separator, viz. TW flow rate, Set Point (SP), Feed rate (FR) and Pulp Density (PD) and then simulate the predicted cut size. The relation between the predicted cut size and the process parameters was presented using Response surface methodology (RSM) and with the help of mathematical software package MATLAB that takes feed size distribution and process parameters as input and provides response surface curves along with cumulative weight percent of overflow and underflow products as output. Pure silica sand sample was obtained from the sand dune deposits of Sathankulam, Tamil Nadu, India using cyclone and spiral combination. This sample was then sized to less than 1 2-K factorially designed experiments were conducted on laboratory scale, Floatex Density Separator in which the effects of four important variables each at two levels have been studied. The variables and their levels are given in The experimental campaign was undertaken in a lab scale Floatex Density Separator (Model No. LPF-0230, Outokumpu make). Floatex Density Separator classifies the material based on their slip velocity. The slip velocity is the relative velocity between the particles and the raising water which is essentially a function of size and density of the particles ( There are six possible combinations of interactions among the four process inputs varied in the present study. Each of these interactions is explicitly dealt keeping the other two parameters at low and high levels respectively. The plots of PCS as a function of TW flow rate and set point are shown in From The effects of interaction between the SP and FR on PCS are shown in At lower TW and SP, the effect of FR and PD on PCS values is negligible ( The validation of the simulation results has been carried out by evaluating the product size distributions obtained from the model (Eq. The performance of an FDS has been investigated by conducting experiments using uniform density material (silica) of varied sizes at different FR, SP, PD and TW flow rates. The results of these tests indicate that: At lower FR and PD, increased TW flow rate would push particles of larger diameters to the overflow enabling the separation to be on the basis of sorting phenomena. Low PCS (Predicted Cut Size) values are noticed due to masking effect of particulate solids at high FR, and reduced TW flow rate and low PD. At low TW flow rate and PD, increasing feed rate (at low SP) results in reduced PCS values. This is attributed to insufficient bed formation caused by higher FR. The same phenomenon when observed at low feed rates, resulted in bed voidage ( The effects of four important operating parameters, such as the SP, TW flow rate, FR and PD of feed on the performance of the FDS have been studied through simulation. From the theoretical values the interaction between various process inputs has been studied. A detailed understanding has been established about the particle behavior under different feed input conditions for pure silica (S.G 2.65). The predicted values are then validated against the experimental results. It has been found that the variations in TW flow rate and FR are predicted with considerable degree of accuracy. The empirical slip velocity model proposed by Authors are thankful to