The removal of Cu2+, Zn2+ and Ni2+ ions from synthetic wastewater with a modified Jameson cell (MJC) was studied using adsorption colloidal flotation (ACF). A colloidal dispersion of Fe (OH)3 (formed in situ from FeCl3) at pH 11 was used as an adsorbent colloid to ensure full adsorption and precipitation. The precipitates were flocculated with polyacrylamide and hydrophobised with sodium oleate and pine oil as a frother during the flotation stage. In the modified jet cell, the downcomer was sealed at the bottom with a diffuser, and the re-flotation of detached flocs and the probability of bubbles/particles capture was enhanced, which improved the recovery rate. As a result, the modified Jameson cell was more efficient (higher loaded carrier recoveries) than the conventional jet cell (CJC) in removing heavy metals ions. The physico-chemical characteristics, cell design and operating parameters were studied, and the removal efficiency was evaluated by monitoring the final concentration of ions in the treated effluent. The results indicated that the removal efficiencies of the MJC were approximately 95% and 98% for dilute (Cu2+, Zn2+ and Ni2+ concentration of 2mg/L) and concentrated wastewater (25mg/L of each ion), respectively. The optimal parameters included a Fe+3/ion ratio of 0.5 and a minimum air flow-rate/feed flow-rate ratio of 0.18. The results are discussed in terms of the physical and physico-chemical parameters, and the findings suggested that the proposed flotation technique has great potential for the treatment of wastewater.The extraction, purification and processing of ores involves the use of large amounts of water, which generates contaminated effluents. The pollutants associated with these effluents can include colloidal and suspended solids, residual chemical reagents, heavy metal ions, toxic anions, oils used in machines and lubrication (emulsified or non-emulsified) organic waste (frothers, collectors and surfactants), flocculants, flotation modifiers, organic solvents, and others. ( When liquid wastes are generated in abandoned mining sites, tailing deposits and tailing dams, the solution may be acidic (pH is less than 7) and contain significant amounts of dissolved metals such as nickel, copper, zinc, lead, mercury, manganese and sulphate, among other ions ( The conventional method for the removal of ions (mainly heavy metals) is precipitation-settling, followed by thickening, deposition and sludge filtration. Other methods that can be used to treat effluents containing anions and dissolved heavy metals are micro/nano/ultrafiltration, reverse osmosis, ion exchange, flotation and biosorption (absorption and/or adsorption). Some of these processes have high operating costs, whereas others are inefficient ( Among novel toxic waste removal techniques, methods based on flotation and the immobilisation of pollutants as precipitates or adsorbates have potential in wastewater treatment. Some alternative methods for heavy metal ion removal are precipitate flotation, adsorbing colloid flotation (ACF) and adsorbing particle flotation (APF). ACF involves the removal of metal ions by adsorption onto a precipitate (coagula), which acts as an adsorbing carrier. The loaded carrier is then floated by adding a flocculant and/or a suitable collector surfactant. Carriers that have been employed in ACF include ferric or aluminium hydroxides and sodium oleate or lauryl sulphate ( Dissolved air flotation (DAF) devices are widely used for solid/liquid separation. However, when large volumes of effluent must be treated, this equipment presents several limitations due to its low throughput (approximately 7 Flotation devices (and their applications) differ based on the volume of air introduced during the process and the concentration of solids to be separated. For instance, compared to mineral separation (30–40% weight basis), DAF processes can be used to separate solids that are present in relatively low concentrations (1–3% weight basis) ( Nowadays, non-conventional flotation technologies such as Jameson cells, columns and centrifuge cells that are used for the concentration of minerals are potential alternatives for the removal of ion-loaded precipitates ( Jameson cells have shown great potential, in mineral processing solid/liquid separation and liquid/liquid separation ( The Jameson cell provides many advantages such as a compact design, low capital cost, no moving parts, low power consumption, low maintenance costs, low residence times (<3 The objective of the present work was to modify the design of a jet flotation cell and study the removal efficiency of heavy metals (Cu, Ni and Zn) using ferric hydroxide as a model colloid of a carrier adsorbent. The work is a continuation of a series on applications of a rapid flotation to remove pollutants ( Synthetic effluents containing copper, nickel and zinc ions were obtained by dissolving analytical grade CuSO Sodium polyacrylate (molecular weight The removal of loaded colloid was achieved using a conventional jet cell and a modified jet cell. Both lab flotation cells possessed a capacity of 0.42   The model effluent was prepared by dissolving different metal salts and varying the concentration of Cu The pH of the solution was not increased in the absence of Fe salts; otherwise, metal ions would precipitate (especially in concentrated solutions). In fact, whether or not precipitation would occur was difficult to ascertain due to kinetic reasons. A pH of 11 was selected because the colloids were larger and more consistent under these conditions; however, the colloids could not withstand shearing. Thus, 10 Thereafter, a collector and a frother were added at a concentration of 50 and 10 In both cells, the collection (collision–adhesion) of aggregates/flocs via air bubbles occurs in the downcomer, and separation occurs in the flotation tank. The mixture falls, and light aerated flocs rise to the froth layer. Alternatively, treated water is discharged at the bottom of the tank.  The inferior performance of the CJC was due to the fact that some air bubbles/flocs units are discharged in the jet and break apart in the separation tank. As a result, flocs are carried by entrainment towards the discharge of the clarified effluent (short circuit). The detached flocs cannot be re-collected and are trapped by the turbulent flow-rate of the treated water. Alternatively, floc breakage appears to be diminished in the MJC. Herein, the jet is diverted in an upward direction, dispersing air bubbles/flocs throughout the separation tank, decreasing the probability of bubble/floc detachment and allowing re-flotation. The results shown in  The removal efficiencies were slightly higher for the dilute solution than the concentrated effluent because the (Fe The results indicated that both flocculant and collector were necessary to achieve good separation. In the absence of these reagents, incomplete separation was observed due to the destruction of colloids under shearing (results not shown). The effect of the air flow-rate/feed flow-rate ratio on the metal (Cu, Zn and Ni) ion removal rate (25 As shown in At low air flow-rates, the Sb value, or the superficial bubble surface area flux and carrying capacity of the device were fairly low, which reduced the overall recovery rate (low capture and low flotation probabilities). As a result, the metal ion loaded-floc carrier recovery rate increased with an increase in the air flow-rate/feed flow-rate ratio and reached an optimal value at 0.18–0.25. Thereafter, when high Sb values or air flow-rates were employed, the degree of turbulence inside the downcomer increased, causing the jet to fall downwards rapidly, which increased the amount of drag on the loaded precipitates, especially those that were not flocculated or weakly attached to air bubbles. As a result, the overall carrier and metal ion removal rate decreased. The results of the present study showed that the modified jet flotation (MJC) was more efficient than the conventional jet cell (CJC) in the removal of heavy metals ions by adsorption onto iron hydroxide colloidal precipitates. To achieve good flotation separation, metal ion loaded-precipitates must be flocculated (using polyacrylamide) to withstand shearing and hydrophobised with sodium oleate to improve bubble capture. Moreover, pine oil must be used as frother to stabilise bubbles and to achieve froth formation. With the MJC, removal efficiencies of 95% were obtained for synthetic wastewater contaminated with low concentrations of heavy metal ions (2 The authors acknowledge financial support from the University of Atacama (Dirección de Investigaciones de la Universidad de Atacama, DIUDA) and appreciate the collaboration of Mr. Bruno Zazzali in the construction of the flotation cell.