Reverse flotation of a subbituminous coal/gangue mixture and the effect of various factors on the reverse flotation have been investigated. The results showed that the separation of coal from gangue by reverse flotation was possible and good selectivity was achieved, but up to 6kg/t of DTAC (dodecyltrimethyl ammonium chloride) were needed. In addition, the separation could only be achieved through stage additions of DTAC. Otherwise, even higher dosages of the collector could not provide a good separation.
                  Dextrin was needed to depress coal, so the selectivity was improved. The selectivity was further enhanced by addition of a ferric silicate hydrosol which activates calcite and dolomite in a cationic flotation. Conditioning with the ferric silicate hydrosol promoted the activation. The flotation was best in alkaline pH range.Coal is an organic sedimentary rock. Its upgrading involves reduction of its impurities. Because of the differences in the properties of coals, the flowsheets of coal preparation plants are different. Flotation is used to clean fine fractions of metallurgical coals and this is followed by dewatering and even thermal drying. Even though the reduction of coal moisture content improves fine coal handleability at mine site, it does not solve the environmental issues caused by dusting and spontaneous combustion during storage and transportation of fine coal. While flotation is currently applied to process hydrophobic metallurgical coals, it is not applied to treat thermal coals. The thermal coals are only beneficiated by gravity methods. The very fine fractions are often discarded as a waste. Old tailing ponds contain huge reserves of oxidized fine coal, which may also be difficult to recover using traditional coal flotation. The seam-to-steam strategy offers an entirely different solution for the handling of fine coal ( The characteristics of CWS depend on the coal surface properties and coal particle size distribution. Since CWS must be pumpable, the amount of water is determined by the CWS’s viscosity. Generally, the coal content in a CWS is in the range of 60–70% by weight. Such a high solid content can only be achieved by optimizing coal particle size distribution and by applying viscosity-reducing additives to change the surface properties of the coal particles. In conventional forward flotation process in which coal is floated, reagents are used to render the coal surface even more hydrophobic and, therefore, the particles of coal flotation concentrate are very likely to aggregate. Such an aggregating suspension tends to develop a high yield stress and increased viscosity ( As discussed above, there is a basic conflict between the objectives of coal cleaning by flotation and the objectives of coal utilization in the form of CWS. Also, traditional flotation reagents are not compatible with the additives required in CWS preparation. Poor floatability of low-rank thermal/oxidized coals on one hand, and the incompatibility of common flotation reagents with the CWS technology on the other, call for an entirely different fine coal cleaning process. Obviously a reverse coal flotation process, in which clean coal is made hydrophilic, constitutes an interesting solution. The coal reverse flotation process in which coal is depressed and gangue is floated can reduce the yield of the froth product from about 50–70% range down to about 30–50% range, thus relaxing the carrying capacity limitation of flotation columns. The reduced yield of the froth product will allow broader application of the columns to clean fine coal. Since only fine clean coal can be utilized to prepare CWS and since flotation collectors are obviously not compatible with the viscosity reducing reagents in CWS preparation, the new reverse coal flotation process may eliminate the very weak conventional flotation-CWS preparation link in the existing seam-to-Steam Technology. Only a few papers have been written on this topic.    The objective of this project was development of the reverse flotation technology for subbituminous coal. In part I of this paper, a raw coal/gangue (calcite, dolomite, and silica) mixture was used and the effect of various factors on the reverse flotation was investigated. In Part II, a subbituminous raw coal was used, and the reverse flotation conditions were optimized. Calcite, dolomite and silica were from British Columbia, Canada. Calcite was prepared from marble slabs and dolomite was prepared from lumps of dolomite ore. Silica was a crushed commercial product. The calcite and dolomite were first crushed and then ground in a rod mill to a desired size. The particle size distributions of the materials are shown in A low rank LS20 coal was selected for this study. The coal was kindly provided by Luscar Sterco Ltd. from the Coal Valley (pit 20) in Alberta. The bulk ash content of this coal is 34.6%. The coal sample was crushed to −6 The inherent ash content of the LS20 coal is 10% as obtained from the tree analysis tests. The coal was upgraded using a shaking table. After six-stage concentration, the ash content of the clean coal is 9.99% which is consistent with the results of the tree analysis. The flotation feed was prepared by mixing the calcite, dolomite and silica with raw coal in the ratio of 1:1:1:7. The ash content of the mixture was 48.5%. A technical-grade cationic amine, Arquad 12–50 (which contains about 50% of dodecyltrimethyl ammonium chloride, DTAC), kindly provided by AKZO NOBEL, was used as a collector in the flotation tests. In the preceding papers on this topic dodecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (DTAB) was utilized ( Arquad 12–50 is a solution of DTAC in propyl alcohol/water. Its composition is given in Dextrin was used as coal depressant without any purification. The sample was obtained from A.E. Staley Manufacturing Company. The trade name of the sample is Tapioca Dextrin 12, and its molecular weight, as determined by The ferric silicate hydrosol was added to activate calcite and dolomite for a cationic flotation. It was prepared by reacting FeCl Flotation tests were carried out in a 2-L Denver laboratory cell. In all the tests, 200 The effect of DTAC on raw coal/gangue mixture flotation was first tested. The collector was added in one shot. Even at very high dosages of the collector the quality of the concentrate was low, indicating that more gangue material needs to be floated. The results are shown in To improve the gangue flotation, DTAC was added in two stages with 0.55 The effect of stage addition of DTAC needs further discussion. The tested subbituminous coal is hydrophilic and has a tendency to adsorb high amount of amine ( Although the stage addition of collector can significantly improve the gangue flotation, it is only effective when the dosage of the collector reaches a very high level, around 6 In the subsequent tests, DTAC was added in four stages and the effect of dextrin and the ferric silicate hydrosol, and pH, on the reverse flotation of raw coal/gangue mixture was further investigated. The tests revealed that the addition of dextrin and ferric silicate hydrosol improves the selectivity of the flotation, lowering the ash content of the concentrate. The results are shown in The effect of pH on flotation of the raw coal/gangue is shown in It is interesting to note that the conditioning time with the ferric silicate hydrosol also had an effect on the ash content of the concentrate. As shown in In the reverse flotation of a subbituminous coal/gangue mixture, good separation was achieved indicating that the coal reverse flotation is possible but at high dosages of DTAC. Although the stage additions of DTAC could decrease collector consumption, it was only effective when the collector dosage was not lower than 6 The addition of dextrin and the ferric silicate hydrosol improved the selectivity. Dextrin was used to depress coal and ferric silicate hydrosol was used to activate calcite and dolomite for a cationic flotation with DTAC. Conditioning with the ferric silicate hydrosol decreased ash content of the concentrate. Funding for this project was provided by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada through its Strategic Grant.