To understand the gas penetration properties during unloading confining pressures and permeability enhancement mechanism in coal, temperature shocks, seepage tests, NMR, CT and SEM scanning tests were carried out with trimmed coal samples. The results showed that the coal permeability increased with the decrease of confining pressures after temperature shocks performed, and that the coal permeability fully followed an exponential change law. To achieve a higher gas permeability, heating-cooling shocks should be executed in low stress regions and stress-releasing areas in coal. According to the NMR results, the increase in pore volume improved the gas diffusion coefficient of coal. The CT and SEM scanning results declared that the growth and extension of internal and surface cracks eventually enhanced the coal permeability. After temperature shocks performed, it can be concluded that coal anisotropy and excessive thermal stresses are the essential causes of the coal damage and gas permeability enhancement.Coal is an important part of global energy resources and plays an irreplaceable role in global economic development. However, with the continuous attention being paid to environmental issues and consumer demand for energy diversification, some new energy sources have gradually emerged. As a typical form of clean energy, coalbed methane (CBM), also regarded as coal seam gas, has broad development prospects ( In recent years, in addition to hydraulic fracturing technology, low-temperature fracturing and heat injection have been used to promote CBM production as new stimulation technologies ( From the abovementioned literatures, the internal fracture extension and permeability characteristics in coal are clearly dependent on temperature. There are few studies concerning the evolution of coal permeability influenced by temperature shocks under the condition of unloading confining pressures. Therefore, it is necessary to understand the permeability properties and the mechanisms of permeability enhancement under temperature shocks with the unloading of the confining pressure. In this study, the permeability evolution of coal samples was experimentally tested during unloading confining pressures as well as the expansion characteristics of cracks induced by temperature shocks. The main objectives of this study were (i) to test the characteristics of coal permeability under the condition of an unloading confining pressure; (ii) to observe microcrack evolutions in coal caused by temperature shocks using NMR, CT scanning and SEM technologies; (iii) to experimentally determine the characteristics of gas diffusion after temperature shocks; and (iv) to understand the mechanism of permeability enhancement in coal using thermodynamic theory. The conclusions of this study can provide theoretical and experimental support for promoting CBM production in future energy projects. Anthracite coal underwent temperature shocks, gas seepage testing, CT scanning, NMR testing, SEM testing and gas diffusion testing. All testing samples were made of fresh raw coal blocks collected from the Guhanshan Coal Mine of Jiaozuo in China's Henan Province. In the laboratory, coal cores were drilled by a vertical drilling machine and then ground on a horizontal surface grinding machine. After drilling, cutting and grinding, the fresh raw coal blocks were eventually processed into experimental coal samples with a height of approximately 50 mm and a diameter of approximately 50 mm (see To meet the required precision measurements, granular coal samples were used in SEM and gas diffusion tests. Fresh raw coal blocks were crushed by a crusher machine, and coal particles with diameters of 3 mm–6 mm were selected to carry out SEM tests. For gas diffusion tests, the size of coal particles must be small, approximately 0.2 mm–0.5 mm. Prior to SEM and gas diffusion experiments, moisture needed to be removed from these two granular coal samples by drying in an oven. According to the objectives of this work, temperature shock, gas seepage, NMR, SEM and gas diffusion tests were conducted successively. The schemes of these experiments are shown as follows. An SLX-80 cryogenic tank and a constant temperature dryer, as shown in The experimental steps of the cooling shock tests were as follows. The prepared cylindrical coal samples used for cooling shocks were marked with “L” to indicate “cooling shock”. The volume and weight of each coal sample were measured and recorded three times. The SLX-80 cryogenic tank was connected to a self-pressurized liquid nitrogen tank filled with liquid nitrogen. When the SLX-80 cryogenic tank was started, the temperature of its internal chamber was subsequently reduced to −190 using a temperature controlling program. Then, coal samples were placed in the freezing internal chamber with a clamping tool to allow them to experience cooling shock for 1 h. Then, the cooled coal samples were removed from the chamber and allowed to naturally return to their previous temperature. Finally, after the cooling shock was performed, the volume and weight of each coal sample were remeasured and rerecorded three times. The experimental steps of the heating-cooling shock tests were as follows. The prepared cylindrical coal samples for the heating-cooling shocks were marked with “RL” to indicate “heating-cooling shock”. The volume and weight of each coal sample were measured and recorded three times. The constant temperature dryer was started, and the temperature was maintained in its internal chamber at 100 The coal samples were placed in the constant temperature dryer to be subjected to heating shock for 1 h. After the heating shock ended, the coal samples were quickly transferred to the internal chamber of the SLX-80 cryogenic tank, which was at a temperature of −190to undergo cooling shock for 1 h. Then, the treated coal samples were removed from the chamber and allowed to naturally return to their previous temperature. Finally, after the heating-cooling shock was performed, the volume and weight of each coal sample were remeasured and rerecorded three times. A triaxial gas seepage experimental system, as shown in To investigate the permeability properties of coal containing gas under temperature shocks, gas seepage tests were conducted under different confining pressures. The permeability of each coal sample was measured before and after the temperature shocks. The gas seepage testing experimental steps were as follows. First, a prepared coal sample was installed in the sample holder and preloaded to 1 MPa of axial stress and confining pressure. Second, the coal sample was vacuumed for 8 h by a vacuum pump to extract air. Third, the confining pressure loaded on the coal sample was increased to 6 MPa using the loading device, and the gas pressures at the inlet and outlet of the coal sample were set to 0.3 MPa and 0.1 MPa, respectively. Fourth, when the gas flow at the outlet tended to be stable, the gas flow rate was recorded three times. Finally, the abovementioned four steps were re-executed when the confining pressure was set to 5 MPa, 4 MPa, 3 MPa, 2.5 MPa, 2 MPa and 1.5 MPa. The testing conditions of the coal samples are listed in The NMR apparatus was a Meso MR23-060H-I low-field NMR instrument, as shown in The NMR testing processes were as follows: The weight of a selected coal sample was measured by using an electronic balance. The coal sample was saturated with water in a vacuum saturation device for 12 h to allow water to completely enter the pores of the sample. After being saturated with water, the weight of the coal sample was remeasured. Then, the coal sample was installed in the chamber of the Meso MR23-060H-I low-field NMR instrument to measure the T As shown in X-rays consist of short wavelength, high energy light photons that are generally produced by bombarding a high-density target with a focused electron beam ( A JSM-6390LV SEM apparatus, as shown in The experimental steps were as described. The prepared coal samples were fixed on the testing platform using conductive tape, as shown in To obtain the variation in gas diffusion before and after temperature shocks, a gas diffusion analyzer was used to measure the gas diffusion coefficients of the coal samples under different conditions. This equipment, as shown in The experimental processes for gas diffusion testing were as follows. First, the gas-free volume of the gas diffusion analyzer pipelines was measured with the drainage method. Second, granular coal samples were placed in the adsorption tank of the gas adsorption device to adsorb methane gas for at least 12 h until the equilibrium gas pressure of methane adsorption was finally reached. Third, the outlet valve was opened to collect the desorbed gas with a glass vessel when the gas pressure at the outlet was equal to the local atmospheric pressure. To shorten the testing time, the period of collecting desorbed gas was set to 1 h. Finally, the methane diffusion coefficients of coal samples can be calculated through data processing and analysis. The cylindrical coal samples are shown in From the visual appearance, the variation in the coal samples caused by the cooling shock test was obviously less than that caused by the heating-cooling shock test. A new macrocrack clearly formed on the surface of the RL coal sample (see The permeabilities of the coal samples before and after the temperature shocks are listed in Under different confining pressures and after the cooling shock, Cooling shocks can shrink the coal matrix and produce thermal stress cracks ( The T  Under the effect of temperature shock treatments, the increase in coal permeability is correlated to the volume of pores and fractures (   According to the abovementioned experimental CT scanning images, both cooling and heating-cooling shocks can clearly increase gas permeability in coal samples since the gas penetration paths and spaces were improved through the expansion and connection of cracks under the temperature shocks. Coal is a type of natural, heterogeneous, porous medium with very complex internal pore and fracture network structures. Since CBM drainage is directly dependent on gas permeability in coal seams, the expansion and interconnection of cracks is beneficial to the migration of free gas and the desorption of adsorbed gas and can consequently promote CBM production (   Similar to the CT scanning results, the SEM images shown in The experimental results of the gas diffusion tests with the granular coal samples are detailed in As listed in To determine the change in the internal structures of the coal samples under temperature shocks, NMR, CT scanning and SEM tests were used to measure the changes in internal pores, internal cracks and surface cracks, respectively. NMR tests focused on the changes in nanopores and micropores, while the CT scanning and SEM tests focused on the changes in mesocracks and macrocracks. According to the abovementioned experiments, the results of these three tests mutually support and validate the reasonability of the variations in the coal permeability and gas diffusion coefficient results. NMR, CT scanning and SEM are three completely different testing techniques, but they can provide evidence of changes in pores and cracks in coal and reasonably explain the occurrence of macro changes during gas penetration and gas diffusion from the microscopic and mesoscopic viewpoints. From the experimental results of the gas seepage tests, the gas permeability of coal samples was certainly enhanced because of the damage caused by the temperature shocks. This damage can be directly observed through the CT scanning and SEM results and can be indirectly reflected through experimental NMR and gas diffusion test results. In terms of the mechanism, the damage is closely related to the thermal stress and the accompanying microstructure changes in the process of the temperature shocks. In general, thermal stress is mainly caused by (1) the difference in thermal properties in particles and (2) the temperature gradient ( According to thermodynamic theory, the thermal stresses in cylindrical coal samples under temperature shocks can be calculated by Eq. For geological materials, the tensile strength is much less than the compressive strength. Coal is thus most easily damaged under tensile stresses. From Eq. Moreover, the experimental results also indicate that the permeability of the RL coal sample is higher than that of the L coal sample on average, as displayed in The following conclusions were reached in this study: Under the temperature shock treatments, the permeabilities of tested coal samples were generally improved during the unloading of the confining pressures. The capability of the cooling shock to enhance coal permeability was stronger than that of the heating-cooling shock under relatively low confining pressures but was less than that of the heating-cooling shocks under relatively high confining pressures. To reach a higher coal permeability, it is suggested that heating-cooling shocks be executed in the low stress regions and stress-releasing areas in coal seams. Heating-cooling shocks are better at breaking coal and should be executed in the low stress regions and stress-releasing areas of coal to achieve a higher coal permeability. After temperature shocks were performed, the volume of different sized pores increased according to the experimental results of the NMR tests on the coal samples. The change in pores caused by the heating-cooling shock was larger than that caused by the cooling shock, which may be caused by the high tightness of the coal samples. Under the heating-cooling and cooling shocks, the increase in internal pore volume smoothed the gas desorption paths and further improved the gas diffusion coefficient of coal. The experimental CT scanning and SEM data of the coal samples showed that internal and surface cracks expanded and interconnected effectively after the temperature shocks. The expansion and interconnection of cracks caused by heating-cooling shocks was more intensive than that caused by cooling shocks because of the larger temperature gradient during the heating-cooling shock. The temperature shocks damaged the coal samples by causing crack extensions and further increased the gas flow paths and flow spaces effectively, which eventually enhanced the coal permeability. After temperature shocks were performed, the gas diffusion coefficient of the coal samples was effectively improved because the increase in the macropore volume reduced the migrating resistance of desorbed gas in coal. The heating-cooling shock was more effective in enhancing the gas diffusion coefficients of coal than the cooling shock, which indicates that the adsorbed gas in coal was more likely to desorb under the heating-cooling shock with a higher temperature gradient. Because of the anisotropy of the thermal expansion coefficients in coal, both tensile and compressive stresses can be produced under temperature shocks. Larger temperature gradients can cause larger thermal stresses. When the tensile stresses exceed the tensile strength of coal, crack extensions will occur and further damage the coal. In conclusion, coal anisotropy and excessive thermal stresses are the essential causes for temperature shocks to damage coal.  The authors declare no conflict of interest. The authors would like to thank the grants Supported by the