This work deals with zinc beneficiation of industrial solid waste by an electrochemical technique combining electroleaching and electrodeposition in a single-cell process. This technique is based on leaching of the solid waste by the protons generated at the anode and migration of the resulting ions toward the cathode where deposition takes place.
                  A laboratory cell was built for testing the method. It consisted of three compartments, two electrode compartments and a solid waste chamber placed between these. Catholyte and anolyte were sulphuric/sulphate solutions at optimised concentrations. Experiments were first carried out using a zinc solution and an inert matrix in the central compartment, then using a synthetic waste prepared by dispersing zinc oxide in silicon dioxide. Best performance was obtained with treatment duration of 6h, at 4.5Adm−2 and with catholyte circulation. In this case, a 97% of zinc oxide lixiviation and 75% of zinc-plated were achieved.Industrial activity generates large amounts of solid waste containing heavy metals such as zinc and lead. For example: electric arc furnace dust Electrokinetic processes have been used and studied for soil and groundwater remediation for two decades and the mechanisms involved have been well described in the literature The method described in this article is based on electroleaching of a metal oxide (ZnO) and recovery of the leached metals by electrodeposition in a single-cell process, i.e. without transport of solids or fluids from one chamber to another by pumps or other mechanical processes. The process relies upon application of an electric field to the solid waste to be treated. Protons generated at the anode by water oxidation, migrate towards the cathode: they react with metal oxides or salts contained in the solid placed between the electrodes. Metal ions are formed and migrate to the cathode where they reduce to form a deposit. The final product is zinc metal and can be directly recovered. A laboratory cell was built for testing the method in discontinuous (batch) operation. It consisted of modular number of compartments, and for the present study, the two electrode compartments encompassed the solid waste chamber. After preliminary tests conducted without leaching operation, experiments were carried out using a synthetic waste prepared by dispersing zinc oxide in sand, acting as the inert support. The principle of the treatment is given in Protons generated by reaction Zn Zinc reduction: Water reduction: Reaction To prevent formation of the precipitate, a sulphuric acid solution was used as the catholyte. In such cases, the side hydrogen formation is due to by proton discharge at the cathode: The electromigration efficiency is related to the transference number Electromigration may be poorly efficient for ions with very low   Leaching yield (LY) relates to the efficiency of electroleaching operation and was calculated as follows: Current efficiency was determined as the ratio of the weight of zinc The deposition yield (DY) is the fraction of zinc deposited. This rate was calculated as All the yields defined above can be calculated at the end of the discontinuous process or at intermediate times. The synthetic waste was obtained by blending 990 All experiments were carried out in a laboratory-built cell schematically shown in Previous works carried out separately on electroleaching anolyte: H waste electrolyte: H catholyte: H It was previously shown that the use of 4.5 In this work, the results of four experiments are reported. Their operational conditions are listed in At formerly defined times the liquid of each compartment was sampled for determination of zinc and H The initial concentration of zinc sulphate in the central compartment was fixed at 1.4 The variations of the mole number of zinc and H Compartment (B) (waste) The zinc ions initially present in this compartment migrate to the cathode compartment and diffuse to the anodic one. Consequently the mole number of Zn species in compartment (B), decreased rapidly for 200 Compartment (A) (anode) Zn Compartment (C) (cathode) For the first hour, the amount of zinc slightly increased whereas the concentration of H   The cell voltage usually decreased with time by occurrence of oxide leaching, passing from 30 Experiments showed that with forced circulation of catholyte, the electroleaching/electrowinning operation can be carried out for longer periods of time. This is probably due to the destruction of formed dendrites by the catholyte flow.  This is in agreement with the observations that one can make in The operation time of experiment 3 was probably too short to allow significant migration of zinc to compartment (C) and quantitative zinc metal deposition. It can be observed in Besides, the metal produced in experiment 4 was of satisfactory quality, as it is shown in The power consumption for treatment of ZnO to electroplated zinc was found at 23.7 The present work was aimed at demonstrating the feasibility of a single-cell process for zinc recovery by electroleaching/electrodeposition. After investigating the effect of the catholyte composition on both the deposition yield and the current efficiency without electroleaching operation, we had applied the optimal conditions on the combined operations. Applying a current density at the two electrodes 4.5 This technique is now being developed for investigations of real metal oxides and salts such as roasted fractions of zinc sulphide, and zinc rich wastes like spent Zn–MnO The grant of one author (P.G.) was funded by Ademe in France. Thanks are also due to Région Lorraine for its significant financial support.