In this study, a two-step pretreatment method was used to improve the sinterability of zirconium diboride (ZrB2). Raw powder was initially crushed using a planetary or SPEX mill to an average size of 0.5–0.6μm. Oxide impurities on the surface of the ZrB2 powder were then removed with a dilute hydrofluoric solution. The relative density of the sintered ZrB2 increased as the concentration of residual oxides was reduced. When the concentration of oxide impurities was less than 0.5wt.%, a significant increase in the relative density was observed. Through the proposed pretreatment process, we produced sintered ZrB2 ceramics with a relative density of 99.5% without the use of sintering additives. The results experimentally demonstrate the fact that oxide impurities on the surface of ZrB2 powder are one of the main reasons for inhibiting densification. The sintering behavior of ZrB2 was improved by using mechanical and chemical pretreatment methods.Ultra high temperature ceramics (UHTCs) have been one of the main subjects of recent research and development in the field of structural ceramics. Among the candidates of UHTCs, zirconium diboride (ZrB ZrB Oxide impurities such as ZrO Lowalekar and Raghavan Sintering additives such as MoSi In this study, a two-step pretreatment process of ZrB Commercially available ZrB After the milling process, the powders were etched in dilute hydrofluoric acid. The concentration of the etching solution was selected based on the Pourbaix diagram for the Zr–F–H After the etching process, the solutions were filtered and residual powders were washed using 2 The phase analysis of the ZrB The ZrB SEM images and the particle size distributions of as-received, planetary milled, and SPEX milled ZrB  During planetary milling process, ZrO The SPEX milled ZrB It has been reported that ZrC can form a solid solution with ZrB Among the oxide impurities formed on the surface of the as-received ZrB From reactions These ionic zirconium fluoride complexes can be removed through washing process, thus the residual ZrO  The oxygen concentration versus the etching time of ZrB The effect of HF concentration on the etching behavior was also studied ( In order to investigate the effect of etching temperature, etching processes were carried out at room temperature, 35 and 45 Based on the results shown in In order to identify the effects of milling and chemical etching processes on the sintering of ZrB The effect of various milling processes on ZrB The relative density of a sintered SMZ specimen was 95.7%. Excluding oxide impurities (3.23 The relative density of a sintered PMZ specimen was 89.7%, which was 6% lower than that using SMZ powder. ZrO In order to investigate the effect of the oxygen content on densification, specimens with various oxygen contents depending on etching conditions were sintered. In order to exclude the effect of contamination and the degree of pulverization, pristine ZrB  By using the optimized pretreatment processes, a dense sintered ZrB By applying planetary and SPEX milling, the average particle size of as-received ZrB In order to remove residual oxide impurities such as B The relative densities of sintered bodies could be increased by reducing the residual oxygen content. Especially, the densification was enhanced sharply when the oxygen content was less than 0.5 This research was supported by NSL(National Space Lab) program through the National Research Foundation of Korea funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology.